Scott.
Representative Stansbury here.
Representative Strickler.
Chairwoman Chandler here.
Chairman Martinez.
Excuse we have.
A quorum chairman very good well
I'd like to call the meeting to
order and we have one item on
the agenda and that is just
being one I am a house co
sponsor along with our colleague
Representative Harper the
committee has seen this bill
before you'll recall at the very
end of the session just I guess
about a week ago it was house
taxation and revenue substitute
for house bill three oh eight
and all of you I'm sure what we
call that what it does is it
provides an additional tool to
the New Mexico economic
development department for very
large a potential leader
projects where the construction
costs are estimated to be in
excess of three hundred and
fifty million dollars and what
it does is it allows the
department in coordination with
the local government in
cooperation with the local
government it's all voluntary to
re invest up to fifty percent of
the G. R. T. taxes generated
from construct the construction
of whatever that project is
going to be and I think that's
pretty much it in a not show now
defer to my our colleague
Representative Harper she wishes
to add anything and then we do
have secretary Alicia keys W.
secretary John Clark as well as
mark Roper available to answer
questions.
Thank you madam chair and and
all just echo and maybe add a
little bit so this is actually
the third time that we're seeing
this legislation.
it was slightly different and
it's first important that we
passed out of this committee and
the the it was part of one of
the COVID relief bills and if
your call when it got to the
Senate district that part out
and we will talk about why the
Senate does that or how we feel
about that when they do that
what we then brought four again
at the end of the session.
And so this will be the third
time essentially we're seeing it
all just mentioned really this
really is narrow in that it only
applies to the G. R. T. during
construction right so we're not
talking about G. R. T.
afterwards no the the operations
of this business after
construction is occurred.
So it's just a way to give a
little bit of money back to the
business
to help offset some of their
costs.
And then also a nice way to put
a little extra money into our
state and local leader I.
and and I know over the years at
the state level it's always been
a struggle to try to get you
know R. the the we the funds
needed the EDD would like.
and it's always an appropriation
and one of the nicest there I
don't know was maybe a revenue
stream
that also fit into that fund
and.
And so I'm I think this is again
a good idea.
and
our.
To to co sponsor was vice chair
Chandler and.
Thank you all stand for
questions turned over to a I
would also like to get Madam so
perhaps the secretary would like
to add add some more in
additional information to our
presentation thank you madam
chair and I just wanted to say
thank you to both Representative
Chandler and also Representative
Harper for caring this
bipartisan legislation the only
thing that I would like to
mention is that
this bill provides a critical
tool for EDD it but we all have
to decide together so EDD the
county and the municipality all
need to agree that they want to
recruit a company to their area
and so that there is that
agreement that has to happen the
other thing that I just wanted
to stress and we got a few
questions yesterday why now.
Well here is one now
I don't know if it is because of
COVID or it is because of the
energy that New Mexico has but
the economic development
department has been approached
by multiple companies right now
deals that we have never seen
before this could be because of
the federal push for big
manufacturing companies to on
shore and restore into the
United States I don't know if
you all set saw president
Biden's released today but they
really are going to
try to promote and convince
companies to come back and do
their manufacturing in the
United States and with our
proximity to Mexico we are in a
very good position to
potentially get these deals and
the next year or two so that is
really why now the
representatives have done a
great job as they said you've
already seen it so many times
before so I'm gonna go ahead and
pass it over to W. secretary
John Clark to see if he has
anything else to add thank you
very much.
Thank you secretary thank you
representatives and madam chair.
This bill creates equal local
and state here to sharing it
takes half of the new state and
local here to revenues again as
Representative Harper mentioned
just during construction and
allows that to flow back to the
projects through the normal
legal process although this bill
strengthens the existing
reporting in club act
requirements again the still
allows half of the new revenues
generated to flow to the state's
general fund and local
governments so this is a win in
terms of jobs and investment but
it's also when in terms of
revenues again this is just for
very occasional really big
projects that we can't we and
other works if we keep doing
what we've been doing we'll keep
getting similar results we
really need to think big and
enable the state to respond to
business time frames we want a
chance to really propel the
state for and rich the lives and
livelihoods of New Mexicans as
the secretary mentioned their
huge projects looking at the
Mexico right now and we need to
prove that we're the business
friendly location that we always
claim to be this bill gets is
there for these large deals in
gives us a chance to compete for
these jobs we so desperately
need.
Thank you we ask for your
support again we know that the
same one which passed
unanimously out of this
committee last time you saw it
about a week and a half ago but
we're more than happy to answer
any questions.
All right so Mister Roper to do
you have anything you wish to
add.
All right so let's go to the
audience M. any.
People who are in favor please
raise your hands.
Very good I'll start calling on
people up Ashley Wagner.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Ashley Wagner
director public policy for the
New Mexico chamber of commerce
we are in strong support of this
bill throughout the regular
session we stress the need for
economic diversity and expanding
our workforce this bill does
that by giving New Mexico one
more tool to bring large capital
projects into the state this
bill invest in the future and
will allow the state to operate
on a timeline that will make us
competitive with other states we
also appreciate the clawback
provision and how would allow
still allows for local control
thank you so much thank you ms
Wagner or Lauren you earn a
sicker.
Sorry.
Sorry if I mispronounce your
name.
And proceed on my name is Warren
and sticker director of economic
development for the city of
Farmington New Mexico and cherry
Committee members this is an
important new tool in our tool
belt I of had pleasure of doing
economic development in other
states in other communities and
wall we are working on a
national competitive stage and
so the more tools we have the
better opportunities we have to
attract businesses this area and
while I do use tools like this
before and this is a wonderful
tool because it's an if but for
type of incentive these are
revenues that are going to be
generated less we attract these
businesses and so it's revenues
that we wouldn't have otherwise
that we are discounting for
ourselves temporarily so that we
can attract larger companies and
New jobs to the community so
very much in support of this a
new opportunity and thank you
for your time.
Thank you JD Bullington.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee this is JD
Bullington representing the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce we thank the sponsors
for bringing for this
legislation all the staff of the
Economic Development Department
New Mexico needs a large arsenal
of tools at its disposal to
effectively recruit businesses
to the state for specially large
projects sometimes lead to
investment alone won't be enough
to close and economic
development deal.
The option to commit half of
future local state gross
receipts tax the specific
project makes really good sense
it's an incentive for economic
activity that would not
otherwise the car this bill
helps our state compete with
other states it's a smart move
and the greater out of Turkey
chamber of commerce urges your
support for this legislation
thank you thank you Brett
Miller.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Brett
more I'm a registered lobbyist
for Albuquerque economic
development and AD stands in
strong support of this proposal
are we really want to thank the
sponsors for staying with it
staying on the course including
a Representative Chandler
Representative Harper as many
people have mentioned this is
another tool in the toolbox in
the possibility of going after
these large projects is very
attractive to eighty eight do we
stand in strong support of this
legislation thank you much thank
you very much thank you Missy
career.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is misty Currier and I sat on
the New Mexico partnership board
of directors we respectfully ask
for you to support Senate bill
one we echo the support that
others have stated today
economic development and
diversification are the
cornerstone of progress and
growth for rural and urban
communities throughout all of
New Mexico allowing New Mexico
to compete with neighboring
states are capital intensive
projects with economic based and
stable jobs great continued
business attraction and improves
quality of life for all New
Mexicans thank you for the
opportunity to testify and thank
you for your support.
Thank you Jason Espinoza.
What.
Madam chair members the
committee my name's Jason
Espinoza on the register
lobbyists with the associated
general contractors Mexico the
mechanical contractors
association in New Mexico the
sheet metal and air conditioning
contractors association New
Mexico and New Mexico idea the
statewide association of
economic development
organizations and all forces
ciation stand in strong support
of legislation we appreciate the
sponsors and the economic
development department for
bringing this for for this
innovative and creative approach
to recruiting capture large
capital investment projects in
New Mexico I just want to know
well disincentive is designed to
capture large prog rock large
projects every business will
benefit many times largest
customer of such a small
business is big business look at
just look at the effect that
Intel is had in Rio Rancho the
state is strong support energy
to move this bill forward thank
you.
Thank you Derek Montgomery.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee my
name's Eric Montgomery and the
vice president for business
development with the Misia
valley economic development
alliance down and Dona Ana
County we stand in strong
support of this bill and might
over decades of experience and
economic developments
construction G. R. T. has been a
huge obstacle especially in
foreign direct investment
projects of which we have worked
with companies from Germany
Turkey and are still re recent
time with these companies.
The construction G. R. T. in the
approach of this lead up bill
help stops that or deficiency
against neighboring states but
then also allows especially for
counties and municipalities that
do not have established lead up
funds to participate in large
capital projects without a major
impact within the single year of
their
Their annual budget so we stand
strong support we hope you do
too thank you thank you if
there's anyone in the audience
who wishes to speak in
opposition please raise your
hand now.
Okay I don't see anyone let's go
back to the committee.
I see a Jason Harper but I have
a feeling it's not Jason Harper.
is that Representative Montoya
perhaps.
This is a record that chairman
this is a Representative Harper
and I'd like to ask myself some
questions.
That way I know I'll get an
answer I like so Representative
Harper what else is new.
So madam chair I just just a
couple questions for
for the with the rehabilitation
Harper please stand up
and answer questions so
Representative.
is this bill different in any
way from house bill three await
Really from the sixty day
session yeah madam chair and and
Representative Montoya it is
three oh eight and this is
exactly the same as as what was.
Included it's really.
Okay thank you because that's
easy because I voted for that.
I have that.
Analysis available to.
So that's roughly you come into
a session like this bill comes
over from the Senate we here at
literally minutes after leaving
the floor and we don't have our
analysts to be able to so that's
helpful.
This second question and and
madam chair Representative
Harper I don't believe that you
would necessarily be able to
answer this question but.
On the on the Senate side and
there was some discussion of
that there are a.
Couple of businesses that are
potentially already in the queue
to to you know maybe some
negotiations already taken
place.
so.
It is if that's happening and
we're kind of doing this with at
this time because with that in
mind
is there but is there any way
that we what we can know who
those are there some sort of
nondisclosure agreements that
we.
are unable to to talk about
that.
And I don't dance that manager
perhaps secretary keys are W.
secretary Clark on a field that
one thank you madam chair
members Getty and and
representative we are in talks
with at least three different
companies that could potentially
use this tool and mechanism in
the future
and that's what I alluded to
very early on is that for some
reason we are seeing these
bigger deals come to New Mexico
right now and so but we are
under in dust with all of these
companies and are not allowed to
disclose who they are.
With that being said the madam
chair
and secretary she's just might
also be a question for you
With that being said one of the.
Big guy
Criticisms of our leaders
program have been that of.
Most of the businesses that so
far that have been able to take
advantage of this our around the
Albuquerque.
metropolitan area or in the Rio
Grande corridor more generally
of the.
Current businesses that are in
the better potentially.
That we could use this.
Are we talking about that same
area again or were we talking
maybe more in rural New Mexico.
Because I mean that was a
concern maybe I heard on the
Senate floor with some
reluctance to vote for this
because someone's already in
mind potentially and once again
it was going to benefit the same
areas so since you can't be
specific as to who.
Maybe you could be a little more
generally.
In the neighborhood of where.
I'm madam chair members of the
committee representative we
always present a number of sites
to the companies that we are
speaking with one of the things
that I have noticed that is a
trend and this isn't breaking
any kind of confidentiality but
a lot of the bigger companies
like to have an airport an
International Airport or an
airport they can hold quite a
bit of capacity within an hour's
drive of their facility so often
times we're very limited by the
amount of sites that we can
actually show someone we're also
seeing that
That companies are really
looking for facilities that
already have infrastructure
there in terms of water and
electricity so that's just
something to think about as a
legislator in the future and I
know that we put together some
fantastic legislation last year
which allows the economic
development department to be a
bit more proactive in those
rural areas in terms of setting
that infrastructure down
and we think that's going to be
beneficial but those are just
some of the parameters that we
deal with on an everyday basis.
Thank you for that the
and madam chair and secretary
keys yeah I think once again we
are.
Tense.
It does tend to be.
Maybe more in the Rio Grande
area private for those reasons
that to end up having.
Having
Businesses that that like you
said International Airport
primary specific to Albuquerque
Santa Fe and Los crucis as far
as proximity there are other
infrastructures the and other
infrastructure you mentioned
like Tricity no water may be
able to more generally okay
that's fine one last question
Madam chair and representative
Harper I have or even.
Yes Representative Harper.
Can someone double dip.
With this program if they're if
they're able to participate.
For instance if they were able
to participate with the
A long term movie production
tax credit could they also
participate in this.
Yeah so madam chair and so much
so yeah that's that's a great
question and I'm sure.
The secretary you're gonna have
something to add but the direct
answer is yes.
and and why I'm why I'm
comfortable with that.
Is when our.
economic developers me was a
company thank you to have more
than just one tool in their tool
chest right the.
I'm it might be that we is not
enough to bring business here so
then they say well what about J.
to.
and then they say well what
about looking at this
particular.
G. R. T. deduction what about
I are beats you know that
there's there's multiple options
available and and I don't know
if anyone business gets every
single thing.
But.
Provincially.
You're successful you're able to
mission mix and match some of
these things which would be
another tool in that tool chest
Vigil yes Representative not off
secretary your job if you looked
at on.
yeah madam chair up
Representative Harper thank you
for that that was a great answer
and just to add on to it so the
Netflix deal which
they bought eight stages adding
ten more stages three back lots
really changing that whole mesa
del sole area that is not even
at the capitol cap ex on that
project doesn't even qualify for
this so if that if that kind of
gives you an idea of what
companies the flak fact that
Netflix would not even qualify
for this it kind of gives you an
idea of the amount of
infrastructure and cap ex that
would be required for this.
Thank you for that madam chair
at John were you gonna change on
this as well Madam chair
representative I I was
essentially gonna say the same
thing that while there isn't
really a restriction in statute
preventing the use of this and
you know the the film credit
there is there's really no film
project it's even conceivable
that would breach that
construction costs necessary to
make itself available for that
asset as a secretary mentioned
the networks construction and in
building purchases were huge and
still come nowhere near this
level so it's just it's
inconceivable that that really
could be a player in this we're
really looking at industries
that build massive facilities
generally to make something to
to manufacture
large projects to manufacture
pharmaceuticals that that's
really what we're talking about
here.
Thank you madam chair and and
the presenters so.
I'm so we're talking about is is
not just the buildings
themselves pry would not be
enough to to justify this it
would have to be manufacturing
equipment why do so so be on
buildings.
A massive mechanical or.
Or even portable equipment.
So.
Okay so because of the way I'm
looking at this maybe I'm
looking at it wrong is this is
really.
Taking the lead a project and
almost and injecting a.
And I are be component to it.
Hybrid maybe if that's the way
I'm saying this I might not be.
I would describe it.
but it would concern me if if
you're able to take this
mechanism and and then also do
an I. R. B. but.
I have a few questions about it
but I support this before I had
a likely supported now but just
some concerns about the.
The double dipping and if these
huge projects.
Could the.
Cause us to to to draw even more
money away or not away but.
Keep our rural areas from.
You know going down dramatically
and then rural areas are missing
out maybe with something that
would be a state projects okay
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Harper hello.
You representative
Representative Scott.
Sure.
Experts same question.
With respect to.
Projects.
Or.
Make sure.
Projects would.
This program.
With those types of projects
qualify.
The yield.
Many jobs in the long term.
Madam chair representative does
would not qualify those are.
Not allowed for state funding to
leader anything involved in
electricity generation or
transmission doesn't qualify and
really I think the reason why
that was put in a long time ago
was exactly what you just said
that they don't typically result
in long term full time job
creation and the whole point of
leader is job creation so while
you can use things like Arby's
for that you can't you stateLee
of.
Thank you madam chair thank you
John answer.
One question from.
Local leadership
was with respect to our.
Administrative expenses.
The associated with one of these
programs working highest.
Who is responsible for paying.
For.
What.
The local communities
participating in current
expenses.
Part of one of these companies.
Madam chair representative I'd
like to turn it over to mark
Roper he's our economic
development division director
and has really been involved on
the ground in a lot of these
projects so he's probably best
able to answer that question.
But thank you the W. secretary
Schardin Clarke Madam chair
representative Scott
generally speaking on a leader
project the administrative costs
or or minimal and there usually
handled by in house staff by the
economic development department
so I wouldn't anticipate any
additional burden placed on the
department or for Indian local
entities that would be
participating in this.
Beyond what is typically happen
so I would not expected to be a
burden on the on the locally
from an administrative
standpoint and I do but I but I
will and I think it's important
to note that there the reason
that they're still fifty percent
about falling back especially in
the local.
Areas because local government
maybe well the project of this
size have some costs associated
with their own infrastructure
maybe road work
fire protection those types of
things that would be a burden on
them so getting that the fifty
percent back into their general
fund would be would be helpful
covering those typical costs
okay so.
It's expected the.
Expenses incurred at the local
level would come from the fifty
percent are still going back.
Yes Mr chair representative of
Madam chair representative Scott
yes I mean if if there are some
additional local expenses that
are are right from the project
that's what that is that's with
the fifty percent would help to
offset those costs but I would
not anticipate any additional
administrative costs.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr Perot.
Thank you Representative
Representative Strickler I'm
imagining the third Jason
Harper.
Well again my are fall I can
hear you but you might try
you're here for your phone.
Okay can you hear me now yeah
that's better actually thank you
Representative.
Apologize never know this is
going to work or not can you
hear me OK you might want to
turn your volume up
Representative okay we try to do
that.
Okay very good
thank you madam chair and thank
you Sanchez
really appreciate worn on singer
from city aforementioned the
get on the line and supporting
this bill
Farmington you know we're we're
rich in energy rich and and
water resources so we've got a
couple the components well we
don't have is is
rail and we don't have
of a major airport so maybe this
question is to John Clark
I believe the I believe someone
said on the panel that if
you're.
Of these economic developers are
looking for an area that that
has served components one of
them is share service with the
with the Durango airport qualify
for San Juan County
if anybody on the panel can
count it can help me on
understand that they do have jet
service it's it's less than an
hour away and now we don't have
real yet but we're working on it
with the Navajo Nation of that
that project is been ongoing so
help me out
to to can understand what we
need to do and San Juan county
and that McKinley County for
that matter to attract
you know large businesses.
I don't know who wants to help
me out there.
Been here Madam chair of
Representative Strickler.
She had your point yes I'm in of
the regular for provides the
service of the company is
looking for it absolutely was
followed by we similarly use the
el Paso International Airport
for support for projects in Los
crucis and Senator races so
very very similar situation if
it will count
as a potential services that
satisfies the needs of the
company.
Thank thank you for that and I
was hoping that was going to be
the the answer because of you
know we normally those of us to
travel a lot we we normally go
to to Albuquerque which is you
know to an ad free our drive
from Farmington the kids
Southwest Airlines for example
to see you know family and
friends or business
the Durango airport has United
they have small jet service they
have United and American in
there pretty good size Jeff
forty forty plus and I was
wondering if it.
With that fit the bill with the
the companies you're looking at
now for example just as a
hypothetical.
Madam chair representative
Representative Strickler some of
the companies we deal with
absolutely because we've had the
similar conversations with with
companies for looking into
southeastern New Mexico and we
utilize Russell Center they're
what they're American service
that fits some of those.
This the the the Durango airport
would fit those needs the same
way thank you thank you thank
you
Madam chair and and thank you
sponsors that that that's really
that's really positive and I
would hope the I would hope that
that's a pretty not sure for
actually in it it can handle
larger jets to just we don't
have the date right now in the
city of Farmington is working
with the with some aircraft you
know with airlines to have some
commuter service so that they
might be help to and what's
really exciting for us is we've
got a lot of projects in in the
hopper that may not qualify for
this will be a project but it's
going to certainly help orient
in a lot of waste sent in that
realm that rail that is start to
get some movement so I hope you
guys can help us on that with
the Navajo Nation I've got the
right away session it's a
hundred ten mile.
Rail rail line item that cost
about two hundred twenty million
dollars to put in place and we
think it could really be a game
changer up here for a lot of
reasons.
So
that's really all I have thank
you madam chair thank you
Sanchez.
Thank you Representative
Strickler Representative Lujan.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you to sponsors you Sanchez for
bringing this up back again I
think this is this is an
important piece of legislation
that we now we we have the
opportunity to to move forward
and and hopefully we do and I
just wanted to
The COVID into maybe ask a
little bit more I was also
listening in on some of that the
debate with the Senate and some
of the things that came up were
I called a hold harmless the
local governments be held
harmless Senator the way that I
read you know the FIR and and
send that information there is
that is not true and if you can
explain maybe some of that a
little bit more and how that
How that works out through this
piece of legislation to create
it.
Yeah madam chair I can take a
stab at this I know the panel
here also understands so hold
harmless is like a password in
the tax committee we we hate
that word.
and there's reasons behind that
and that is
in the streamlined sales tax
which New Mexico is.
Out of a hybrid member of.
We work very carefully not to
divide our tax base you don't
have locals taxing something
different within the state's
taxed something Senate just gets
really confusing really quickly
want to keep your local and your
state tax base same.
And one of the things I really
like about this bill is that it
actually requires the locals to
be on board with the state and
our level of contribution to
both what was in the state is
the same.
I want to set up a situation
where the state is giving up its
share and the locals are held
harmless and they're not giving
in and he's.
Right we want we want both folks
have skin in the game.
Since they're both benefit right
the vocals are specially
benefit.
and so yeah I this bill doesn't
have local hold harmless I think
that's a good thing
but it does require that the
locals are on board the state
just can't come in and say Hey
we got a great deal for project
and locals I'm sorry we're
taking your your revenue for
locals were sorry what is doing
this without your support this
requires that everyone be on
board to forward or that would
be my response and anyone else
wants to jump in.
Madam chair representative I
think you said that perfectly
and it just as you said this
really is optional for the
locals.
It requires us to work with them
and find a deal that works for
us at the state level but also
works for the county and the
municipality said that it's a
good deal for all of us.
Thank you for that response
the response was wonderful to
hear that and and maximize your
because it does create that
balance and that's what's that's
really important that's
This is a question I have just
as I'm learning more more about
leisure you have the the
general.
information and concept of it
but is there are no occasion
you to leave the funding for
rural areas.
Specifically like set aside cut
out for them.
Madam chair and representative
there's no set aside for rural
areas but we submit a lot of
information on a quarterly basis
to DFA in LFC about how we've
used Leader phones and one of
the things that we get scored on
every quarter through the LFC
report cards is how good a job
we've done leveraging dollars
creating jobs but also how many
jobs we've created in rural
areas and so we we submit that
information is publicly
available we but all this
information on our website as
well but also LFC does include
that on a report cards and so we
try to make sure that we're
creating a lot of real jobs and
I forget the exact percent for
what we did in twenty twenty but
I believe we suppose that
surpassed forty percent for the
jobs that we created being
created in rural New Mexico.
Madam chair representative of
the lot if I can jump in here
also
I I all echo that I think that
the twenty twenty number was in
the neighborhood of forty
percent additionally there's not
a set aside we definitely have a
A broader look when we look at a
rural project we prioritize them
and or yeah and I don't want to
see more generous but we have a
broader scope when we look at a
project we understand that that
three jobs in a rural community
as is way more important
sometimes a hundred jobs in
urban setting so we work hard to
make sure we prioritize those
jobs.
The other thing we
we do on all projects as we look
at the wages in the prevailing
area so we're not for group when
we look at a rural spot we're
not comparing those wages to
what they would earn an urban
area work comparing the
legislature's what they would
earn their and we always look to
to try to prioritize jobs are
making a higher wage that
they're making in that area so
we're not comparing
some of my backyard in rowing
New Mexico to Albuquerque you
know we're we're we're comparing
apples to apples when we look at
legions.
Madam chair and at and
the card is Representative you
so much for those answers and
Representative Harper those
those are really important
answers as we're having this
discussion and and and that's
been aware of that and how this
how this is a really and nicely
balanced and.
And the conceptual whereabouts
Working to to to create more on
economic development in our
state which is as we know very
much needed so thank you for
that I think that those are the
questions I have right now and
appreciate it thank you so much.
Thank you Representative Lujan I
see it Jason Harper with the
hand up but I'm assuming this
just a hang on a little left
over hand is that you
Representative Montoya.
Yes madam chair I don't have any
other questions I was just
trying to clone Harper again I
think if we call items New
Mexico's tax problems on the way
you think.
Okay all right I'm happy I see
no other hands up if anyone
would like to make a motion that
be great.
We do.
Thank you there's a do pass from
Representative Strickler do we
have a second.
and a second.
Second from Representative Lujan
I think is that right.
Very good thank you Elaine we do
call the roll.
Representative.
Speaker.
thank you Representative I heard
you thank nine thank you.
Speaker you got.
Representative Parker.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez yes
yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative Maestas yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative Romero.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Stansbury yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
Speaker.
Chair woman Chandler yes.
I'm here.
Okay speaker egolf.
I vote yes and.
Madam chair may we give just a
moment for.
Representative Romero G. joints
that I leave she wanted to vote
we have the right if we get
Regis government yeah I know
she's in Judiciary to and we're
juggling a lot of things speaker
as you know.
In a world you know.
Okay.
Madam chair and told that
Representative Romero is the
attendee group okay great.
More right now thank you.
Thank you madam chair we you
know we want to make sure that
we are.
All here to discuss it to
disprove the notion you can
already in one place at one time
hello.
Many of us learned are being
three places at three one is
just Representative Romero are
you with this.
I thank you madam chair.
Representative Romero eighty.
So are we.
I vote yes thank you madam
chair.
Thank you and last but not least
chairman Martinez I believe is
presenting in the Senate it
looks like we have twelve in the
affirmative zero in the native.
We have a due pass with twelve
to zero thank you so much
everyone for your time and
questions thank you madam chair
Senator was able to be here do
we tell Representative Harper
that I would have seventeen for
amendments.
What what that's all I would
have rather done in the
committee but at least you know
it's it's just too hard so we'll
just take care of.
That's awesome.
Thank you to everybody and we'll
see you in a few hours probably
on the floor thank you Secretary
W. secretary Mr Roper thank you
very turns thank you so much
guys thank you.
