chair.
Have you
All right, we have a quorum, and
I want to give it up to Aaron
Bega for passing the test on the
pronunciation of our members'
names. She's been working hard
since the last committee meeting
that we've had, uh, without
further ado, it looks like first
on our agenda is represented
lustrom if you want to assume
the
The chair, but we have a
A few bills on our agenda today.
We have House Bill 19 trade port
Development Act,
and House Bill 47.
Be in property tax exemption as
well as House Bill 52 Rural
Healthcare tax credit
eligibility, and I assume that
we're online, we're on Zoom,
we're streaming on the webcast,
correct place? We're good? All
right.
If we're good to go without
further ado, representative, uh,
lunchtrom, the floor is yours.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and good
morning committee. Is this, do I
need to push this back?
All righty. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and good morning
committee. Good morning
audience. Uh, today we're gonna
talk about House Bill 19, I
think just as a general
overview, this is an economic
development bill which focuses
on the use of existing
infrastructure assets.
You know, we often talk about
the need for economic
diversification, and one of the
best practices for economic
diver diversification is to use
your existing assets, both state
and local.
New Mexico is seen as a bridge
state often people travel
through here and that's about
it.
This bill will position New
Mexico to increase trade,
increase reshoring, increased
onshoring.
And primarily it could provide
the country with the elimination
of supply chain disruption.
It also comes with a 10 year
sunset.
The economic development
department has administrative
responsibility for this
legislation. There's a criteria
to create the actual districts.
Um, it also includes a P3
incentive component, uh, which
also comes with some criteria.
There's an advisory committee
that helps the economic
development department
secretary.
And the way this is paid for is
in section 12 and how the money,
how the money is moved.
Mr. Chairman, I, I can go
through the bill, uh,
extensively if you'd like, um.
But I can, I can tell you that
generally what happens with this
bill is that a trade port
district is designated. There's
criteria that's assigned to it.
Once its designated, they are
then eligible to apply for the
trade court fund for
infrastructure purposes.
Uh, there's considerable uh
language associated in this bill
with setting up a P3.
As one of those incentives that
we currently don't have in New
Mexico.
There's an advisory board that
helps the uh secretary, the
advisory board not only helps
with identification of good
infrastructure projects to.
Go inside the trade port.
They also bring with them
resources as an example.
Um,
That we need water and
wastewater type infrastructure
inside the trade port because
the Environment secretary would
serve as an as an advisory
member, they would also bring
with them resources that would
match those of the trade port.
And it's got a 10 year sunset.
But generally when you think
about what's happening at a
national level, and you think
about what's happened to us with
supply chain disruption, New
Mexico is in a perfect.
Place at this time.
Without Mr. Chairman, I'd stand
for questions and.
Happy to
Get into this in more detail.
Thank you very much,
Representative. So at this point
in time, let's begin with public
comment. We will go to uh those
that are online first.
And so do we have anybody on
Zoom that wish to make uh a
comment in support of House Bill
19. Yeah, we have 1.
Marcos Gonzalez.
Please then mute your
microphone.
Hi, good morning. This is uh
Marcos Gonzalez, executive
officer for Verilo County
and Ber County and supported
this for this benefit our I-4034
project they were working with
Porto Valley, but others to
communities in Arizona to help
improve our efficiency of
shipping goes through the
country
flag of the USDOT and then
there's $40 million in funding
so far from.
um having this type of
infrastructure funding would
allow us to spur on much quicker
and be able to start
delivering, so we kind of
supported the bill. Thank you.
Anyone else in support? Anyone
in opposition?
Possible 19 online. Oh, OK, very
good. Let's go into our room.
Can I have all those in support
of House Bill 19. Please raise
your hand.
We have a few.
Uh, let's go. We have a
microphone that the sergeant of
arms is going to bring to the
front if we can establish a line
and uh one by one, right behind
the sponsor, please.
Sergeant Arms.
So, we have one right here and
then we'll start here and then
we'll just
filter through.
Please, good. Thank you. Good
morning, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. My name is JD
Bullington, speaking on behalf
of the Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce. Uh, this
legislation is a smart
reinvestment of groceryceipts,
tax and motor vehicle excise tax
revenues into what drives those
revenues, our supply chain.
Um, having New Mexico establish
a trade port district sets up
our state to experience expanded
economic development.
And as sponsor representative
Lundstrom has once said the goal
is to make New Mexico more than
just a bridged state. We already
have built-in corridors east and
west and north and south, uh,
throughout our state,
communities from Burnleyo County
to Gallup and McKinley County to
Santa Teresa have recognized the
need for and the opportunities
associated with developing
inland ports. House Bill 19 will
help several communities in New
Mexico, get on the road to
reaching their full potential
and chamber supports the bill.
Thank you. Thank you.
Next
My name is Louis Bonnariti. I am
the mayor of Gallup, uh, as Pat
as Miss Lindstrom had pointed
out, uh, people drive through
our state. Well, Gallop is the
gateway from the west side
coming into the state. So we are
in support definitely of House
Bill 19. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Mayor. Next.
Thank you Mr. Chair, committee
members. My name is Frank Petty.
I am the city manager for
Gallup.
Um, Galup has some great assets,
I-40 uh intercontinental, uh,
railroad going through our town,
but we have not been able to
take, use that as our advantage
um competitively with the with
the rest of the state or the
nation. This trade work bill
will help us. We uh we're taking
the first steps, we've been just
under 5000 acres to start an
industrial park, trade port
zone, we're looking to create a
foreign trade zone to take
advantage of this, um, this bill
will definitely help us with
the.
infrastructure to be able to
take that next step to not only
be competitive with others in
Mexico and United States, but be
an asset to the state of New
Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Next
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, thank
you for the time and thank you
to the sponsor for bringing this
bill forward. My name is Bill
Lee, president and CEO of the
Galum McKinley County Chamber of
Commerce, and we are in strong
support of HB 19 assessments of
our primary industrial assets
have concluded that
transportation and logistics
truly define the heart of the
potential for economic
development in Gallup and
McKinley County, recent years
our region has been devastated
by not only COVID-19
restrictions and impacts but
also the dramatic changes in the
energy industry.
Resulting in the closure of a
refinery and a coal-fired power
plant, the loss of these major
industrial employers from
McKinley County not only means
many good paying jobs have
evaporated, but so too as a
large tax base for the county.
HB 19 would help us capitalize
on our competitive advantages,
easy access to BNSF
Transcontinental Railway, the
Interstate 40, a revitalized
transportation along with a
foreign trade zone designation
being planned for the Gallup
Municipal Airport, all of those
things come together to make.
opportunities afforded by HB 19
a much needed economic win for
our area. HP 90 not only
benefits Gallup and McKinley
County. It's designed to provide
funding support for
infrastructure development and
qualified trade ports all across
our great state. This truly is a
pathway forward for real
diversification of our state's
economy, HB 19 also aligns
perfectly with our mission and
vision of the Chamber of
commerce with its 3P component
of uh in public private.
partnerships, uh, and our
alignment with community
commerce and collaboration, we
ask that you move um HB 19
forward with the due pass. Thank
you.
Thank you for your comments.
Next, yes, ma'am. Thank you,
members of the committee. My
name is Alison Riley, Public
Policy director for the New
Mexico Chamber of Commerce here
to support HB 19. This
legislation is a comprehensive
and innovative approach to
harnessing our state's
geographic strengths and
stimulating economic
development, as companies
increasingly consider onshoring
and reshoring these designated
trade ports have the potential
to attract significant capital
investment and high quality jobs
into our state. Importantly, the
bill promotes inclusivity by
encouraging application from
Native American.
tribes, nations, and pueblos to
participate in these
public-private partnerships.
This ensures the benefits of
revitalized trade infrastructure
are widely shared among diverse
communities. For those reasons
and for all the others mentioned
prior to me, we urge you to
support this legislation. Thank
you.
Thank you for your comments.
Next. Yes, sir.
Good morning, Walt Eddy County
commissioner of McKinley County
here with Danielle Nota, a
fellow county commission without
just repeating all the
statistics that Bill just
mentioned our, our commission is
100% of passing this House bill
we think would be a great.
Thank you. Thank you,
commissioner. Next.
Chairman, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza
speaking on behalf of New Mexico
idea, the statewide economic
development Professional
Association, as well as the
mechanical Contractors
Association and the sheet metal
Contractors Association in New
Mexico, which all stand in
strong support of the
legislation. You know, we
strongly support investment and
trade for infrastructure to
strengthen New Mexico's economy
and enhanced national supply
chain resiliency.
You know, we're using existing
assets that we have here in New
Mexico, really make strategic
infrastructure investments which
will expand our role in domestic
commerce, create jobs and
attract private uh sector
investment, so we stand in
strong support. Thank you.
Thank you. Next.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, John Lipschutes
with the New Mexico Federation
of Labor AFL-CIO. Also here to
speak on behalf of AFSE Council
18, uh, I could just say I think
it's pretty rare when we have a
bill that labor, the
municipalities, business
community, and contractors all
come together to support. We are
here to support our 40,000+
members representing sector, the
public and private sector. We
stand in strong support of this
measure. We thank the sponsor.
For making some amendments that
we had uh some minor concerns
with, and she was very amenable
to that. So thank you for that.
And we are in this because, as
was stated before, this measure
will create good high quality,
high paying jobs, and that is
something we're all about. So
for that reason, we hope you
support. Thank you very much.
Yes, ma'am.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Stephanie Maez. I'm a
registered lobbyist today
representing the New Mexico
Building and Construction Trades
Council were an alliance of 15
labor unions in the building and
construction trades with more
than 15,000 tradespeople members
across the state and, um, for
the reasons that have already
been stated, we are excited to
support House Bill 19. We also
want to thank the sponsor for
coming to us early on and
addressing one minor concern
that we had with the bill, and
we're very happy to
Support would encourage your
support as well. Thank you.
Thank you.
Yes, sir.
Mark your heel at the IBEW
Electrical Workers Union.
We
Thank you. Thank you, sir.
next.
Morning, Mr. Chairman Matthew
Swatters with the Western States
Carpenters here in New Mexico
representing 1600 members in the
state of New Mexico and 90,000
members across the western
states. We are studying this.
To labor on this measure in uh
locals across.
The California for the work
supporting here in New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you, sir. Anyone else in
support of House Bill 19.
All those in opposition of House
Bill 19.
Anybody? Please raise your hand.
Saying none,
OK. Appreciate the commentary
this morning. Let's come back to
the committee.
Community members and questions
and comments.
Representative Montoya.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair.
Representative, good to see you.
I know you've been working on uh
Trying to find a way to help
your community.
survive.
Considering losses to
Consistent jobs that we've have
in that in that corner of the
world. So, um, I have, I do have
a couple of questions.
About this legislation, uh,
Not necessarily concerned, some
of them are concerns, but some
of them just just questions.
Um
I, I noticed that the uh
That the trade ports.
Legislation that that uh
Procurement code.
I, you don't necessarily have to
follow the procurement code.
Um, and I'm just wondering why.
Why is, why was that decision
made?
I think um
Mr. Chairman and uh primarily
because it is one of these
things that we may be interested
in.
You don't want to be a
procurement code and as you can
see most of this bill is
everything that's exempt from
the pyramid code at this time,
but we, we did ask that we would
be exempt.
So thank you, Madam Chair, and
I'm sorry, Mr. Chair and
Representative, um, I, I did
believe that was probably why it
was not in this legislation. So
I guess my follow up question
is,
Why did we then, since we're
talking about private dollars.
Why did we then amend in.
I believe in the last committee
prevailing wage.
Um, I, I, that's so, so for me,
Since we are trying to bring
private dollars into this.
And in one hand, we're trying to
make sure that we don't slow
down the process with some other
things that we as a state do
with state dollars.
On the back side, I, I, I do
believe.
It's an impediment.
Potentially in some communities
if we're going to
And uh
Include prevailing wage. So
maybe you could talk to that
just a bit.
what I did is in the uh.
ment s in the last committee
prevailing wages to his current
law. All I did was restate it in
the bill.
Thank you
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative.
Um
I also didn't see in the
legislation any.
Perhaps it doesn't, I, I don't
see that um one project.
Uh
Would necessarily be.
Apt so I I'm, I'm trying to
figure this out if
If if there's one project that
comes up.
In a year
Up to $70 million.
Would, would one.
Project to be able to take the
entire amount, how would that be
determined?
Yeah, Mr. Chairman, that's a
good, good question, uh,
representative, there's an
entire process before you can
even be designated as a trade
for.
criteria in section 4 that you
have to meet.
Once that criteria is set by the
end, you've been approved as a
trade port district by the
economic development department,
then make app structure
improvements.
One of the, I think.
Beauties are strengths of this
bill is that the advisory
committee brings resources with
it.
So, uh, I'll just be candid in
the Gal McKinley County area.
We need water and waste water,
we need wastewater lines as an
example that could be a project
that the city or the county
would but.
You would match for money then
with what is already available
in the general appropriations
Act or federal funds that are
available that that department
controls.
So, um, when you look at the FIR
and you look at the tax
analysis you can see in year
one, at least from tax and
revenue, the estimated affected
gross receipts, tax rate, and
what would go into the trade
port fund is about $73 million.
And then from the motor
vehicles, he should be about
what we anticipate is about $550
million over a 10 year period.
But it's there to leverage other
other resources, so I would
doubt very seriously that all of
it would go into one project, we
do have some projects that.
Are very interested in in moving
McKinley County.
So I would doubt very seriously
that that entire fun would go.
So thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I
I, I, I doubt it as well, but
I'm just wondering if we would
not want to hedge against that,
uh, it seems like they're, there
are several interested parties.
And without that specifically
being
delineated in the in the
Bill
It would not preclude
All or most of the money in a
given year.
a single project if it were
approved, so I, I, I don't know
if that's uh I don't know if
there's any.
Leeway, uh, in
Given to the administrators to
be able to make that
determination, but it, it
doesn't seem like that is
prescribed.
It's not described because uh.
apartment.
On assigned to be the
administraor at that time we can
weigh in as legislators,
legislative intent may be not
one single project would get all
the funds on and also any time a
new initiative is set up.
It has to be
Rules are assigned to it.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, just kind of one
last question. I, I don't see
that uh.
Airports necessarily could take
advantage of this and for if you
don't live on I-40 or I-25 or
I-10.
Um
likely would not be able to
participate.
In this program, not
necessarily, Mr. Chairman, when
I think about your area
representative, I think about
the airport, I would absolutely
disagree with that. OK, so
airports could potentially, OK,
I, I that, that's good. That's,
that was gonna be my suggestion
if that could be an asset that
is in Farmington.
It's an existing asset build uh
trade port activity around your
airport. Well, I'm glad to hear
that. I don't have to lobby for
it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Let's
uh.
Speaker Martinez. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you for
Lundstrom for uh this really
important piece of legislation.
I think we saw it in public
comment, um, and somebody
mentioned how rare it is to get
that group of folks, um,
supporting something, usually
they're on opposite sides.
Um
Part of the reason I'm really
excited about this proposal, Mr.
Chair and Representative.
is the potential that it has to
Turing Mexico from from a bridge
transit state into a place where
we can actually make things and
a place where we can actually
import and export things
directly. Um, and when I think
of the opportunities, uh, and
you mentioned it just now, it is
rare to have an economic
development tool like this one
that is targeting.
Um, specific areas of the state,
right? So you think of Gallup,
for example, you think of Berlio
County, South Valley. There's a
tremendous opportunity there um
for work that's already
happening, but to expand the
work, then I think of Santa
Teresa, which is incredibly
incredibly important.
To the future of the state as it
relates to economic development.
Um
Can you, um, uh, Mr. Chair and
and Representative, can you
expand a little bit on how the
advisory committee.
And help
Not only create and imagine what
could happen in these different
communities, but perhaps more
importantly,
How that committee can help
build sustainability for the
long term, um, for these
projects.
Thank you.
Speaker and Mr. Chairman.
When you think about a trade
port and we have visit basically
what they are, they're
industrial park on steroids with
a specific focus on logistics.
And because it is a the core
piece is logistics, you then
build clusters of manufacturing
around it or support services.
So you've got a
High-powered industrial park.
Its focus is is transloading.
Or logistics.
And then you're able to take
that and build.
The port around it.
And that is um.
What we're talking about when
we're when we're saying you're
building a um.
The cluster development.
So what happens then is that it
allows for anchor business,
which would be logistics and
nature.
And from that um.
Jobs are created.
Jobs are created then uh in
terms of what.
have to have for supply that
kind of industry.
Um, I think what happens to a
community, it actually changes
the face of the community
because it changes the kind of
curriculum that's that is
provided, you know, at public
school level and your community
colleges.
You have to have people that
understand that kind of
industry.
Uh, starts building on initial
pipeline for uh.
I think it also provides um.
Marketing
Or other states that don't have
this kind of thing. Um.
what happens is that.
You've got
of Long Beach, you've got the
Port of Houston, you've got the
Port of New Orleans, and you've
got the largest in.
And they all are moving through
our state.
But there's nothing happening
except that they're traveling
through the state.
We get, we know what kind of
cargo, at least in my area is
coming through on BNSL. We
understand that.
Wouldn't it be great if we
couldn't have something there.
Along that route, that then
provides as a stimulus to build
the rest of the economy.
around logistics.
Education, training programs,
apprenticeship programs, things
like that. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and Representative, and
I have a hard time thinking that
any of these jobs are going to
be minimum wage jobs are gonna
be
well paying in many cases, union
jobs through which you can raise
your family, um, and more
importantly, in many ways.
Folks don't have to leave these
communities.
That's correct, Mr. Chairman,
Mr. Speaker, to grow our own.
We want to be able to provide in
areas that.
suffered
You know, we've had a lot in
Mexico. There's been, it makes
sense to us that is happening,
but also that we're providing a
service to the country.
When it comes to supply chain
disruption, um.
Lots of changes that they wanna
be ready. We wanna be ready for
that, um.
And uh I think New Mexico's in
the driver's seat seat with 3
major interstates, two class,
uh, one railroads.
Uh, the fact that we're part of
the four corners, fact that we
have connection to the border, I
mean, we're, we're in a very
good position now as a state to
be able to do something like
this.
And
Maybe somebody can correct me
here, but I, I think I heard
somewhere or I read somewhere
that.
Santa Teresa area is smack in
the middle between the port of
Long Beach and the port of
Houston?
It, it is uh.
Speaker,
it's in a very, very good
location.
accounting, uh, and they were
one of the that we were working
with throughout the interim
team, team members as well as
from Burnleyo County and
McKinley County. We tried to get
as many folks as we thought
would be interested in this and.
They had a lot of good ideas, we
actually made a presentation at
the state conference last
September.
And last question, Mr. Chair, I,
I know there are 2 of us here,
uh, two of us from Berlio
County, right? Yeah.
We gotta fix that.
Yeah
It's right.
We need 4 more. Maybe I'll make
an announcement on the floor
this morning, um, can, can, uh,
you and I talked offline about
this, and this is really
exciting. Um, what is happening
down?
And, uh, in Berlio County, um,
and for those of you who are
familiar, sort of like where
I-25 and.
You know, kind of curves down.
It's that area down there. I
mean, I know that the county uh
economic development department
has been working on some
projects. Can you, can you maybe
just give us a little, a little
summary of what's happening and
and potentially what could
happen because of this
legislation.
Yes, that's a good point and
there super interested in this
legislation, and it gets back to
when we're looking at the uh
criteria for designation.
Um
Curly County has been uh working
very, very hard with other
states in terms of getting a a.
Federal designation.
And um it's gone very well for
them, they've done a lot of
work.
And I'm looking for the specific
term it is referred to as.
Designation
by the United States.
a court
regional infrastructure
accelerator.
They have that designation
through a grant that they'd
received, and I do believe.
What that means is, is that,
hey, the feds are looking at
this.
I think in that particular part
of the state.
They have the population base
that is uh available for
distribution.
Trade ports have different
focuses. The focus that I
believe Bern Leo County has set
it up for then distribution area
of the state.
In our case, the trade port
market is different. Our trade
in the county would be different
than Luna County if Deming
decided to do something like
this, it's different than
Carlsbad if Carl's bad decide
each one of those areas has a
different market. We've had a
market analysis done for us.
Uh, we know where our strengths
are, we know where our
competitive advantages, I'm not
gonna say it openly. I don't
want anybody stealing our ideas,
so but uh everybody has a
different market.
trying to get some insects so
you can uh take it back to Bran
County, uh, that's all I have.
Thank you for bringing this
forward. Thank you, sir. Thank
you for your question. Let's go
to representative, uh.
Silver.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
Representative, um.
I, uh,
I want to say first I, I think
that the.
The idea of this is a really
good idea, um, and I have some
questions, uh, I wanna thank
Representative Montoya for
raising one of my first concerns
about exemptions to the
procurement code.
Um, but I'm also wondering, um,
on page 3 lines 23 to 25. It
says, um, that.
shall meet as many of the
following criteria as feasible
at the time of designation.
And so,
Any community could qualify as a
trade port as long as the uh
economic development department
determines that.
Thank you, chair.
correct, Mr. Chairman, uh, you
don't have to meet, you don't
have to check all the boxes.
But you have to check some of
the boxes.
And I think what happens in this
process when they set up the
rules and regulations.
It's going to be what makes
sense for that community.
There is no community in New
Mexico that.
But um there are, I mean.
It'd be up to the department to
see, does this make sense, what
is the business plan look like?
What is the cost benefit
analysis look like?
So that kind of work would be
done, I mean, you may only meet
one criteria.
But that doesn't mean you can.
OK. Thank you, Representative.
Thank you, Chair. And so I'm
wondering if there is an analyst
might help me also answer this
question or representative you
might know how solvent with the
trade ports development fund be
then if many, many.
Communities applied for being a
trade port and then many, many
were approved. Thank you, Chair.
I'm not sure that Mr. Chairman
would be approved.
Because you have to have a
marketing plan and you.
Um
And that doesn't mean that a
trade port project couldn't be
in collaboration with another
agency, in other words, and I've
thought about this particularly
for the border authority.
The Border Authority as an
example, could be a
collaborating partner in your
area. I'm not quite as familiar
with your area, but it makes
sense that you can.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Chair. Um, and speaking of
the New Mexico border Authority,
um, they had concerns about
duplications and conflicts. Um,
I'm wondering how, and I'm
looking at the.
Uh, the summary, um, of the
house bill and it says the New
Mexico border Authority wrote
that the proposed trade ports
advisory Committee may duplicate
roles or create conflicts and
project oversight.
Evaluation and implementation
with the New Mexico border
Authority as their tasked with
overseeing infrastructure and
economic development, etc. etc.
Um, is there a way to address
that or how, how, how are you
thinking about that future.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, the way
I think about it is, is that
there's so much that needs to be
done in the state of New Mexico,
it doesn't make sense. I don't
think it takes anything away
from him. I have visited that.
That
facility and.
Very familiar with what they do.
Uh, they have an important role.
But it doesn't, it doesn't mean
that they couldn't work with a
trade port authority if it was
initiated by Donana County.
There's nothing that prevents
that.
OK. Thank you, chair. And then
my final question, um,
How does this bill address
potential issues with the Open
Meetings Act and with the uh
investigation of Public Records
Act as it relates to public
private partnerships and
engagement. Well, private
entities agree to submit
activities and meetings and
notes to those statutes. Thank
you, Chair. Mr. Chairman, it
depends on what's in the
agreement.
Identifies everything that will
be done.
There's some general criteria in
this agreement, but at the end
of the day is going to be
between, let's say, and a
private.
private entity.
At that point, that agreement
will identify what will be
shared, what when.
Particularly if it is a uh trade
secret, those kinds of things
usually aren't shared. There's
some type of.
Innovative trade secret
initiative that's tied to uh
logistics.
Could be, I mean, at some, at
one point, Amazon Prime was up.
Amazon Prime have probably had
tons of trade secrets at one
time.
But uh it's going to be dictated
inside. Thank you
representative, um.
Hi, and thank you, chair. I, I'm
unsure that this is an adequate
way to achieve the purpose that
um.
That the bill is, is trying to
um to get to and I don't know if
it has adequate accountability
to study the specific outcomes
that I think we're trying to
achieve here. I do think it's a
great idea though, like in um.
Just in spirit, I really, um, I
really like the, the innovation
of it. So thank you
representative. Thank you,
chair.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to ranking member Duncan.
Just a
Since I was um
So let's just say in a perfect
rural farmington.
Gallup gets that spur.
Out to nappy.
With the Navajo Nation be
allowed to work on that.
Well
Um, Miss Sherman representative
absolutely.
I fully expect that there'll be
at least a couple tribal related
projects and it would make sense
that um.
I know that San Juan County has
been very involved with the
Navajo Nation.
On that spur line, it would make
sense that if.
You all are going to be
connecting into the that it
would be an agreement between 3
groups I'm I'm assuming.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you for that.
And then the other question I
had was,
Taking notes and so maybe I
didn't hear it clearly.
Beyond this funding, you said
they were able to place for some
other fund.
just
What I'm saying is that the base
funding for the trade court is
a.
4%
Um, I don't want to call it
scrape off, but that's basically
what it is if gross seats tax.
It goes into the trade port
fund.
So that percentage would not
then go into the general fund, I
mean, it's basically less money
going into the general fund.
What, what would happen here is
that the advisory committee.
But also be a funding source, so
to speak, for projects.
When I think about your area.
In particular,
There may be need for
improvement at the airport.
Haven't seen what I recall at
one time when you had passenger
service, it was, it was.
Roaring and boring and really
going.
up there, I don't know if
they're still passenger service
up there.
Is there
Mr. um, they just announced that
they would be starting again in
May, that's good because then
you're now eligible to set up an
FTZ.
With passenger service, um, you
get a foreign trade zone
designation with passenger
service air.
Uh, then you can start building.
Your market of what you think
you're gonna be able to move. I
don't know what size if they're
big enough for cargo, Mr.
Chairman Representative, you've
got. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you.
To represent Duncan. It's got a
uh Representative Chandler.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and um
thank you representative for
bringing this forward. I'm
trying to understand, Mr. Chair,
the actual financial structure.
So there's a district, I
understand there will be a
designated trade district.
Is it the GRT that's generated
within that district, Mr. Chair.
OK, where is the GRT coming
from? GRT if you look, if you
look at the FIR.
You look at the fiscal impact
report.
I
and by LFC.
I'll use the one done by taxi
and you'll see that.
For the estimated revenue impact
for FY 2026.
Is $73,800.
That is equivalent to 4%.
Uh, flow through from gross
receipts.
It's not going to the general
fund is going to this new
tradeport fund.
Oh, OK, Mr. Chair, and, and, um,
representative.
So we're taking the general GRT
fun uh tax, which is 4.
something, 4%.
And we're taking 1% of that.
And we're putting it into this
fund for 10 years, correct.
got a 10 year sunset. And I
noticed the FIR.
Mention there might be an
ambiguity, Mr. Chair, and
representative about the local.
Option and do we have some
resolution of that, uh, Mr.
Chair, I actually agree with
what LFC put together, I think
it's super clear in the bill
that we're talking about a.
Uh, that value. So after all the
distributions are done.
From the grocery receipts tax,
this comes from that.
LFC has said that and I agree
with them.
I don't know where that other
implication came in, but I read
it this morning.
Um, and I guess it'd be somebody
from tax that would have to
explain that we've got LFC here,
but I agree with what LFC says.
If you want for clarification
representative, we can have Izzy
speak to it. If not, we can do
the dialogue.
OK, um, well, maybe he could
because the I don't interpret
it, madam, but.
It being that strong, it says.
LFC interpret this is page 4,
the language of the bill to
impact only the general fund
share, the grocery receipts tax
from the state imposed GRT.
Implementation of the bill could
be interpreted to divert 1% of
the municipal share of the state
rate from the municipal's
distribution, so I wouldn't, I,
I don't count that Mr. Chair, as
a strong
Opinion one way or another as to
how the municipal peace will be
diverted. Thank you. Torres, if
you would please.
Representative Chandler, um,
the, the question comes from the
reference to the fund. That fund
is that suspense fund, which
also collects the 1.225 before
it goes back out to the locals.
So the, the confusion here is
really whether or not the 1%
applies to the pot of money.
Before the 1.225 goes out or
after the 1.225 goes out,
regardless, local governments
will get the entirety of their
1.225 share.
It's just the size of the
general fun piece that they get.
And, and I think there there's
something in the FIR that refers
to clarifying.
At which step in this process,
it comes out at.
And that's, that's how you can
get different revenue estimates
as well.
OK, Madam Chair, and
representative what I hear you
saying is the ambiguity lies at
what step the one what amount
the 1.225 applies, does it apply
to the larger amount before the
distribution, or does it apply
to the amount after the
distribution, that's what I hear
you saying.
Mr. Chairman, if I may please.
On page 18, line 6 at the end.
As of the end
On the net receipts tributed.
But it says in the bill on page
18 line 6.
Oh.
Mr. Chair, at your pleasure we
hear from the
tax secretary.
Chandler, you still have the
floor. Good.
Um, madam, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative Chandler, I agree
with everything the chief
economist, Mr. Torres, said the
net language on page 18 is net
of those hold harmless
distribution, so I think there
still could be the whole
harmless distributions under 7.
9, whatever they are, 4746, um,
so there could be still
ambiguity about the 1.225%, but
we are in agreement that it
doesn't apply to local option
taxes, which was the first
hurdle. OK, um, Madam Chair, and
I'm trying not to belabor this
point, but I do believe we need
a resolution because it will
impact the amount of money that
the municipalities will be
entitled to.
And I, I believe I just heard
the tax secretary say.
That it's still, there's still
some ambiguity, and since the
tax secretary's department will
be interpreting this bill.
You know, I would like some
assurance that it's going to be
clear, the municipalities would
not be harmed.
by a lower distribution in terms
of how
Madam.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Chandler, thank you. um.
It's just for providing
technical support here. The
local governments would receive
the 1.225. There's no ambiguity
about what local governments
would receive the question is
how much the general fund versus
the newly created trade supports
fund would receive. Do we send
1% before or after taking out
the 1.225. So there's no local
impact, just general fun versus
new fund. OK. All right.
So no negative impact on locals,
that's what you're telling me.
Um
I think this is an interesting
concept. My concern though is.
1% is
Significant amount of money.
That we will not be receiving.
Mr. um
I, you know, I just want to
point that out. I'm happy to
think about what my vote's going
to be for that.
concerned about that, Mr. Chair,
Madam Representative Bless you,
and, and to your point,
Representative Chandler, that
because of the fiscal impact
being so large in this.
Excuse me, that uh the nature of
this bill in this in this
committee anyways will be that
it will be tabled.
For for reflection and then
potential inclusion into the
omnibus tax package, so that's
the way that this would be
handled. So just so we're all on
the same page.
Any further questions?
Thank you. No, Mr. Chair.
Good. Let's move on then to uh
representerrazas.
Thank you for your patience.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Representative for this, this
legislation and, and, you know,
I've been listening to some of
the questions that I had.
Did get answered Mr.
And that, but it, it, you know,
I don't wanna go on and on about
this, but I know that your area
has been a lot of uh job losses.
And, and this in particular, how
much would it impact if you
foresee new jobs or recovering
jobs. What, what do you, what
percentage or?
Can you give me an idea of what
that would do for your area.
Uh
Thank you, Representative,
Thank you, Representatively what
we do is we look at a uh a
general multiplier.
We have
Some companies now that are
interested in moving into our
area.
That it's not
Necessarily.
paid for it cuz we don't have
trade port legislation.
So what would, what would happen
is, um.
We would take those existing new
jobs that we think we're going
to have in place.
We use a we use a.
And hoping then that we could
replicate that simple scenario
inside of a trade port.
I would say that it would be
phased because this takes a long
time to build out, doesn't
happen overnight.
I would say at least 300 jobs.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative, I
think for me, you know, when,
when we have massive job losses
that.
Um, in the community, it, it
ripples through everything. It
ripples through the evaluations
of homes, um.
Schools, everything, everything
takes an impact.
And, and commerce altogether.
And uh so, Mr. Chair
Representative, the, the reason
I was saying that is like, I
kind of remember.
When I did visit the the power
plants.
Some years back, I went out
there. It was something that it
was interesting there that you
talked about that, I remember.
Where there was
Somehow on a map, and I can't
remember exactly how how the
presentation was done where
there was an intersection of, of
I think the railway or
something.
Something there that made it
unique to
commerce moving and a good spot
because this is not something
you I think you've been working
on this for for one time, yeah.
Can you, can you remind me what
that was and I'm sorry, I just.
Yeah, we have what's called an
energy logistics park and you'd
heard, uh, I think it was city
manager mentioned that that's
now been annexed into the city,
so moving all.
But it's available.
translating, particularly
industrial type product, my
county is about heavy industry.
And that's who we are. We've had
mining, we've had, so we have
that in place now and it's in a
very good location in terms of.
Who could serve us.
That's probably what you had
seen, I know for the power plant
specifically, Mr. Chairman.
It also has rail service.
It is in pristine condition now.
It shares an area with its
design, it has lots of
designations to it, you know,
every time the federal
government.
Uh, comes forth with something
like um empowerment zones or op
opportunity zones or things like
that. We want to make sure that
we're taking advantage of that
and applying for those things.
So inside of our county, the two
industrial sites.
Definitely have uh every kind of
stacked uh.
Designation. And I only have 2
more questions on here.
Represent that is uh.
You know, how much federal
funding do you think we could
leverage?
With a fun like this.
Well, I mean, currently, uh Mr.
Chairman Representative,
particularly Berlio there that
they have that accelerator
ground.
Um
I think
The the uh federal DOT has been
looking for things like this.
The pilot projects and you think
that once you can get a customs
agent.
Into your community I know we
have that once you can get the
customs agent there that opens
up and you're able to what we
call break bulk, you actually
take the container, open it up,
break it down.
So I think there's an incredible
level now that you see some
changes in in uh trade policy.
Well, Mr. Chair Representative,
I think, I, I think what I need,
you know.
So I'd like, you know, see.
I don't know that you have this
number, but
We're we're investing $70
million because we're gonna have
federal funding of an
additional.
2040, 70, double, I don't know,
you know.
I, I didn't know that number and
I just kind of just threw that
out there.
Last thing, Mr. Representative
is, I think sometimes.
We, we
We want to be careful and, and,
and Representative Chandler has.
Every right to bring up the 1%
is a lot.
On the other, on the other hand
though, Mr. Chair.
I think that's investing in jobs
that will create more commerce
that will then back.
Bill
Some of the, the money that
we're investing, I think, well,
yeah.
By creating new jobs and new
commerce and building out.
Well, we are going to create
more grocery seeds are gonna.
In, in, in a sense.
Make more
Make
that this, this works.
Always sometimes we're always
hoping for the best, but I, I
hope that uh this would create
more jobs in both in Donana.
In your area in Albuquerque, um,
and if there's some other places
that
And benefit, but
I think
Concentrating it on.
Handful of areas I think that
was brought up also, I think
it's very important.
Uh because
The money starts getting thin.
Sure.
Representative, I think.
We won't be able to leverage
that as, as far, but I, I, I
appreciate your legislation.
Anyone else questions or
comments from the committee?
Seeing and no one else
representing anything else to
add.
Couple of things, Mr. Chairman,
I'd like to mention is that.
I've been, I've been tracking
what we've been doing with Jen,
we've had lots of money.
And we're setting up lots of
savings accounts and that that's
good, but that doesn't drive the
economy.
It drives the economy is
investment.
And I think we need to do that.
I think the state of New Mexico
needs to.
Yes.
Pull up their big boy pants and
start driving the economy.
The last I heard, Izzie, correct
me if I'm wrong.
What's the reoccurring amount of
uh general fund.
$13.6 billion.
So just think about that and
what percentage this would
represent, I think is a very
strong investment.
Particularly when you have the
multiplier of what this could
mean.
This is, this is economic based
employment.
This is economic based industry.
I think with the kind of money
that the state has now to
invest, we need to put it into
working for us.
We need to make sure that we're
working toward creating jobs and
building up.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I.
I appreciate your presentation
this morning, representative,
and for all the questions and
those that have come from, from
near and from far to be in the
room and also for those that
joined us online and, and, and
recognizing that maybe in this
committee, we do things
differently here that uh
whenever there's a a large
fiscal impact with any type of
legislation that, well, I voted
in favor of this in the previous
committee in in commerce. I
recognize the, the value of what
you're trying to do, but here,
because of the uh fiscal
Impact. What we will do is we
will uh table it here for those,
so don't, don't feel upset about
it, but it's just a practice
that we have here in this
committee that it will be tabled
and then it will be uh
potentially brought back
depending on our capacity in our
tax omnibus bill or potential
inclusion. So at that point in
time, later on in this in this
session, we'll then have a
further discussion about this
and other bills that come to
this committee as well. So at
that, at this point in time, uh,
I
Showwoman Kadena.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move
that we table House Bill 19 is
amended.
Motion table seconded by
Representative Gallegos.
I see no objection.
I appreciate the conversation
this morning. Thank you very
much, Representative. Thank you.
OK, let's move on now folks to
House Bill 47.
Representative R de la Cruz,
Chairman de la Cruz will present
this morning and um recognizing
that.
While this has a fiscal impact.
This is one of those that uh is
uh reacting to the
constitutional amendment that
took place in the fall of 2024.
So representative uh de la Cruz
as well as Secretary Sergeant
Clark have requested this bill
to be an emergency bill, right?
And so that being said, it's now
in our committee that passed
through the first committee.
And uh the floor is yours, the
both of you, whenever you're
ready to proceed.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Members, it's a pleasure to be
here with you.
Uh, co-sponsor.
Alan Martinez is hoping to be
here. I don't know if he'll make
it. I know he really wanted to
be here, but he had a
conflicting bill in another
committee.
It's our honor, Mr. Chairman
members that we were asked to
carry this particular bill.
Uh, because what it seeks to do
is give benefit to our veterans,
our disabled veterans and of
course veteran widows.
I'm happy to introduce with me
this morning Secretaryharon
Clark, who will be answering all
of the technical questions
related to this particular bill.
So I will just read a brief
synopsis of what we're trying to
attempt.
The committee substitute for HB
47 is a simple bill that
effectuates the two veteran
property tax.
Exemption constitutional
amendments that were approved by
the electorate in the November
2024 general election.
The first constitutional
amendment increases from 4000 to
10,000 the exemption that may be
claimed by any veteran or
veteran surviving spouse.
In future years, $100,000
exemption will be adjusted for
inflation.
The second constitutional
amendment expands the disabled
veteran property tax exemption
to include a proportionate
exemption reflecting a veteran's
partial disability.
The current exemption only
provides a 100% exemption for
100 100% disabled veterans.
Mr. Chair, we, uh, stand for
questions at this time.
Does your expert wish to make
any comments?
Mr. Chair, no, I'll happily
stand for questions. Very good.
Thank you both. OK, let's go to
those that are joining us
online. Anyone?
It is support of House Bill 47.
David Venus.
David, good morning.
What, uh, my name is uh David
Pettis, uh veteran, also,
uh, stand in the strong sport
so. Thank you very much.
Thank you, sir.
Ex
Veterans and military.
Morning veterans and military,
you're with us.
Good morning, Chair Lundy and uh
Tax and Revenue Committee
members. This is Claudia
Reisner. I'm a Navy veteran, and
I'm speaking on behalf of the
560 members of the Veterans and
Military Families Caucus. We are
in strong support of HB 47.
These two constitutional
amendments that expand the
property tax exemptions for
veterans were passed with strong
support by the voters in New
Mexico. I think Representative
Stella Cruz and Martinez for
carrying this important and
enabling.
legislation and thank you, Chair
Linte and committee members for
the opportunity to speak in
support of the bill on behalf of
the Veterans and Military
Families Caucus this morning.
Yes, ma'am. Thank you.
You want in opposition.
Legislation.
Nobody online, OK. Let's come to
the room. Anyone here in
opposition of House Bill 47.
Seeing no one, anyone in support
of House Bill 47.
For the same reasons as to form
a line and we'll have our
sergeant of arms hold the mic
for us. Thank you, folks.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. Good morning.
I'm JD Bollington speaking on
behalf of Greater Albuquerque
Chamber of Commerce, Mexico is
home to 141,000 veterans who are
proud of their service in
defense of this country, the
greater Albuquerque Chamber is
proud of them too, and it wants
to make New Mexico more
attractive for veterans to serve
here and stay in our great
state.
Hospital 47 is a good investment
in New Mexico's economy and for
the many veterans who are
business owners, consumers, and
contributors to our state's
success. We applaud the sponsors
for bringing it forward. Thank
you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
committee. I'm a secretary James
Anode on the Department of
Veteran Services, also a veteran
and we stand in strong support
of this bill as a derived by the
the vote in 2024. Thank you.
Thank you, yes sir.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
committee members, um, Kent
Cravens, registered lobbyist for
New Mexico Association of
Realtors, Realtors across the
state enthusiastically and
proudly support this legislation
and we thank the sponsors for
bringing it forward.
Thank you, sir.
Uh, anyone else in support,
seeing no one else. Thank you,
Sergeant, for holding the mic
for us. Let's come to the
committee first on our list is
Chandler.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, representative for bringing
forward this necessary
legislation. I'm trying to
understand about uh how this
bill addresses the 2024, 2025.
Property tax evaluation issue
and that's shorthand because I
doubt I can explain it as well
as the secretary, but I think we
need to put that out on the
table as to what it is doing and
what it's not doing, Mister
Chair and Representative. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you,
Representative Chandler. I'd be
happy to uh try that, so this
bill, what it does do is it
moves the $4000 exemption to a
$10,000 exemption starting in
tax year 2025.
Uh, the property tax years, the
timelines are a little
confusing, but the tax year 2025
valuations are the ones that
must be mailed by the assessors
by April 1st of this year.
Therefore, the emergency clause
on this bill.
It hacks year 2024 evaluations
are those that were sent by
April 1st, 2024. They were
protested in the spring of 2024,
they've been billed, uh, they're
beginning to be paid and the
timeline for all of that is is
long ago. And so this bill
cannot really address tax year
2024 in the property tax code.
And so they're, it's, it's
difficult because the House
joint resolution language
proposed tax relief in a year.
It could not be provided unless
there had been a special general
election called, which there
wasn't
Mr. Chair and Representative. So
let's extend that conversation
to the impact on the local
governments.
And
The local governments are going
to be facing a potential
protest, Mr. Chair, if I'm, I'm
understanding this correctly
because we're, they may not be
in a position.
Or are not in a position to to
have taken this into account.
Because of the way we crafted
that constitutional amendment.
I got all the way through our
house, the Senate, it made it
through TRD without any flag for
us, and I'm very concerned, Mr.
Chair, about local governments.
And what is the state planning
on doing to make those local
governments whole, because it's
not really their fault that we
goofed up and that's, and I
think we need to own that, Mr.
Chair, we goofed up.
All the way up and down the
chain, and now we've got
counties that could be hurting
really some more than others,
but uh there are gonna be
veterans rightfully claiming
that they are, they are not
getting the exemption that they
deserve, Mr. Chair and
Mr. Representative.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Chandler.
Um
I think the the best way you can
answer that question is that.
The deadline to file a refund
suit for tax year 2024 was
January 9th.
And by that time,
Everyone knew that the
constitutional amendments had
passed and in general, those
refund suits have not been
requested. I think I'm aware of
one taxpayer in one county, and
so that's maybe a $300 exposure.
Um, I can't speak to what courts
would do, but our interpretation
of the property tax code is that
a taxpayer had until January
9th, that was the timeline to
file a timely suit for refund.
Mr. Chairman, if I might add,
It's, it's one of those
conundrums because they're
conflicting, we have conflicting
law that requires a protest by a
certain time.
At the same time we passed an
amendment that is is is.
Functionally after the fact.
Thank you, Mr.
Um, Mr. Chair, I, Mr.
Representative, I think you got
it in a nutshell. So we're
saying.
Mr. Chair and Representative.
Um, well, veterans.
You had this entitlement.
You messed up because you didn't
protest promptly enough and.
The chips fall where they may.
And, uh, you know, if, if
everyone's OK with that.
Mr. Chair, that's what we're
saying.
Um
If, if I could add a bit, Mr.
Sherman.
So
Uh
I will share that with the
committee that
I've talked to an awful lot of
bits. I have a lot of veterans
in my district, and for whatever
it's worth, Miss Chaman. Most of
them understand the situation
that we're in, and mostly, and
that's why I think we have a
broad support that this is.
A right that we will be able to.
Enjoy going forward.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative, of course, I'm
not faulting you at all, like
you're working, Mr. Chat to
solve at least part of the
issue, but.
You know, I think we just need
to be more careful how we do
these things. I guess I'm
stating the obvious, but it's
just it it's not right, um, so
thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Anyone else questions or
comments from the committee?
Representative, uh.
Remember Duncan?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
Representative, it looks like
the the assessors counties were
all involved in this
municipalities, we're all
involved in this, before this.
it
Thank you. Yes, we have received
support now.
They also have been concerned
that this.
is a problem, but
She
Sheriff.
Kelly.
That has an issue with it.
And so, uh, we had at the last
committee the first committee
that we were at, there was
support from the Association of
counties as well as the county
assessors.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
following up on that then, I
know Berno County probably has
the largest.
A group of veterans that live in
Berlin, so.
But what about throughout the
state and some of the other
smaller counties.
That might have a large
contingency of vets there and
If they were already mapped out,
you couldn't raise their taxes
anymore.
How will this impact?
Would you like me to, um, Mr.
Chair and Representative Duncan,
um.
We did a county by county
analysis of how we expected, um.
So what we have to take a step
back, we're narrowing the tax
base slightly by removing some
veteran properties from it and
through the yield control
statute, that means that in
general, you raise the mill rate
imposed on everyone left in the
base, but it's a much bigger
group, so the increase is, is
fairly marginal, um, but that
depends on the county having
millage left and I, I believe
the county uh maximum is
11.6585, 11.85% max. And so, in
general, um, yield control will.
most counties harmless from
this, but we did list in our FIR
about 14, uh, areas where.
The through yield control, they
would just be held harmless and
then 7 where they would have uh
a slight decrease in revenue as
a result of village being maxed
out.
Thank you, uh
victory.
That's the smaller counties that
don't have
Any uh ERT.
A way of driving the other
income toward them.
Those are the ones that I was a
little concerned with if
They were going to be impacted
greatly.
Um
That's all I
Sure.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan. Let's go to
Representative Kadena.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
sponsors and secretary. Um, I
want to follow up a bit on the
questions and concerns raised by
our colleague Representative
Chandler.
I understand that this is
enabling legislation. We out of
this committee in this body has
two different constitutional
amendments that now we have the
responsibility to enact and
bring to life.
Um, it's my understanding we uh
talked through the, the dates,
the 2024 issue here.
In the conversations I've had
with counties and others.
There's other concerns we heard
about them in Reep December, I
believe.
Um, can you just talk us through
what it looks like to.
Step into something like the
enabling legislation and
consider whether there's any
other opportunities.
To address some of the concerns
that have come forward with
this, with the constitutional
amendments we passed.
Um, is there any, whether it be,
I know counties have talked
about how if there's two
veterans that live in the same
home. Does that stack, um, just
these questions that remain
unanswered, um, yeah, is there
any, have you addressed any of
those other questions in this
enabling legislation and do you
have opportunity to do so,
besides the ongoing
conversations that you all are
in to resolve some of those
issues.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Chairman
Lin Tae and Vice Chair Karena,
um, yes, we, we've heard, I, I
guess through counties as well
as we've discussed with LFC
staff, the issues of stacking,
um, I, I'll take it in two
directions. The Constitution
says that a veteran who is
eligible for one or both of
these exemptions shall receive
the exemptions. So any anything
we do in the enabling statute
and then anything further down
the line that we could do in
property tax division rule has
to stay within the umbrella.
in the Constitution. So we shall
allow these exemptions at the
county level if a veteran is
eligible and as, as to the order
of the exemptions taken at the,
the new twist, the new wrinkle
in that is, you know, a, a 4000
to a 10,000 exemption off the
top of your property value is
pretty straightforward, but
what's new is that the disabled
exemption used to be just a 100%
exemption for a 100% disabled
veteran, then there would be
nothing left to to stack because
it was 100% exemption.
Now the question is, if you are
partially disabled, let's say
90% disabled and you receive the
$10,000 exemption, which do you
take first? Do you take 10,000
off the top and then 990, it's,
it's like the conversation we
had on the last bill, or do you
take 90 and then take 10 off
that. We will have to clarify
that in, I guess in rule, um, to
the extent that we want all
counties to do it uniformly.
But it's not addressed in this,
this language really just
affects the constitution, which
I think is appropriate.
Um, your second question, I
think it's to the fiscal impact
and the uncertainty around the
pro rata disabled exemption. We
have really good data to
estimate the fiscal impact of
the, of going from 10 or $400 to
$10,000. That's pretty simple.
But there is not, uh, we have to
make a lot of assumptions about
to pause for a second to make
sure we're all following this
because I had to hear it on
repeat many times to follow you.
So that becomes more simple
because.
Potentially, the majority of
people who are already eligible
to um
Received the $4000 deduction,
you have accounts of them, so
all you're doing is increasing
the amount, the dollar amount of
that count, right?
Yes, thank you.
And now going to the other
issue, that becomes more
ambiguous. Exactly, Mr. Chair
and Vice Chair Karina, the
disabled prorated distribution
is more difficult now, the
assumptions we have to make on
the number of partially disabled
New Mexicans and their
percentage of disability and
their home values all affect
that estimate.
But I will say that the types of
assumptions we have to make on
that aren't really any more
extreme than the assumptions we
have to make on many FIRs that
Mr. Chair, if I might turn to
some of your other experts.
I imagine part of our
uncertainty here also has to do
with
Our reliance on federal systems
of determining someone's
disability, um, correct? And Mr.
Chair, and experts.
It's my understanding that our
state agency is also doing more
to to better communicate and
collect data on what the
disability status is of veterans
that call New Mexico home,
correct, Mr. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Uh, secretary Herrera is here.
He can help answer, but
They are qualified, working with
the state as well, if I could
have Secretary Herrera step to
the microphone please if I may
introduce and recognize uh the
the whip of the House
Republicans and your co-sponsor
joining you.
I was gonna ask if we could
break protocol just briefly to
have Representative Martinez
introduce himself and make a
statement.
Uh, let's, let's get the
question answered first and then
we'll come back to you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, vice chair,
would you mind repeating the,
the question exactly so I can
make sure I address you Mr.
Chair and Secretary. Thank you
for being here.
It's my senses our economists
and others and counties try to
get a better idea of what the
financial cost of this important
constitutional amendment is, um,
the 4000 to 1, 10,000 jump is
more certain because we know
who's been um filing with the
exemption on the 4000, we're
expanding the dollar amount of
that exemption. But on this
piece, because we've never been
interact, the state has not been
interacting with veterans that
had a disability status below
100 because previously our
constitutional amendment allowed
for the 10.
%
Um
Blame on this tax exemption.
It's been communicated to me
that at least um the legislative
version of the state potentially
different than the executive
branch, we don't have.
Data that tells us how many New
Mexicans are at 40% or 50% or
70%.
It's been shared with me more
recently that potentially, even
though that data is affirmed and
collected at the federal level
that you and your agency have a
sense of where New Mexicans are
with their disability status as
determined by the federal
government. Is that accurate?
What is your data look like?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
um, so we do have the the
federal database so the
Department of Veterans Affairs
does track all disabled veterans
by county in the state of New
Mexico.
So we, we do have the the the
roll up of everybody who was
Considered a veteran and was
already receiving that in the
assessors have probably the the
best analysis of that because of
the transfers that take place
within their offices.
The
200 to 90% percentages we have
as of close of 2023, and this
has been provided to the the
assessors association to ensure
that they have the same data
that we have because they were
operating off of some
assumptions from 2020, 2021, so
I've reached out to them. I've
been in uh very transparent with
them about what we, the numbers
we are tracking with a possible
growth because of uh what we've
been doing with the
communications here, for
example, and I'll I'll use a
Donana County.
Currently we have total number
of veterans that the VA is
tracking.
At 4-916 veterans in Donana
County.
That's plus or minus depending
on the assessors and our our
current.
The 0 to 90%.
That are gonna be eligible in
Donana County to be reassessed
on the percentages.
will be 3724.
So a large preponderance of your
veterans that are already
receiving the 4000 are also.
Receiving a percentage of
disability.
And that will be applied and the
assumptions that can be made
based on the data we have is uh
they could worst case it at
2040, 60, and
80 to 90% that they could
actually base an assumption of
of so it's not gonna be perfect
math, but I believe that we've
given him at least a a a a
viewfinder on where we stand
with a with a percentage were
again in the rules committee I
think this could be identified
as uh everybody is using the
same numbers to reach the same
objective.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I really
appreciate that update,
certainly, certainly we're not a
perfect body, um, and we often
operate on assumptions, uh, it
is really reassuring to me, and
I've heard the same from others
that as of recently, it seems
like you're doing.
More of these, um, bodies are
working with the same data and
that seems um quite helpful so
that we can climb through this
uncertainty together and make
sure that we have the impact
that veterans and you all came
forward and asked for and the
veterans deserve. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I appreciate that.
Yes sir, please
Mr. Vice Chair, I just wanted to
add as a this is assuming that
every veteran is going to come
forth and request that
percentage um of disability as
well because they will have to
come forward and their their
certificates that are provided
by their claim letters.
Their award letters that we will
revalidate and that's.
New certificate that we've
already developed.
successor's office to go
forward, so we're assuming that
every veteran is gonna claim
this exemption and there's
several veterans that I've
spoken with that they don't feel
like they they they would need
to do that.
So
Again, we're talking worst case
numbers.
Thank you, Secretary. Before we
move on.
Representative, do you need to
make any statement or say hello.
Hello, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for joining us
going back and forth between
committees but I'm, I'm just
here to thank you for being
here. Absolutely, thank you. Uh,
let's go to Representative
Silva.
Thank you, chair, uh, thank you,
representatives. Um, I wanna say
first, I, I support the shift
and um.
And correcting the
constitutional amendment, so,
and I have some questions, um,
I'm wondering if uh the tax and
revenue Department has the time
to create the rules to guide
counties, um, if this were to
pass, and then it's a tight
deadline, so I just wanted to
check on that. Thank you, Chair.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Silva, thank you for that
question. Um, we wouldn't do a
rulemaking before they send
their April 1st mailings, but
we'll certainly be in close
contact with the assessor's
affiliate.
Thank you, Chair. And so the
concern on the
House analysis on page 6,
without clear direction from the
legislation or a mandate from
Texan rev to promulgate
regulations, there's a potential
for inconsistencies and
implementation.
A county assessors, um, do you,
would you, would taximer be able
to help and guide county
assessors so there's less
inconsistency even if there
isn't a rule. Thank you, chair.
Yes, Mr. Chair and
Representative Silva, we win.
And then I have one more
question, chair, um, just a
clarifying question cuz I was
confused. Um, you said that
there were 7 counties that would
not be held harmless.
Um, but in the attachment E,
there's 23 counties of of the
33.
Um,
have no remaining authority on
their um on increasing their,
their meals. And so I'm just
wondering if you could correct
that for me, and if these
numbers on attachment.
are um
is the total revenue loss that
counties are gonna be expecting.
Thank you, Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Silva, you're referencing the
LFCFIR which has some tables
that didn't come from us, but,
um, so I think if there are
questions about the attachments,
this probably could be answered
by Mr. Excellent. Can, can you
help, Izzy, thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Silva, a coup a couple points
here. The total revenue loss
also reflects special districts
which have the ability to
increase meals, they're not
limited by that operating mill,
um, constraint like the counties
are. So there may be an initial
loss that can then later be made
up in increasing mill levies for
special districts. And you'll
notice the operating loss column
is really the, the area where
we're referring to and and
Secretary Shedon Clark brought
this up too. There's actually,
we're seeing only 2 counties
that would be impacted.
affected by that limitation, and
you could see their loss that we
estimate there. Um, the, the,
the
The calculation isn't
necessarily just capacity in, in
the operating. There's that
certain amount of yield control
that occurs each year that can
capture some of that loss and be
made up, even without that extra
milk.
Thank you, Izzy, I appreciate
that. Thank you, chair. Um, and
then I think I'd want to just
spend extra time helping, um,
the counties in my district just
navigate that too and then
making up for any additional
revenue they might wanna do so.
Thank you, chair.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to Representative Lundstrom.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
also looking at page 7 on the
FIR. We're looking at
substantial.
substantive issues here.
Um
I'd like to ask.
dizzy.
Uh, where we're talking about,
there's a small concern that
bonds at the state level.
school bonds, etc. I'm looking
at the last sentence where it
says for these jurisdictions, it
may not be possible to adjust
debt levy.
Cover the losses from the new
exam.
Madam Chair, um,
Or Mr. Chair and Representative
Lindstrom.
Uh, so there's a couple of
issues at hand here. Um, when
the voters approve a special
mill levy, frequently that'll be
based on the project and not on
an actual mill amount. Those can
be increased in future years to
ensure coverage of the existing
debt service.
If uh
So, I, I guess the, the issue
being raised in the FIR is if in
the initial
Reduction in in revenues, if
that could um be insufficient
revenues over, say, that next
year to continue to meet the
debt service, that, that's
certainly a concern. I don't
know if I'm missing something on
that one.
But of course that most of these
um special districts maintain.
A, a small reserve, usually the
next two bond payments in the
event of a revenue decline. So
we expect that the, the risk is,
is low, but the risk is not
zero.
Oh, Mr. Chairman, I, I'm
Mr. Chair Representative
Lindstrom, it, it would affect
them as well.
Um, the other thing I had, Mr.
Chairman, and it gets back to, I
think it was page one I flipping
through the.
Yes, I are here on page 3.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, on the uh FIR.
as the bill is silent on how
assessors should implement
stacking of the exemption can
someone talk about that, please?
Mr. Charon represented
Lindstrom, um, to kind of add to
what we talked about previously
with Representative Silva and
others about the stacking, um,
the property tax director Ira
Pearson wrote me a really
helpful note. He reminded me
that the 4000 to $10,000
exemption goes into effect here
for tax year 25, but the um this
the prorated disability
exemption doesn't go into effect
until tax year 26. So we do have
that extra year to make sure
that rules go.
effect that clarify how they are
to be stacked. All right, thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to Representative Pajon.
Mr. Chair and thank you so much
for presenting this bill, um.
I have a
A question actually on the page
2 of the FIR.
Um
Secretary and Representative Mr.
Chair.
The
It says here that starting in
2026, property tax year that the
$10,000 exemption will be
adjusted for inflation.
Using the consumer price index.
Um
Can you walk me through how that
would happen, consumer price
index increases 1.6 in the year,
then the 10,000 increases by
1.6.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Parajon, thank you. Yes, there
are several areas of the tax
code that for one reason or
another are adjusted annually
for inflation and so basically
the, the statute will talk about
a numerator and a denominator
where you take the current year
divided by the base year,
whichever year that is in, in
this case, and you just, um,
compare the change in the CPI
over time and adjust it, and
then I think this one provides
also for rounding to the nearest
$10 or something along those.
lines.
So, uh, Mr. Chair would that
mean that
So this $10,000 exemption will
grow over time to one day be
$20,000 for instance.
Mr. Charon represented Claudon.
That's correct, over time, it
will grow and also it will keep
pace with inflation so that the
purchasing power of what is
exempt is aimed to keep pace
with market value in the $10,000
was set, um, to take a step
back, I think the $4000
exemption was last amended, I
think in 2000, but I, I'd have
to look. So over time, you know,
we've we've gone at least 20
years since adjusting that in
the value of the 4000 has gone
down.
significantly.
And Mr. Chair, our, our property
taxes today adjusted based on
market valuation or CPI.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Parajon every year, a
residential property is
reassessed the value of it by
the county assessor and so the
assessment each year does go up
for market value, um, changes,
it could go down, it could go up
and residential properties with
certain exceptions are capped at
a 3% increase, which is
For purposes of your question,
it is less than CPI usually is.
Mr. Chair, so.
So we do have a cat, but that
could increase. So if CPI one
year increases 4%, but their cap
is 3%.
Correct, um.
Correct, it's possible in a year
of uh sustained high inflation.
That CPI growth could be more
than growth in the property
value under that cap.
Mr. Chair.
Is, so you, you said that other
taxes are also adjusted for CPI,
what, what I'm trying to get out
at here is really like.
Is trying to understand how the
growth the growth exemption
taxing all the other properties,
for instance, if um.
Since other property taxes have
to be adjusted in order to make
up for this property tax
exemption, uh, in a year where
there is.
A much larger
CPI, but the rates are capped.
How does that adjustment, if
that makes.
I think so. I, I'll first just
start by, I think, stating the
obvious, which is that this is
required by the Constitution,
um, and so we're reflecting the
language that was in or that was
approved by the voters and the
body in a, in this House joint
resolutions, but
Yes, it's possible and and let's
keep in mind that the
residential properties owned by
veterans is still a very small
piece of the whole property tax
base statewide. So when you
narrow that base, including
continuing to narrow it with
inflation adjustments in the
future, the shift of that tax to
the rest of the tax base is is
pretty minor.
Um
But yes, it's possible that
there could be a year where the
inflation adjustment for those
properties is larger than the
base growth for all the others.
Mr. Sharon, just lastly, um.
But this bill doesn't just
affect residential properties,
it also affects the business
properties, is that.
OK.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
all of the properties owned by
veterans or their residences,
but the shift of the tax would
be in, and through yield control
would be to non-residential and
everything else.
Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Questions and comments from the
committee?
Sing Nan, uh, secretary, so.
Vice chairman then I brought up
some some interesting points
that I think we failed to to
really talk about between
yourself and myself and the
sponsors in regards to the
stacking concern, the stacking
questions that she had. And so,
um, in conversation with both
our vice chairwoman and our
ranking member Duncan and some
other folks, um, what's your
time frame to have to get, my
understanding from speaking with
the assessors and their
affiliate is that because they
have to mail by April 1st, they
need a.
signed by about March 1st to
give themselves time to adjust
their data files and.
Print and prepare and mail
everything. And, and it's not
our intent to, to belabor this
issue. It's an important issue.
It has to get done, but I would
rather pass out something from
this committee that represents
something that is, is well
thought out that leaves.
No, uh, ability for, for
ambiguity or interpretation. So,
uh, would you be OK then, uh,
with us and some of the members
on this committee to look at the
stacking issue and, and redefine
that with council service. We
can roll this today, but then
have you, if we can get it done
today, have it first thing on
Friday so that we can continue
to get you on the road so that
you can get this done.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members. I think that would
work. OK.
Yeah. It, it, it's better for us
that, that we feel comfortable
with what's going to happen
here, instead of just passing it
on and kicking the can and
hopefully we have this, or
hopefully we wouldn't have this
conversation on the house floor
and then it just creates further
mess. I really appreciate the
committee's engagement on this,
we share your concern of just
wanting to get it right. OK,
very good. So uh we have uh vice
general would would would take
the lead on, on working with you
all and counsel service and Izzy
and whoever else so that we can
get it done and if we can get it
done today, we can get it on.
on Friday.
Yeah my commitment.
Thank you. Thank you folks.
Thank you.
Moving on, folks to our last
bill for the day we have House
Bill 52, Representative Miguel
Garcia, Rural Healthcare Tax
Credit eligibility.
The floor is yours, sir,
whenever you're ready.
Thank you, uh, Estema chairman,
uh, the chairman, I have an
amendment and I'd like to act on
the amendment so that I can
incorporate it into our
presentation. Thank you for
clarification. What's the 22
number on the bottom?
It is uh 230208.2. OK. I think
that's what we all have that has
been passed up we can.
We're getting a passed out
representative and so.
Uh, while we're doing that.
We get all the way to the end of
the day.
Somebody moved the amendment for
discussion.
discussions or second it.
Representative, what's the
amendment?
Thank you Mr. Chairman, um, Mr.
Chairman, um,
In the health committee, uh,
which was the first hearing for
this legislation.
Uh, we had, uh, what we thought.
Were the last of the Mohegans in
terms of
Healthcare practitioners that
were not part of the rural
healthcare practitioner Tax
Credit Act.
In presenting
The, uh
The bill
Uh
There was input from the public.
Uh, that we were not including
two health practitioners.
And those were.
The um
The narrow narrow paths.
And the
Uh, naturopathic.
positions.
So the amendment basically
incorporates those two
professions into.
Our House Bill 52.
That's what the amendment does,
Mr. Chair. It has these two to,
to health professions that we
inadvertently kind of left out.
Uh, in the original drafting of
the legislation.
OK.
Questions, comments from the
committee.
Move adoption by Representative
Lustrom. Is there a second?
In the opposition, seeing none,
your bill has been amended,
gentlemen, thank you.
Thank you Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
um.
Hospital 52 adds the following
health practitioners to our
rural.
Health care practitioner Tax
Credit Act.
And it includes a $3000 credit.
Uh, these professions are
licensed nurse practitioners.
Emergency medical technicians.
Paramedics
Speech language pathologist.
Occupational therapist.
Chiropractic physicians and then
the two professions that we
added on with the amendment.
Which are the naturaltroopathic
doctors.
And the
Naturopaths
And Mr. Chair, um,
He ruled out your Tax Credit
Act.
was established in 2007. I
remember clearly voting on this
legislation.
And it was a two-tiered.
Uh, credit
We had a $5000 credit.
Uh, and these professions are
stated in the bill.
Uh, $5000 credit.
That went to mainly the doctor
class.
Um, so these are kind of higher.
Practitioners within our state.
And the other
Part of the tier was a $3000
credit.
Um
And Mr. Chair, the purpose of
that legislation.
was to essentially
Retain current practitioners in
our rural communities here in
New Mexico.
That was a thrust of that
legislation.
And also to reduce.
Work shortages in our rural
areas.
Of some of these professions.
That, uh
Uh, were short or non-existent.
In many of our communities.
And Mister Chair
Uh
The additions in 2009, there
were some additions to the.
To the um tax credit in 2009.
This is a 22 years after the
legislation original legislation
was passed, and these are
basically nurse specialist
categories.
From 2009 to last year, Mr.
Chair.
We had not done any inclusions
into the tax credit.
And last year, as this committee
is very aware of.
We
Brought in 6.
Of professions
That we have been trying for 11
years.
To put into their tax credit
Act, and these were pharmacists.
Registered nurses
Social workers
Behavioral health therapist.
And counselors
Um
Physical therapist.
And uh certified midwives.
And these professions.
fell within a realm.
Of
21 to 24% of these professions
were working in the rural
community.
Uh, in regards to the
Uh, uh, the additions that we're
bringing forth, Mr. Chair, that
that 2024 um legislation of
which was
In the tax package that you guys
put together, Mr. Chair.
Brought in 5600 new
practitioners.
The legislation before us that
brings in the 7.
Uh, health professions would at
approximately.
Uh, 1400 new practitioners.
And uh that are from the mental
healthcare Workforce Committee.
Which is a committee that was
established by the 2007
legislation.
To look at creating data.
For the legislature regarding
health care practitioners.
Uh, they estimate that of these
new professions 23 are
practicing in the rural.
Community.
professions that were bringing
on board.
Mr. Chair, the, uh,
The health care
Um
Workforce Committee in their
2023 report.
Finds that there are 900
occupational therapists.
Practicing
Um
In our state
Of these 900 occupational
therapists.
23 practice in rural New Mexico.
Yeah, New Mexico is 65% rural.
Under has Bill 52, approximately
210 OTs would be eligible for
the credit.
Also
Considering that same data of
the healthcare Workforce
Committee.
Uh, Mr. Chair, we have
approximately close to 2000
speech pathologists.
In our state
23%
Are practicing in rural New
Mexico.
Yeah
You must go a 65% rural.
Under House Bill 52.
Mr. Chair
Um, 460 speech pathologists
would be eligible for the
credit.
Also along the same lines of
that 202023 report.
We have 500 chiropractic
physicians, 23% practice in New
Mexico.
Yeah
65% of New Mexico.
Um, is rural.
And under House Bill 52.
115 chiropractic physicians
would be eligible for the.
Right.
And Mr. Chair.
The report does not include
The LSC report.
Does not include reliable data
for EMTs.
Uh, paramedics and licensed
practical nurses.
But what the FIR did it kind of
used tax and rev data.
To uh
Come up with some estimates for
these professions.
And uh an estimate states that
uh
And we have approximately 500.
Uh, licensed nurse practitioners
in New Mexico.
And again, um,
Um
Uh, I just want to say lastly,
Mr. Chair.
That um
Yes he made a hit on the general
fund.
For these 6.
Positions that were bringing on
board.
The last of the Mohicans or what
I would term the last of the
Montoyas.
You know, uh.
Would be a hit of approximately
$2.5 million on the general
fund.
Keep in mind, Mr. Chair.
Uh
Legislation that we did last
year we brought in.
Some heavy hiting professional
health practitioners.
Was a 12 to $13 million dollar
hit.
the general fund.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I'd
like to, uh,
Uh, due to my witness who.
We also
Do a brief presentation on the
significance of legislation.
Thank you.
These brief so we can uh session
in 15 minutes. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
Linda Siegel, I represent a
number of different um
healthcare providers including
occupational therapists, which
are included in this version,
and this bill has over the years
picked winners and losers and we
hope that finally with this
legislation that we can get all
of our essential healthcare
providers into the rural tax
credits to help people.
Go to and stay in rural areas.
Thank you.
Very good. Thank you very much.
Let's go to the uh
Audience, those are online, you
want to support or opposition of
House Bill 52. Anyone support?
NMCA.
MCA, good morning.
Morning, uh, Mr. Emergency
committee, thank you for your
time. My name is Doctor JC
Moore. I'm a chiropractic
physician and president of the
New Mexico Chiractic
Association, the New Mexico
Association support of this
legislation. I personally have
been involved in a leadership
role within the NMCA for
approximately the last 10 years,
uh, in every board meeting that
we have held over that time,
there are concerns from our
providers in areas like McKinley
County and Silver City.
and the consequences in Clayton
of the lack of providers coming
into the area in the exodus of
the chiropractic physicians as
well as other healthcare
providers. Um, I believe that
this bill has the potential to
help.
Uh, incentivize doctors to move
and stay in these areas and uh
we thank the sponsor for his
support and bringing us to the
front.
Thank you, doctor.
Next
Jessica Salazar.
So good morning.
Good morning. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Jessica
Salazar and an occupational
therapist as well as the
legislative chair for the New
Mexico occupational Therapy
Association. And I'm here to uh
to express our strong support
for HB 52.
New Mexico is facing a
significant shortage of
occupational therapy
practitioners currently 25 out
of 33 counties fall below the
national benchmark for number of
OTs with many of these counties
being rural occupational
therapists are an essential part
of the healthcare team.
with individuals of all ages
from birth to end of life in a
variety of settings. We help
people engage in meaningful
activities that are important to
their health, identity, and
overall well-being occupational
therapy has also been linked to
reduced rates
stated earlier, the majority of
occupational therapists
concentrated in urban areas like
Albuquerque, Rio Rancho Santa
Fe. In rural areas where access
to OT services is limited or
nonexistent. New Mexicans often
face a difficult choice of going
without necessary care.
very long wait times or
traveling long distance to see a
provider. HB 52 offers
incentives to encourages to
practice in these underserved
areas. So not only improve
access to care for Mexicans, but
we also support the growth and
sustainability of our profession
in the state. On behalf of the
New Mexico occupational Therapy
Association. I urge you to
support AB 52. Thank you. Thank
you. Next.
Dana Gray.
Ana Gray, good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Dana Gray, executive
director of physical therapy.
We would like to thank
Representative Garcia for his
tireless efforts in regard to
this bill. While the network is
comprised of 30 independent
private practices of the
physical and occupational
therapy clinics are located in
rural areas.
Our rural clinic struggle to
retain and recruit staff. The
tax credit
for rural occupational therapist
could provide incentive.
For therapist to serve
underserved communities. We
stand in full support of House
Bill 2 and urge your support as
well. Thank you. Thank you.
Next.
What else? Anyone in opposition?
Oh, OK, in our room, anyone in
opposition for House Bill 52.
Anyone I support of House Bill
52. Very good, Sergeant arms
will hold the mic for us, and if
you can form the line, would be
great.
Thank you. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. I think we all know we
have a shortage of medical
professionals at all levels
across our state and encouraging
all of them to live and practice
in rural New Mexico as a
win-win. So this year the
sponsors, the legislation are
advocating to expand the
healthcare practitioners who are
eligible for this credit, as
noted in the fiscal impact
report from last year, TRD said
the credit would encourage more
healthcare professionals.
practice in rural areas. That's
good news for the nurses, EMTs,
therapists, chiropractors, and
everyone who decides to make New
Mexico their, their home, and
it's good for the people who
live and get treatment in rural
communities in our state.
Thank you. Next.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
of the committee, Richard
Romero, I am a registered
lobbyist in support of the New
Mexico speech and hearing
Association, we wholeheartedly
endorse this and want to thank
my representative in Albuquerque
for pushing hard on this bill
and the others. Thank you very
much. You, next morning Chairman
Lente, members of the committee.
My name is Fred Nathan. I'm
founder and executive director
of Think New Mexico. We
enthusiastically support this
legislation and commend the
sponsor for bringing it.
In the fall, we sent out a
report on the healthcare
shortage in New Mexico, and this
was one of 10 major
recommendations. I understand
building an omnibus bill every
year is probably the most
challenging and important thing
you do on this committee, um, it
sounds like there's going to be
an omnibus bill this year, and
we believe House Bill 52 should
be included for at least 3
reasons. First, it addresses an
urgent and dire need to attract
and retain rural.
healthcare practitioners, just
as one example with EMTs, we've
lost 1,134 over the last decade
were 4900 underneath the
national benchmark. Second, this
is a credit that's targeted to
working class people. These are
the unsung heroes of our rural
health care system, the people
that wake up in the middle of
the night to go to crash scenes,
for example, and it has a
relatively modest effect uh
price tag.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Next
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, my name's Charlie
Marcus. I also represent Desert
states Physical therapy Network.
I just wanted to add that this
is really about access and
providing those professionals
that are badly needed in rural
communities. Well, they're not
going to say they're tax credit,
it is something that helps. So
thank you very much and we hope
you passed this bill. Thank you,
Mr. Marquez. Next.
Good morning.
My name is Peter Compos. I
represent the Gallup-McKinley
County Chamber of Commerce, and
we stand in.
You
And thank the sponsors.
Legislation. Gallup McKinley
County and all of rural New
Mexico are in the midst of a
healthcare crisis, struggling
and failing hospitals,
healthcare facilities, and a
lack of medical providers are
now the status quo. A recent
conversation with the family
medicine doctor in my community,
highlights what most of rural
New Mexico is facing. He and his
wife serve almost 20,000
patients in our community, and
they are aggressively
interviewing outside of our
state and plan to leave no later
than August. This is due to the
ever-increasing cost and
liabilities of practicing
medicine.
in New Mexico. While addressing
only a small, small portion of
the problem, House Bill 52 is a
step in the right direction to
help address the significant
healthcare workforce shortages
that are increasing across our
state, but especially in rural
rural New Mexico.
The bill's FIR is quick to point
out that the LFC has serious
concerns about the risk to state
revenues from the erosion of the
tax revenue base. To this, we
would argue that the departure
of medical professionals leaving
our communities is an even
bigger erosion of that tax base.
Also in the FIR, the Healthcare
Authority rightly points out
that the credit being proposed
in House Bill 52 may contribute
to increasing the rural
healthcare workforce, bringing
in more providers would serve to
offset the tax base erosion. The
authority also points to the
even bigger
benefit of improving quality of
life in our rural areas by
increasing the healthcare
workforce. The health, social,
and environmental benefits
gained by rural New Mexicans in
their home communities versus
those who have to travel long
distances for care and in some
cases, giving up on seeking out
care outweighs the LFC concern.
Furthermore, we believe that
this is a great place to utilize
a portion of the state's budget
windfall by extending this tax
credit, we respectfully ask that
the committee move this
bipartisan bill forward with a
due pass. Thank you.
Thank you, sir. Next.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committees, again, Frank Petty,
city manager for Gallup. I'm
actually gonna speak on the
educational front.
Um, as his former former life
special education coordinator, I
supervised speech language
therapists, occupational
therapists, therapists, physical
therapists, um, being in a rural
area, um, a lot of them worked
part time for us.
And part-time in medical.
Um, as you look at now being in
the rural and sustaining, um,
get McKinley County schools
right now is 100% teletherapy
for their students in speech.
Um, they can't recruit the
people live to the rural areas.
So this would be a step to help
our health professions as they
contract out in the health and
qualifying and help our school
age kids. Speaking as a
volunteer firefighter, there's
times in the county where we
lose 90% of our EMTs. They want
to make a living. They're
leaving for wildland fire.
So that, that zaps, you know,
I'm not an EMT. My daughter, I'm
proud to say, is, but she leaves
every year, California, Oregon.
I can report to those medical
things as a volunteer
firefighter, but I don't have
the expertise, so this will be a
way to hopefully help retain
some of those EMTs in the county
during full year versus just the
quote unquote off seasons.
Thank you for your time. Thank
you, sir. Next. Thank you Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee. My name is Jason
Thompson. I'm here representing
the New Mexico Pharmacy Business
Council. Um, they're an
association of locally owned
independent pharmacies, which
are the vast majority of which
are, are in rural New Mexico. I
know y'all are short on time. I
won't be uh repetitive, but
anything that can be done tax
credit wise, you really
appreciate the sponsor's work on
this, um, anything that can be
done to help these folks keep
their doors open and keep the
access open, uh, especially in
Ro New Mexico with independent.
pharmacies be stand full
support. So, thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Thompson. Anyone else
questions? I mean, uh, for
opposition.
If not, let's come back to the
committee. First on our list, we
have Representative Terazas.
Just real quick comment, uh, Mr.
Chair. Representative, thank you
very much. This is, we heard of.
A debate yesterday about how to
get her nursing staff back. I
think this is.
A lot broader, I really like
cause it's real broad and
One quick question, the MTs, I
know that was something that
came up on the air, uh if IR.
There's 5 different categories.
I would assume that this would
just cover anybody that has an
EMT license. Is that correct,
Mr. Representative?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator.
Yeah it'd be all inclusive, yes.
I have. Thank you. Very good.
Anyone else uh representative.
have 2 questions, Mr. Chair,
very quickly, um, first, uh, my
brother's an EMT. I'm super
proud of him. He's practicing in
a rural area. It's really
difficult, um, long, long
transition times from the rural
area to the hospitals in
Albuquerque, um, so a lot of
stabilization. I have a lot of
respect for what he does, um,
the first question here is that
this is expanding the tax credit
that already exists. So what did
that previous tax credit do for
our rural areas, did it?
actually expand character, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um.
Are you to uh
single.
Mr. Chair, representative
Parejon, there actually have
been no definitive studies about
the impact of roll tax credits
anywhere in the country that we
can find. We do know anecdotally
that providers tell us, and I've
had numerous providers tell me
it, it really helps support me
remaining in this rural area to
practice or a lot of providers
live in urban areas, yet they
drive.
and practice in a rural area and
so they are eligible for the tax
credit, so that tax credit helps
with their expenses of of
driving back and forth to to
provide the the service, but as
far as actual definitive.
roof that this helps, we do not
have it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you expert and rep, um, this the
last question is I just want to
confirm something about my
knowledge of EMTs, which is that
in the FIR they are analyzing
the different kinds of EMTs and
the different tiers saying that
perhaps a lot of fire
departments who have EMTs, um,
or require their firefighters to
have EMT degrees would be
eligible for this tax break, but
it's my understanding that a lot
of our rule.
Uh, you know, our rural
districts don't have actually
the capacity to fund fully their
fire departments and fund EMTs
within the fire department and
rather than have to rely on
private EMT uh firms to provide
that care, um, so is that
understanding of of EMT
practice, correct?
Mr.
Chair Representative.
You know, there, as you are
indicating, there are multiple
ways that, um, particularly
rural areas employ all kinds of
providers and often it is
contractual, a lot of people are
not employees, so as far as the
credit goes, it's just about if
you're practicing in that rural
area and based on the number of
hours for part time or full
time, then you are eligible for
1 or 2 levels of that. Thank you
Mr. Chair. Thank you, members.
Mr. Chairman, real brief, you
know, by bringing in the, the,
um.
The EMTs, paramedics, in
particular.
is kind of a red flag for the uh
New Mexico.
Um, healthcare.
Workforce committee.
Because that committee lacks
data on these professions.
But now being part of this
larger group.
Practitioners that are in the
tax credit.
Gives them
Kind of notice that they need to
start doing some data collection
on these professions.
So I think next year we'll have
a better sense and feel.
where we stand with these new.
Kind of um
8
professions that were bringing
in.
Good, thank you. Let's go to
Representative Lunstroom.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Just one
quick comment, I support this
bill, I think this is the kind
of thing that would help.
With recruitment and attraction,
uh.
I live in one of the most rural
counties in the state and I can
tell you, I think it would help.
Thank you.
you. Anyone else questions or
comments? Representative Vice
Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Garcia, an expert, um, I feel
like I've been a broken record
on this. I appreciate Rafarajon
for asking the question that I
keep bringing forward.
I'm not convinced that this tax
credit is enough or the right
way to target and focus our tax
policy in the effort of
recruiting and retaining
providers. In the meantime,
while it exists, I think uh
Representative Garcia's sponsor,
you're quite right, we shouldn't
be picking winners or losers if
we have this in place today, it
should be expansive, it should
be comprehensive. It should
include everyone and I'm
committed. I don't know when
we're gonna get to it to
actually looking closer, uh, um,
the limitations of what this is.
And imagining if there's a
better way to use tax policy or
the state's revenue to do this
important effort of recruiting
and retaining the providers of
all types that we need in New
Mexico, um, quickly, Mr. Chair
Representative.
We have emails. It feels like
every year we, um, debate the
definition of rural, if they
should advance, I think we need
to look at that one more time,
it seems like we've changed
definitions over the years,
defining what rural means in the
context of this particular piece
of legislation. So should we
advance this, I think we just
need to circle back to that
conversation, not today, but
it's still in front of us. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Anyone else,
questions or comments?
Saying that at this point in
time as we do in this committee,
we will table this bill and
we'll take it up if we have room
in the, in the Inos tax bill,
uh.
And can you make a motion
please?
I moved to table House Bill 52
opposition
we're uh
Bills been tabled, thank you
very much, Representative. Uh,
just a note for folks that uh
invitations were passed out once
again. If we didn't get one,
we're sorry, but our email's
been funky, but so for staff for
our assistance for everybody
here, uh, the LSC staff, Izzy
and you folks, uh, please see uh
our invitation for tonight's
dinner. Thank you all. Have a
good day.
