Here.
Vice chair chamber.
Chairman Martinez.
I am here we have nine.
We have no I'd we can we can get
Roland she.
Good morning members I hope you
had a wonderful weekend
hopefully you get a little
better breast we have to get a
long tough day on Friday and I
understand somebody had
committee most of the day
Saturday and some of you have
committee yesterday I think
we're going to Representative
will go ahead committee
yesterday and Representative
Chandler had committee issued so
kudos to you all.
Being in the work.
We have
We you know we're we're coming
to that time when things get a
little bit
funky and.
you know time time gets really
really limited this week as you
know we're gonna be on the floor
starting at eleven for a few
hours and then we're gonna break
again for committee so starting
Wednesday taxed rents will go
back to its original start time
of eight thirty.
Buy us another half an hour to
get ourselves you know situated
and get our business done
hopefully we don't have to do
Saturday meetings or anything
like that I'm I'm I'm proud of
that we have been pretty
efficient and we have enough to
do that hopefully that continues
but you know just just just be
aware that we might you know we
might have to call a special
meeting here and there to clear
the docket if we need to.
today's
Today's agenda we have
Senate bill three small business
recovery act that senator
Candelaria and Representative
Matthews I don't see anyone here
but maybe they're in the
attendee list delay.
Want to let them in
we didn't have a house bill two
seventy eight Representative
Harper manufacturing services
gross receipts.
After that we've got a house
bill one seventy four double
certain tax exemptions and then
we have house bill one sixty
seven cigarette tobacco product
taxes
whatever doesn't get finished
today will roll over to the next
meeting
and yeah I mean hopefully we
don't have to pull you in on a
Saturday but you know if we need
to we'll we'll make sure you get
plenty heads up so that you can
plan accordingly.
Do we have
Do we have Representative
Matthews and or senator
Candelaria all there you are
good morning Representative
Matthews.
Your muted.
Try that again good morning Mr
chairman and members of the
committee as a pleasure to make
my first appearance before the
tax committee.
Is it really your first
appearance only goodness before
the tax committee I'm I I I have
been grilled by others but I
hear there is no grilling like
the tax committee that that is
that is exactly right.
That is exactly right.
All right let's see.
Senator a this is your call was
gonna join today well he said he
was and also we have is an
expert Marquita Russel from the
finance authority.
Great great great can we get the
miss Russell admitted please
seeing.
And we can give a minute to to
if you want to text a the
senator
What are we can Miss Mister
chairman if it's alright we can
also start
Of he said he was gonna join us
but.
I can I can texting.
At that city.
Good morning miss Russell let's
see you.
Morning Mr chairman thank you
for having me.
Yes.
Mr Chairman looks like a speaker
needs to be amended as a
panelist.
I was gonna let him in but now
that you mention it I guess it
should.
Yes good morning Mr speaker good
morning Representative there is
a capital outlay Mr chairman.
Mr chairman I've texted that
senator Candelaria.
Okay.
Good deal.
I was gonna say if if if you
show up late today gonna lose
you capital outlay
Representative Lujan texted me
so she was good to go
Representative Maestas texted me
he's good to go speaker egolf
I hear there's a little bit of
money for this committee to
share on the table.
Yes why don't you take it away.
Thank you very much
well good morning again Mr
chairman members of the
committee
Senate bill three is the latest
it or iteration of the small
business recovery loan act that
we passed in the June special
session in response to the
pandemic last year and as you
may recall that act was an
effort to stimulate our economy
by providing low interest loans
to are struggling small business
community.
The loan program actually
expired under that legislation
December thirty one twenty
twenty and for the December
special session I prepared a
revised bill in case the
governor wanted to put the loan
program on the call for the
December special session which
in and that revision reflected
the many of the lessons that we
learned from the original loan
program and we reduce the detail
and made other changes in the
legislation.
But we had a hundred million
dollars in federal cares Act
money for grants and there we
really was no need to extend the
long program at that time.
Committee substitute Senate bill
three.
We authorizes the loan program
in this session and would have
it run through.
Excuse me may thirty first
twenty twenty two.
It is it and what happened in
the interim I am going to share
some of this because I think it
is helpful to understand why the
bill is set up the way it is and
why the changes were made.
I'm sorry I'm our
Senator Candelaria.
Organize last fall organized and
hosted several meetings with
business owners and advocates to
solicit input and these were
very very valuable and helpful I
was very interested in the data
the hundred million dollars in
cares Act grants was generating
about our business community and
its needs so in January after
that program closed I began
working with the finance
authority EDD and the small
business at director Dan
Schlegel at the governor's
office and to try to figure out
what changes would would be
needed in the house bill from
that I I prepared a house bill
Senator Candelaria filed his
Senate bill first
I had finished drafting the
house bill.
But before I filed it we all of
us got together to see if we
could agree on a single bill and
we did our and the committee
substitute reflects senator
Candelaria is bill with the
changes incorporated from what
was the un filed house bill.
and he and I agreed that we
would co sponsor the committee
substitute SB three.
And I share this history because
I think it's significant that.
The committee substitute is a
collaborative effort between
both the house and Senate
Sanchez finance authority EDD
and the small business director
of the governor's office.
So I I I think that's a great
deal of thought has gone into
how to revise the small business
loan act to make it more
effective tool it accomplishes
four main goals first it removes
details and provisions in the
original act which prevented
loans from being made.
Second it contains substantial
protections.
To minimize the risk of loss for
making loans to businesses which
are financially stressed by the
pandemic we never ever wanted to
lose money
at the state's money in this
program
But there is some risk about
because of the pandemic and the
nature of the business community
at this time third it expands
the eligibility criteria for
loans to include more medium
sized businesses and forth we
think it's been structured so
that it will serve both to
continue to provide financial
help for businesses struggling
still to survive.
And.
Those ready to return to a
growth mode as we come out of
the pandemic because of the
vaccine.
I'm insured I think personally
this is a much better tool to
assist our small and medium
sized business community and to
stimulate our community I'm
sorry it's not our community our
economy and with that I'd like
to introduce Marquita Reso at
the executive director of the
New Mexico finance authority
to
at it will be our expert in the
senator Candelaria is here I
would also say hello to him and
certainly thank him for all the
work and collaborative effort
that we have made together on
this bill and would that be
would stand for questions.
Thank you Representative
let me let me look at the
attendee list.
That that Senator thinking
candies but I don't know which
name.
I think I know I think I know
I'm gonna I'm gonna promoting
right now Elaine I think it's a
I think it's Corey MC promotes
panels.
This Senator Candelaria good
morning and thank I think this
is you.
Look like you but it looks like
your husband some assuming it's
you.
I just lost some weight thank
you Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the house tax committee
Representative Matthews really
hit a home run and explaining
what got us to this point the
important changes that have been
done in the bill and these
stakeholders that have been at
the table to ensure that this
program continues to exist as
the lifeline that is intended to
for many small businesses across
our state I really want to thank
sincerely Representative
Matthews as well as the speaker
and our other partners Act NMSA
in in the governor's office
really doing the hard work it
took to to to speak with folks
to get around the table to look
at the data.
And to and to craft this bill so
thank you all for your time and
I'm here to answer any questions
but Representative Matthews is
our lead today she's really done
amazing and long work on this
bill so I'm here to support her
in whatever she needs thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you senator hello and
welcome.
Miss Russell good morning
anything to add.
Good morning Mr chairman I think
Representative Matthews did an
excellent job introducing the
bill I would just mention that
we have some real life
experience under our belt which
really does make this bill much
more effective than the initial
bill that was filed back in June
of twenty twenty so with that
real life experience we have
some ability to really help
businesses that we were unable
to help the first time and with
that I'm very happy to answer
questions.
Great thank you for being here
this morning let's go to the
audience and let's see if
there's any public comment on.
Senate Bill.
Three.
Give me a minute to raise your
hands.
There they go.
Thank you.
Remember that we'll have
Roughly a minute thirty seconds
for public comment so please try
to abide by.
By that time limit.
Let's go first to
On Senate bill three in support
Ruben Bach.
About a year muted can hear you.
Mr about that you are muted.
We'll come back to you.
Let's go to Ashley what wedding
here.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy with the New Mexico
chamber of commerce first we
support this bill and would like
to thank the bill's sponsors for
their continued support of small
business in New Mexico small
businesses are in desperate need
right now and so we appreciate
the intent of this bill to
provide much needed support as
we come out of this pandemic we
must have laser focus and
discipline of rebuilding our
economy through a lens of
creating communities of
opportunity for our residents we
can only achieve this if our
state leaders work with the
business community as partners
for New Mexico's future this
bill is an example of the good
that can come out of that sort
of collaboration thank you so
much.
Thank you ms Wagner appreciate
you being here let's let me try
Ruben Bach again Mr Baca.
Go right ahead you do have to
admit yourself the.
Can you hear me now.
The state.
Excuse me can you hear me.
We can hear you now.
Okay hold on just one second I'm
having.
We're on Senate bill three.
Issues okay hear me now.
I'm sorry.
We we can here now we can hear
you said conversation to.
I'm sorry.
What what what what we're
support of this is supported
Senate bill three.
I am not in the as for or
against and time I do not mean
to to hit the the button to talk
about I'm sorry okay it's okay
it's nice talking to you.
Thank thank you for joining us
this morning it's going to
Alison Smith.
Good morning Mr Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Allison Smith of the
registered lobbyist for The New
Mexico restaurant association
the restaurant association would
like to thank senator Candelaria
Representative Matthews speaker
egolf and everyone who's worked
so hard in this legislation for
making the changes to the
original small business recovery
act while many of our struggling
restaurants are fearful of
taking on debt they may not be
able to repay we feel the
changes made to the act put
forth in this bill will make
these loans easier for
restaurants to apply for and
make use of The New Mexico
restaurant association
appreciates these efforts to
help our economy recover and get
back to work and we stand in
support of this bill thank you
for your time.
Thank you for being with us.
Jason Espinoza.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza New
Mexico state director with the
national federation of
independent business and we
stand in strong support of this
legislation small business
recovery act provides an
important Avenue of financial
relief that will benefit many
small businesses across the
state I know to small businesses
are the same that's why it's
important to have multiple
relief programs available to the
wide array of small businesses
either of and small business
recovery act provides increased
flexibility that will make it
more accessible the importance
of a program like this for small
businesses also increases as we
start to see the light at the
end of the tunnel with the roll
out of the vaccination and the
potential and insight financial
calculations are different and
this program can provide
financial assistance to get
small businesses across the
finish line as we answer what
many hope is the last mile of
this pandemic
I also know there's been a lot
of back and forth in the
legislature whether they should
pass just a loan program a grant
program or tax relief in our
opinion given the extent of our
economic crisis New Mexico does
not have the luxury of picking
just one option the legislature
must take and all about all of
the above approach I thank you
for your time we urge the
committee to move this important
measure forward thank you.
Thank you.
Next we have Sarah fitz Gerald
good morning.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name Mr
fitzgerald I'm senior vice
president of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
we we really appreciate the
Sanchez work to improve the
accessibility of this program
the fact is that a lot of
businesses still aren't in a
position to take on debt no
matter the terms but we're
hopeful that these revisions
will increase participation and
be viewed by those struggling
businesses as helpful we
appreciate that this bill
expands X. eligibility to
include businesses that didn't
have to necessarily close or
really significantly reduce
operations businesses have been
hurt and so many different ways
this bill really takes into
account we're also happy to see
longer repayment periods many
businesses are more likely to
consider and avail themselves of
this loan program so we urge the
committee to get this bill to
the floor and to the governor's
desk as soon as possible thank
you.
Thank you for joining us.
Next we have Jason Weaks.
Morning Mr chairman members of
the committee Jason Weaks on
behalf New Mexico hop
hospitality association and the
Albuquerque Hispanic chamber of
commerce and the New Mexico
brewers guild and distillers
guild this is a piece of
legislation that really does
greatly improve and expand
access to these relevant loans
some of our members in the
hospitalization already taking
advantage of these loans and
they'll be able to take further
advantage of these loans with
some of the changes that have
been made it really does
dramatically improve the program
and this is gonna be a huge and
significant lifeline for a
number of the businesses both
hospitality association of
brewers and distillers guild and
for a number of small businesses
throughout the states really
want to thank the sponsors for
bringing forward this is as we
view it must pass and stand in
support of this legislation
thank you.
Thank you for being with us.
Next in support Carlos Santana.
Good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee of Carlos
Santana the president of the New
Mexico business coalition we
very much appreciate the Sanchez
work on this bill.
Making it easier for businesses
to access capital we continue to
have reservations about this R.
many of the businesses are not
in a good position to take out
additional debt right now given
the situation that they have
faced over the last year but we
do appreciate this as a tool
that they can use are we also
like to encourage the.
Legislature those are sponsors
of this bill who are very
focused on small business to
look for other avenues as well
especially in funding the you
live Fund with the money that we
just got from the federal
government thank you very much
for the work you've done a for
your consideration.
Thank you for being here anyone
else in support of Senate bill
degree.
Raise your hand.
Dominic Silva welcome good
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name's
Dominic Silva with that New
Mexico independent community
bankers
at the beginning of the pandemic
the feds gave out quite a bit of
money and and in just in New
Mexico alone New Mexico
community bankers are
responsible for lending out over
one point two billion dollars in
loans to small businesses so
with this added effort we
wholeheartedly support the
state's efforts to support our
small business is our business
customers thank you.
Thank you for being with us
anybody else in support of
Senate bill three.
Okay how about anyone in
opposition.
Two Senate bill three.
Going once going twice.
All right let's go to the
committee.
And for some my list I have
Representative Lujan.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
committee I just want to commend
the sponsors for this and.
Very involved in my own district
and I have wanted to biggest of
small business districts in
Santa Fe County and thank you
very much for working on this in
in building to diligent about it
and and collaborating the
efforts here that's that's
really really important in
getting us to this place.
I just have a couple questions
Mr chair
When the provisions I know that
there were up that there are
provisions in the the previous
loans that we're we're in place
can you tell us what those those
provision that you removed were.
Mr Chairman I'm Representative
Lujan.
We removed and I'll also
deferred to.
It is also on this but in
general what we removed there
were lot of very specific
provisions for example the
losses were related to things
that happened in April and may
I mean fairly quickly we became
aware that that had been too
restrictive depend the economic
fallout from the pandemic was
spreading much further than just
that very initial period when
the first public health orders
came out and so a lot of the
provisions that were have been
removed related to things that
where we it was too restricting
critically time wise but also
asked the.
Ms Russell to comment on that.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative ESO and in
addition to the specific time
frame the manner in which of the
finance authority had to
determine that loss was based on
reports filed monthly with the
department of taxation and
revenue not all businesses are
required to report their gross
receipts and as a result that
was a significant portion of
businesses that were unable to
access the funds the other thing
is that it allows us some
flexibility for determining what
your average monthly expenses
are there were provisions in the
initial legislation that
required that we
deduct the amount of cares
funding that had been received
for instance
and this one Broughton's that
suited dition to expanding the
eligibility there are now three
months of expenses that can be
with the the loan amount is
based on three months as opposed
to two months so for number of
reasons that both expands and
deepens the amount of funding
that a business can receive.
Great thank you Mr chair thank
you for answers and I just
wanted to to
Eliminate those those reasons
why this is so important and and
some of the challenges that that
I was
getting feedback from the small
businesses here so thank you so
much and really putting this
together I just have one more
question will this help
businesses to have to close the
doors would they be able to come
back in access or ask for them
to they can start up their
businesses there's began.
Mr chairman of.
And Representative Lujan yes as
long as they are
as long as they were in business
as of I believe it's March
thirty first twenty twenty
they can is that they were
formed as a business as of March
twenty twenty they can
C. funding under this bill.
In his wrestling my correct on
that.
Yes Mr Chairman representative.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative
Matthews this is really
wonderful work I really
appreciate it and all of our our
businesses and communities
really appreciated as well thank
you.
Thank you Representative Lujan
next is Representative role
metal.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative members of the
committee.
I I so I'm I was able to work on
this with Representative
Matthews in June and this is
been so exciting to see it
evolve and I like Representative
Matthews I'm really interested
in some of the data because we
were really struggling to figure
out how this investment worked
at that time and heard every
reason why this is a terrible
idea so I'm so grateful that we
are are now understanding what's
what's gone on and I think
that's where
you know the lessons learned in
what we're trying to evolve to
with this program and through
this process is is really where
my line of questioning will lie
and I think and I also want to
think Marquita for your
excellent work I have is calling
you with constituent calls and
frustrations through the
application process and trying
to at every level trying to
figure out how to make folks
eligible knowing that they were
in great need so that's my
concern as well as is knowing
how we sort of play with all of
that and understand that folks
who are qualified and have been
in business and the new wants
that is is involved in in that
process and when they shut down
or when they receipt when they
started their business and when
they're qualified for for more
support for instance for the
committee's understanding we had
had a business owner that had
purchased a business of
brokerage he could have
purchased the business about
three months before March and
didn't have enough time line in
order to qualify based on these
rules so that said to how
that'll be my first question
what are the requirements now
through the program as far as
when business was established as
to how you know in particular
for a lot of entrepreneurs and
and folks would just open their
doors at the start of the year
or maybe just six months prior
do they now qualify for this
program and would they be able
to see go to see access to that
relief.
Chairman at Representative
Romero yes and I'm going to let
ms Russell explain how that
works.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative so in fact the
the flexibility that provided to
the finance authority in this
bill allows us to create a
program that helps a number of
different businesses with
different circumstances but as
Representative Matthews
mentioned in her earlier
comments as long as the business
existed in some format so they
had to have
you know if if we can see
evidence of the lease or that
they filed their articles of
incorporation they would be
eligible to receive the funding
which you know before you had to
actually have revenues by
March I'm sorry April of two
thousand nineteen so this does
not require that you have
revenues by them but that you be
in business and then operating
entity in some manner prior to
the pandemic and then that
allows us to put forth different
conditions for which a business
can then qualify and that's
really I think the the greatest
a portion of this bill is the
flexibility to have a decline
evidenced in the number of ways
because not all businesses are
the same we we faced some really
heartbreaking of calls when
people said I just spent six
months redoing the interior of
my business and opened on March
fifteenth or March first or
whatever and you know they did
not have the could not qualify
all their life savings were in
there they had loans they now
had to repay and no ability to
collect any revenue so these are
the sorts of situations that now
as a result of that experience
we can address the in the rules
that will then help evidence the
decline.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative and this Russell
that's so heartening is the real
frustration when we were working
through and I was you know we
were touting this excellent
program that was meant to help
so many and then folks can
access that so that's so great
to hear and and those within our
community I mean again the the
the economy was at its peak when
we when everything went dark and
so folks for making those
investments in our communities
and so I so appreciate the the
change so that that said to our
their residency requirements for
the the funds as far as
establishing whether you pay G.
R. T. or you know is it is
whether or not you did is there
a residency requirement for New
Mexico Mr Chairman at.
Representative Romero there is
but it's been change and again I
will let I would defer to ms
Russell to explain in detail.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative so there are
residency requirements it moves
from eighty percent down to
fifty one percent so there needs
to be a majority ownership but
there's also a provision for
those businesses that are
located in New Mexico employee
Mexicans but can't meet that
fifty one percent ownership
requirement so it allows a
business to be eligible
regardless of whether they are
New Mexico owned as long as they
employed full time at least ten
New Mexicans so we have to have
ten F. T. E. New Mexicans
operating operating the business
if they don't if they can't
otherwise demonstrate that fifty
one percent ownership thank you
Mr chair thank you
Representative and as Russell
so going back to that other
question I think previously that
Representative Lujan brought up
for qualifications of those who
may have already closed their
doors but like why is one of the
things that we had worried about
back in in June and and of
course as soon as March is the
worry that
what happens when they can't pay
this back and how long is the
how long is the pandemic gonna
last we don't know
you know what happens if you
know there six months eight
months nine months down the line
and they're still relying on you
know my grants loans everything
that we can possibly muster to
to help make them whole and they
still can't make ends meet
Mr chair representative what
happens if they default on these
loans now or they've decided to
close their business at this
point or in in the future under
this program if they've already
been receiving support Mr Mr
chairman again we have done
revisions to the repayment terms
and I will let ms Russell
explained the details of that
but I think that.
I let me just add that I the the
philosophy was to encourage
repayment by making repayment
terms doable for businesses that
are struggling R. and so it's
there's time extensions that are
built into the program in order
to to accomplish that goal and
and with that I'll defer to the
stress on the details.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative so the prior the
legislation had a three year
interest only loan program and
then at the end of three years
the principal was two for the
business could ask for an
additional three years at which
time it make monthly principal
and interest payments that was
those are incredibly generous
terms this bill takes it one
further there's a for the first
year is a there's an interest
holiday no interest accrues
during the first year and then
there is two years of interest
only payments and then at that
point it can be extended for up
to a full ten year
term so you can kick it out for
another seven years at that
point of interest interest and
principal payments and the thing
here is that it allows for
different time periods so rather
than just annual payments which
might be incredibly difficult
for small businesses it allows
it to be as determined by the
finance authority so obviously
we will try to work with the
business to provide the the
repayment terms that are most
beneficial for them if that's a
monthly amount because it's a
you know it's much easier to
meet a smaller amount than one
large amount at the end of the
year then that's the way we'll
design it so we we really want
this to be
available to a business and the
way that they can best prepare
it and and make it easiest on
them.
And if I may Mister chairman and
to Representative Romero us
question
under the original act and under
the revision for you the re
authorization New Mexico acting
through the NMSA has all the
same rights and powers to
collect on any default to dat
that any unsecured creditor has
in the market place think of New
Mexico finance authorities Papen
in this case as being akin to a
credit card right on secured
debt now what this bill does is
it it's sort of bifurcates the
loan amount so under this bill
the maximum loan amount is a
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars right
the first seventy five thousand
of that is on secured meaning
that no collateral has to be
pledged there is no personal
guarantee why because there has
to be a low barrier to entry
above seventy five thousand
dollars shoppers so loan goes
seventy five thousand dollars
and one that one dollar and
there must be a pledge of either
collateral or personal guarantee
right so for the first half of
the loan New Mexico axes an
unsecured creditor meeting we do
have legal rights to recoup the
dat we do have the ability to go
to court we do have the ability
to seek to see this charge or
restructure or payment of the
debt in bankruptcy like any
other secured creditor would
with this bill adds a new
projection which is that over
the seventy five thousand dollar
mark the loan converts to a
securitized.
Thank you Mr.
You Mr chair thank you
Representative Senator ms
Russell that's very helpful I
think just an understanding you
know while there's a lot of
unknowns how to be able to
protect oneself and the business
and and just know that folks can
still get their paychecks but
also know that they can meet the
demand when we're all you know
what we were all back opened up
but even so as we slowly said
recovery happening that's
excellent
just it just any one more
question how does any business
qualified for this loan
depending on industry are there
any is there any bar from entry
into a potentially seeking out
this loan in from all of our
different communities around the
state agency if Mr chairman at
Representative Romero of no
there are no restrictions on the
type the the the the area of
business that it is in
The idea is to make it as as
broad as possible because
different parts of our economy
we're hit by the pandemic and we
understand that recognize that
night just to confirm with
ms Russell and want to Senator
that I am speaking correctly on
that I'm there's nothing in it
that restricts the type of
business.
Thank you madam chair thank Mr
chair thank you Representative
I'm so grateful for these
changes I'm hopeful that a lot
more folks get access to it for
those that may have been
prohibited from from entering
into an op the opportunity that
we were struggling with in my
community so I just I appreciate
the forward thinking and and the
opportunity that's that's now
here so thank you Mister chair
thank you.
Thank you Representative role
metal.
Next on the list is
Representative Harper.
Thank you chairman.
Good morning Senator and that
Representative.
Thanks for bringing this bill
forward I remember we had a an
interesting debate on the house
floor covering some of the.
The the details of of the
original legislation and I guess
I just want to first say I don't
think any of us would argue that
there is not great need to help
folks in New Mexico who were
either impacted because of COVID
or impacted because of the
shutdown.
Mr Connie was not in the
greatest place before COVID hit
no well gas industry was doing
okay but our economy was still.
Recovering the last economy
recover from the Great
Recession.
So so having this kind of.
Almost kicking us while we're
down was was COVID also I.
I totally understand the.
Rational reasoning and having
lots of different options for
helping our our our our
employers.
I I I do support the original
legislation reluctantly I I
think there are lots of problems
and it.
It feels like many of those
problems gonna dressed in this.
legislation this review our
adjustment whatever you wanna
call it.
so want to commend you on that.
Do you have a.
A few questions.
So.
My understanding is the more
more of recollection is the
original legislation passed in
June was a four hundred million
dollar.
Cap of dot monies that could be
taken on the severance tax
permanent fund is that is that
correct.
Miss Mister chairman at
Representative Harper I believe
it up for this program the
original amount was four hundred
and fifty million dollars.
And Mr chairman what I'll note
is the the original bill on the
re authorization before you
doesn't doesn't right it doesn't
take money.
House of the investment fund
In outside tomorrow there's
gonna be a five hundred million
dollar transfer.
it is drawn down between S. I.
C. and NMFA on an as needed
basis that's what the bill
before you does is it provides
an authorization right it
provides investment direction
sets investment policy and
provides the authorization to
the S. I see to invest up to a
certain dollar amount if right
there is actually the need.
In the program as negotiated
between NMFA and the state
investment council.
Chairman I'm sorry Mr chairman
at.
Representative Harper and I
would just add that I checked is
figure
the there's three hundred and
fifty nine million dollars.
On spent and that's what will be
available for this.
This round of loans.
Chairman and Representative
Senator Representative thank you
what yeah my understanding is
and this is what I see in the
FIR as well as that was
originally four hundred million
dollars.
And that roughly forty million
of that has been
loaned out.
And that this bill would
increase that authorization from
four hundred to five hundred
million.
so they be.
Not roughly another four hundred
sixty million.
Available if this becomes law.
So.
With that said
We're looking at.
Those businesses that will take
advantage of it and of course it
was nowhere near what we
expected.
Do we.
Have we heard back from those
businesses are from other
employers as to what the real
barriers were.
and and how we address those
here.
In essence it is sorry I'll just
I just wanted to to to to share
yes
MFA did an excellent job in
collecting this sort of data and
I'll go back to Representative
Matthews Mr chairman and then I
think miss miss Russell can
basically present the data but
it should answer your question
the the vast majority of
applications for funding under
round one were denied because
Representative Matthews
explained you know just
correctly summarize for the
committee.
Initially the intent was to
focus on exclusively those firms
who could demonstrate that they
were shut down and there was
also the requirement that they
demonstrate a thirty percent
decline in gross receipts tax
revenue for both may March April
and may of two thousand and
twenty each of those successive
months that requirement alone I
understand it is the is the
reason the vast majority were
were not permit the reforms in
the re authorization.
Get rid of those two
requirements and in stad find
the alternative requirement that
the loan applicant must
demonstrate quote a substantial
decline in revenue or
substantial disruption in
operations as determined by the
New Mexico finance authority the
loan originator but I'll yield
representative of masters and I
think that mistrust oh she's to
fill in some of the data.
yes thank you senator
it.
Is that Representative Mr
Chairman representative Harper a
couple things happened that is
Senator Candelaria explained we
were focusing too much on a
specific period of time we were
using gross receipts and it
turns out there's just use
numbers of businesses that don't
file gross receipts certainly on
a monthly basis and so those
were real problems but another
thing that was happening quite
frankly was that of the federal
government was making more more
money available through grants
and any business if they have a
choice of a loan or grant is
going to take a grant
and just you know common sense.
And.
And I just want to say that that
I don't and there might be more
grant money available.
There may be more grant money
available if there's another
round of help from the federal
government.
That's that's not a we're not in
competition with grant programs
if there is grant money
available we totally understand
that businesses are going to
want to take that over the loans
the loan is there for situations
where there may not be grants or
they need additional money or
whatever but I I want to
emphasize we're not in
competition and while we fell
short of what we expected the
number of loans to be
it never less reserves and the
net range of three thousand to
four thousand jobs in the state
and this significant and that's
what we were trying to do to be
sure people had employment
businesses were surviving and
with that I will also I'll defer
to do that to a of at.
Ms Russell because she does have
more specific information about
what some of the bases were for
the.
For the numbers that we had
thank you.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative so the finance
authority created the
application process for the
small business recovery loans in
a way that hosts.
Reduced expectation that we
could not fulfill so we created
a program that said if just on
your face you're not eligible
because you didn't have that
thirty percent decline in each
of April and may or you didn't
have of the revenues under five
million dollars or you didn't
have the The New Mexico
ownership of at least eighty
percent you were really unable
to complete the entire
application we didn't want
clients to have to go through
the process of.
Other you know confidential
documents with on their face
they didn't qualify so the
application itself wasn't really
set up to to collect a bunch of
information but we do know that
we had if these twenty six
hundred applications filed in
only about nine hundred loans
made
the end of those twenty six
hundred only about two thousand
of them were actually in a
position to be reviewed and it
just kept coming back to a lack
of the meeting those that
criteria predominately the
thirty percent decline in each
of those two months as evidenced
by the reports filed to taxation
revenue came really eighty
percent of it came down to that.
Chairman representative miss
Russell thank you that that
really helps kind of a
perspective on.
On this
And.
I think.
I agreed with us the move to.
Relaxer loosened some of the
requirements that more folks are
able to qualify and apply.
My I ask this question of
Sponsor on the house floor we
are debating the bill
didn't have an answer at the
time
Since looked it up
the chairman Senator
Representative do you know how
many small businesses we have in
the state of New Mexico.
Mr Chairman Representative
Harper I've I've been counting
and every since you asked that
question on the house floor
thank.
I believe the figure I just I
was something like a hundred and
sixty thousand but again I think
ms Russell would be more
knowledgeable about that than I
am.
In terms of that would be my
answer as well Mr chairman I
think I'll give the lawyer
response which is it depends on
what you define as a small
business.
As a state depend I wish I had
my coffee mug actually says it
depends on that
the issue is in the bill the the
how the the the placeholder for
what to provide a small business
is net revenues of five million.
Right so that is going to
capture quite a large number of
firms in New Mexico deliberately
and intentionally.
That that may exceeded the
number of firms right.
As I think the one hundred sixty
number perhaps as a number based
upon number of employees.
Right
for example you know a lot of
hotels a lot of
a lot of those sort of
businesses ordinarily would not
be counted as a small business
but under the revenue approach
in this bill most likely what.
So again it's I'll just and with
it depends thank you.
Chairman and representative and
senator thank you for that and
that and I and I appreciate that
answer very much depending on
how you define it that number
can change our.
And and I and I will agree with
you the number that I've seen
in general is about a hundred
sixty thousand.
Businesses.
What follows in the small
business category that means we
have more businesses than that
in New Mexico right as we have
we have a few large businesses
as well as some and a good
number of medium sized
businesses.
so when you're looking at.
Just for context right when
you're looking at roughly five
hundred million dollars.
And I'm I'm guessing your
average loan would be seventy
five thousand dollars you know
what you're spending a hundred
fifty million I'm sorry her
fifty thousand dollars
you know I could go up but the
average is.
I'm sorry five thousand dollars
that really turns into about
five percent of businesses in
New Mexico five percent of small
businesses in Mexico we can
help.
and and if you increase the
payout amount miss everyone got.
R. fifty thousand dollars
which they won't but you know
just looking at the extreme
you're looking at really two
percent of small businesses in
New Mexico that you can help.
So I'm.
Just so we all kind of
understand you know.
What we're able to do and and
help for due to help small
businesses with this.
Of course you have to balance
that with the the cost to the
stars Tax permit for.
Right
Chairman representatives
looking at the FIR is on this
interesting.
The table on the first page.
Start showing.
losses reoccurring losses to the
general fund in FY twenty three
can you can you talk to that
what what is the source of that
walks sure so Mr chairman and
members of the committee
As you're aware that the
relationship between the general
fund of the severance tax
investment fund is is as follows
there's a certain there so we
get interest transfers annually
from severance tax to the
general fund
you know when we first passes
bill you know we'll talk about
it now there's probably an
opportunity cost to the general
fund all told you know as I
calculated over the ten years
assuming you now there's a every
loan goes for ten years and
assuming a thirty or forty
percent default rate you know
there may be a twenty million
dollar hit to the general fund
spread over those ten years I
think it's important for us to
to acknowledge that what I'll
say that Mr Chairman is those
projections are sort of the
worst case scenarios as the
committee is likely aware we are
actually going to see an
increase in severance tax
transfers to the general fund
this year and I believe we are
projected to see an increase
next year and of course this
year's transfers were in light
of this program existed and
investing fifty million
thereabouts and so worst case
scenario yep that's that that's
the to the general fund I think
from a public policy perspective
Mr chairman
I think we will are much better
spending investing this money in
the ingenuity and the
entrepreneurship and the grip of
New Mexico business to stand
themselves up and to restart
this economy
we're much better Sir using this
money in that fashion than
letting it stay in the severance
tax and generate an incremental
amount of interest twenty
million yes that is not
something to laugh at but let's
be Frank impractical talking
about the size of the state
budget.
That is a rounding error
especially when spread over ten
years Mr Chairman.
Chairman and senator I I am very
appreciative that that answer
and I think.
I'm again not not looking for
gotcha point some trying to earn
here I'm really trying to.
Make sure that we understand
deeply the policy pros and cons
that we're talking about here.
Senator your where your here a
few years back when I carry
legislation to try to save our
summers Tax permanent fund.
One of the bills I'm most proud
of the got signed into law.
Alright unlike the land ranch
permanent fund
which is grown and Miss Vigil
C..
and just continue to increase
distributions to the general
fund every year which we're all
grateful for especially during a
bad year.
The severance tax permanent fund
is not.
it is struggle there are many
years were actually gets no
inflows.
And
And with that fund started it
you know back in the sixties it
received significant inflows but
the legislature over time is
whittled away at those inflows
and wheeled away and rolled
away.
And.
And recently just for years ago
but simulations in Monte Carlo
simulations of where this turns
tax refund it showed that it was
going to lose value and die.
So we have to be.
Watch for the cognizant that why
are you well yes.
It is super important help these
these businesses these
employers.
We also have to be aware that
this fund is not in good shape.
And.
And Chairman representative of
the and Senator the the numbers
I've I've seen the FIR are are
up a little bit more than the
twenty million that you you
mentioned and of course that
depends on the assumptions with.
Right what percent of businesses
will default on the loans how
much of this money will be
appropriated.
And so I would say probably in
the FIR page five they give the.
The most gloomy
projection which would be.
What we give two examples one is
roughly seventeen percent of
loans default and one is if
sixty percent loans default.
but in both cases.
going out ten years.
You have.
A loss of the seven stacks per
fund value of roughly five
hundred to.
Seven hundred forty million
dollars and a cumulative loss
Similar to what you said
Senator chairman and senator
about two hundred and sixty
million dollars with ten year so
roughly.
twenty six more.
This is what you mentioned going
out further into this thirty
year range.
Now we're seeing that the impact
of doing this could cost.
the funding diminished value
anywhere from two to almost
three billion dollars.
And.
lost revenue to the general fund
of roughly one point two to one
point six billion dollars so
we're talking about.
In the worst case scenario over
thirty years right we just need
to understand what is what is
the all what is the actually
cost what.
By going for with this what is
it going to cost us.
Where are.
So far I have one more question
I'll pause there if anyone.
Mr wants to to address them and
I think it's a chair out let me
just real quick Representative
is that the loan that the thirty
year number is no longer
relevant to the bill.
the long term is ten years and
I'm gonna respectfully disagree
Mr chairman that the severance
tax fund is a feeling Fund.
I think if we if we consult the
returns data we will find it is
anything from a failing order.
And we can characterize things
politically but if we look at
the numbers it is not a failing
order but all you'll to
Representative Matthews.
Mr Chairman Representative
Harper
when I first got involved in
this in June.
Maybe a slight may June of last
year.
We begin looking at Senator I'm
sorry not Senator Representative
Eli was so small block and we
were looking around for where is
their money that we could invest
in New Mexico's businesses at
the time when they are searching
under such stress stress and we
were looking at a program we
were told that there with the DS
I see it stepped up and there
was a program for businesses
with forty or more employees and
it had a certain interest rate I
don't remember teachers right
wise and they had maybe seven
months.
And.
The impact of the pandemic on
this economy in this state.
Could not.
It we had to do better than a
program that made seven loans
M. even though we didn't hit
where we wanted to be we made
eight hundred and ninety loans
and moving forward we anticipate
we will be making even more
loans I think you have to judge
some of this in terms of what we
lose if we don't do this and
what we lose is a portion of our
business community our business
community is not that strong
anyway as somebody mentioned and
if we don't invest in it we
really look at a situation where
particularly with the decline in
oil and gas in the the uncertain
future of oil and gas
we either have to invest in New
Mexico and New Mexicans of or we
probably are looking at a state
that is simply going to become
poor and poor and it gets this
is a partisan view it's just a
reality of we we have to to fish
or cut bait here and there is a
cost to this and there is a risk
to this and we understand that
and we've tried to set up a
program which minimizes the.
The risk that may the decline it
may happen that they've the how
many business may fail as a
result of this
but.
It the policy question is do we
invest in New Mexico or not.
Yes so so chairman and senator
and representative thank you
you're you're you're making my
point exactly it's that there is
a cost which understand the cost
in this look at the budget and
decide is the benefit worth the
cost.
I'm and and chairman Senator
I very much looking at the
numbers here as a PhD chemical
engineer who makes a living on
members
I respectfully disagree with you
the certi year number where that
comes from is not based off of
the loan duration.
I understand it's Longduration
is ten years.
The example I would give.
Is if I have invested five
hundred million in my for one
Kate.
And I take it out.
For ten years and I slowly put
it back so it's all back in ten
years.
I have lost.
Investment earnings over those
ten years and those investment
earnings are permanently lost
and as you extrapolate that out
over thirty years that is the
real cost.
Was lost earnings and what does
loss of earnings would have
gained in investment over thirty
years.
That's the that's the cost that
was in the FIR.
so that's that's just a question
mark
I post so we can understand.
What this benefit versus cost is
the last question I have.
Maybe maybe it's just a a
statement like I thank you
chairman for the time.
we.
We need to be.
Careful.
Was how we approach policy that
is impacting our employers.
I'm.
I'm I am grateful that we're
talking about providing relief
in lots of different ways
temporary relief to address
COVID.
and that's what we're doing with
us you know the right hand but
was with the left hand I see
lots of legislation.
That is significantly go to harm
or make it more challenging.
for employers to stay in
business.
to continue employing.
especially in I'm looking at my
in August three teenagers you
know
and know how hard it is for them
to find.
Point now as we continue to make
it.
More and more expensive.
Are to be in business or.
But I would just ask that we.
Look at.
The large.
the more comprehensive picture
right we talked about this
before if you look at anyone
tax in isolation.
We can say.
Well after the state's tax it
this way and we don't.
Or.
No it's very easily isolation or
to cherry pick something and and
look at it from a very different
point of view but when you look
at it in a in a more broad
perspective and say when it
makes sense The New Mexico's
taxing it this way even other
states don't because of how we
structure things so I would just
ask that we also do that when it
comes to the other our
legislation we have in front of
us with regard to how it affects
businesses I don't want to be on
one hand growing temporary very
important relief.
And then on the other hand July
first have a bunch of stuff that
goes into effect that.
That makes it permanent long
term much harder.
And and all that's the end of my
questions and comments and would
like to to address that.
Thank you chairman.
Thank you Representative Harper
next on the list we have
Representative Scott.
Sure.
Representative Matthews.
Senator also.
With numbers.
What's important to me.
To
to come up with a.
Yes this case scenario on the
cost to the permanent fund.
From my numbers to thirty years
which.
Representative Harper's
calculations repairability
right on the money what.
Mr Chairman Representative
Matthews.
The state investment council is.
Smoked toward the.
Thank trying to reach you.
For returns funds.
Six quarter percent.
Six percent.
Mr Chairman
I'll defer to to that ms Russell
on that.
Mr chairman I I don't have an
answer for that that's not
something that I have tracked
closely Mr chairman I'll state
it depends which frontier we
talking about there's multiple
funds that are under the
administration of the S. I see.
Representative Scott we are I
least I'm having a little
trouble hearing you I don't know
if anybody else is but it seems
like you're in your my kids is a
little bit far from you.
Mr.
That's much better thank you.
Close to the target rate of
return.
Which tracks fund.
Mr Chairman Representative
Matthews could you tell me.
The first rights.
What on the long.
Question in this legislation.
Mr Chairman representative spat
at this point the interest rate
is pegged at one and a half
percent of Wall Street prime at
the time the loan is made and
right now that figure is one
point six something percent is
substantially below the six
percent.
Yes.
We presume the program.
Repays our obligations way.
Thank you sh.
Yes.
Perhaps.
Mr Chairman.
Representative.
I.
Six quarter percent over ten
year period looking.
Just a little over nine.
All.
Twenty million.
Yes only to repair program
transaction we would be looking
at some.
Three hundred.
The million dollars yes.
So.
Hi.
Three hundred.
And.
Mr Chairman representative to
the to be the best case.
Cost to.
The severance tax permanent fund
or.
Thirty four
million dollars a year.
With this.
With this program we belong
together.
The permanent fund income what
this legislation have the
ability to affect the bonding.
Mr Chairman now we do not bond
against the investment fund we
bond against the annual
revenues.
So.
Thirty four minutes.
Being here.
Reduction in.
Which is not quite accurate
because collecting.
Money there would be some
reduction in the ability to
bond.
Mr Chairman up the bonds are
issued against the inflows
against.
The severance tax receipts that
are collected and as
Representative Harper mentioned
earlier prior to his legislation
which increased the amount of
tax revenue that Moscow into the
permanent fund we were capturing
basically all of that in flowing
Revenue and bonding against
right this legislation does not
affect in any way the revenue
right that is collected out in
the world which is the severance
tax revenue nor does it change
the distribution set up by
Representative Harper's
legislation a few years ago
so it does not affect the the
bonding side of the equation
your point is well received
Representative that on the
balance sheet is likely to be
decreased or a lost opportunity
cost of the severance tax what
we that we're gonna bring.
I think from a public policy
perspective the argument the
Representative Matthews then I
completely agree with which is
when you stack the two against
each other what we proposed to
this committee is that investing
that money into hard working
entrepreneurial New Mexicans who
are doing their best to rebuild
this economy is a smarter
investment of that.
Your concern creation work.
It.
To.
She can't Mr Mr Chairman
representative got we can't I
can't hear you.
You're fading in and out.
Technology wonderful
Representative.
I heard that.
Yes
Representative our question.
We
Fifty million dollars.
Lost opportunity.
From the server Stratix Fund yes
on page.
Coast for the effort.
We look forward to rest of the
conversation.
To
Senator and Representative thank
you for your answers.
Thank you Representative Scott
next we have Representative
Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you resit Representative
Matthews and senator Candelaria
We
I guess.
What I like to for you to
discuss is we're we're using the
severance tax permanent fund is
a kind of a kind of a funding
vehicle.
For this loan program.
And it was mentioned earlier
from the from the independent
bankers that they've they've
issued one point two billion
dollars of business loans
through the federal government
and this this would be on top of
that so
I I I guess in my community in
San Juan County I know that
Quite a few businesses took
advantage of that federal
program.
And that to kind of get him over
the this you know this there
will pandemic that shut your
business stand for you know six
months to a year.
and I know that help is on the
why we're seeing lights in the
tunnel
Businesses are opening up in our
state
the other restaurant industry
finally use half or half for
status is allowing our a
restaurant a restaurant opened
up we're still we're still
hopeful that the rest of the
state will be opened up by now
in San Juan County.
we missed the cut off
for the comment by lesson one
tenth of one percent so or
restaurants or you know I think
just open up and and I know the.
The restaurant industry spent
especially hard hit with this
pandemic
they think there's two thousand
restaurants in our our state in
five hundred and currently shut
down so that's that's a big loss
to those communities and
whatnot.
I'm just.
Just curious you guys look at
the big picture and
and you try to meet with our
what the with the fate fencer
denying to help us I know we've
got a lot of stimulus to action
and you know trying to help or
unemployed in the sort of thing
why didn't we consider
using our our cash reserves to
help fund this this this program
and the reason I ask that we've
passed a bill I think SB one
that uses two hundred million
dollars to get to all right you
know our businesses and
industries and and employees
which I think is a good
investment.
And then we've got to.
I guess it was in twenty
nineteen or yeah yeah twenty
nineteen we set up a a a a trust
fund for early childhood
development for three hundred
million dollars out of out of
our cash reserves in our cache
river reserves are at an all
time high.
Did you did you guys think about
you know maybe parent backtest
this program instead of five
hundred million to four hundred
million.
Maybe tap two hundred fifty
million the cash reserves and
and and kind of keep the
severance tax permit Fund in
little better shape.
Mr Mr Chairman representative
stick stricter
when we first set this up in
June of twenty twenty the cash
reserve we we were having a
special session because of the
decline in income index of
stress on our cash reserves at
the time so when this was
originally set up we were
looking for alternative Senate
sources of money and the
advantage of the severance tax
fund was that it would require
an appropriation the money could
continue to earn interest on
behalf of the state to the
extent.
That we weren't pulling it out
for these loans and it wasn't a
draw on the general fund
and so of.
Senator Candelaria could could
speak for himself on this but as
we revise the program since we
already had the authority to
draw on those funds and because
it if it meant that the that the
program was only taking what the
program could justify taking out
of that since is not an
appropriations just a draw when
you have customers who need the
money it's just seem like a much
better way to do this than to go
to the general fund we're we're
actually drawing on we need an
appropriation of.
And there were a number of other
economic stimulus programs that
are coming out of this session.
And which are going to be
general fund funded
and.
From my standpoint I didn't see
any reason to change the
structure we had created back in
June and Senator Candelaria may
have a different reason I don't.
Mr chairman I'll echo
Representative Matthews and the
only other caution I'd give this
you know.
I really appreciate the the
brass and and that the Daffin
candor of this discussion
because I think these are
important issues with this bill
and given our issues in the
state generally and I think the
the other issue we have to
contend with is really the
volatility of our reserves you
know there's there's likely to
be significant federal cares Act
to money coming in that is not
yet arrived
but even when that does arrive
you know at least just speaking
from you know as a member one
member of Senate finance but I
think our committee is is very
concerned about the volatility
of that reserve rate the
volatility of recurring revenues
going out six months twelve
months eighteen months.
And so ultimately this funding
source provides some stability
and reliability for business
applicants that taking it to
reserves may not otherwise find
especially given our economic
situations to try to but I
concur with Representative
Matthews as well thank you for
the question thank you Mr
chairman and and thank you
senator thank you Representative
well let me just give you an
example
you know I'm I'm I'm a small
only gas
the producer and last year was
breath taking in terms of
negative cash flow
June of last year when this bill
first came up it we reached my
business in the state race rock
bottom in terms of terms of cash
flow revenues and sort of and
I'll just give you a number of
right here here
My my business was down forty
seven percent thirty two percent
of that was attributable to low
the only gas prices fifteen
percent is attributable
additional normal decline of the
asset you know depletion.
Now you fast forward to today
and we've really made a
remarkable recovery you know
I try to be optimistic you know
I you know that that's my nature
and
In that the glass was definitely
half full in my opinion I've
been in this business I've been
the only gas business for forty
three years and I've I've
experienced many many downturns
and so as to state one so
I think our cash flow is is is
is improving dramatically I
think as we open up our
businesses and I think we're
going to be fully open hopefully
not fully open by twenty five
percent opened we're here next
next a couple weeks or so yeah
we're saying dramatic recovery
so
the severance tax permanent fund
the way I understand it now in
the center you probably know
this and and no no
Representative Harper knows is
we we draw down about ninety
four percent we bond out ninety
four percent of the cash flow
revenues is that about right I
mean it's really a big draw
down.
to the severance tax farmer I
know the words of the inflow
that comes in we we set six
percent.
To help build up that that you
know that principle and we
bonded out you know ninety four
percent cash plus we have this
party are is that is that your
understanding.
Mr chairman and and and Senator.
Sure I'm not gonna venture to
say the exact number but do we
walk out the majority of the
revenue yes we do.
For good right yes Sir I think I
think it's around ninety four
percent maybe it's not maybe
slow little around that that
figure and so the contrast said
to the land grant permanent fund
we take at five percent so it's
a it's just a it's a it's a cash
account terms of bonding we use
it for capital outlay for the
schools
you know for the colleges you
know I maybe half and then we
had you know and then the rest
is for for our.
For our individual district
eight.
did you guys ever think about
In order to fund this suggest to
have every every house and
Senate members just
forgo their capital outlay for
one year to fund this I mean I
know that's a that's a big
sacrifice for individual
districts but is is for the good
of the whole
you know I don't know what the
distributions this year but I
think it's three hundred million
dollars capital outlay I know
was that was that ever thought
of.
By your change.
Okay okay well thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative Matthews and
senator Candelaria
I I just.
I know we're kind of in in dire
straits and
This loan program is been a lot
more flexibility is been built
into it.
I think the the the the
requirement of having capital
over seventy five thousand one
dollars is good I think the
collateral property would be
good for the entire amount just
to be safe and I think the
business community
would understand that after all
they're getting a one point
sixty five percent loan rate
which is better than I can get a
commercial bank so this increase
we Dale so
appreciate your answers and
thank you.
Thank you Representative speaker
you go.
Thank you Mr chairman at I I
have she general comments but I
did want to.
I've been asked the same
question the Representative
Strickler asked you know why not
just forgo capital outlay for
here and the basic answer is
because if we it would be far
too costly.
I remember the the capital
outlay we allocate for projects
borrowed money so if we were to
add here for forego capital
outlay for a year that means the
state would have to issue
severance tax bonds.
The state would receive the
money start paying interest I
believe we pay three to four
percent interest on STDs and
those severance tax bonds are
typically are you know security
as revenue coming into the fund
that would still be the case but
we would be paying interest for
the duration of the bonds
whether the money ever went into
a loan to small business or not.
The way it's set up Mr Chairman
is the these funds are
appropriated from the severance
tax permanent funding really
made available to be drawn upon
if the finest Authority approved
the loan so there's no cost to
the state in terms of having to
pay interest on borrowed money.
Yes ma'am this is coming out of
the corpus of the severance tax
permanent fund not.
And not committee bonds she gets
I believe that's correct Mr
chairman miss Russell's my
understanding correct.
Mr chairman Mr speaker yes okay
thank you so so that that's the
that's the first answers to the
why and then we heard a couple
comments from the city attendees
during the public testimony
portion talking about and all of
the above approach and I think
it's perfectly appropriate and a
good idea to give small
businesses the opportunity to
choose whatever of these
opportunities best fits their
business model and best fits
their needs.
It is true these are in a very
very low interest loans.
And the it may be that that
works as well and be better and
some of the things that we're
doing with the grant program.
I am program hostile Levin you
know has restrictions on how the
funds can be used as the job
creation requirement
we're eight year with quarterly
reporting so many folks would
rather pay a small amount of
interest to access this it's
opposed to going to the
application process for the
grants the grants just reminded
committee under house bill
eleven that is general fund so
it it's not just all of the
above approach in terms of how
the money gets to the small
businesses it's also very
approach with regards to the
source of the funding.
Which I think is prudent and I
think it's a it's a bit of it's
a good way to go forward.
And I also liked it there it's
all going to be under the
oversight of the finest
Authority Mr chairman miss
Russell her team and the
governor's office has done a
great job of setting up a
process for applications and
loan servicing that should be if
it isn't already a model for
other states to look at how to
how to do home grown support for
business New Mexico I believe
remains the only state in the
country to do not just one but
two different.
Programs similar to the paycheck
protection program The
Washington passed last year I'm
not aware of the state's doing
what we're doing so we're
leading the country in a in a
good category when it comes to
supporting small business we're
asking a lot of business when
they are but under the public
health order.
In order to keep New Mexicans as
safe and healthy as possible but
we're not just imposing those
limitations are also coming in
with meaningful and real and and
quicker financial support
So you know there's a lot
there's a lot there
for small business I do want to
say I've been somewhat
distressed by comments
specifically of that restaurant
association Carroll right there
executive director and the other
lobbyist is here
watching that hearing today but
ms Reid had a.
An audit in the state of New
Mexico yesterday that was fairly
outrageous.
Published in the Santa Fe New
Mexico and the oldest newspaper
in the west literally on the eve
of the passage of this program
and forty eight hours after the
passage of house bill Levin and
literally on the eve of the
passage of Senate bill one now
with a tax restructuring and
the.
Changes for specifically
designed for restaurants it is
part of a.
Public campaign attacking the
members of this legislature
supposedly.
For not doing enough to address
the needs of small business with
the business community generally
so I think it makes sense to
just take a few minutes Mr
chairman to look back over the
last eight months this
legislature convened in June
to address the issues related to
the budget and the changing
revenue situation we took swift
action the budget that is put us
on course to have reserves
without spending adjustments of
nearly forty percent.
Over two point seven billion
dollars in reserves because of
the swift action of this
legislature to shore up our
financial house in that same
session we created the small
business recovery act we are
modifying today I'm making
available in in on truly
unprecedented way hundreds of
millions of dollars from the
severance tax permanent fund for
small business loans but also
for local governments and I
believe that most of the hundred
million was set aside in the
bill the local governments did
make its local government
supporting the delivery services
and supporting local governments
efforts to support businesses of
all sizes within came in
November into the state's
support for small businesses up
to a billion dollars in a state
that is often at the bottom of
the list in terms of.
The size of our budget and not
is not thought of as a.
It is not offered is not thought
often enough as a state.
With with great wealth we
created the business grants
program.
And we made other changes to the
tax structure making last year's
investment over a billion
dollars we're coming through
this session with another
billion dollar vested in the New
Mexico business community in the
terms of economic recovery with
a combined effective Senate
bills one two three and house
bill of it also Mr chair.
Another at B. C. relief targeted
specifically at restaurants in
spite of the taxed restaurant
association we're pushing
forward with house bill two
fifty five Mr chair which will
allow restaurants to deliver
alcoholic beverages for the
first time and will allow for a
new type of liquor license
restaurants in only have beer
and wine license to begin to
stir spiritus letters.
That is some of the restaurants
with us for four decades and
they're on the cusp of getting
it.
So I hope that those still
listening Mr chairman to this
committee meeting and any any
folks out in the media might be
covering this debate I would
take a moment to consider the
tremendous efforts that this
legislature.
It leadership in both chambers
with bipartisan support in this
committee.
Have a passed in house bill two
fifty five specifically
targeting in assisting
restaurants House Bill Levin
Senate bills one two and three
in all the passing a bipartisan
basis with important
contributions for leadership in
both chambers on their work wait
a get signed by the governor and
perhaps it's time to focus on
some of the positive things
we're doing to support our small
businesses and the tone down the
attack rhetoric because you use
painting a a false narrative
and that you know I hate to have
to single out the single a trade
association now but the
restaurant association is
cementing a reputation for
itself in this legislature as a
as so it is it is an association
that is our.
On the verge of a operating in
bad faith.
Not to be missed characterize
work of this legislature while
we're doing everything that we
can effectively to support
restaurants are during this very
very difficult time.
So I hope the going forward we
can have some more conversation
that is a realistic and
reflecting reality entreaties
false of pot shots from the
executive director of the
restaurants association
hopefully they can stop is it's
it's long past time especially.
As we're heading to the floor in
the next step in the next days
to pass all these bills are
directly assisting restaurants
thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr speaker vice chair
Chandler Mr chair thank you very
much I move a do pass of Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill three.
I think you have a do pass
motion by Representative
Chandler and a second by
Representative on.
And a second by Representative
Lujan
That is proper motion I've got
just a couple quick comments
first of all thank you both
Sanchez for all of the work done
not just now but over the last
several months I also want to
echo I think that the sentiments
expressed by the speaker this
legislature in bipartisan
fashion has been doing a lot of
good work not only this session
but the last two special
sessions as well to help support
our small business community and
to help support our the those
most impacted by this pandemic
which is our our you know
restaurants and hospitality
industry.
Real quickly Representative
Matthews why is this a loan why
is it not a grant
Well I think we all know the
answer to that question but we
still get asked by constituents
can you can you say that
publicly wise any loan and not a
grant I'm yes Mr chairman it is
a loan not a grant actually
because of the severance tax
fund for two reasons one is the
anti donation clause and which
which prohibits gifts
essentially to folks and
secondly because the money does
come from the severance tax fund
it it must have a financial
return to the state and
therefore there is an interest
rate on these loans.
Very well and I think that that
highlights the need for further
reform in in in our entire
system and I know there's a bill
or two and I think maybe CENIC
of that is working on this as
well I know Representative
Allison is and I forget who else
but there's an effort to you
know to better align that
particular clause of the
constitution so that we can
actually invest the people's
money our words needed and not
be.
Hamstrung by these what I
consider archaic rules
so that that I think that's in
the that's in the hopper and
hopefully it's something we can
get done this year but certainly
it's something that needs to be
looked at
with that thank you both thank
you for your time today thank
you for taking all of our
questions this this is a tough
Committee by design so thank you
both for for hanging around we
have to pass a motion by by your
Chandler seconded by
Representative Lujan Elaine
please call the roll.
Representative Cadena.
Yes.
Speaker.
Yes.
She Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative at this.
Yes.
Representative Lujan.
Yes.
Representative Maestas.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Stansbury.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative Maestas.
Representative Montoya.
No.
Representative Stansbury.
Your chamber yes.
Chairman Martinez.
Yes.
And three in the negative.
By a vote of eight DEC eight in
the affirmative yes Sir.
One of eighty three you have a
to pass thank you Representative
thank you senator I believe
you're on to the floor good luck
the rest of the way thank you Mr
Hart we're ready thank you both
Representative Harper you're up
next with two seventy what is it
to seventy eight.
That's correct.
So.
Income is seventy eight yeah
yeah because of the time knowing
that we're a about fifteen
minutes away from the floor.
with your permission chairman
I'm we know I know this is going
to be a this has a fiscal
impacts we're gonna table.
hopefully not permanently maybe
some part of this can make it
out the session but.
But I really like to do is just
kind of.
Tell a story and and share some
information I hope will up.
Be a helpful to new members and
also help dust off cobwebs on
current members that's all
right.
At that the that would be
helpful
Representative in in reviewing
the bill over the weekend it
states you know pretty pretty
complex I think in many ways and
I think for a lot of the new
members and be good to get get a
better sense of what it is I'm
trying to do so why don't we
take the next fifteen minutes or
so to go through it whatever we
don't get through we'll we'll
roll it over until the next
meeting.
Awesome thank you chairman I
appreciate that.
So.
This this bill does two
important things they'll find
some real meaning for relief to
our New Mexico employers
especially small employers.
But before I go to any any that
I really want to give some some
contacts that I hope is helpful.
So.
In New Mexico we don't have a
sales tax we have a gross
receipts tax.
When I first got on this
committee nine years ago in the
legislature I honestly did not
really understand why we had a
gross receipts tax how is it
different than a sales tax.
Why do we have one.
And went on this long journey
and actually had a partner in
crime
representative bill mccamley at
the time Representative family
rebels freshman together.
he is now gone on to a bigger
and better things making way
more money than any of us to in
the legislature as a share okay
secretary workforce solutions
and the I do still talk to him
and and and I complimented him
on the great work that he's done
if that's been a huge our effort
on this last year.
I know he wasn't expecting when
you signed up for the job.
But we we explore together why
do we have a gross receipts tax
how is it different than a sales
tax.
And I'm not going to go into you
know that a big lecture on this
I'm gonna just to slow down just
really what you need to
understand.
And.
A gross receipts tax.
Is different from a sales tax in
really one simple way.
Sales tax taxes the final
transaction.
In the commerce chain.
Right so like when we go to
Walmart and buy something that's
the final step right we're we're
the consumer getting the final
product so we paid we pay tax
but that's a sales tax it's
really the final step.
The gross receipts tax.
It's a turnover taxes have how
it's how it's define what that
means is every step of the way
every time money is turned over
it's taxed.
So it's a gross receipts right
all of all of the money that you
get on your receipt is taxed.
So.
Sampled maybe that of gross
receipts to help offset the
example from sales tax so let's
say you are in business and you
are making
if you're making us cell phone.
So.
You first you need to hire
people to make a design right
and and if they're not inside
your business you have to pay
for that designed to be done
good pay gross receipts tax for
that contract to make the
design.
I'm then you have to pay
to get raw materials to to make
the phone so that would be
taxed.
And then
maybe you have to contract
someone to take those raw
materials and form them into
different shapes or patterns
that's taxed and then and then
you have to contract with Intel
or someone to make the chips and
so that is taxed and so every
step along the way you taxed and
taxed and taxed you get a final
product but built into the final
product is a bunch of taxes
happened already.
And then you sell it again and
the consumer pays tax on it.
So this this taxation along with
different steps away it's called
tax permitting.
And.
Yes so let's just take that
information let's tax promotes
the big difference between the
gross receipts tax and sales tax
sales tax would be just twenty
by the phone.
Proceeds taxes all the steps
along the way.
So.
The average consumer having a
seventy percent gross receipts
tax New Mexico is not a big deal
we just go to that Walmart would
pay that tax rate we go to
another state you're buying in
the same sales tax rate it's not
a big deal right.
But where this really hurts the
economy New Mexico is small
business.
And the reason is.
if you roll into the cost of
this product all those different
taxes it's much more than just
seven or eight percent.
Richard Anklam who's the head of
the New Mexico tax research
institute great nonpartisan.
you know some of that either
side of the aisle can use for
understand tax policy or helping
with legislation he's done some
mass and he's shown that
depending on what sector the
economy here and.
Yes secretary of tax rate on
your product could be as high as
seventeen percent.
That's a huge especially think
about trying to compete now in a
global economy we're looking on
Amazon or anyone can go across
the.
You know the the line to Texas
for our Colorado Utah Arizona.
you're now at a seventeen
percent disadvantage immediately
off the bat.
It's all about talk with people
I don't understand why you know
we're not.
We're we're not charging a lot
of money for a product and and
we don't have a lot of cost how
come it's so expensive in New
Mexico versus how do we have to
charge more versus another
summer product in other states
and it really is this this gross
receipts tax.
that permitting.
and and I'll just shared
examples so that you know this
isn't just Representative Harper
right
so back in I see was two
thousand eight two thousand nine
Ernst and young did a study.
And what they did was they took
ten virtual businesses and plop
them into all the different
states the US and they applied
their tax code against those
businesses and then ranks them.
The tax burden.
for always different state
always different businesses and
and of course the the sad story
of New Mexico is you know where
did we rank.
And it wasn't fifty yes.
It wasn't yes it was fifty first
because they include the
district of Columbia.
So we were fifty first worst in
the state in the state part of
all states.
And and just give you some
context we are just the worst we
were way worse if you look at
all of our neighboring states in
the region Arizona Nevada we are
just that we were twice as bad
as the next worst.
Weiss's does next with.
Well Richard income so the study
are great folks legislative
finance committee I saw the
study and they dug into the
numbers and I said wait a minute
this isn't right
they missed a bunch of stuff.
a bunch of our exemptions action
credits I missed it and so the
state of New Mexico actually
paid Ernst and young to redo the
study partnering with us
our tax experts so we can get
the numbers right.
And when they re did the study
instead of being twice as bad as
the next worst we turned out to
become a middle of the pack.
And to me that just screams to
two lessons screams of.
The first is.
Even Ernst and young got it
wrong the first time right so
how complicated it messed up our
code must be right the experts
come get it right.
The second question is if you
don't qualify for one of our
exemptions deductions credits in
our tax code.
How on earth can you compete.
And my my dad who's an
accountant
When I first saw it he said well
you know no trace of the joke is
if you can hire a lobbyist or if
you have a friend in Santa Fe
you don't pay gross receipts
tax.
And I and I saw that I saw that
When we first came up here the
bill after bill is asking for an
exemption deduction to the gross
receipts tax and we see that not
not as badly the session but
usually
we've got dozens and dozens of
bills in the park here that are
asking for an injunction.
The gross receipts tax and you
look at our tax code it is
literally a block of Swiss
cheese.
we have over three hundred
different exemptions deductions
and credits.
And some of those are good right
the to provide the base but a
lot of them were just.
We had a Christmas tree session
a lot of money and the lobbyists
and friends that we had we just
passed out gross receipts tax
deductions and the worst it is
not a political thing that's
just that's just what happened.
and now we're in a point where
our tax code is not stable
because we've put so many holes
in this box was cheese relying
too much on the cheese that's
what.
We've taken out seems that
their value increases with
inflation I mean the biggest
samples food I would talk about
whether it's good tax food or
not and all all day long but the
fact is it was in our tax code
now it's not and that's one of
the greatest things that raises
was deflation right.
So so that.
Really the point I'm trying to
make here is the more holes we
how can poke in the Swiss cheese
the more that people who are
left paying and paying more than
their fair share.
Representative to cover the cost
of folks are are paying.
So.
I see a got maybe just a couple
minutes left.
you know still just setting the
stage here
I think I'll just talk about
where Representative mccamly
nineteen to all kind of going
through this journey together
and and we we all brought here
revenue stabilisation Tax Policy
Committee launched a whole
introduced dive into this
deeply.
And what we found was.
Over the years our gross
receipts tax started working so
I went in the thirty that's what
started the real answer to why
we have gross receipts taxes
because.
We.
The states during those thirties
have that time create were
adopting sales tax for the first
time it was kind of a new
concept New Mexico is kind of.
Ahead of the game.
Dr the gross receipts tax first.
and the way we structured it
let's just tax the federal
government sometimes so I mean
that there are some some other
nuances to it but really it's
just that's we decided about
first whether states were
looking at sales tax.
And over the years it started
with just a two percent tax
receipts tax just to percent to
percent that's okay you can have
permitting at two percent is not
gonna kill you.
It should be closer to one
percent or two percent level.
Over the years what we've done
is we started raising the rate.
And our Costa separate percent
recurring just chilling.
So we're really kind of more of
a hybrid now between the gross
receipts tax and the sales tax
we don't tax everything like we
used to we've got some holes in
the Swiss cheese.
And our rate is much higher
gross receipts tax should be.
But there still is a lot of pure
omitting which the sales tax
doesn't address we we've kind of
become a hybrid and the worst of
both worlds.
And then the solution we came to
after exploring lots of ways to
go straight to after sales tax
to go back to approve those
receipts tax the solution we
came to us because they need to
be a hybrid let's take the best
of both let's be the best of
gross receipts for best of sales
tax and what New Mexico we for
the spirit what's being
available to took the spirit of
the tax policy on.
I put together essentially a
broad based retail sales tax for
the twenty first century.
so all.
I see my time is is over I think
this is probably a good time to
stop and chairman if it's
alright next round all talk
about how we do that how this
bill helps.
Representative Harper I think I
think that would be I think
that's in order thank you for
forgiving of that background
will will begin our our
Wednesday meeting.
With the mechanics and the
specifics of the particulars of
two seventy eight.
it does have a fairly large
fiscal impact is as you noted
earlier so we'll be we'll be
doing that table three table on
this but I I agree with you I
mean I I it's I don't always say
that but I I do agree that this
is some it's a problem and it's
a much bigger problem than I
that you know then then I think
Many people realize.
And it's been forty years in the
making.
And you know I I think that
front of us we have.
Both public policy decisions but
then there's also an aspect of.
Of of non partisanship with
regard to the mechanics of how
these things should work
and I certainly think that
taxiing a transaction five
different times.
Is is terribly clunky and
Services no real policy purpose
and ultimately the most impacted
of the the the folks at the end
of that change right and and.
The gross receipts tax is is
terribly regressive as we know.
It it's
you know hits people with lower
incomes a little bit harder than
others.
and so I think that anything
that we can do to.
Begin or not to begin but to
continue the work of of of
fixing the COVID I think is is
in order so we'll take this back
up on Wednesday
I'm curious to hear from other
committee members and from from
the public as well with regard
to the idea and then we'll we'll
take it from there.
Thank you chairman.
Excellent our members we are at
time we are on the floor now at
eleven remember that Wednesday
we will begin at eight thirty.
and for the foreseeable future
that will be our new start time
it'll be noted on the agenda so
everybody everybody gets and sub
including the public thank you
good work today we appreciate
all the questions and all the
debate and I will see you on the
floor and then I will see you on
Wednesday we are joined.
Thanks for your.
