Representative Chandler here.
Representative Duncan.
Represented the Gallegos here,
Representative Henry,
representative Hernandez.
Representative Lindstrom,
Representative Martinez.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Pajuan here
Representative Silva here
Representative Terazas
representative Vice Chair
Kadina.
And chair there.
I'm here. Thank you, man. Once
again, good morning, folks. Uh,
Speaker Martinez, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Last week we had a bill
House Bill 1095 that was tied.
It was, it's in limbo. I'd like
to move it for reconsideration,
please.
to 95.
295. Uh, there's been a motion
made by representative, uh,
Speaker Martinez there 22 by
Representative Silva, um,
At this point in time, since
we've had a full hearing, um,
one of the sponsors is here if
there's any questions, I believe
represent Parajon, um, at this
point there's been a motion in a
second. I'm gonna call for a, a,
a vote on that House Bill 295.
And, and for your reference,
that's a reconsideration of
house 295 that was
representative Chairman Small
Bill Rita Bill.
Representative Chandler.
Yes.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Henry.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Parajuan, yes.
Representative Silva, yes.
Representative Terazas.
Represented by Sercodina.
Representative Cherente.
Yes. Um, it is 7 to 5.
By a book of 7 and the S 5 in
the note, uh, the
reconsideration does pass and so
we will move on House Bill 295
uh.
Mr. Chair, when appropriate I'd
like to move a due pass in House
Bill 295. OK, there's now a, a
motion for a do pass.
On House Bill 29, I've never
done this before, so pardon me
and there's a 2 by
Representative Chandler, so that
was the motion for
reconsideration. This is now the
vote on House Bill 295.
So please call the role again.
We've already had a boomerang on
on this matter.
Representative Chandler, yes.
Representative Duncan. No.
Representative Carigos, yes.
Representative Henry.
No, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Parajun.
Yes.
Representative Sullivan. Yes.
Representative Terasas I'd like
to explain.
And the vice chair Cardina.
And the chair lion.
Yes.
We have a book to 7 to 5
of 7 to 5 in the affirmative,
House Bill 295 does pass this
committee. We have two members
wishing to explain their vote.
We have first Representative
Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just
would like to remind everybody,
uh, since we tabled it, we've
had a lot of counties reach out
to us, including New Mexico
counties, uh, on the impact, I
think the impact I've seen all
the way up to $300 million worth
of property taxes, um, just
wanted to, to let everyone know
that's why I said no.
Thank you, sir. Thanks,
Representative Tarasas, you also
have 11 to voice my concern over
the property tax issue, uh, in
the, uh, implications that'll
have when it's stacked with uh
what we already passed with the
veterans exemptions. I think
it's gonna be tremendous for
those counties. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative. OK,
that being done, let's now move
to our, our agenda, which is
House Bill 417 as amended. Uh,
this is uh again a
reconsideration of a bill that
we've heard, uh, two weeks ago
at this point, and we do have an
amendment, so if you can please
pass those out.
Good morning, representatives.
The floor is yours, you know you
want to speak and as, as you do
introduce yourselves again and,
and get us going, uh, these
amendments are being handed out.
And once you get yours, if you
could please read the 0.23
number off the bottom left.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning. Um, yes, we are here
today with 47 House Bill 417 as
amended, um, and we are bringing
a new amendment to the
committee. It's 0231775.1.
Thank you.
So,
thank you.
Go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, after
many conversations with members
of this committee and members of
the body, we are coming back in
front of you to uh bring a
different agreement forward. So
with this amendment does is
strike the House Taxation and
Revenue Committee amendment that
we passed previously, um, that
amendment, uh, did create a
carveout for one particular part
of the retailer industry. What
we're doing here, um, and
striking that amendment is
bringing
all the retailers or taxpayers
back into this proposal, and
then most importantly, setting
up two differential rates. So
with this amendment does is set
up a rate of 3% for all
alcoholic beverages sold and
consumed on the retailer's
premise. So again, there will be
tax equity in all the retailers,
uh, would be back in this bill,
but we've dropped the rate in
half from 6 to 3% for all those
alcoholic beverages sold and
consumed on premise, then it
would remain the same.
that for all other other
alcoholic beverages sold, so
package basically, the rate
would remain at 6%. Um, that's
the amendment, Mr. Chair.
I appreciate it representatives,
uh, questions, comments on the
amendment from committee
members.
Oh yes, ma'am. Representative
chairwoman. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, thank you, representatives.
So I'm, I'm curious as to why um
there's different
There's 3% and a 6% in the why,
why is there a difference?
Thank you, Mister Chair,
Representative, um, typically
when a beverage is sold on site,
you're buying her beverage. Yes,
there are retailers that will
sell a bottle of wine, but
typically you're paying for a
for a serving, uh, when, when
you were buying elsewhere,
you're buying either a full
bottle or a 12 pack or something
that is in volume. Uh, so we
thought as a tax principle that
still allows us to move
something fairly, especially in
including the all the retailers
would be included in this rate.
And, and Mr. Chair and
Representative, when you say
retailers, how about grocery
stores?
Uh, at what percent would they
be at? Um, grocery stores sell
it packaged, so they would be at
6%, Mr. Chair and
representative.
So, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative, um, when we talk
about equity, it seems like
those people who are playing um
struggling more, I would go to a
grocery store and so that would,
that would increase the cost of
their grocery bill, um, those
people, Mr. Chair, don't usually
go to restaurants when when
times are tough and so I think
that that one, I guess I'm
confused about the equity part.
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
this will not increase the
grocery bill of
A consumer, it would increase
their alcohol bill,
specifically. It would not be 6%
on their full purchase price,
but explicitly on the price of
the alcohol they were buying,
um, and Mr. Chair
Representative, um, I appreciate
the argument and that's
certainly why over this
legislative process, our
argument was that we lower the
rate and keep everybody in. Um,
this certainly is a compromise,
but for those consuming on site,
they are ultimately pay.
a higher price for alcohol
because they are buying the
alcohol per drink. So for
example, um, if you're buying a
12-pack, you might be getting
that beer for $1 a beer at 1199
cent purchase price if you're
sitting down at one of our
incredible New Mexico
restaurants, um, you're likely
playing 5 to $6 per that beer.
So, um, in the end, because of
the way alcohol is priced, we
see that there's fairness in
this policy, and I would share
Mr. Chair Representative that um
after we brought this agreement
forward.
The New Mexico Restaurant
Association has moved to a
neutral position on this bill.
They're no longer standing in
opposition to HB 417 because
they see that again, all the
retailers, all the taxpayers are
included and we have um
considered what it means for the
retailers who sell on site for,
for consumption on site, um,
they're starting their price
points at a higher level.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you,
Representative. Um,
I guess I'm, I'm still curious
as to why it's, it seems to be
two different rates versus just
a flat rate across the board
and, and you don't need to
answer that, but that's the
problem that I'm having with
this. Thank you.
Mr.
Thank you, Chairwoman. Let's go
to Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I'm
gonna echo some of your
sentiments as well. I think that
this actually makes it way
messier, so.
You know, you have
Let's say bars or local watering
holes, especially in rural areas
that do both, um, or you can go
in and consume, or you can go in
and buy package, sometimes you
do both. Um, and this is just
gonna make it so that their POS
systems now have to have a whole
bunch of extras, um, taprooms,
or breweries, um, who do both.
This is going to affect them,
where they have to do the same,
I think.
Um, that it just, it makes it.
Super messy for a whole bunch of
retailers in our state.
Um
And so I guess I don't really
have a question, just wanted to
point that out that you're
actually making your already
super complex bill for a whole,
what, 40
for a whole slew of
Of
Businesses in New Mexico now
even more um complex and so I
will not be supporting your
amendment. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mister Hernan,
Representative Hernandez. Let's
go to Representative Duncan.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Um,
Representative got a couple of
quick questions for you on this.
My concern is
That cell at either package like
a store or a grocery store,
Walmart.
That individual Meninger is
gonna get in that vehicle and
he's gonna drive and sometimes
he's going to drive for an hour
to get home.
that individual man, the, the
same person is going to be
drinking that entire hour.
The person that we're trying to
help the most is getting taxed
the most.
I love that the basin is going
out, um.
I, I think that's great. I
think, I think 6% is an unfair
tax.
Is everybody in this committee
knows I don't drink, you could
tax that 100%. I don't care.
But I think we're harming those
that we need to be helping, and
so
By doing that,
Are we just incentivizing people
to
Because that guy that's gonna go
to the speedway on the way home
from work, he doesn't care
whether he pays 6% or not. He
will then choose not to pay for
something else where if
Everybody on this committee went
out to a restaurant, you know,
we might buy a drink.
we'd probably have the carrot
cake instead.
that drink and, and go home and,
and, uh, you know.
to do something else. So I, I
think we're incentivizing.
Um
The wrong way with the 6% tax,
and we're harming those that
need the help the most, and so
I'm gonna be voting for this
simply because I like that
everybody's included now. Um.
But I, I still think this is a
bad bill.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
ranking member Duncan.
Let's go to represented luxury.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had a
couple of comments how I'd like
to know now that you've changed
the percentages, what kind of
money is that gonna raise?
Um, Mr. Chair and um
Representative Lindstrom, we
think that it will raise but
still continue to raise between
30 and 60 million. Uh again, Mr.
Chair and Representative
Lunstrom, we're not sure because
this is a new tax, um, and we,
we, um, we don't have any data
of, of how many, um, at what
price points all the beverages
are being sold at.
Mr. Chairman, I guess I'm a
little concerned about that then
if you look at an FIR on the
original bill.
It
Absolutely identifies how much
money would be raised and um.
I don't, I don't think a bill
should be.
Especially when we're gonna be
raising taxes should be.
Considered at this point if we
don't know how much it's gonna
raise.
I, I think that would be a
concern for me, but more
importantly for me, I apologize
for missing the first
presentation on this.
But in my county, we already
implement a 5% tax.
There is no way I could vote for
another 6 on anything, but I'm
just putting that out there now,
it's, it's just, that's 11% for
us.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Lustrom. Let's go to
Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, representatives like.
I, uh appreciate the effort to
try and bring equity, but I
don't believe this does that.
Um, in my mind, um, Mr.
Chairman, and, uh, and
representatives is if you're if
you're looking at the the
breweries.
Or standalone wineries where
there's no food service.
This is a tax on every item they
sell.
Um, Mr. Chairman and, and, and
representatives.
If we're looking at
A restaurant
Uh, to have an alcohol license
in a restaurant, it has to be
less than 50%.
Of your
Tonal cells.
Um, I, I don't see equity here.
What I see is a a a tax on every
product.
That is going out the door at a
brewery or a taproom.
Um, most taprooms, um, Mr.
Chair, and most wineries, the
one, at least the one in in San
Juan County. If there's food
service, it's an external food
service, a food truck or
something else that's brought
in. So the winery
Or the taprooms, um, except for
There, there is one, we have
Three Rivers Brewery that serves
food, but the other uh
breweries, um, Mr. Chair.
Uh, and representatives, they
don't serve food. So, so this is
a
attacks.
On every item.
that they're selling, and I, I
just don't see the equity in
that, um, I, I don't, I didn't
like 6% on restaurants. I would
like to have seen that come down
to 3, but, uh, I, I, I don't
believe we should be taxing 100%
of uh of every product at some
of these wineries and breweries
I cannot support your amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to Representative Silva.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
representatives. I've heard a
couple of concerns about equity,
um, from like the grocery store
or buying um her package so I'm
wondering, can you help me make
sense of what does this mean for
price changes, um, with this
amendment.
Thank you, chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Silva, thank you so much for
that question. So, uh, I think
it is helpful, uh, you know, to
see what the actual numbers are
when we're calculating the 6%
and 3%, uh, for, for a $17
beverage. So let's say you went
to buy a cocktail that $17
cocktail would now be 1751, so
it'd be a 51 cent increase, uh,
in contrast, that $17 which is
maybe the average price of a 12
pack here at the grocery.
Grocery store, um, now that
would be an each beer would be
$1.50 so, um, really we're still
seeing that if you buy in bulk,
you're still gonna have lower
prices even with the 6%, um, but
you are buying more.
it. Thank you so much. Thank
you.
Thank you. Anybody else on the,
on the amendment from the
committee.
Seeing none, I'm gonna call for
the role, uh, to, uh, amend.
Twice amen House Bill 417, uh,
take the role, please.
Can I get a motion, please?
I move for a do pass on the
amendment, Mr. Chair. Sorry
about that. What is there a
second. Thank you.
Representative Chandler, yes.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Gallegos, you
know.
Representative Henry.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Martinez. Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Baron.
Representative Silva.
Yes.
Representative Tarasas, Vice
Chair Kadina.
Yes
She then
Yes.
It'll be 6 to 56 to 5 you bill
has been amended.
That is yes sir we do pass on
House Bill 417 as
motion made by Speaker Martinez,
seconded by Representative and
chairwoman, uh Chandler.
The duke passed for a house Bill
417 is twice amended. Please
take the rule.
Representative Chandler. Yes.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Gallegos still.
Representative Henry.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Parujuan.
Representative Silva, yes.
Representative Terazos.
Viercadina.
Yes.
And a representative.
Can we go back to representing
Duncan who walked back into the
room, please.
Duncan. Yes.
00, no.
Well
sorry about that.
I was walking through the
amendment
66. OK, so by a vote of 6 to 6,
uh, does not pass. Thank you
both representatives.
Moving on to House Bill 403 Oil
and gas fund distribution uses,
Representative Murphy.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, member
of members of the committee,
um,
Here to talk about House Bill
the committee substitute for
House Bill 403, I believe the
202 numbers 231.
1872.
Um
I'm very pleased to be here, uh,
I would note that this bill
passed unanimously out of the uh
Energy Committee, and I find it
Just that fact pretty amazing,
but uh the fact that uh that the
three amigos uh representatives
um McQueen and Montoya and
Murphy can agree on anything as
quite astounding you throw in.
Representative Dixon, vice
chair, uh Saana and, and even um
My, uh, guy that sits behind me,
Representative Henry, so, um,
The history of the reclamation
fund. Oil and gas companies pay
a variety of taxes, including in
the Mexico severance tax, and
conservation tax, emergency
school tax.
Natural gas processors tax,
production tax and equipment
tax, and these fund many of our
public activities as this
committee knows, and the Mexico
oil and gas conservation tax
began in the 1950s and then and
is levied against every barrel
of oil and every MCF of gas
that's produced. In the 1970s,
the Reclamation Fund was
established as a non-reverting
fund is is funded by the
conservation tax to ensure the
proper plugging and abandonment
and the re reclamation on
retired oil and gas wells and
associated
facilities where the responsible
party um cannot be found. It can
be thought of as an insurance
policy, uh, uninsured motorist
policy perhaps that industry
pays to make sure that if a
company goes bankrupt and the
state can't find or or collect
from that company, there's a
fund to properly plug and
reclaim.
Um, over time, the balance of
the reclamation fund has been
swept when the state encountered
hard economic times in one
particular extreme example, the
funding formula was amended so
only 10.5% of the fund goes um
to fund these efforts.
The, uh
Oil and gas wells, so that kind
of brings us to the current our
current situation and that's
wells that need to be plugged in
the bandment, plugged and
abandoned when um uh when
they're no longer uh economic.
Uh, in, in 2022, the last
numbers I have industry plugged
about 451 wells, OCD plugged
about roughly 49 wells. There's
Currently almost 6 69,000 active
wells in the state, 34,000 of
those are on state fee lands and
34, 3, excuse me, 349 are, are
known, are identified by the
OCD.
Um
equaling a failure rate of about
1%.
Um, or abandonment rate, um,
there are another 1700 wells
throughout the state that OCD um
is looking at, and so that
number of 349 could certainly
grow in this fund may really be
needed even more. Currently, the
last balance I show is around 21
million, um, in 20, excuse me,
in 2022, it's 21 million, uh,
today, it currently sits at
about 66 million.
Um, the goal is to achieve and
maintain a sustainable balance
in the oil and gas reclamation
fund, which would also have the
effect of reducing or
eliminating the con the
contention surrounding increased
financial assurances, uh, well
transfers and, and plug-in
abandonment conversations.
The, the administration of the
wealth program, um, plugging
program, uh, it needs to be made
more efficient and needs to be
expanded by OCD so that the
wells that are sitting in
inventory can be plugged
quickly.
Um, we have a surplus of funding
from the oil and gas industry
right now, and we would, um, uh,
the purpose of the bill is to
make sure that uh the state can
plug and remediate and uh in the
future before there's a
slowdown, and I'll stand for
questions, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Let's go to
folks online, those in support
of substitute for House Bill
403. Please raise your hand.
We have two folks on the line,
Carla.
Carla, good morning.
Car,
we seem to be having some audio
issues, we can see what you're
saying on the screen, but we
can't hear you.
Give us a quick second, please.
I
The
We have issues.
OK. So for those of you online
we're having some technical
issues on our end. We will call
IT, uh, we will come back to
you, but let's go now to the
audience here in our room and
then hopefully by then uh we can
come back to you online. So
please stay in place, but for
those of you that are here in
support in the room for the
committee substitute for House
Bill 403. Please raise your head
and then we will have our
attendants come up and, and you
can make formal life and then he
will hold the mic and make some
comments.
Not all at once.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, Jim Winchester here
from the Independent Petroleum
Association of New Mexico, and
I'm speaking, uh, on behalf of
both the New Mexico Oil and Gas
Association this morning and the
Permian Basin Petroleum
Association. So, um, of the many
taxes that oil and gas operators
pay, this long ago established
oil and gas reclamation fund,
uh, has been there to serve as
the backstop for the division in
the event that Wells are
abandoned and as Representative
Murphy explained.
that money was diverted about 20
years ago when money was tight.
Now, had this diversion of this
oil and gas paid money not
occurred, New Mexico would have
not had the open well problem
and backlog that exists right
now. So this bill essentially
just corrects that
misappropriation and makes the
reclamation fund whole again, as
it was intended when it was
originally agreed upon between
administration and industry many
years ago. So, by passing this
bill,
The oil conservation division
will have the necessary capital
that they need to finish
plugging and remediation of
abandoned wells. Um, this bill,
as mentioned, had unanimous
support through the House Energy
Committee. It also made it
through several Senate
committees last year with
bipartisan support and the
support of the administration,
and we think that it can and
should pass both chambers this
session. Uh, in summary, this
fix is long overdue. It's a
win-win for the state and for
the environment and ask you to
please support. Thank you.
Thank you. Next.
Nobody else? OK. Anybody in
opposition then of substitute
403.
No one in the room.
Were we able to get
Back online and have the audio
working.
Oh
OK.
got here. That time change, I
tell you what
Te Cole, would you please try to
speak?
So, so, so, uh, Terry, we, we
Again, see what you're, what
you're saying, but we can't hear
you. And, and the tech is here,
so.
Give us a minute, please.
Why don't we do this, folks, um,
since we had 2 online, we'll
note their names and he was
Terry and the other one was.
Carla and, and, and they're both
lobbyists, so, uh, I, I would
hope that they would be in the
room and not online, but um
let's, let's just now move into
the committee for for further
discussion.
Um, I, yes, Mr. Chairman, I
thought that uh I might quickly
explain uh the two changes to
the bill. I'm meant to do it my,
my main presentation. OK, um, so
this is a a committee
substitute. It was amended
primarily on page 2, on line 7
through 15 were the distribution
schedule was stretched out, um,
and that was done for two
reasons by uh Chairman Saraana
uh felt like that that might um
mitigate some of the impact to
the general fund and also would
give the division time to ramp
up, um, their activities and
personnel. Second change is um
online uh still on page 2 on
lines 24 and 25. That was
language that I worked with,
with uh Chairman McQueen, and to
make sure that the money is um
spent for the purposes that that
are, are not that are intended
and are also listed on page 3
under 1 and 2 from lines 1
through 9. thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, sir. Come back to the
committee, bless you.
Question comes from the
committee, Representative
Montoya.
Uh, thank you, um, Mr. Chair,
and Representative Murphy, um,
So
Very good. There we go. OK.
Um, so I was, I wonder if I vote
and it echoes like that if
you'll count every vote
echoes.
Um, so Mr. Ye on this side I say
no
um, yes, Mr. Chair and
Representative Murphy. So, uh,
what is the purpose once again,
you brief, you ran through that
it was fairly
OK, let's uh mute them online
and uh we're back to the
committee. Thank you.
OK, that was fun.
Um
So, uh, you briefly, you kind of
ran through it fairly quickly,
but the purpose of the fund is
to is to mitigate orphan wells
can, can, can you talk a little
bit about the orphan whale
problem in New Mexico right now.
Sure, um, the, there's been a
backlog of orphan wells because
of just the rate of the, the
state has had to um has has
plugged and abandoned. I mean,
roughly it's
You know, somewhere around, um,
you know, 25 to 30 wells a year.
And so that program, the, the,
the fund was originally
established to ensure that there
was, there was an account that
had the money in it that would
allow the OCD in the case of a
not being able to find a
responsible party for, for well
to undertake the plug-in
abandonment and reclamation of
the, of the area. And so this is
something, um, you know, oil and
gas prices are, are uh
cyclic in nature. Uh, we've
certainly had some downturns
that our recent experiences is,
has not been there. It's uh
obviously we've seen production
uh grow, prices uh hold fairly
well, but there have been cycles
uh in the 70s, uh, and certainly
in the late 80s and early 90s,
um, and even a, a, a brief
period in the late 90s where um
some of some companies uh just
couldn't survive and went
bankrupt or whatever, but the
rest of the industry has
provided
and, and that company did while
it was operating because it paid
into the fund on the oil and gas
it produced, but we, we all pay
into this fund to, um, you know,
to insure against the uninsured
motorist.
So thank you, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative Murphy, so, um,
I've been, uh, this is
I've been here 11 years with my
9th year on this committee, not
not consecutively. I took 2
years off, but I also 9 years uh
in the uh energy Committee.
And uh the 9 years that I've
been in the energy committee,
um, I've been told over and over
by advocates that the oil and
gas industry, uh, doesn't pay.
For, uh
For the, the abandoned well
problem. Um, so you're saying
this.
This fund was created to deal
with that.
That's correct, Mr. Cherry
Representative Montoya, and um
it is currently generating and
it depends which year you're
looking at, but somewhere
between 120 and $140 million a
year, of which some somewhere
between 20 and 30 is usually
spent by the OCD on these
activities and the rest that is
is swept.
Um, had those, those funds, uh,
not been swept, uh, the, it's
difficult to get exact numbers
that we would probably be in the
hundreds of millions of dollars
that would be available for
these activities. Now, with this
direction back to the it's
intended purpose, uh, Mr.
Chairman and Representative, um,
the funds should grow
substantially over the next few
years, and as Chairman McQueen
and I talked about in committee,
uh, I would expect the
legislature will probably
Need to reevaluate it at that
point, um, to see, uh, what
progress has been made and um
the rate of abandonment of by
OCD and if, you know, basically
the, the, the fun is fully
funded. Um, so I would
anticipate and, you know,
occasional reviews.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative. So it's my
understanding that
Only about 20%.
Of the dollars going into the
fund from the oil and gas uh
community is going for the
purpose of the fund, but about
80% approximately is being swept
into the general fund.
Uh, that's correct, Mr. Chairman
and Representative Montoya. So,
uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, uh,
approximately how many abandoned
wells, and if you could break
that down as well, I understand
that some are on federal lands,
which there are there are
federal dollars that should be
going towards uh plugging those
abandoned wells.
But uh but on state lands and on
private lands in New Mexico,
what approximately how many
wells are we talking?
So the, um, of the 68,000 wells,
69,000 and about half of those
are on state and fee. And
currently, OCD estimates or has
on their list 350 or so.
roughly 1% on the fee lands that
the, the number I've gotten from
the OCD on the total number
which would include a federal
wells would be as roughly 1700,
and so if you took the 350 from
that, you have roughly 1350 that
would probably be on federal
lands, and I would hasten to
note that the federal government
actually pays uh for the, for
the lugging abandonment of those
those wells. They typically Mr.
Chairman and Representative,
they, they contract with the
OCD.
because OCD has the
relationships with the
contractors and the people on
the ground, and they actually go
out and perform the work.
Uh, but the, uh, the, the
federal government reimburses,
uh, for that work.
Famous chairman Representative
Murphy. So uh if we were to
divert the money back to the
fund, how quickly would you see
potentially the plugging of
these abandoned wells.
Um, I would think that within
certainly a couple of years, the
350 could be plugged very
rapidly and um and then as the
federal situation, uh, clarifies
itself, even if
Uh, the federal government for
whatever reason we're not to pay
for those, um, this fund within
probably 5 years, um, would, uh,
would have the money to cover
all of that as well. And the
math sort of works like this is
that currently I took OCD's
estimate of 1700 and just upped
it. I mean, it's it to 2000,
which is a pretty dramatic
increase, that's not really
supported by history, but it
seemed like a good safety factor
and then took 1250.
000 per well, which is what the
OCD is estimating there or has
given me as their average some
more, some wells could be more
expensive to to to plug in a van
and, and remediate and others
much less than that.
Uh, so that comes out to about
$250 million and this would be,
that would fully be funded
certainly under almost any
scenario within 5 years.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So I,
I'm just gonna make a statement
at this point and that is uh Mr.
Chair and, and, and uh
representative, um.
It's easy to see.
That had we not diverted the
money away, we would not have an
abandoned wha problem in New
Mexico right now. This is, this
is very much like uh you and I,
uh, paying in our insurance uh
uninsured motorist coverage for
those who who might run into us
that that don't have insurance.
That's what, that's what the
industry has been paying into
and so uh Mr. uh Chairman and
Representative Murphy, as I
stated in the last committee.
To whatever degree we have an
abandoned whale problem in New
Mexico, it's the legislature
that created that problem.
Industry has provided the money
to this fund, but currently,
Mister Chair and members of the
committee were the ones taking
the money out of this fund and
and putting it into the general
fund, even, even though we have
all of the other taxes, the
Avalorum taxes, the royalties
that we get paid, the um the uh
severance taxes, uh, the
property taxes we, we have a lot
of taxes that are meant to go to
the general fund or meant to go
to the permanent fund, but the
dollars that are going to the
conservation fund and then are
being taken out and going to the
general fund.
They were meant
For plugging abandoned holes and
abandoned wells, and we have
over 2 or about 20 years ago.
Uh, diverted that money and have
never returned it back and uh to
Mr. Chair, uh, representative,
to be honest, about getting a
little weary of hearing.
Um
From advocates who continue to
say that uh the oil and gas
community is not cleaning up
their messes, and Mr. Chair and
um uh representative. I, I
believe if we, if we remedy
this, um, this would go a long
ways towards the
Uh, I, I believe the gripes
about oil and gas industry, uh,
uh, going away. So thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, as a
reminder and appreciate you
bringing this bill and you and I
had this conversation
representative in regards to
your timely timely miss or or or
or or delay in terms of bringing
this bill, but at this point in
time, we've heard all the bills
that have a potential of being a
part of the the tax package and
so uh this is one of those that
that didn't make the cuts
because of the timely the the
time nature of it all, uh, it
does have $119 million impact to
the general fund. So as we talk
about this, just realize
that this will be uh temporarily
tabled in this committee,
Representative Chandler.
Thank you. I'll, I'll be brief,
um, um, Mr. Chair, uh, the
question about the 150 million
that's no longer going to be
sent to support education. Could
you give me a little bit of
detail about where that money's
been going and what impact that
will have, Mister Chair and
Representative, Mr. Chair and
Representative, thank you for
that question. It's 150,000 that
was me I misread and
that was done, um.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
um, probably 20 or 30 years ago
where um the OCD had an
education program about not only
oil and gas, but some of the
emerging renewables, and they,
there's other funding for that
now, and so it, it was just
mainly clean up.
Appreciate it. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Representative
Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I just want to
ask one quick question just to
for clarification, make sure we
all understand. So, uh,
Uh, Representative Murphy, are
these tax dollars or are they
oil and gas industry dollars
paid above and beyond normal
taxes.
Uh, these are, are taxes paid by
the oil and gas industry for a
specific purpose above and
beyond any of the other types of
taxes that, that, you know, most
businesses may pay grocery
receipts tax, and, and those,
uh, and of course, um, you know,
there's ad the war tax and
others, but no, these are funds
that are directly paid on the
value of every barrel of oil
produced and the value of of
every MCF gas producer is paid
by the company to the state for
this purpose.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Anyone else, questions or
comments from the committee.
Seeing none
please make a motion.
For sure I moved to temporarily
um.
Table House Bill 403.
In a motion made for uh table
for committee substitute
hospital for uh substitute for
House Bill 403. Is there a
second?
They could
see no opposition. Thank you,
Representative Murphy, for
coming out this morning. Thank
you. Thank you members of the
committee. I appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, just a
comment. Come, um, I'd like to
see a study this through the
interim. This is definitely uh
something that we need to look
at if we're gonna be looking at
uh plugging abandoned wells, uh,
we're gonna have to address it,
um, and, and unfortunately what
I see happening is a uh
continued uh
The stream of bills that go to
plugging wells on top of uh what
what's already um being handled
by industry, so I would like to
make that formal request that we
have at least have a discussion
about this. You got it noted.
Thank you very much. Thank
yousenter Murphy.
Let's move on to Representative
Gonzalez.
Good morning.
Whenever you're ready, the floor
is yours.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you committee. Um, I do have an
expert online.
And if he can be pulled up.
Uh, Matthew Probst.
Matthew, Matt or Matthew Matt or
Matthew, are you online?
Yep.
OK, we have.
Stand by.
Do you want to talk about the
bill or you gonna talk about the
bill? I'll talk about the bill
and I'll pass it off.
So I just wanted to make sure we
got
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you committee. um House Bill 395
is a tax credit for healthcare
preceptors. So for those of you
that may not be familiar or
preceptor is those that
supervises a period of
residency, um, for healthcare
and related professionals, um,
so it has been noted in multiple
studies about our need for
healthcare professionals in
different areas. Um, and one of
those ways to tackle that is by
increasing our residency
programs and so but.
do increase those residency
programs, you do need healthcare
preceptors to supervise these.
Um, these residencies and so
I'll go ahead and pass it off to
Matt Matthew, Matt.
Um, and Matt, by the way, is the
physician that said, well, he is
a physician assistant, but he's
also the director of real
engagement with UNI Office for
Community Health.
OK, Ma, good morning. You're
with us.
Thank you, Matt. Anything else?
No with that I stand for
questions. Let's go to the
audience. Uh, you wanna hear and
support for House Bill 395.
Please do move forward if you
wish to make public comment. Our
attendant will hold a microphone
for you.
Good day sir chair and members
of the committee, Jacob Smith
from Sandoval, Governor Change
Project, former graduate
clinical program coordinator of
all APRM programs at the
University of New Mexico here in
support of HB 395 with a slight
amendment under section 1, Part
A, who has performed a
partnership, not less than 4
weeks in New Mexico may apply,
be amended to has performed a
partner uh preceptorship of, of
less than 4 140 hours in New
Mexico may apply. This is to
prevent confusion and misuse, as
most graduate programs go on an
hour.
hourly rate, not on a weekly
rate for doing their clinicals,
um, key example of this would be
like HEACMP, uh, those providers
work in the ED might work 12
hour shifts and 7 days a week on
their contract, that would equal
to where they're working 336
hours over 4 weeks. Nurse
midwifery might only do 2 hours
over the course of 4 weeks, thus
limiting the field of confusion.
Thank you for your time and
members of the committee. Thank
you, sir. Next, yes, ma'am.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Katie Gutierrez. I, I'm
here on behalf of Think New
Mexico. You all probably
received our report with our
suggestions to address the
healthcare worker shortage in
New Mexico.
Uh, we were, we think that this
bill would really help with the
healthcare shortage, which we
know is worse in more rural
counties. We would like to thank
Representatives Gonzalez
Thompson, Anaya, and Lindstrom
for bringing this forward. Um,
this also is not the first time
that this legislation has been
introduced, Senator Ortizi Pino
has introduced this legislation
in previous years.
It would help grow more of our
own, address our healthcare
shortage, and it goes behind the
healthcare adage that behind
every good clinician is a great
preceptor.
Currently there's no
standardized method of paying
our preceptors, most of them
actually volunteer, so this
would ensure that these workers
are compensated and incentivize
more of them to actually work as
preceptors at a very relatively
low cost. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else uh here
in support? If not, anyone in
opposition of House Bill 395.
See no one else in the room. Is
anyone online that wishes to
make any comment. We have 2
people, uh, those in support of
House Bill 395, please raise
your hand.
Connie.
Connie, good morning.
Yes, ma'am. Thank you, Connie.
Next.
You
No. OK. Nobody else left. Anyone
we're gonna come back to the
committee unless you have any
other further comments to make.
Nope.
Questions, comments from the
committee.
you do have to comments, you do
have two comments online.
But we went through one, right?
So we just need one more.
we
OK.
Uh, well, we're gonna come to
the committee and there see, we
seem to be having some technical
problems online, so.
Question comes from the
committee.
Seeing them, uh,
representative, I moved to table
House Bill.
3955.
2nd by representative uh
Gallegos, any opposition? Seeing
none. Thank you again and uh and
I I I guess the next time
around, as I mentioned before,
uh, let's see if we can get
these types of issues uh on our
agenda earlier in the session,
but we appreciate your, your
work on this. Thank you. Thank
you, members, and uh we will
continue.
Sure,
we got this, yeah, you got it.
Will do. Thank you all. Have a
great day. Have a great week.
