a lunch time.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Montoya.
Represented here.
Representative Silva.
Representative Terasas.
Yeah
Representative Kadina.
Yeah.
Representative.
Thank you. Good morning,
committee.
As you can see, we're deep into
the legislative.
Um, but we're glad to be
opening.
Today's
Committee with 3 bills on the
agenda, um, we are going to
start with House Bill 226 and
Representative Martinez, um.
Just quickly, we're going to
note that we have multiple
members presenting bills in
other committee, including our
chair, so we will be moving in
and out of these seats. Um,
we've checked in with uh ranking
member Duncan. If it happens
that we drop in quorum for a few
minutes, we'll continue with the
presentations and we'll take
action on these bills when we
get our numbers back up and have
quorum.
So, um, I know, yeah, people
have places to be this morning
and we'll, um, work to hold that
with a lot of respect for each
other in our process. But we'll
get started with HB 226
represented Martinez.
Thank you Madam Chair members of
the committee, um.
appreciate your indulgence in
moving me up the list, uh, today
I bring you House Bill 226.
Uh, this bill increases the
rural healthcare tax
practitioners Act.
Um
And it requires the Department
of Health to determine eligible
practitioners.
who will qualify for the tax
credit and provide a
certification.
Uh, of eligibility to the tax
and rev department.
Um, basically this amends
existing language.
To raise the tax credit.
Um
On page 2, line 3, it raises the
existing credit from 5000 to
15,000.
For all physicians, osteopathic
physicians, dentists,
psychologists and the list goes
on.
Uh, then on line 16 raises it
from 3000 to 9000.
All pharmacists, dental
hygienists, basically, madam
chair and members of the
committee, that's what this bill
does.
I stand going to public comments
if you are participating over
Zoom and would like to speak in
support or opposition to this
bill, please raise your hand
now.
Hey Duval, we're gonna start
with you, um, for all of those
participating over Zoom, please
state your name for the record,
um, and make your concise
comment either in favor or
opposition to this bill. Thank
you. Well, good morning, uh,
Madam Chair and committee
members, Duval Westfall,
executive vice president of the
Policy and program through the
greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. He in support of the
HB 226. 1 of the big talking
points this session, of course,
has been a severe shortage of
healthcare providers in our
state and
We're all Mexico feels that
shortage acutely, and that's why
it's important to increase the
value of the rural healthcare
practitioner tax credit, so we
can attract and keep more
medical providers. It's that
simple. Our amazing state is not
the only one in great need of
the medical professionals, and
that's why it's gonna take a
whole bag of carrots to get the
healthcare providers in Mexico
so desperately needs to come to
and stay in our great state and
this tax credit is an important
one. We urge you to vote yes.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next, we have Mike
McMillan.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Mike
McMillan.
Operations officer, athletic
trainer at Southwest Bone and
Joint Institute in Silver City.
I urge you to also support this
bill, uh, the tax credit
increase is another tool that
can help attract and retain
providers to rural New Mexico.
The current amounts are uh 5000
and 3000 are appreciated, but
really not significant enough to
Attract new providers and retain
those providers in our rural
communities. So I urge your
support on this bill. Thank you.
I'm trying to see who we have
next on Zoom, Danna Gray.
Yeah I agree.
Yeah
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Dana Gray, executive
director of Desert State
Physical Therapy Network
representing 30 independent
private practices throughout the
state. 14 clinics are located in
rural areas. Rural clinics
struggle to retain and recruit
staff, an increase to the tax
credit for rural physical
therapists could provide
incentive to serve in these much
underserved communities. We
thank Representative Martinez
for his work on this bill and
stand in full support of House
Bill 226. Thank you.
Richard Montoya.
Go ahead, Richard.
Thank you very much for the
opportunity. My name is Richard
Montoya, I'm executive director
for the New Mexico Optometric
Association. I'd like to thank
the sponsor and everybody in
support of this bill, which will
help attract and retain
healthcare providers to our
rural communities. Um, I
appreciate your support and urge
you to uh move this bill along.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Anyone else joining
us over Zoom that would like to
speak in supporter opposition to
HB 226. Please raise your hand
now.
Justin
CEO of Mental Health and
Consulting Services to pay.
Um
Like others, you know, we
experience.
A health care shortage.
Being along uh the border of the
state.
State.
Larger areas, um,
Salaries are higher.
So
attach.
Uh,
a far higher
than others so we need to pay.
But sometimes that's not an
option.
For us, it's competing in Texas
and Texas.
That. So,
Tax credits are additional
pieces
they're they go.
Less than an hour away, in some
cases.
Not have the texture.
Thank you.
Next, we're going to Allison.
Hello, good morning, chair
members of the committee. My
name is Alison Riley, Public
policy director with the New
Mexico Chamber of Commerce, and
we're in strong support of this
legislation, and I'd also like
to state that the Gallup
McKinley Chamber of Commerce is
also in favor of this
legislation. Right now, many
rural communities struggle to
attract and retain healthcare
providers, creating gaps in care
that make it harder for
businesses to succeed.
The rural Healthcare
practitioner tax credit makes
New Mexico more competitive for
recruiting medical professionals
and underserved areas. This
means better healthcare access,
stronger local economies and a
healthier workforce, which are
essential for business growth.
Companies looking to expand need
to know their employees will
have access to medical care by
incentivizing providers to stay.
This still helps local
businesses thrive.
A strong healthcare system is
the foundation of a strong
economy, and this legislation
ensures that rural businesses
and workers have the support
they need to grow and succeed,
and I urge your support. Thank
you.
Thank you. Anyone else over
here?
Next
Uh
In-person public comment, please
line up and the attendant will
provide a microphone if you're
here to speak in support or
opposition, the HB 226.
Good morning, Madam Chairman
vers of the committee. My name
is Gloria Doherty. I'm a
registered nurse for 35 years,
nurse practitioner for 25. I'm
here on behalf of the New Mexico
Nursing Association and the New
Mexico nurse practitioner
Council, and we are in strong
support of this, um, and we
heard in house appropriations
that some of the rural numbers
have improved for nursing, but
we are far from solving the
nursing shortage with close to
7000 openings on the latest
workforce data report. In
addition to this and all the
other
great incentives and recruitment
tools that the legislators put
past, this will only assist in
making sure that we have a
better pool to pull from, so
that we can take care of our
great population. Thank you.
Hi, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Julia Ritten and I'm the
senior director of uh government
affairs with the New Mexico
Hospital Association. I can't
say it any better than those who
have spoken before me. We are in
support of this bill, uh, uh,
for our providers in New Mexico,
and us as New Mexicans and hope
that you will pass this bill.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Sky Devo and I'm the
registered lobbyist for ALS New
Mexico and the New Mexico
Society of Acupuncture and
Oriental Medicine, and we
proudly support this. um,
representative Martinez,
anything else before we go to
committee?
Madam Chair, and I do have uh an
amendment that was 30 number if
you'd like that at this time.
that
We're getting it passed out now.
Thank you.
I.
It's a 0.231047.1. Thank you.
We'll move this amendment for
discussion. Go ahead
representing Martinez to explain
your amendment.
Madam Chair of the committee,
uh, this, this amendment.
Aligns it with the bill that's
already been heard, uh, Garcia.
So aligns the two, it adds.
Uh
More practitioners on page 2
line 20 counselors that inserts
a comma and on line 25 it
strikes.
And
And after therapists, it it
inserts license practical
nurses, emergency medical
technicians, paramedics, speech
language pathologist,
occupational therapists.
chiropractic physicians, doctors
of oriental medicine.
Not naturopathic doctors and
naturopaths.
Page 5, line 19.
After nurse, it inserts or
license practical nurse.
On page 6, line 5, it strikes
the second occurrence of and.
On page 6 between lines 7 and 8.
It inserts.
Section M.
An emergency medical technician
or a paramedic.
License pursuant to the
emergency medical Services Act.
And section and.
a speech language pathologist
licensed pursuant to the speech
language pathology.
Audiology and hearing aid
dispensing practices Act.
Um
Section 0 an occupational
therapist licensed pursuant to
the.
Occupational therapy Act.
Section P, a chiropractic
physician, licensed pursuant to
the chiropractic physicians.
Practice Act
Section Q, a Doctor of Oriental
medical.
Licensed pursuant to the
Oriental medical, the Oriental
medicine Practice Act.
Section or a naturopathic
doctor.
Licensed pursuant to the
naturopathic doctor's practice
Act.
In Section S.
An apropa licensed pursuant to
the naturopathic.
Practice Act
And with that I stand for
questions.
Thank you, uh, representative
for the commentary. Let's go to,
let's go online to see if
there's anyone in support or
opposition.
Is that you already done that.
OK, excuse me, gosh.
You just told me that.
We missed that. OK, so we're
coming back then to committee?
me if I'm wrong, OK, just
represented Lindstrom's on the,
on the list. Representative.
Mr. Chairman
You know, generally, the
amendment is done first.
Mr. Mr. Chairman.
I need to understand you, you
said that this.
Um,
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Lunstrom, I don't have the
representative, uh.
Garcia, Miguel Garcia.
So if German representative, if
you're if you're tracking with
that bill, you're adding all
these additional practitioners,
is that all you're doing?
This amendment
Mr. Chairman Representative I
have
on the bill, Mr. Chairman, but
that's all I had on the
amendment. Thank you.
Any other commentary on the
amendment, not
Social media adopt the
amendment. There's a second by.
There's a second by
Representative Hernandez and the
opposition to the adoption of
the amendment.
If not, we're back in the bill
and if you want to provide
additional commentary on the
bill, Representative? Did you
already go through everything.
is entirely on the bill.
Yes, Mr. Chair. OK, then go back
to representative.
And
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um, couple of questions on the
bill itself when we're talking
about rural, how is that
defined?
Question is, is who's eliminated
in.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative Lindstrom on, uh,
carrying 3 bills in 3 different
committees,
and then trying to vote on my
own committee.
Um
I don't see the the definition
of that in the bill. I'm sorry
for that.
And my question around the
definition for rural, Mr.
Chairman, is that I know that
that come and serve a scallop.
So when they're.
Actually home
How, how does this work? We have
a.
Gallup Cancer Center as an
example.
I'd just be curious about that,
um.
Other questions I had, Mr.
Chairman, is I like to build,
obviously, you know, we need
doctors, but I am curious to
tell us what the participation
rate has been so far.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Armstrom, I do apologize for
that. I had that information.
On my desk and running out of
the.
The only reason I bring that up,
Mr. Chairman, is because when we
added all these new people.
We amended this bill, the FIR is
wrong.
I mean, because we, we think
that we're gonna spend so much
money.
Out of the general fund.
But if we could get that in
from, I support this. Let me
just say that I support what
he's doing, I support this bill.
I just want to know how much
it's gonna cost because I'd like
to see this part of your
package.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative, I
imagine that our sponsor will
then work with, with the
committee.
To get us that that and also we
can uh share that with uh LFC we
can get a better idea of what it
will cost, sir.
Mr. Chairman, um, I will get
that to you this afternoon. OK,
sounds good. Let's go to
Representative Silva.
Representative Martinez. I
appreciate this bill. I'm also.
In support of it, I, um,
represent a large portion of
House District 53 that is
extremely rural and um I, and
I'm wondering, um.
Why the bill doesn't have a
sunset period in it, um, because
it is a new tax credit expands,
um, the credit to many different
practitioners.
Um
One of the analysis was that it
might be a good idea to have a
sunset so that it can be studied
and uh it's impact taken into
full account before. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Response
Um
I, I agree with you and if you'd
like to make that.
Thank you.
Well, I appreciate that. I, I
think that would just be, um,
it, it, it's just good practice,
I think with uh an expanded tax
credit like that. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
If, if that is a friendly
amendment you wishing to make
that amendment to this
amendment, amended bill OK,
please, please restate your.
Um, OK, that's my first
amendment in committee. So I, I
would like to, um, do I make a
motion.
Yeah, you make a motion. Motion
to, whatever you want to amend
and if it's friendly or not,
we'll ask him. OK, I'd like to
make a motion to amend House
Bill 226, uh, to include a
sunset period.
Of 5 years.
Uh, sponsors at Friendly
amendment.
And
Wait, what do you?
I
10? OK. With the a sunset period
of 10 years.
Representative Silva.
A question, where would that
page 6.
Uh, chair representative, um, I,
yeah, I think it would be, um.
And at the end, section 2 with
under applicable.
Representative Silvan and
sponsored that that that's
appropriate that Mr. Chairman,
I, I would accept that as a
friendly amendment. OK, uh,
they're second to the amendment,
seconded by Representative
Duncan.
Uh, any opposition to that
motion?
Seeing none, you have an
amended.
Amendment to your amended bill.
Very good. Any other questions
or comments? no, uh,
Representative Terazas.
Well, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. I
think this is great, I think.
I, I agree that there's
obviously a little uh uh fiscal
impact change, but
Um, I don't know what that'll
be, but I think what's nice it's
inclusive, it doesn't.
As a pig.
positions and not leave some
out, I think.
A lot easier.
positions to
New Mexico also.
Agree with uh Representative
Lindstrom, I do see a lot of
people.
That are working rule in Mexico
and are going in and out of Las
Cruces and Albuquerque coming
from the possibly.
And I don't know if the language
be if this is how it could be
handled, where if they work so
many.
More than 51, 50% of their time
in rural New Mexico.
Maybe that's the the approach.
I'm not really sure how to
I can do that because they do
still have their practices or
they're based out of.
You know the hospitals
Urban areas
So, I'm not sure how that would
be, but I agree that we need to
include them.
Do you have any uh
thoughts on that?
Representative.
Mr. Chairman, I do have an
expert that is uh.
Willing to answer that all.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Members
of the committee. My name's
Gloria Doherty. I've been a
registered nurse and a nurse
practitioner for decades and I
am one of the beneficiaries of
this working at Sandoval
Regional Medical Center.
And the bill itself states that
you have to work over 14 hours,
1400 hours.
representative, that answers my
question.
Mr. Chairman, um, just, uh, that
is on page 6.
Sections 23 and 4, going to the
last part line said of a
partially rural county.
As designated by the Health
Resources and Services
Administration.
The United States.
On that point,
Yes, Mr. Chairman, I don't know
what that means.
It's some federal definition.
I'd like to know in New Mexico,
I'm just curious, you know, this
is.
I know McKinley County at the
end of the day McKinley County
qualifies. Thank you. And if I
may interject, I, I know that we
passed the rural health test tax
credit, um, last session or
perhaps a session before that
was Miguel. He was Miguel, you
know, Jesus, uh, Miguel Garcia's
bill, and uh and and he further
defined that too. I think your
point. So I think we can
probably refer back to that,
maybe in just refers to this
year.
Any other questions, comments,
uh, for the sponsor. Do you know
anything else to add,
representative or Mr. Whip?
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee.
As the
this is a,
uh, I moved to table.
Is the uh.
He passive.
I would, I would love to, I
think the impact like uh rep
Linton said there will be an
impact that
No, no, that's OK. So a
temporary table, bill, uh 226,
uh.
As twice amended at this point
by Representative Silva in the
opposition, saying none, uh,
common practice representative
uh in this, in this committee,
and then we'll, we'll bring it
back up, uh, to see how it fits
into the larger package.
Thank you Mr. Chairman members
of the committee, I will take
this up with the.
Ranking member of uh.
I seen that whip too,
see that.
OK, let's go to House Bill 202.
Gun storage income tax credit.
Representative Hernandez.
And you guys
Um
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity to present House
Bill 202.
Uh
promoting responsible firearm
ownership through a gun storage
income tax credit.
Uh, this bill establishes a
pilot program to provide a
one-time tax credit of up to
$750 for New Mexicans who
purchase a secure gun storage
device such as a gun safe
lockbox, or other secure storage
designed to be accessed by only.
by a key combination or similar
means. The goal is simple.
Um, encourage firearm owners to
take proactive steps in securing
their firearms, hoping to reduce
accidents, theft, and
unauthorized access.
responsibility.
Law enforcement, firearm
instructors, and safety
advocates all agree that secure
storage is one of the most
effective ways to prevent
unintentional injuries,
suicides, and stolen firearms
ending up in the wrong hands.
HB 202 is designed to be
straightforward and accessible.
It allows for up to $1 million
per year in tax credits issued
on a first come, first serve
basis, ensuring we incentivize
as many safe storage purchases
as possible while maintaining
fiscal responsibility.
compliance with safety
standards.
Additionally, any credits
exceeding a taxpayer available
to all New Mexicans regardless
of income level.
Since this is a pilot program,
it will be in place for a
limited time through taxable
years prior to January 1, 2028,
allowing us to evaluate its
effectiveness before
considering.
This approach ensures that
firearm safety in New Mexico.
Um, also, after talking to the
chair, we are working with the
drafters to potentially find a
way to make this even more
accessible.
Um, at the point of sale through
an income tax credit so that
someone uh you know, someone who
doesn't have $500 to shell out 9
months or longer for their have
not found a perfect path forward
on that yet, but we will
continue to work on that while
this hopefully sits on if we do
find a solution for that, so.
Um, I appreciate your time and
consideration and I'm happy to
answer any questions.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to the
Publicone online?
of opposition.
Nobody, anybody in the room.
No one's in the room, so let's
go to Representative Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
I hate to use this example, but
this might be something that the
department could do in Galile at
rebate.
For low water users. So when
they come in and you can get
your bill.
You've bought a by the.
Is that not something you might
be able to do with something
like this is a rebate process as
opposed to a credit because I
agree with you, Mr. Chairman.
Wait 9 months until after
something is purchased and then
go through all the rigamaro to
try to prove you did it and, you
know, all these things.
Isn't there something like that
that might be available for, for
this, Mr. Chairman, more of a
rebate style.
If you
You buy it and it's say 1000
bucks was here.
Yeah
Return
Mr. Chair, so, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, so I wouldn't be
able to replace this bill with
it, it would have to start as a
whole new one, which is fine,
um.
But it would be something that
would need to be, you know, you
would apply for it through DPS,
let's say, and they would give
you a, how that would work
and it would then be on the
retailers the way that it was
explained to me, um.
To do and so that is one of the
paths it would be much easier
that way, um.
But it would need to start as a
whole new bill, so I'm not sure,
but um,
Yeah. Me and Pam.
This doesn't end up going in
anywhere this year, um, Chairman
Linta and uh.
Figure out what the easiest way.
I remember.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
yeah, I did not make it in last
year's package, so yeah, I
decided to be in Chairman Lente
has been gracious enough to to
answer a bunch of my questions
and kind of give me a different
outlook, make it much easier um
to do so.
Uh I think that's outlook is.
Was so yeah, this, this has not
been put.
So we're still trying.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you the questions and
comments, Representative
Terasas.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Representative. You know.
I hear what we're, what we're
doing here and we're trying to
find a way to
Solve
Representative, way for people
that possibly struggle.
Of, of purchasing it out
outright, and then getting a
credit.
At the same time, Mr. Chair
Representative.
See that it serves about 1,333
households in New Mexico.
And we're not even, we're not
gonna make big advances all at
once anyway, so I, I think gun
safety.
It's a really balanced approach
and
And helping those individuals
who
Have maybe in collections or
have in uh inherited guns or
whatever.
You put them away safe and and.
I think
It may not be perfect.
You know, right now.
Um, but I think it is a good
bill to just move in that
direction.
Altogether
It was at 1,333 households. I'm
not sure exactly what that would
do for New Mexico, but.
households there are that would.
You know, take advantage of it,
but there's a lot of gun owners
in New Mexico, even, even at
best it's gonna take years to
for this credit to go through,
so, um, although my opinion.
That it's not perfect.
It's
At least we're moving in that
direction.
And then even if we were able
to, you know, make it a part of
the package.
possibly the following year, may
maybe we could amend it in
adding that language, that
you're not having to start all
over, just, what do you, what
are your thoughts about them?
and, you know, you hit the nail
right on the head is.
You know, this credit release
was, you know.
New Mexico is.
You know, especially gun owners
and.
There is also including myself,
you know, people who have guns
that have been passed down for
generations. There's, um, you
know, we have.
A big safe that has a whole
bunch myself and the rest of my
giant gun safe is all guns that
have been in our family forever.
Um
But I want to make sure that my
daughters still don't have
access to
um.
You know, we try to do gun safe,
um, it's just not like it
doesn't work I think in their
brain at the same way, um,
because hunters or gun sports
people or any of that, it's OK,
we're going to teach you how to
use this safely, but
There's um I think for the other
part of it, that's for the
committee to decide if we, you
know, pass it along, um.
And get it into the packet and
that's all of us coming
together.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
think what, what, what I'm
asking the committee to do is
just.
Thought in in what we're trying
to do, and I think at the end of
the day.
T10 year olds, it doesn't matter
if they're 15 or whatever
something.
It this just incentivizes on
safety.
opinion
Altogether and something that
people this that this
legislature is always.
Really, really
See as seen something that is
very important.
And so it just incentivizes
people, even if they can afford
it, they're not doing it. I just
nudge them into doing that,
possibly.
Save, save a kid that out of
curiosity starts looking at it
and starts
Handling it might actually save
a life, so.
And those, for those reasons, I
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
You know, for most of us, um,
And maybe for 50% of the people
within the state of New Mexico,
you know, we've already
our gun safe. So I would just,
um,
Urge you to find a way for those
who can't afford that $500
without putting it on a credit
card.
To be able to
allow them to purchase this
without tax credit or something
so.
Anyone else questions or
comments?
Again, appreciate your bill,
appreciate the work you've done
over the past couple of years,
you know, growing up, the
benefit of having two older
brothers was that there was just
a closet full of guns right in
our house, and that's just the
way it was, right? But as I, as
I've gotten older, I've
appreciate more of the fact that
we have to keep those guns safe,
especially from, you know, our
household that's a lot like
yours, right, with young kids in
in the house and so as we evolve
in terms of working on your
legislation, you know, obviously
it's here now, but uh as we work
on the credit, the point of
sale, I think that'd be great
looking at an option like.
Estrom talked about as well as
another option, you know,
there's a lot of things,
especially in regards to how
this legislature has moved to
trying to
Uh, look at gun safety or look
at uh guns.
Generally, right? We want to
make sure that if they're going
to impose a lot of different
things that
We should also, you know, pony
up some dollars to make sure
that we can also keep our people
safe as well. So that being
said, uh, we'll, we'll we'll,
we'll do what we have to do and
then we'll come back to this,
OK?
Representative Duncan.
I moved to temporary table.
Duncanallegos in opposition,
seeing none. Thank you very
much. Thank you. Next we have on
our agenda House Bill 211, solar
market tax credit changes
representing Ferrari, and
representative Kates.
Uh, represent Ferrari for your
information. We will not hand
out your, your, your
presentation, but we will hear
your presentation and then move
forward.
why
Uh, probably with the chair.
Thank you.
OK, well, the reasons we need
this amendment, um, is to um.
Ensure that we can um.
help
The solar market.
Moving the amendment for
discussion, we'll hang it out
right now. Oh, thank you.
As we all received the
amendment, would you please
verify us with us the number at
the bottom.
Representative Ferrari, um,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, this
is a committee substitutes.
Motion made.
Would you please verify the,
the, the number at the bottom?
Yes, the number is.
Um
230656.3. OK. That's what we
have.
Please proceed.
Thank you Mr. Chair and.
Um, would you like us to explain
the bill or the uh changes. The
committee substitute.
OK, um, I will refer to my um
expert.
Chair, committee members in the
uh previous committee.
Meaning there were several
suggestions made and uh the FIR
literally came out.
A few hours before that
committee meeting, so we've
taken those suggestions and the
uh input from the FIR from the
uh M nerd and from uh revenue to
to make.
Adjustments as was requested.
So that on page 2,
The, uh, request is to make sure
that it was a property in New
Mexico, so on line 6 it added
property in New Mexico.
Just to make sure this was only
a property in New Mexico.
Um
On page 2 also.
Uh
Oh, excuse me, that was already
there.
On page.
On page 4, excuse me.
Um
There was an input from tax
department that they wanted to
keep the references to 2023
because amended tax returns may
refer back to that, and so that
had that section for the $20
million relating to prior years
we had taken out and then that
this was put back in, um, so
this was just staying to what
the original bill was, but it
was put back in uh as in this
amendment instead of.
Uh, so that was put back in.
The
Yeah, there, there were um.
A couple of commas that were
requested to be put in for
clarification.
Uh, and those were put in.
Um
Yeah, as you're going through
this bill and the changes,
please.
Reference the page number and
the line number so we can follow
along with you.
On page 2.
Uh, line.
4
Uh, after the word taxpayer
comma was added at the request
of Imner to for clarification,
so taxpayer comma, the comma.
I, I guess, can you talk to us
about the substance of the bill,
what changed it versus in terms
of just wordsmithing, I mean
what.
Comms added.
Um
The Most substantive thing was
to put back the $20 million
referencing 2023.
Other than the and then saying
it had to be in New Mexico
property that was with the
substantive things the rest of
it was wordsmithing.
So at this point, would you like
to explain your bill?
Yes, sir.
So
Um
This bill is an amendment to an
existing bill. There's no change
in the total budget. It's still
a $30 million bill.
Uh, so there's no change there,
uh, M nerd, uh, reduced the
amount they said for a a cost to
their department to update their
website would be $75,000. That
was not in the fur.
The bill basically adds.
An ability for low income people
to better participate.
So it allows PPAs, which is a
power purchase agreement so that
a third party can purchase the
equipment and then just charge a
homeowner.
Or
An electric price which is
generally going to be 70% less
than they're paying now.
Most of the homeowners
approximately 50% of the
homeowners in New Mexico do not
pay federal income tax.
Therefore, the federal tax
credit is not a benefit to them.
When a third party PPA.
Does the owns the system and
then sells the electricity to
the homeowner.
They can get the federal tax
credit.
Which is actually more than what
the individual could get because
they can get both a 30% base
plus the 10% for energy
communities, which is about half
the state.
So they get a larger tax credit.
Plus they get depreciation.
under the IRS rules would be 80%
of the basis, so they only
deduct half of the federal tax
credit.
So it enables our lower income
folks and actually all folks.
We'll get a better deal on a PPA
than they will financing it
themselves. It's transferable.
But it allows a lot more people
to participate.
And that's the essence of the
bill is it allows more people to
get a better deal because the
federal tax credit, the federal
depreciation can be taken into
account to get a better rate. If
a bank finances it, they can't
get the depreciation on it
because they don't own it, it
has to be a separate ownership,
which is what this allows so
it's an amendment to the bill.
No change in the budget.
To allow more people to
participate and to get a better
price.
And they said we go to the
audience.
Um, yes, Mr. Chair and
committee, I think it's really
important that you know people
who can't afford to get solar
and didn't want to do the
financing.
When it was really at a high
price, um, can take advantage
of, you know, having someone
else get the um credits and the
funding and then just get a
lower utility bill, and it will
make it so that we can have more
solar rooftop.
And make it so that maybe our
utilities don't have to expand
as much as they're projecting.
To their um household use.
And I know it will help my
daughter-in-law who has, you
know, really high, um, electric
bills and um.
Especially during the summer in
Las Cruces to make sure that her
utility rates will be um kept
low.
Thank you.
Thank you. Let's go to the
audience for questions,
comments, or I'm sorry for uh.
approval.
Uh, anybody online? 00, we have
one.
G Anne
Good morning. You're with us.
Good morning. My name is Axton
and I represent the League of
Women Voters of New Mexico.
Thank you, Chair and members of
the committee for allowing me to
speak.
The League of Women Voters of
New Mexico supports policies and
incentives.
That reduced greenhouse gas
emissions by promoting greater
energy efficiency and by
developing clean renewable
energy sources. We believe that
government should educate the
public about how to reduce their
individual carbon footprints,
but also offer incentives to do
so. This bill takes us a giant
step toward uh expanding
availability to groups of people
who are have not so far been
able to do so there.
For we strongly support this
bill. Thank you.
Oh. Anyone in the room, no one
in the room. Let's then go back
to the committee. Questions and
comments, Representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess
I'm, I'm a little confused.
Mr. Chairman, and I'm looking at
the uh committee sub by our
Democrat leadership, and I just
want to make sure I understand
this.
We're gonna have an aggregate
cap of $30 million for both.
Personal income tax and
corporate income tax as a
refundable and transfer and
transferable, is that correct?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Lustrom, that's corrected.
It allows both the corporate and
the individual income tax
credit, but the combined total
stays the same, the same 30
million, it does not change the
limit at all. OK, so Mr.
Chairman.
Since it does include corporate
income tax where it's refundable
and transferable.
I need to understand what that
um.
Projection is for use.
Mr. Chair Representative
Lustrom, um.
The belief is that.
Um
This will allow so many more
people to uh participate that it
will, uh, use the full amount
each year, so the full 30
million was particular or um the
Navajo Nation, uh, they have a
large number of off-grid
personnel and with the drop in
battery prices they alone could
use all of this this year, Mr.
Chairman, the discussion has
been around individuals. What
I'm talking about is.
HB 211 creates a new corporate
solar market development income
tax credit.
That's what I want to focus on,
Mr. Chairman, expert. I, I
don't.
I get what you're trying to do
for the individual homeowner
that I want to understand how it
works for the corporations and
how quick would it take for the
corporations then to get to that
30 million.
Because those are the groups
that actually have tax
liability.
So my my question is, is that do
you have a projection of how
much would be used by
corporations in the state of New
Mexico, Mr. Chair
Representative, um.
I understand your question
better. I'm sorry. OK,
so, uh, the expectation is that.
The limits that are put on it,
it's $6000 per property means
that this will be almost
exclusively for residential, so
the reason it's on the corporate
income tax is not because
corporations will use this to do
projects it's because
corporations that fund it as a
purchase power agreement would
aggregate many properties and
then they would file it under
allows up to $12,000 if
batteries are included, but
that's still.
is a maximum of $60,000 per
project for a battery and.
Uh, solar project that's really
mainly a large residential, the
utilities have told us quite
fervently that low income does
not mean low bills, people that
may have 8 people in their
household may still have high
bills, and they would need a
greater amount.
The expectation is that.
There would be very few.
Um
Corporate, you know, I mean
$60,000 project for a
corporation.
For big building is is not
enough to be significant, they
would use other methods is our
belief.
Mr. Chairman, then.
How many and what companies do
you think would actually use
this.
As an aggregate for a population
that can't afford to do it and
then.
Come back and ask for that
credit.
In other words, I'm thinking
about those that provide power
in in my part of the world.
And I know expert, you've got 3
different power providers in
McKinley County, at least that I
know of, there may be even more.
In McKinley County, we've got 3.
And one is a co ops.
That have put in a major solar
farm now.
Out where the Escalante power
plant.
for the purpose of course.
With that co op then be able to.
Like under its.
Under its responsibility.
households and.
I'm not sure how it works with
co-ops.
And now that is the primary
source of energy in.
Before you answer that question,
uh, just a quick housekeeping,
realizing that this time of
year, people have to skip in and
out go to other committees, so
we are in a, a subcommittee at
this point of how taxation, but
please proceed.
Mr. Chalastrom.
It would be unusual for a co op
to put together a financing
group. I know that some have
been done in the past. My
expectation is that would almost
all be done by.
Companies that are in the
business of doing purchase power
agreements already.
Uh, the largest one in the world
is um.
Next era, they already have over
100 megawatts of solar in New
Mexico.
are willing to service the
entire state, so I I expect
companies like that that have
online systems so that
homeowners can directly apply
them and certainly co-ops can
work with them.
Um, but I think that is probably
more productive than a coop
trying to set up its own
financial.
limits on the co op's ability
to.
Compete with banks and so forth,
yes, so I expect it'll mainly be
with the existing PPA provider.
Mr. Chairman, so.
In roll New Mexico, the primary
provider is co op, so my
understanding anyway.
Uh, in Northwest New Mexico, I
know City of Gal are for its
city, Farmington does the same.
Um
I just have to get my head
around this, Mr. Chairman,
because he is expanding this
down I've got the analysis just
Thank you representative. Let's
go to Representative Terazas.
I, you know, I
I ask you a couple things,
David, and then
I had, I had a, a, I mean
like most people have had.
Come and talk to us about.
Um,
of my home and
Buss and stuff, but
And I'm just gonna tell you my
personal feelings on that just
to, to.
Is that I had and some of those
were
Uh, in my home that they wanted
to charge me about $80,000 to
put in.
Solar system.
Uh, I would have prepaid
$80,000.
or
To, right, and then on top of
that.
I said, what happens? She goes,
oh well, we can carry it, so you
don't have to pay for it, and
they get in your house.
put a lien on your house because
it is attached to real property.
So I, I thought, I, I'm not
comfortable with that.
You know, in other words, I'm
either, I, I come to towards
where I write a check, pay for
repayment power basically for
I don't know, I can pay a lot of
power bills.
For that.
And, and then get, get it back
slowly with.
Time or I allow them to carry
it.
And
Um
close to
It, it saves you a little bit of
money, but overall, you still,
you're still, you still got that
lean go forth.
So
That brings me to this question.
Representative.
To ensure that the customer is
gonna get full advantage of that
credit, corporation takes the
credit. How do we know that that
that savings.
Passed on to
consumer.
And some of these systems are
expensive, I think these systems
are, are
To cause a lean on somebody's
home.
At the
will put
You answer that.
How you
to my expert.
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
The horror stories and virtually
every industry of home
improvement, used car sales,
etc. etc.
Uh, there are bad actors and.
I wish we could all bad actors,
but this is not.
Trying to figure those things
out, it's just trying to
accommodate more folks in terms
of the.
Companies that are doing PPAs.
Electronics has improved with
artificial intelligence to such
an extent that they.
part of their findings and
requirements or requiring a
their computer analysis to be
done in the homes. In fact, they
can do.
that are amazing.
artificial intelligence
Uh, so that is a huge step
forward in ensuring that people
are going to receive the savings
they're supposed to because.
As I'm, I'm just mentioning one
company, they're not the only
one, but next year uh.
approximately 40 times the size
of P&M to give you a
perspective.
Uh, they have
It's $150 billion of equity.
They have very deep pockets to
be sued if they do something
wrong.
are trying to make sure that
they don't do something wrong.
In answer to your other question
about lies on houses.
None of the
Qualified quality companies that
do EPAs that I'm aware of, put a
lien on homes. They put a lien
on their equipment.
They do not put a lien on the
home itself.
And um
To have an inquiries from people
that do the home title insurance
and so forth about this title
companies that are lean on
equipment is not the same as,
you know, it's, it's not a lien
on the house itself.
I don't know of any major
companies are significant I
don't know of any companies that
I've checked into that have a
lien on a.
Know that there have been some
unscrupulous people that have
done that, and certainly if you
get a home improvement loan in
order to finance it otherwise.
For the PPAs, they do not do
that that I'm aware of.
A representative um expert, I
think.
You can put a basically as a
contractor that has put its
mechanics lien, um, Mr. Chair
representative you can be and it
is attached to that.
That's a real problem.
It's not your, your typical, I'm
gonna take a second, you're
talking about two different
things, Mr. Chair.
This is mechanics lien on a
home.
And I would say that some of
these systems
Um, I don't know that they care
the care too much about the
value of your home.
I think they're more interested
in selling the system.
Uh, on, on a home.
And therefore, you know, you're
talking about, it's not just the
panels that are attached to the
roof.
Uh, but you're also or they can
have a structure, but a lot of
people don't have the room, Mr.
Chair, representative of the the
land, the property to do other
than just put it on the roof.
on that, you also have the
transfer switch and all that.
equ ip ment that goes along
with, you know, with this meter.
I don't see how you can separate
that, and so,
Therefore, I, I, I, I understand
what you're trying to say, but
they'll be a mechanic's lien on
that property, I can assure you.
Also, Mr. Chair, the evaluation
of these homes if they have a
They have a mortgage or
anything, some people are still
paying mortgage insurance
because they don't have 20% of
their equity in their home, and
so this can throw off kilter.
In my opinion, this gives a a
big corporation, a way to
Actually not
I mechanically glean a home.
Pausing later on for that person
to be maybe possibly stuck, not
being able to sell a home.
The ability to
Uh, a new purchaser to look at
that and go, oh my goodness, I'm
underwater with that, and I
don't think that
Motor Company, Mr. Chair
Representative come and
Ripple that
re ver se all that if it's sold.
I, I wouldn't imagine.
Do that. Now I'd be used
equipment that's depreciated
out.
Um
I don't
I don't know how that would how
that would transfer.
Uh, ownership because if you're
saying that the corporation was
representative was purchasing
the system.
That is on somebody else's
house, you transfer that.
Ownership
To the homeowner
Unless there's a contractual
agreement.
That they're gonna pay you back.
Or what is attached to your
home. Can you explain that a
little bit more, Mr. Chair
Representative?
Mr. Chair Representative, um.
I'd be happy to to.
Request some copies of the
actual contracts, the contracts
are typically about 2025 pages
long, they address those issues
and while I agree a mechanics
lien could be placed on the
house by the contractor. That is
not what's done by the PPA
contracts themselves, um.
But in either case um we are not
changing the fact that.
Uh, under the current tax credit
that we're amending, they could
do the things you're you're
concerned about, uh, and I, I
abhor that I don't, it should
not be done, but it still could
be done under the existing bill.
We're not changing the fact that
there's a tax credit, it could
be financed with many.
Large finance companies that do
solar financing or it could be
done with local financing.
The amendment to the bill is not
gonna change the fact that that
could be done by bad actors.
What it is doing is bringing in
large actors that do not do that
because they have deep pockets
and they wanna make sure it's
done right and it will bring a
huge benefit to the lower income
folks and a much lower price
because they get much more
incentives from the federal
government.
Mr. Chair Representative, I, I
see your intent, please don't
say, but to me it's scary to
know a company that's, I don't
know how many more times bigger
than P&M around and own all
these systems, and they could
potentially.
kind of clean that, that, that,
that property.
It, it scares me a bit away.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just, just
a couple of questions, uh,
representative, uh, Mr. Chair,
um, do we know what the fund
balance is in the current law
that we have.
chair and representative Duncan,
I believe it's.
30 million.
I'll ask my expert too.
Make sure that's right.
Mr. Chair Representative, the.
The
1032 with a budget of 30 million
per year in 2024 approximately
$6.2 million were applied for.
It was the first year that
there's been a significant
decrease and that decrease was
primarily because.
Interest rates had gone up to
the point it was not as
economically feasible and the
price of solar had gone up
dramatically due to the supply
chain issues which took a couple
of years to to reduce those
things have been partially
corrected. Interest rates are
coming down and the supply chain
issue is such that the price of
solar componentry has dropped by
almost 70% in the last two
years.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that. Can you tell me,
um, so 6.2 out of how much?
Mr. Chair, Representative, 30
million per year, but it does
allow carry forwards, uh, to
future years if you spend more
than one year, they can apply to
future years. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you for that. So
I guess my question is, we've
only used 6.2 out of 30 million.
Why are we asking for more?
Mr. Chair Representative, we're
not asking for more. We're not
asking to change the budget at
all. We're asking to allow PPAs
so the people that can't use the
federal tax credit can have a
third party do it and then get a
price it's approximately 70%
lower so that they can
participate and have the tax
credit and actually higher tax
credits and depreciation used to
give them a better deal.
Thank you, Mr. I should have
worded my question a little bit
differently. So, um,
From that, let me ask one other
question and then I'll, I'll be
done, Mr.
Can you tell me if an
individual, let's say doesn't
want to put it on his house, he
puts it in his backyard.
Can you tell me what the clean
up would be on that.
In 20 years when it's obsolete
and equipment needs to be
purchased and stuff. Let's just
say at that point in time, the
kids have been inherited the
home and they choose not to go
solar. Can you tell me what the
clean up would be on that.
Mr. Chair Representative.
Uh, the warranties currently are
running 30 years at 86%.
The production still at 30 years
out.
Uh, so if by clean up you mean
removal of the system because
they no longer want it for
whatever reason they want to
build a larger house, whatever.
Generally speaking, if it's put
in the backyard, it's going to
be put on a canopy, uh, that
canopy is gonna have to be under
New Mexico rules.
Uh, certified for 105 mile per
hour wind resistance and so
generally that's gonna be
footings that can either be
removed or left.
Uh, removal.
It's probably the most
residential size system is less
than a 4 hour job and if they
want to take out the footings.
They have to chop those up and
basically it's removing the
concrete, so it's fairly simple
in the grass or whatever.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Let me,
let me, uh,
I'll, I'll lead you with my next
question.
Um, have you ever looked at the
sta, the state land office lease
and what's required after a
solar system is taken off state
land lease.
Mr. Chair, I didn't quite
understand the question. Have I
what? Have you ever looked at
the state land office, their
lease for a solar farm.
And what what's required after
that solar farm is no longer
there.
Mr. Chair Representative, yes,
in, in regard to solar farms,
I've looked at that. I, I don't,
not aware of residential lease
of land for residential homes,
but on, on, uh.
Uh, on all of the PPA contracts
that I'm aware of at the end of
the EPA term, the PPA provider
is required to remove it and put
it back to essentially the same
condition, less wear and tear.
And that's part of what these
contracts do now for residential
as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The contract that I looked at
many, many years ago when I was
a real estate agent. There was
significant work that needed to
be done. It wasn't super fun
site, but it was, it went down
that alley and so I would be
very cautious if I was a
homeowner, not putting that on
my roof.
For that reason.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan. Let's go back to, oh,
let's go to Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Representative and expert. I've
got a couple quick questions.
I'm just interested in the PPAs.
Excuse me.
So what happens if a homeowner
sells their house uh with this
PPA in place, but what happens?
How does that?
Mr. Chair Representative PPAs
have provisions for
transferability, um, most of
them have a $50 fee for transfer
for the paperwork and so forth,
and that's the preferred
situation, uh, if they decide
not to transfer it, then there
is a cost at that point to
either remove the system or
whatever may be, and that's
spelled out in the contracts for
all of those contingencies.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Representative, the reason I
asked this question, it kind of
goes along with what
Representative Teraz has asked.
Uh, and this isn't one of those
political setups, right? This
literally did happen last week,
um.
I have a family member that was
interested in purchasing a home.
Unfortunately, the homeowner has
a solar system.
They're on a, they can sell the
house.
But he still owes more on a
solar system that's on the roof
because it is attached to the
house.
So he has to pay the solar
system off before he's even able
to sell the house.
Selling the house doesn't give
him enough money to sell the
house. It was kind of stuck.
Um, and I know you say that some
bad actors and PPAs have deep
pockets. How do we ensure that
that's not going to happen to to
some of these families who put
this on. I mean let's say they
go to sell their house.
They barely have enough, they
may break even.
Next group doesn't want to buy
the house, so now they have to
remove it. How, how are we
ensuring that folks aren't going
to be stuck in the same spot
that I see on a regular.
Regular basis is extreme. I have
seen on occasion with these
solar systems.
Mr. Chair Representative, um.
The home improvement industry as
a whole has the same exact
issue. If you do an addition on
a house and then you later sell
the house and because of market
conditions, the house is worth
less than what it was with the
improvement in the homeowners in
the same situation if they need
to pay it off.
In the case of solar if.
They sell the house and the
house has had.
A 70% lower electric costs than
another house of similar size in
the same real estate area.
And that should be taken into
consideration. It may not always
be taken into consideration, um.
But in terms of of this bill
we're not changing the basic
fact that home improvements can
be made and if there's a market
change that that is a problem
for the entire market.
Um
We're only saying we want it to
be able to apply to more people
so that they can save a whole
lot more money and use the
federal incentives in an
indirect way.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
expert. So, in your example, if
I was to add an addition to the
house, it also brings value to.
A price per square foot, so I'm
actually bringing more value to
my home. Does a solar panel
bring more value to the home, or
are we looking at it, you know,
I put a pool in in my house.
An absolutely horrible
investment.
Um, it's been great. My kids
have enjoyed it. I've enjoyed
it, but I'm never gonna get my
money back for this pool, it's
not bringing any more value.
That was a choice I made. Is
that not what maybe solar panels
are?
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Henry, um, my previous home.
Um, had solar and geothermal,
and when we sold it, it was an
added value to the home.
So yes, it, it was very
beneficial.
Aner home.
Thank you, Representative, Mr.
Chairman Representative, um, you
know, in that scenario, I, I
think that's great. I've seen
others in, in kind of where I
live.
They're not bringing that kind
of value, um, most folks are
shying away from it. So I would
assume it's kind of territory
where you are in the state
possibly, um, but that is good
to hear that that is possible.
Um
The other question, you say PPAs
have a deep pocket. So what are
the PPAs? Who, whom are we going
to allow to
I guess they're gonna make a
loan, is that right, Mr.
Chairman Representative?
In a sense, they're going to own
the equipment you're gonna be
paying off the equipment.
The way I worked that out of my
mind is you owe somebody, that's
somewhat of a loan, is that
correct?
Mr. Sher Representative, um.
The way I think of PPAs is it
that's another utility company.
Because all they're doing is
selling the electricity. They're
not selling the system. They're
not leasing it, there's not a
loan, there's not something that
goes on the homeowner's credit.
So if you buy power from P&M or
El Paso Electric or SPS or one
of the co ops.
You don't really have a choice
on what you pay for that
electricity, it's set either by
the commission or or other
groups.
And if you lock in a PPA, you
have a fixed price for 30 years
and with the expected, well, not
just expect with the affirmed
price increase, as you may know,
P&M requested 30.94% increase
and they're only going to do
19.84 right now.
But those increases you're
avoiding and unquestionably
there's going to be more
increases in in all projections
of utility costs in New Mexico,
so it's not like a loan, it's
not like you owe somebody money,
it is like.
If you
Build something onto your house
and you use two examples. The
swimming pool was not a great
investment, maybe an additional
room would be.
Um, and
That's not gonna
I think the the valuation is
going to be more a factor of the
costs on solar have come down so
much that 10 years ago people
were saying OK well you're gonna
start breaking even in 10 years,
you're, you're gonna pay more
now, but later on you're gonna
save money. What's happening now
is to say you're going to save
money from day one and you're
gonna save more as electric
prices go up, and so you're in
your savings is gonna increase.
That means that assets should go
up significantly in value,
which means it's a
Boon to the house instead of a
negative and certainly for
people that are off grid that
that have no electricity now.
This is the only way they can
get electricity. It's $40,000 a
mile to extend power lines and
if you're a couple of miles out,
you just never gonna happen and
so especially for those folks.
This will enable them to do
something that they thought
couldn't be done.
Mr. Chairman Representative or
an expert, I guess that maybe
I'm chasing a rabbit, I'm not
smart enough to catch it.
Uh, which has happened.
If, if they're putting the
equipment on the house.
If the PPAs are putting the
equipment on the house, it's not
a loan towards the equipment,
equipment is not free.
So they're paying it back over
time because they're getting a
discount on their rates.
That what you said
Who's paying for the equipment?
I guess that's where my
question, Mr. Chair
Representative, uh, if I can use
a short example.
If next era put a 5KW system on
a home in Albuquerque.
And they put 30 KWH of
batteries.
Next era and a contractor would
do the work, so they would
create local jobs to do the
work.
next year would own that system.
And then they would sell
electricity to whoever the
occupant of the home is, it'd be
a rental house, could be
whatever, but they would then
say, OK, if you're paying PNM
currently around 15 cents a
kilowatt hour, and they do a
contract at my cents a kilowatt
hour, you're saving 2/3 of the
price next year if they paid.
$30,000 for that system, but
they get.
40% from the federal government
in tax credits they get 20% from
the state under this bill at 60%
if they then get 80% as a tax
deduction, which at 21% is
around 16% in that.
They've almost gotten all the
cost out of that, which is why
they're willing to sell it and
maintain it and ensure it long
term at a price that's 1/3 of
what you were paying P&M.
So it's a very good deal for
everyone in the system. He and
him actually can raise rates
less because they don't have to
buy as many assets, and it saves
everyone in the system.
I don't know if that example
helps. I'm trying to help.
Representative and
So I, I guess back to your
question, who's who's paying
like who pays for the system,
right? Yeah, I didn't hear that.
I don't understand that that the
homeowner or the company.
In that example, next year I
paid for the system.
So, Mr. Chairman, uh experts.
If, if I do this tomorrow on my
house.
3
Like the company's gonna come
in, put it on my house, sell me
electricity at a discounted
rate, and all I'm paying is for
electricity. I don't pay for any
equipment. I don't pay for
anything at all.
Everything is done.
What, so what's the agreement?
I, I buy it from them. Are we
talking?
Satellite TV type thing where
they put the dish on my roof,
and now I've got to buy a TV.
I'm very confused. I, I
honestly, I am, I'm not trying
to be.
Intentionally confused but
it is that simple. You just
agree to buy you your utilities
from the PPA because they have
been able to take advantage of
the federal and state tax
credits, solar tax credits and
put that to good use for not
only the solar but also the
battery and make it so it's an
advantage for the homeowner to
just.
Agree to buy at that lower rate
their utility.
They're um kilowatt hours,
they're electricity.
So it's really a win-win because
we have such big investment at
the federal and the state level.
So Mr. Chairman, representative
and expert, you say this is in
place right now and this is just
going to expand it.
If it was free right now to
your.
What you just said, basically.
Why is everybody in New Mexico
not already hooked up to solar
panel.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Henry this.
is what we're asking to change
so that companies can come in
and that homeowners don't have
to themselves, yet the tax
credits and make the investment.
This will allow company um with
a lot of funds to make that
available for people in New
Mexico, and I think it's
especially advantageous for
people in rural areas that.
Can't get hooked up to the grid
and can have their own, you
know, have their um uh.
Power for Internet and
everything else, be taken care
of.
Thank you.
Representative Henry, the first
time talking.
This is here.
Great questions, man. Um,
Now, now, you better go sign up
today and you
need
to pass the bill came out of his
shell. I love it, Mr. Chair
representative.
I'm gonna tell you, I mean, I'm
there's still got to be an
agreement, there's no way they
just.
But I just don't understand how
you attach it to, to, uh, a
structure without
I don't even know if this is the
right word.
You would have to have some sort
of easement to allow them to put
that on there, uh, if it's not
theirs.
That means it can work on it and
take it off, end of the day,
there's still probably 20% of it
that it's that it's owed.
Representative, even with all
the tax credits and so forth.
But I remember sitting here last
week and we've talked about the
fears that the federal
government was going to pull
back funding.
So that could stifle this whole
thing, that that scenario you
just gave with what I had heard
last week that we're thinking
that the federal government's
gonna pull back this, you know.
Funding and so we're trying to
now find a new way to do this at
another and giving.
Tax credits, so I just, I just
At the end of the day, their
representative.
Sounds too good.
You got a really, really open
your eyes and start really
looking deep, and I, I just
don't, I, I don't understand
share representative.
Our company is gonna come,
invest.
40 $50,000 into your home.
Without an agreement,
And then, and then if you sell
that house.
How you, there's nothing in this
bill that ensures no, if, if I
thought there's a mechanic's
lien.
So forth and and let let's just
be.
Let's just put it out there. uh
what's happening, Mr. Chair
Representative, because the more
people that go on solar and take
get taken off the grid.
Basically the pool of people
that are on the grid.
Or just sharing the cost just
like we we talked about property
taxes. That's just what's
happening.
So we're gonna see that or that
reason, um, the less people that
can help with the infrastructure
for the the actual grid, um,
that are on it, um, we'll, we'll
still have to, you know, share
the cost of, of keeping that
grid up. So I don't, I just, I'm
sorry, Mr. Chair Representative,
I just don't see, I didn't
understand the agreement we're
getting to a
a fair understanding of what
that agreement would be to
protect because at the end of
the day, it's not about me, I
just, I'm trying to protect that
homeowner that is probably if
they're on a fixed income, they
can't afford it. Uh, they can't
afford an attorney, they can't
afford, um, to put this on
themselves, they can't.
could be elderly, could be on
social security, I don't know.
I, I think it's vulnerable.
That's what gives me some pause.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative.
Thank you, Representative. We've
come to the end of our list, so
at this point, I have a couple
of questions I've reserved for
myself, um.
So with this bill, and, and I'm
gonna, I'm gonna quote you, you
say it's simply trying to
accommodate more folks.
You're not expanding the request
from $30 million but you're
gonna expand what $30 million
can do for everybody else,
right? And you may mention that.
Part of that was to provide more
residential people to.
enjoy solar through PPA, but
then it also has corporations
would also be included, right?
So, so I, I, I think that I
think that's the fear in this
committee. I think that's really
represent luncheon was getting
to in regards to
wouldn't corporations then just
take the lion's share.
Of, of, of this entire package
if we expanded it to
corporations, so why, why
include corporations, not just
residential through the PPA.
Mr. Chair, the
Expansion to to corporations is
because.
Next year as an example is a
corporation and they can't
finally a residential tax credit
to get the usage of the tax
credits,
the way we're not
big.
Solar farms are big projects
take up all the money is by the
limit per property.
At a 6000 or 12,000 limit per
property, that's what makes sure
you can't have a bunch of.
Huge jobs take up. OK.
Doesn't answer my question, but
go ahead,
um.
This, um, will also have
competing, you know, companies
coming in and their long term,
they're looking at the long term
investment of having the
utilities and also um.
And lower incomes that can't
don't want to take advantage of
this, there utility costs will
go down because then we won't
have the demand so much demand
for P&M, um, to have to make
bigger investments like they're
trying to make 77.
You know, um, some million
dollars and then they pass that
on to higher rates to the
ratepayer. So with more um uh
solar.
On rooftops and people paying
lower utilities, it also makes
it so others who aren't.
Able to take advantage of that,
we'll be able to have lower
utility rates or not see the
increases that are planned
because there won't be the need
for the capacity of.
P&M to make those investments.
Thank you. And so to clarify
then, the only way this vehicle
would work is that if we expand
it to corporations only, then
we'll be able to accommodate the
lower income families and.
It well, it's the.
Companies, the corporations that
come in and make the investments
in the agreements to sell at a
lower cost to the homeowner, the
homeowner doesn't have to pay
for anything they the equipment,
the storage, um.
They don't have to collect the
tax credits. The corporations
will take care of that and then
the um.
Homeowner just pays the lower
utility costs, but then also
takes less pressure on the grid.
you.
OK. Uh, we've come to the end of
our agenda. Uh, we don't have
enough to to make a tabling
motion at this point. So we'll,
we'll bring that up back when we
meet again in, in, in regular
committee, but appreciate the
presentation this morning. Thank
you very much for being here.
Have a good day. I think we've
got to get to, you gotta get to
a committee correct
Representative Ferrari.
I was just saying I could, I
will send a copy of an actual
PPA for Demming school district
because they've done all the
legal work and that may help
each of you, there is a
contract, it's not a no contract
thing a residential contract so
I can share it with Henry.
Representative Tarasa so we can
know what's really going on.
Thank you so they can sign up.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee.
