to do a long with the
association of counties we can't
quite find the wrimer reason why
those six counties were selected
in the nineties they do not
include see below mckinley who
have the.
Um heaviest outcomes related to
alcohol but six counties take
the first swipe at what's left
to a total of two point eight
million dollars.
After those six counties take
that take or I receive those
resources off the top then all
thirty three counties are
eligible for it for a
distribution based on a formula
that relates to the population
of their county and alcohol
related crashes in their county
what we've heard from the
counties including a sounds like
they're pretty incredible DWI
affiliate who happens to be from
the county mr representative
shout out to her for all the
incredible work she's done
across the state but including
in your county um she's she
shared and expressed concerns
that because of how the
distributions are made
especially that final
distribution it often comes in
the middle of june and their
expected to spend down by the
end end of the month because
counties can't always spend down
the money in a hurry they end up
with the reversion that's about
two or three million dollars a
year of the seventeen then they
put those reverted dollars back
out to counties as forms of
grants that they apply for.
That's what's in place today.
M chairman representative with
the new system.
With the near system represent
it would you like to talk as
through this
thank you mister chair
mr chairman members of the
committee with the new system we
proposed that the twenty five
million dollars it's currently
going to the general fund be put
into harms alleviation fund
err so ten percent of that fund
would
be able to be accessible by
through the indian affairs
department for
four treatment and that is
specifically culturally relevant
to our native american relatives
the other
forty percent the other forty
percent would then go into the
would go to the counties
directly through a new updated
formula which would include not
just car crashes but how many
alcohol related desks that you
have in your county
and the final fifty percent
would be put into a into the
medicaid match where we would be
able to triple those dollars and
then be able to invest those
dollars into our treatment
facilities that exist around the
state.
Oh and then one more additional
peace my especially important
pieces that five hundred
thousand dollars over the course
of five years will go towards a
contracting with an agency or an
entity that has
experience in doing research on
these forms of tax policies to
analyze how the tax policy
affects different demographics
because that information is
there there's a gap in the
literature on that information
so mister chairman.
Representatives under the
current system of that half of
the fifty million dollars it is
collected is directly
distributed in support of
alcohol related programs
mr chair representative.
And under the new system how
much of that would be directly
moving toward alcohol related
programs mr chair representative
all of it and so without a
massive increase in tax revenue
but by using our revenue dollars
that we've collected more
strategically with greater
impact we would be sweeping the
part that keeps the general fund
hole redirecting that and then
updating the formulas with the
county so that including that
though their dollars would be
non reverting so that they could
also use the dollars they get
distributed out to their local
decision making really truly
about what their community needs
are and hopefully reflecting
that back in the funding
priorities they would establish.
But the determined
representative of the medicaid
portion of that would not be
specifically directed toward
alcohol related programs or
wooded mr speaker and chair yes
it would.
Thank you very much for your
answers that's all
thank you representatives got
its good representative borrell
mr chair appreciate that you
didn't forget that we had
questions and I had to think
this morning what my question
was and thank you
representatives all of you for
bringing this forward
it sounds like you've done a lot
of really serious thought about
it and only issue that I still
kind of have with regard to the
you know aggressive tax
but they have been said and I
and I had a
little conversation with
representative part of the other
day
and i'm gonna ask that same
question and just kind of in
real time
typically when somebody goes
into a de talks it's about a
three day
sort of dry out period and then
from there
actual details would be or or
action i'm sorry that would be
the detawks but the treatment
would be anywhere from thirty
days to a year
and typically
that
time you know most of those
programs are not state funded.
And there are private and i'm
just wondering does medicaid
would would a part of medicaid
cover that caused or how does
that work
mr chair and representative
the.
They're a hundred and forty.
A hundred of those are private
and.
What we found is that the state
owned ones would accept medicaid
other some exception.
You have locally run detached
programs are because sometimes
those programs are run
in present facilities where
they're unable to build.
So mister chairman and
representatives so
what about the private programs
is there any portion of that
that could be applied to
the private sector chair
representative private entities
of course have the option of
becoming medicaid providers I
would say this connects back to
our longstanding conversations
about low medicated
reimbursement rates and have
providers have expressed real
concerns that at those low rates
they can't cover the cost of
providing those services so I
certainly think
the more money we can point to
support our state medicaid
programs that allow them to do
things like increase rates and
as they have been so shout out
to our appropriators for working
diligently to create more
mechanisms to better resource
behavior health providers in our
state but it is real that our
state is has a work force
development issue and we are we
have a provider shortage issue
so nothing in here promises to
fix that in its entirety but we
certainly think redirecting
those funds out of the general
fund and towards the state
medicaid program with the focus
on alcohol will give them some
room to to do more
so mister chair and and
representatives what i'm hearing
I think come hearing i'm i'm not
certain about this but is it
only a portion of them of that
of that cost
would go to private providers
possibly if they accept it and
the public
programs could possibly accept
the entire amount
mr chair representative not
exactly and unfortunately
there's local government run
facilities in new mexico today
that are also not set up as
medicaid providers for some of
the same issues so I think
moving forward we all have more
work to do to making sure that
we're build building out the
infrastructure and systems.
To get new mexico's families the
majority of whom have medicaid
eligibility I mean we have the
highest numbers of medicare
eligible populations of any
state in the country so the more
we can do to build out our
medicaid system so that it
becomes more accessible for
communities with outline weight
times without a delay on a bed
that that to me mister chair
representative is is the
heartbreaking piece if there's
someone navigating substance
independency and one day for ten
minutes they say i'm ready to
imagine something different and
we say there should be a bed
open at her quick lodge and six
weeks we've lost them maybe for
another decade so
I proposal can't offer abandoned
solution or a permanent solution
to those long standing and
chronic issues but it would take
the twenty five million dollars
from the general fund and point
it to these efforts and
hopefully give our state
medicaid program more resources
to be bold to pilot new
initiatives to raise rates to
pull down federal match dollars
do what they need to do to
expand out specifically their
services related to substance
use in alcohol harms thank you
representatives and thank you
mister chair.
Thank you representative it's
got a representative channel.
Good morning
great conversation so that there
would really two parts to the
bill one is this redistribution
and kind of a reassessment of
how we
prove pay for and provide for d
w y programs and treatment
programs and all.
So a question I have is that
could be a free standing
bill could have not mister chair
in representative in how would
we go about vetting it I mean I
just want to chat a little bit
about why we're coupling the two
and why we can't you know have a
discussion about it separately
mister chair and representative
mister tere representative of
the short answer is that at
first I was just trying to
understand and potentially offer
some solutions to a flood tax
policy
if miss jokes is here the
further we got into the weeds we
will including that in the
language of house bill two
thirteen where you see the
direct distributions we start to
ask questions why are a couple
of these entity is getting
resources off the top what's
happening with the restaurant
if you as we've gone to need no
each other mister chairman
representative once I see
something that doesn't make
sense and looks a little messy I
quite can't turn my eyes away so
certainly there could be
separate conversations about how
we distribute the revenue no
matter what or how we collect a
shout out to represent it harbor
and represent it hot member hill
for starting some of that
conversation without touching
how we collect alcohol tax or at
what point
because the language is in the
same section of our statutes I
couldn't just not keep looking
at where the distribution went
and that's why they came forward
as one proposal
thank you for that answer and
thank you mister chair so I I
think it could be a very
worthwhile proposal but I would
like to think it through a
little and also eight each s
should be involved in the
conversation I mean they this is
an item that's very much on
their radar in portfolio there
is the interim committee process
where this would be a very
appropriate thing for the health
committee to be looking out and
talking about and
and although I appreciate mister
chair and.
Madam vice chair you're reaching
out to stake holders I took
really get out there it would be
a greater opportunity to include
more in the conversation so I
want it commend you for the idea
but I would like to
have an additional vetting of
that and so that we can get it
to health and have a better
sense and in tax as well you
know it might be very much
appropriate thing mister chair
for restaurant as well but I
think we need to have you know
some reals coordinated effort
between the two subject areas
and I know mister chairman and
pice your you're very
knowledgeable in the area of
health as well but I think
having the chair women of the
health committee and the chair
of.
Knowledgeable members I think
would be great so thank you for
the idea in interesting past
forward and like to pursue it
some more now in the tax.
Let me just try to make sure I
understand this we'd eliminate
taxing on the whole
so right now there's a tax at
the wholesale level
I assume it's different for
based on alcohol contantant and
so on and it as it makes its way
down to the consumer mister
chair it's incorporated somehow
in the price mister chair
representative yes today it's
forty one cents a gonna be here
forty five a leader of wine a
dar sixty leader of spirits and
yes the economic assumptions are
the taxes imposed at the
wholesale make their way to the
consumer potentially at a rate
of one point five or two times
higher than the tax imposed okay
so and then at the end at the
cash register so i'm going into
smiss
go to the liquor section by a
bottle of urban there some tax
that's included in the price
mister chair and represent we
can we are assuming that mister
terr and representative yes
there are assumptions built into
that idea that taxes ultimately
are paid on the consumer but it
is not something that would be
noted or clear to the consumer
adult
so we know it's increases the
cost at that level and then at
checkout there is whatever seven
or eight percent g r t added on
miss a representative yes okay
so just thinking about that
changing the paradigm would be
no tax at the wholesale
some sort of I guess additional
tax at the cash.
Is that right yes based on
yes so there be your buying beer
two percent at it on and then
whatever grate you're paying at
the cash register seven eight
percent
so that's you know ten percent
so missus chair and represent
just to confirm and clear for
that loud without making the
same mistake we did on canada so
grt would not be imposed on the
alcohol tax and alcohol tax
would not be considered after
the d so they would both be
imposed on the the origin of the
products okay good thank you
mister chair that's super
helpful to clarify it out so
this is where it i'm having some
difficulty with the concept
definitely this is something we
put should pursue further is and
I was talking to repairer per
hon on a couple days ago about
this too when I if you think
price should impact if you think
accept that as a premise whether
you're going to buy it or
whether it's going to have a
negative it's gonna cause you to
tamper your interest in
purchasing which is what one of
the premises being proposed out
there and we talk about when we
talk about the alcohol tax.
To me this one doesn't have as
much meaning for this reason
mister chairman vice chair
went right now you see it when
you go to the by the bottle of
bourbon that price is the price
you're paying plus great so
you're it's already
incorporating extra cost and you
see that right there yes we did
this method that you're
proposing by share that price
would not be included you're at
it could be a lower price
because that the wholesale there
that increase has an occurred I
hope i'm being clear and your
only paying you're paying at the
cash register well i'm just I
can only speak for my psychology
mister but I bet it's not much
different from others I pay no
attention to how much i'm paying
into mister chair so I looking
at the bottle of wine it's
already increased in costs
because the cost has been done
at the wholesale i'm not
thinking oh i'm gonna be paying
guarantee i'm just thinking
about the price i'm seeing and
so I might buy a cheaper bottle
if i'm feeling particularly
stingy that day mister chair and
vice chair but that's what i'm
thinking then if we think
there's a psychological thing
going on mister chair with price
and causing people to purchase
less alcohol this method seems
like it won't get you there at
least in the way that I do my my
psychological thing and I bet
i'm not much different from
seventy five percent of people
there are people with very fine
pencils in the world who think
about the tax every time they
buy something maybe when it's a
car or something really big but
if you're buying a twenty ballot
bottle of wine or fifty dollars
that's just not really
working so i'm interested in the
concept mr chair and by share
and you're happy to hear
response message her
representative i'm certainly you
raised a couple of points that
we fleshed out over the last
month or so and represented by
the hone.
Early on raised that question
what if with the elimination of
wholesale tax there's a drop and
prices and we could see an
increasing consumption and
that's a really serious
consideration.
Umm unfortunately I was being
cynical and I said this is
corporate america nobody
stopping prices but then we turn
to the economists we trust and
it looks like there's data to
show that those profits will be
scooped up whether it's the
distributor or the retailer if
they have a market at those
price points they have no need
to drop those prices back
additionally and to that second
point mr chair representative.
I think for people of different
income levels there are buying
decisions that directly are
connected to understanding
what's on sale and where the
coupons are and where the taxes
and one of the things I think in
particular and just to say I did
not introduce this proposal
based on the premise that
increases and prices decrease
alcohol
again shout out to the lip
reviews and extensive research
done by my co sponsor here.
There is not strong data to show
that for hispanic populations
black populations and
potentially other american
indiana other populations that
that's how the market works
those but the price increases do
not lead to the same drop in
consumption that they do for
white people so in a state with
the majority people of color
i've.
Not followed that argument to
say with certainty that if we
had these price increases we
would actually see decreases so
that is not the premise that
mine and just to wrap mister
chair representative this last
piece as I think you have a
point that someone's looking at
what's that sale there but this
would be a brand new way of
taxing alcohol so once you start
to see that on your receipt or
your tablet bar the restaurant
are the one print out you get
from albertons there would be a
line item that showed the taxes
you paid on alcohol so maybe
that first time it's not part of
your consideration but for
people that have a budget
they're watching they will very
much know exactly the tax they
are paying for the alcohol they
purchase and whether or not that
impacts their decision I think
it would play into the same
price points as they did
otherwise because they know
every other time when they grab
something out of that fridge
there's going to be a taxed by
the time they get to the
register
thank you mister chair
interesting conversation i'd
like to see some of the research
that you refer to and I know we
will have a great conversation
about that offline but again I I
like I like pursuing interesting
ideas but I think we need to
understand more before we move
forward with this mister chair
and thank you so much
thank you representative channel
it's good representative of
dunkin.
Thank you mister chair
in order to
as a municipality or is a county
I can't imagine raising taxes
for
alcohol substance abuse and then
sending it to my roads
and yet over and over and over.
As state we do just exactly that
we inflict taxes for a number of
things and then we send half of
it to the general fund.
If if we only this much then
that's only tax as much instead
of this much and let's put it
work it needs to go to
I appreciate where you trying to
do here and I applied i'm for
that.
My concern then would be to make
sure that we are going to be
taxing as much as it is right
now.
And so and i'm i'm going to
guess you're going to flush this
out during the interim and and
make sure that that's where it
lands
in I don't know
relatively to the information
you shared with this
representative.
What that does with somebody
that's already poor.
Struggles with this addiction
they in a day out I do know that
that the city of farmington that
I represent they used those
funds and can use probably
double most funds in some months
to help those that are need
needed.
One quick question on the
the ten percent that's going to
the tribes
there there's not a lot of jail
to prisons on reservation.
In these happen on border towns
so will a try be able to to
contract with
county governments or or state
wherever that individual ends up
to be able to give them the
services that they need mr chair
representative and we may have
covered this wednesday but we
didn't go into detail today the
ten percent would go to the end
in affairs department but it
would be available to
municipalities counties indian
nations and jurisdiction so
certainly I imagine of the city
of armington and the county of
sun one would probably be some
of the first people ready with
their evidence based programs
with their culturally relevant
programming to go and pull down
those resources and because that
ten percent would come out to
about five million a year I
imagine that the city of
armington and others could could
likely receive more than their
their pulling down today based
on this new distribution so
certainly we've gotten totally
as much as the first time I read
this I said what how does
armington get get this money in
nobody else's i've been grateful
and appreciative of the folks
that have reached out and talked
about the kind of services that
have been better built out in
your community over years and it
so the indian affairs department
would administer of a fund it
would be available and we were
very clear on this not just a
counties but municipalities and
counties aren't to do this kind
of programming to serve people
at home
thank you
add something as well
represented it mister chair and
representative i'm also sort of
tying in representativ.
For the tax being levied in a
flat way
that people who are least likely
to react to those price large
price increases are people who
are high users so those who who
are who need to continue to use
alcohol and because alcohol
unlike other substances where
you can withdraw you can have
seizures if you don't have a a
correct medical detacks
and so the idea here is how do
we balance this question of we
have multiple different people
in our society who are suffering
from this how do we about once
deter from people starting up to
drink but at the same time let
me this tax in a just way that
also addresses people who are in
the most low income and who are
able to and as you've seen from
the map that I just handed you
don't necessarily have access to
that medical detaw side they
need mister chair representative
mister thank you for that
does comments
and I think you're shared the
program is there it's in place
now whether that person can come
from seventy miles away deep in
the heart of the reservation to
get an access there
I would tell you and I would
submit that that person comes
from that far away to get the
alcohol.
So
that they program is there.
They just have it hit the
bottom.
And they haven't chosen to say
i'm done and I mean I give up
this we have seen all of us have
seen that
if if a price point they can
afford then they will go to
drinking other things which
could be streaml.
I want to be very careful if
there's a way to tax it tax it
fairly
and even lower the tax others
i'm okay with that we collect
taxes and then drives me nuts
with what we do with and so
I look forward to this in the
inner owner and see where we can
go with it thank you mister
chairman thank you represent
duck and let's go to
representative harper.
Thank you chairman
myself the interruption of her
horn was a fernand is thank you
for bringing this to us
a couple of questions in a
couple comments I think
just a little bit of history
legislative history.
I think most of us know the spot
you know we didn't always have a
liquor excise tax in the steer
new mexico right we we've had
gross receipts tax for a long
time.
Um.
But
there was at one point
legislature a discussion about
the.
Harms that the industry in
alcohol
can have on the citizens in new
mexico and that has a cost
associated with it and so to
legislature decided to adopt a
literate size tax and they would
take that money to address those
harms
and.
The industry actually supported
that effort and they support the
legislation to oppose the liquor
excise tax.
But they were told.
That it would go towards
treatment and prevention and etc
programs addressing the ills of
the industry and legislature you
know across their heart and you
know you know we we will never
you know send that money
elsewhere but when you look at
the history very quickly the
vast majority of that went to
the general find.
And earn.
And I appreciate over the last
ten twelve years or so we've
been making efforts to move more
of it to treatment prevention
because it's not like we don't
have a problem here and we can
take some of that money and put
it somewhere else because you
know we figured out d why.
So I want to comment you
chairman representatives for
including
changes to that distribution as
part of this bill
I
there's always a bit of.
In australia where and you're
putting a piece of legislation
together are you gonna keep it
meal just simple or are you
gonna put some important things
that relate to each other
together
to maybe build support in some
areas.
Not have support and others.
Then i'll just share from my
personal experience
doing things peace meal is a
great way to get it done quickly
but you often lose important
components
and getting those through later
it's a very challenging so I
just want to incurs you chairman
representatives to not do this
peace meal to do it together
that's important I think
another interesting thing I
made a couple purchases in in
utilities recently I was
traveling up there to visit one
of my kids and at score and on
their receipts they actually
break out where all the taxes go
it's not just sales tax rate it
says this much goes to the state
the smash goes to you talk honey
and this much goes to city
approval
and I thought that was
fascinating
i'm wondering if maybe we do
something like that here because
I think it will be oh I don't
pay too much to the state the
county gets almost nothing and
what is my city doing to me
that that might be something
that we we consider in the f.
So.
So getting to get a couple
questions then so chairman
representatives
I again I really love this idea
this is a thinking outside a box
in a winning to understand
deeply the pros and cons of this
and and compare it to the pros
and kinds of our currencies them
and they make a decision which
is which which systems better
but while we're here.
I've noticed that there's
actually been a lot of change to
like alcohol in the last several
years right it's not just we've
got spirits we've got wine and
we've got beer
right there's all kinds of other
stuff now
so chairman representatives i'm
just good and that my ignorance
here I mean i'd even know there
is such a thing is fortified
wine do there's no
mister chair representative
stocks and they had that and
apparently it's when you add
spirits to wine and in our
conversations with my taken from
the tax and revenue department
we eventually decided to just
delete that definition because
if it happens that the alcohol
by volume hits the the point of
other where you would consider a
spirit they tax it as a spirit
if it happened to the far below
the wine peace even with the
addition of the earth inside the
wine we would tax it as such but
yes we we decided that some of
cleanup was helpful in the
statute because it's it's not a
commonly used product and you
make score we can tax it on the
a b b
c chairman represents I I
appreciate that and and I and I
thank you for walking me through
kind of your your thought
process there and I think I I
agree with that conclusion you
came to
you know it's also
pre made mixed drinks now
there's alcohol selters and a
lot of her crafted silleries
make beer of all kinds of
different and alcohol contents
so I guess my question is
chairman and representatives you
know is regards to this process.
And as you could go through this
process.
Yeah and wrestling in my mind we
add more definition to capture
more of what's going on in that
the car of that is it's more
complex
or do you keep it simple but
then you have the connects you
have to be careful how you draft
it because then some things
could not be a bit befusy and
where do they fall.
Mr chair president I may say
maybe I was leaning a bit to the
messaging I hear from my friends
on the other side of the isle we
we clearly made the decision to
keep it simple in our
consultation with relevant
agencies at the time they did
say that based on alcohol by
volume is where they can impose
attacks so that we did not try
to keep playing catch up with
the alcohol industry now there's
thc infused drinks that also
have alcohol there's there's
also the products and instead if
if they still had the mechanisms
to impose that by the alcohol by
volume that we did not need to
to play catch up definition by
definition and so it's a bit
surprised to see something
different in the analysis from
the but in the conversations we
had in drafting of the
legislation that's how it was
explained to us mister chair and
representative and moving
forward we we could revisit that
certainly
yeah chairman was that
representative thank you for
that.
And and just in general that's I
think that the direction that I
like to go
just as an example rate when
when you are very prescriptive
and how the right definitions.
When news things come along they
fall out of the base rate and an
example is in a lot of states
right now are wrestling with.
Intangible licenses right
software used to be something
which was store and bought.
And and then it was something
that you downloaded and now it's
something that you pay a license
for and so because states still
have a definition of a tangible
property something that's taxed
they're not collecting taxes
when you pay for your office
three sixty license right and so
they were wrestling on how do we
change our code and and you know
it putting attacks on something
is always hard
code we don't have that problem
because the gross receipts just
says any time money changes
hands your taxed.
So in that way it was actually
pretty brilliant right very
future group.
Right so
yeah I just consider that as
your as you're working on this
further and then why my last I
guess point chairman and
representatives kind of ties
into that too as
you know you're looking at how
to structure this no in the past
we've talked you interest the
tax rate based out of increasing
alcohol content in the drinks is
usually what we're doing here
and that's what presented here.
But mister terrible that I will
you repeat that I just quite
hear that comment yeah so to
represent.
Well we've seen I believe
everywhere and even in this bill
is that you know beer is charged
at three percent wine at four
and spirits at five or seven or
whatever it is but the tax rate
goes up as the alcohol content
goes up right.
But I think what i've heard and
committee and what we've talked
about and even on the prior bill
is that the tax rate in general
does not impact consumption
right it's a scatter plot rate.
But what can impact consumption
are
programs like the local dwi
program and other you know
whatever to be done with alcohol
harms program
uh media you know program to
make treating alcohol not cool
these kinds of things can infect
a consumption so so maybe just I
thought to consider is that we
look more at what is the total
dollar amount we want to bring
into the state
and then what tax rate does that
equate to for all alcohol
purchases.
And that are greatly simplify it
at the retailer slim after have
different tax rate for this
bottle of that bottle of that
bottle we just know we want x
daughters to fund these programs
what should the tax rate.
Mr terry representative i'm
certainly I think that's a
conversation worth having a for
us they think we've been very
clear that we didn't introduce
these proposals to raise
revenues enough time of new
mexico having unprecedented
budgets and including a surplus
but we wanted to clean up the
flood tax policy and then use
the revenues that we collect in
which would remain pretty study
based on these estimates
conservative estimates to
greater impact so I think you're
right.
That could be an internal
question of what we need and how
much we need I would argue that
as legislators much of that
falls on us and that it may not
be the right policy just to say
we haven't been able to figure
out how to appropriate so far so
let's go pull it out of new
mexicans that are struggling but
instead to say what can we leave
and lend and lead definitely to
use the revenues we collect to
greater impact.
Thank you
let's go to representatives that
though thank you mister chairman
I think you presenters and I
apologize if you've already gone
over this um
the day feels like a week in the
building sometimes so sometimes
catching up and but I appreciate
the extra time you give us mr
mister chair to really dig in
these cause this is really
important conversation are there
any other states that are doing
this taxing on retail versus
taxing on wholesale.
Um mr chair and representative
yes there are multiple different
states that levy a sales tax in
addition to the
in addition to the wholesale tax
the specific example that's most
similar to what we are proposing
is maryland the state of
maryland they level of very very
low wholesale tax it's in the
real arses forty cents per beer
there is is like nine cents per
m per gallin of beer so you know
over time you would expect that
that real value of that sense
would become smaller small and
smaller and then instead day
levy at the at the point of sale
a nine percent tax on
their alcohol and they don't
charge to your tea so it's just
the nine percent and what they
have found is that
is that they have seen a
reduction in
essentially driving while
drinking they've seen a
reduction in consumption and
also a reduction in stics
thank you mister chair thank you
okay and then
there was one of my my folks my
county rich reached out of the
wi program and they were
concerned that there was a zero
there would be a zero tax on
like a twelve pack of beer that
Mister chair representative
what our hospital to thirteen
offers is to eliminate the
wholesale tax which is
ultimately passed down consumers
and with some assumptions built
in about how that passed on
but they would not be accurate
otherwise this proposal includes
the the option or what it would
move forward is that we would
tax all spirits at four percent
all line at three percent and
all beer at two percent and that
matter mister chair
representative what happened
whether you were purchasing at
the grocery store or the gas
station or a bar or a restaurant
and so it is real again we did
not design this to raise revenue
it is real that the people
paying the largest increase
either people that would be
consuming on sight that's just
because when you're having a
beer whether it's happy hour not
you might be paying five dollars
for that beer and the two
percent of five dollars comes
out to ten cents
if you are buying package which
is overwhelmingly where people
are consuming in rural new
mexico and likely what people
struggling with alcohol use
independency are they would not
be bearing the burden of the big
tax increases they were still be
paying attacks on those products
absolutely and as as i've
explained it more casually if
you're a top shelf drinker
you'll be a top shelf taxpayer
if you're a bottom of the shelf
basement drinker you will still
be paying attacks and it will be
clear
in and as you've as you pay your
tab or you pay at the grocery
checkout line so there would be
a tax imposed it is honest
inaccurate to say that the
highest increases will come to
those consuming alcohol and say
um I would also argue that they
are also the people that are
leaving that establishment and
heading somewhere else at the
end of their drinking.
And if i'll add mr chair and
representative
for just to give you a real
example if you were purchasing a
twelve pack of high noons and
that's twenty five dollars and
ninety nine cents you would be
paying fifty two cents on tax
thank you mister chair thank you
representative last question I
did notice that you all excluded
or and I could have get this
wrong you guys don't a lot of
work so thank you but you all
excluded local reason what
wineries and decisions are now I
so clear by that his mister
chairman rep and if so
able to logic be do other states
mr chair representative on that
piece where we started with was
the significant tax
differentials in place for the
smaller makers today so as it
stands today at the forty one
forty five and all our sixty
price points the small wine
growers the craft brewers and
the craftest dealers pay about a
fifth of what the the big guys
pay at that wholesale level so
just to be real when I was
trying to figure I I told
everybody that would listen I
want to figure out that the
basis in the middle of this
policy which is overwhelmingly
not the small guys and so what
we did is in the other bill you
propose that kept it wholesale
but moved to percentage we carry
those differentials forward in
this one because of this the
simplicity we were trying to
honor if those products are sold
on someone else the shelf so if
you're at albert sons and you're
deciding between that and a
corona or a marble or blisker
all those beers would have the
two percent imposed on them
because at that point someone
has gone to buy the product from
the smaller maker and put it on
their shot the same would play
if I was at my local bars and
bought the or by last year's
long standing features of mesia
but because at this point we
were trying not to get enough
eight with the local.
Businesses who bring forward an
economic development argue that
definitely proceeded my service
and term here
we decided to keep that simple
about everybody else yourself
that as this bill is drafted if
someone were to consume or to
purchase products that were sold
by that person on their premise
they would be exempt from the
tax again that was took carry
forward the differential that
had already been established
thinking that's very helpful to
thank you representative of
anyone else in the committee
questions comments if not ever a
couple free missed by a chair
women representatives I
appreciate the conversation that
you've had with the committee
today I a further appreciate you
allow me to be a correspondent
on this and from the church
perspective it's always hard to
to sit here trying to be
objective and listen to
conversation but yet i'm a coast
month around this and I did so
simply because I appreciate what
senator and his you do a lopus
and represent for rory brought
to the table in regards to.
The troubles that we have in the
statement surrounding alcoholism
and how plagues are communities
but I appreciate even
even more the thought prices
that went through your head
might and by share a woman in
regards to how you've
passionately over and over and
over again articulated how the
tax structure just wasn't fair
in regards to how initial
proposals represented and I
appreciate that simply because I
know because I live in those
communities you and I will share
that that perspective that that
how can we make this equitable
for air for for everybody within
the communities within the state
and if taxes is the way that we
are looking at if this or should
we go to just having the state
pay for it I get the arguments
both on both sides absolutely
but my question do you
representative is one simply.
We when you make the statements
about generational trauma and
how you've adjusted the tax
weeks here to account for that.
Can you talk me a little bit
more through that perspective
from you.
Mister representative certainly.
As alcohol has been before this
committee in previous sessions
and over the interim committee
i've gotten lots of media
attention and i've gotten some
ugly threatening emails from
folks saying
you think this is because race
of them are conversation or
genocide alcohols the problem
alcohol has the poison on
because the hire more you taxing
alcohol to save the day.
And mr
mister chair mister chair.
I know that if we want to talk
about the harm caused by alcohol
we have to talk about what new
mexicans are holding and
navigating every single day we
have to talk about generational
poverty we have to talk about
push out of our schools we have
to talk about living wages we
have to talk about
paid family medical leave.
These are the kind of
conversations we need to have
about honoring where new
mexicans have come from i'm
gonna shout out just as I did on
wednesday the dwi affiliate
chair through the association of
counties who happens to be from
the county.
And it might conversations of
course we started some panic
because we're sweeping the d w a
grandfather.
That is not to be little or
under mine the work of
incredible new mexicans trying
their best while being under
resourced over decades but it's
also to say that I found these
deserve us to reimagine the
conversations were have any
having and reimagine how we
point resources in the right
direction I felt like someone
was speaking to my heart when I
I spoke to the dwi affiliate
chair and I said I was tired of
prevention strategies that tried
to shame or stigmatize their
lecture new mexicans about how
harmful alcohol is instead of
asking you mexicans how are you
we've been through a lot what
are you holding what do you need
and when I share that with the
dwi affiliate chair again she
coordinates the efforts of the
dwifi it's across the
association counties.
She said representative I think
you'd like to hear we don't do
prevention anymore we do
community wellness.
And that's what it's going to
take to start to interrupt some
of these cycles that have been
weighing on our families that
have been.
The sinking are families for so
many years.
So well I have a particular lens
that comes from an equity
standpoint and adjusted
standpoint I also think this is
common sense it's time that we
look more closely and instead of
expecting that the people that
have the least and are
struggling the most would bear
the burden of this tax let's tax
fairly let's tax people on the
price of the alcohol they are
purchasing and meanwhile let's
redirect those dollars so that
we can show up for them we can
imagine harm reduction and a
different possibility in a way
that we never have so mister
chair thank you for the
opportunity to revisit that
thank you thank you matter vice
chair women and so I appreciate
your perspectives on that and as
the conversation has gone
through this through this room
over the past two days and there
there's been some mention about
i'd love to massage this more
and talk about this more during
the interim process and how you
know it'd be tough to push us
out
knowing that there's still some
questions here what what what's
your reaction to those type of
statements and message her i'm
honored to be in my third term I
often say people say you're
going to run this next year
let's see who's here next year
elections matter people get to
decide who they want to send
back to santa fe we all get to
decide whether or not we think
we're still having um the impact
we meant to when we get here.
All that to say
I knew we are walking into a
thirty day session and I knew
rightfully so thanks to so many
of the advocates in the room and
those listening in an art are
colleagues and the legislature
that this issue is going to be
presented and I thought it was
time that we have a broader
conversation about how we could
imagine modernizing the alcohol
tax structure I am incredibly
proud and humbled that there's
been so much momentum i'm proud
of all of it thoughtful
conversations i've had with
representative her non this with
an insight that I don't care
about this industry and and his
diligence in learning from the
gas stations and the groceries
and the bars and the restaurants
to making sure we aren't causing
consequences that we didn't
intend I appreciate
representative out of home for
just bringing it with so much
fire to this conversation and
and so much smarts from both of
these but certainly I did not
imagine you could for something
like this often a thirty day I
i'm so proud of me at this part
and I every day and more
impressed by the idea and
concepts like again I introduce
this to have a good debate and
now it seems like we might be on
to something and I appreciate
the feedback and would be
very looking forward to working
this through our rest up interim
committee and having the follow
through happen in the interest.
Thank you madam based your woman
and so to follow up to that then
I think in regards to how I feel
about your proposals in its
wonder that this is why III
asked to join with you all
simply because I recognize that
they should make a denied
represent but a hon represent of
her nand isn't the others that
have put their their thought
into this their soul fire
basically that you all have lead
with your with your hearts in
your minds and I appreciate that
so much that the thought prices
that went into the structure of
of taxation that that price of
the win into the ideas of how it
is equitable for everybody in
this date
regardless of the of
demographics right.
You learned again like I said
with your own thought prices not
being led by advocacy groups not
being led by an industry but
being led by what you felt was
right and appropriate.
And as well and as you choose to
develop these ideas to the
interim I applied you for
recognizing that it takes time
it takes transparency takes
communication to bring these
types of issues to the forefront
to get it right
and so with that being said I
just want to say III thank you
for allowing me to be a
correspondent with you and so at
this point in time we've come to
the conclusion of hearing both
of these bills two days worth
and I appreciate everybody's
attention in presents both here
in the room and online
we we understand this is a a big
issue in the state that we are
very much committed to your
solving and bringing resolve and
hot and help to those that
needed the most all across the
state and so at this point in
time I would like to revisit
them the commitment that I made
to the sponsor of house bill one
seventy nine that.
If you want it if you want to
vote today I I i'm more than
welcome to to bring it to a vote
if there is still your wish
and if it is
and and if it is then I will ask
them that at this point in time
knowing again based on this on
the.
Presentation that was made by
representative vice german
cadena on house bill two
thirteen you're open to the idea
of pushing this along to the
interim.
Yes mr chair we are not asking
for any action.
Then i'm going back to house
bill one seventy nine
is there emotion where do you
pass a house bill one seventy
nine
motion may is there a second
second mate.
Can you please call
representative but
no and i'd like to when they go
representative gusty young no.
Representative turner yes
representative dunkin no.
Representative
representative harper.
Representative
speaker martinez.
Representatives got.
Representative
representative townsend.
Madam based trickle and.
No experience well
for and support intended
opposition house bill one two
one seventy nine does not pass
thank you mister chair and I
just like to remind that we have
been working on this in interim
quick that we're going to go
back for two years going to go
back to our committee.
Explain your book please
thank you mister chair and thank
you representatives and senator
for bringing in the sport I
think it has sparked a lot of
questions probably more
questions in my mind than
answers and I would like to see
hopefully that this would and
and the other bill as well that
there is more work done on these
bills
I I think that you know
mentioning that I have more
questions in my mind i'd be
happy to sit with the sponsors
and talk a little bit more about
what my questions are um and see
if maybe in the future
you know it can be a little more
convinced about some of the
questions that I have thank you
thank you and to explain myself
as well we appreciate once again
the work that you have done to
this point we appreciate the two
years worth of a presentations
here in this committee but as
mentioned that we're not arguing
the point of whether or not this
is an issue that's valid for for
anybody in this room to want to
feel comfortable talking about
we know that there's a problem.
But at the same time we
recognize that there has to be a
process to which we bring all
stay called together to make
sure that we get it right the
first time and so that being
said this is not the minister do
mean any other work that you've
done to this point this simply
means that at this point I think
there's a recognition by this
body that read this at least
this room in some of us that
there are some very valuable
options in terms of a thought
prices at least to the tax
perspective of it all and i'd
like to see that fleshed out
during the interim and I think
that's the way that we move
forward collectively that if you
move this one forward is that
the right is that the right
step.
And does it have the support to
make it through the house
chamber and and so forth but at
this point in time I appreciate
it when I want to make that
mention thank you very much.
Let's move on to senate bill one
fifty one premium tax to
emergency services funds.
We have senator compose.
You're with us today.
The.
Rather the room quite at least
get to the business of our next
bill we appreciate it I also
want to recognize all of the
young folks that were able to
filter in the last discussion at
night I know there was several
of you and welcome you into
watching this process of
deliberations and I know that
maybe taxes and always the most
popular most exciting but at
this point in time some of the
things that we deal with there
are very emotional and i'm very
meaningful but for those of you
that have joined us this morning
thank you for taking the time to
to visit with this and and I
hope that we don't bore you too
much.
Instantly complete the rest of
your centers and expert
witnesses and senate bill one
fifty one as amended premium
taxed to emergency services one
the floor is yours never you're
ready.
The.
Thank you very much mister
chairman of course members of
the committee it's great to be
here with each and every one of
you as we.
Present this very important
piece of legislation that
has been a long time and come in
and we hope or are some
favorable consideration of what
it is that we're going to
present my remarks are going to
be done in breverty of revenue
and then from there but the
intention would be to also allow
a representative here there may
be maybe a senator or two that's
gonna also come in and then of
course from our experts so will
make our presentation as brief
as possible and would be
available for questions
so in essence what this
particular committee substitute
would do
is it directs an additional
eleven million to the emergency
medical services fund to support
your services across the state
and in essence what this would
do again is as time goes on
it'll direct five percent of
health insurance premium tax
revenues that currently go to
the general fund to the mast
phone effective fiscal year
twenty six i'm going to start
with that and if I may also
defer if you will to our esteem
representative and then from
there to the experts that are
going to be here with us to
further the explanation thank
you mister chairman.
Representative thank you mister
chairman and members of the
committee I just stand shoulder
shoulder with mass across new
mexico this is something that is
highly needed
for all of our members across
the mexico and hope that we can
garner your support thank you
mister chairman.
Good morning mr chairman members
of the committee thank you for
your consideration of senate
bill one fifty one today my name
is alice and nichols i'm the
policy director with the new
mexico municipal league on
behalf of armunity palidies and
and I know counties as well as
supporting this we really
appreciate your consideration as
as I think you'll probably hear
from some other folks today you
must funding really has not kept
up with needs at all I was doing
some research last night and the
current distribution to that
yeah ms find hasn't actually at
the same level that it was in
nineteen ninety four so it
hasn't even kept up with
inflation much less capped up to
address the increasing
complexities that emails has to
deal with today with the
challenges faced in our
communities by substance abuse
increase over doses dealing with
homeless populations you know
although challenges they're
addressing and I think most of
us would agree that we want
ems to be able to address those
issues you know often it's it's
law enforcement that that
addresses them I think yeah ms
is often the more appropriate
response to to many of those
situations we want to make sure
that they can they couldn't they
can address the situations
again as I think i'll hear many
of our smaller departments
especially are receiving just a
fraction of their costs for
example I know in
someone park they receive about
twenty thousand dollars from the
distribution there at their
budget is about two million and
I think you'll hear some similar
some similar situations today
some other research that that we
did we found out that
that only for five states had
fewer ambulances per thousand
square miles the new mexico new
mexico is a fifth highest
percentage of the population
living in so called ambulance
deserts and all our counties
have ambulance deserts so I
think are the need the need is
really credit call this is an
existing funding source that
would be going into an exist.
Sting funds mister by doh you
think this is the right time to
invest in our email services
thank you.
Good morning mister chairman
there was a community managed
chat handle I am the volunteer
fire cheap for the town of
herman understand
echo what she would say I will
spend a lot of time we're
hurting for money and we
appreciate this bill appreciate
the center and represent
representing us then for any
questions that.
That basically concludes our
initial presentati.
The.
Thank you center think you
represent thank you to your
experts as now move to the
committee for all those that are
in support of senate bill one
fifty one as amended please
raise your head.
We will begin on the sale room
yesterday.
Thank you
for you
house.
I've been working in advocating
for emails.
Stagnant.
And is beginning with what
part of the problem is that
we're losing
because they do not have the
body training equipment and all
the
from those apartment is now
falling back on the larger
counter community.
Working on our personal and I
just strongly asked for your
favorite
thank you sir extra.
The next well then support yes
ma'am
thank you mister
all the reason.
We have counties with no
services because I can't afford
them and.
Next it's support yesterday mr
chairman my name is.
Echo whatever was already said
on top of that I think
that must
actually increase
but we're also getting so stuff
in the diagnosis.
The whole duty of funding as
well as.
Especially the rule.
Areas that
access to the hospital so
getting that in their h.
Thank you thanks for coming out.
Next support.
Yes sir
I rescue
support of this bill not only a
critical stop yeah to the
issues that are facing the state
right now but also
further needs that
a pretty pirate currently has to
send all trust other counties
and communities across the
states that i'm available to us
with you can imagine process for
more you mislead to be available
helps everyone
thank you next to the support
yes sir.
So
we support this
we have like any other mike my
colleagues here
for supplies reputation the
spiel is greatly needed and we
hope you have.
Next in support yesterday mr
care after the community low
federal president are far
association I stand you're with.
We are one service do you run
fire
as well
they said.
Thank you
the salary support if not on
this said yes may.
Support you wanted to see your
name and where you from perhaps.
Yeah.
In december.
Yeah.
Massive.
The.
The.
Came across another gentleman
who had been writing.
Yeah.
You would not.
Yeah.
Coming up
thank you anyone else support
yesterday
there's a committee money
bar and rescue strong support we
cover thirty seven hundred
square miles
rule traveling
this month drastically help our
providers feel right services
back to the citizens sample
county a lot every other part
thank you.
Thank you sir anyone else
yesterday
sorry yeah mr chairman members
of the committee charlie markets
registered lobbyists from city
as has been previously stated
these funds are critical for
services that are vitally
important each community so we
just urge your support thank you
very much thank you yes
then providing services and
education.
Last few years are increasingly
dire and
by saying
I was model.
This is funny this
thank you very much.
Thank you anyone else in support
or a senate bill one fifty one
in the room if not let's go to
online anyone online.
Tg good morning you're with us.
Hello dj.
Okay what will come back.
Your your muted body
can you hear me now you know
thank you this chief capital
retail fire department I come to
you to express support not just
for my department but also from
the six volunteer agencies that
help serve our community and I
appreciate your support in this
because as has been stated many
times this is drastically needed
across our state thank you thank
you let's go to christian
christian good morning.
Hello good morning my name's
christian mateo garcia and
respected chairman members of
the committee thank you so much
for loading me speak an
emergency medicine in physician
and an ems physician i'd be
medical direction mostly in
rural and tribal areas across
new mexico including over
fifteen different agencies this
is a profoundly impact phone
helpful at bill for us and is
much needed support for all the
work and the efforts are
training supplies and equipment
that are needed and critical to
saving lives in the work of the
providers out in the field thank
you so much
thank you thank you for joining
us that's go to one year time
you good morning.
The.
Thank you thank you chairman
members of the committee I am
partnerland I am the deputy
chief of cralified apartment I
have been here since nineteen
ninety seven and I hold some
data for you in twenty oh three
I received eight thousand and
seventy four dollars in the ms
finally we've had dramatic
increases and calls call in the
last five years but twenty years
later in physical year twenty
three I only received one
thousand one hundred and thirty
four dollars in the ms funding I
are department like so many
others we do not charge for any
medical response and the price
of medications has increases
dramatically thank you please
support this bill we desperately
need it thank you thank you for
making time for us today let's
go to just in just a good
morning.
Good morning tear in committee
members my name is just and
drove far cheese invest director
for clinton fire rescue
standing supported this one
hundred percent started my
twenty fourth year serving state
new mexico with the message fire
in that time we've seen an eight
thousand to a fourteen thousand
dollar budget and in the past
fifteen years we've been holding
the study of fourteen medical
suppliers is what I spend that
on and
we don't have any problems going
through that in the first
quarter
we are sprc regulated service so
we need a bill with some of the
changes in medicaid medicare
payout where we no longer
can break even on things where
desperately behind in some
technology and get their bills
paid so do appreciate all the
support that legislation is
given this this year it's good
to see and I hope you guys
support this to you thank you
for your time thank you for
joining us this go now to p
eight good morning.
Good morning to me mister
chairman thank you for learning
the speed and peak dollars
moving serving into mexico or
forty years on a street to lost
cruises in an indone and
accounting with donnie and
county volunteers
this bill is tremendously
important as you've heard that
the increase has not happened in
over thirty years to the fund
act.
As we were not excused me where
the front line of health care
and many of the rural new mexico
and
no more certain services don't
get more than twenty thousand
dollars right now from the
current fund act and it probably
averages about eighty five
hundred and ninety thousand
dollars and as you've heard
already those are spent in the
first quarter i'm just supplies
and and things
in the masco is is in entire
streets for funding and this is
a great opportunity for the
state and for you folks to
support the front line of of
health care for many rural
people in new mexico cost of
raise tremendously as you'll
hear monitors or third thirty
five thousand forty thousand
dollars and your three hundred
to four hundred thousand dollars
I urge you to sports in a bill
fifty one and I think that
sponsors for bringing it to the
floor thank you
thank you
that's all for those in support
of senate bill one fifty one on
line so in the room all those in
opposition of senate bill one
fifty one.
Please form a line here
just keeping senator
getting center there is no one
in the room there is no one on
line
so at this point i'm in the also
add before you go to the commit.
Okay committee members I have
first on the list representative
townsend
thank you german senator
representatives I think it would
be important.
To have some conver.
The.
I'm sorry mister
representative
so in addition to this running
from the ms fund which I think
probably covers a rap probably
less than twenty percent for
most most ms agency sometimes
much less sometimes
local communities.
Find a master they're operating
budgets and to the extent that
they're able to.
It they they may get some grams
as well but but I think that
they keep he's here as you know
that operating budget for ems
many of our communities are
stretched then and that comes at
the expense of of other you know
public safety of of a fire
service of one forcement of
roads water
you know with limited funding I
think it's it's often hard for
them to find it and often hard
for them to find it at at the
levels that we need I mean we've
heard from many of the the
commenters today that video
messages just stretched then and
it's really does not have the
equipment the response times you
know that the training that it
needs to be able to to respond
and and.
Expert appreciate that would it
be fair to say that smaller
communities are just but por.
To provide this
service
mr chairman representative towns
and
that is corrected the smaller
services are the ones that are
suffering we've seen bon
ambulance sir bonnie ams is no
longer running calls and
couldn't they don't have the
personnel and have the funding
house ems so
those departments are now
relying on like a mayor mailer
talked about the larger
community so you're waiting for
ambulances out of santa rose out
of more the out of browser of
something happens around that
bon area just depends on where
you're at so the smaller
services
i'm all across the mexico rural
front year department sir are
suffering because of the lack of
funding into clarify our finding
is from the partner of health
and it's appropriate down and
distributed amongst the
services.
German.
Expert at is exactly where I was
going with my next question is
how will the.
Directed to support those rural
counties that you and we have
discussed being more most
stressed.
I think he must chairman and
represent if we have a formula
in the state that set by the
state white advisory committee
and goes back to the m s bureau.
And it.
Really set to help the smaller
departments we put a cap on it
so if you're a very large
department you can't get.
You know
three quarters of the find it
set
by your
level of service in the number
of calls that you have and so
and it starts at a base and then
it works from there and so the
max that you can get
in any time with the current
finding is twenty thousand
nineteen five in the least you
can get is about fifty five
hundred.
So.
With that answer.
If you have had no mess
facilities in your just diction
is that how many you have.
Had within your county that how
many mess because you have had
in your county or how many.
Providers have responded within
that county.
A mister chairman representative
so it is per department so if it
the heckerman fired apartment is
an als service they get the base
of
seventy five hundred and if we
run two hundred calls it's
figured into how we we take out
of the pie but that's all in
chavis county so there's nine
other departments that are
fighting for the money that's
designated to chavise county or
eddie county
farmington it is all into that
county is how that
is distributed and mischairman.
The.
This eleven million dollars
divided by thirty three counties
little over three hundred
thousand dollars.
Although eleven million dollars
is a lot of money when you
divide it by all of the small
rural entities within every
county that we represent.
It's not a significant.
Is that where my missing
something.
A mr chair represent this
correct it's not
considering that a heart
monitors thirty five thousand
and once is four hundred
thousand.
It's really just but dropped in
the bucket.
The measured german one more
question are there any services
provided whether it be air or
ground are they all supported or
are any of them excluded from
this furnity
and mr chairman representative.
The the phone doctors written
where I just a private analyst
service does not get this
funding of four profit and what
service does not get this
funding the only way of for
profit and what's has access to
that funding as if they are tied
to a municipality or county
through a contract so if they
are so amr in the city of rose
will have a contract together
for them to provide the services
they can use they can apply for
fund act rost will be the fiscal
agent and has to approve
the dispenditure of the finding
what they're going to spend it
on if it is equipment and the
contractors separated then that
equipment has to stay in chavis
county.
Thank you representative towns
and it's a representative scott
thank you mister chairman
certain.
Representative experts
do we know.
What's the total resources in
the state.
Amount to and support of these
emergency medical services.
A mister chairman representative
I would like to defer that
question to them mrperiod kyle
thought he's the bureau chief
for the m s bureau.
If you would please come over to
the mikes of here you online as
well please.
Mr chair representative
you were asking for
the total amount of support for
ems agencies across the state
correct
the the department health
certainly isn't aware of a.
Particular number because all of
those funds are there's various
than different kinds of funds in
each county and each city
it it is probably in the low
hundred.
Million across the state if you
were to add everybody up
but we don't have just a
singular number.
Mr chairman senator to follow up
on.
Affinitive townsends line of
questioning ten million dollars
does not seem like very much to
me in the scope of the need.
Is.
Is this really
the best we can do.
Mister chair representative
yeah I I would agree that you
know eleven million is is
probably just to start here you
know we mention that that's
about three thousand dollars
three hundred thousand dollars
for county and I would add that
over three hundred year mess
services receive the money so
you know once you're chopping up
for their across three hundred
entities it's a very small
amount of money you know we've
heard five thousand eight
thousand dollars that's really
not a lot
but you know I think this is a
start to begin addressing the
news I think somebody mentioned
you know this gets us to to a
place where they can build some
of the those capacities of
facil.
So mister chairman.
Most of the money that supports
these programs comes from the
operating budgets of
the towns and cities.
The.
Representatives got your correct
does come from the towns and
cities so as we deal with it and
with the enormous needs that
come out of the counties and
cities minus a palidies even the
unincorporated communities it
makes it very difficult for them
to go ahead and provide these
emergency services.
So mister chairman senator the
smaller the community would
expect the more difficult it
would be to provide the services
enough and I am guessing.
That smaller communities much of
this is on a volunteer basis
mister chairman representative
scott you're correct and here's
an example so in the community
of mode if they're going to be
responding to an accident and
waters they go mode and then
come on through by the time they
get to the scene of the accident
forty five minutes and if they
have these ambulances that have
high mileage or one is in
disrepair it makes it even more
difficult especially if they
have maybe a local incident so
within that the resources they
are available to the smaller
communities are much less and
that's part of the reason why
we're trying to go and at least
start to elevate if you will the
resources available across new
mexico for all of these
communities specifically the
small.
Their ambulances replace him and
at the same time also provide a
needed equipment and if I made.
The experts respond if there's
some.
Mister chairman representative I
would just add at one
you know number that I think is
is helpful to keep in mind when
you talk about the the impact on
smaller communities that it is
so much more expensive for
smarter communities to respond
um I was doing some reasons
research yesterday and saw that
the the average cost of response
is a thousand dollars per
response in a high volume area
but over forty thousand dollars
in a low volume area so it's
just relatively so much more
expensive for these smaller
agencies so you have you know a
situation where it's even more
critical to have a fast response
time when you're in a rural area
and at the same time it's
relatively more expensive for
them to respond so it's kind of
you know the perfect the perfect
storm if you well.
I know mr handle is anything
else dad.
Mr chairman do you have children
expert at brought me to my next
question was how do these fines
get allocated.
I think what should be an
emphasis on those wrong
communities with the highest
costs m
and lowest option sir.
Mister chairman representative
so my understanding and again I
think this can provide some more
detail here but my understanding
is one of the ways that this
directs more funding to rural
and frontier services is that in
general no recipient can receive
more than one percent of the
total amount allocated however
regionalized your mass agencies
which by definition in the
statute are rural and front here
they can receive more than one
percent so they are able to
receive a relatively higher
amounts and and yeah maybe.
Mister chairman representative
so it's it is based off of a
formula in that formula does.
Really kind of lean towards
those rural departments so again
it's based on number of calls
that there the ability or the
level of service that that
that's provided and this
distribute out through the ems
bureau who
has.
Individual that actually mixed
sure that the standards are held
the same across the boards where
the year and albuquerque whether
you're inherent new mexico that
standard net level of care is
held at the same as standard
soul the emest girl make sure
that everybody is funded and
those smaller departments
receive.
Okay mister german
I have information showed here.
Provided to me yesterday
were the correct distributions.
Our universally lesson twenty
thousand dollars
which is a house of one run
in a rural community.
The.
We should be able to do better
first
atmosphere chairman thank you
representatives god it's going
to represent him dunkin
missed turing sender and
representatives this was an easy
bill for me to sign on to
just a quick question.
The this tax center of this
taxes collected from what
source.
Thank you very much mister
chairman of course
representative from the premium
tax which basically comes from
insurance okay mister miss churn
senator is all the design this
tax going to the into the fund
for anything like this where
does you know where that fund
goes to.
That so mister chairs we
developed that so the the
resources go into the premium to
acts and then from there into
the general fund and so what
this would be would be an
intercept for most resources it
would go directly to the.
That's my point exactly what
collect attacks and it should be
going toward health
anything to do with this and yet
we put it to the general fund.
I think it all want to go into
this fund I toward help in
health and mental whatever
whatever we need to do with that
and so I
this is a do passport for me so
thank you very much for that
thank you representative dunkin
that's got a representative
harper.
The chairman senator
representative panel.
I'm have just like a few
clarifying questions from
represent duggins comments and
others my questions have been
answered but.
You know i've talked a lot about
see where these funds are going
and how they're distributed but
i'd like to talk about the other
set acquaint which is the taps
portion rate and so chairman
senator my understanding is
that.
Right now it's the only mexico
as a three point zero zero three
percent tax on insurance
premiums
and that's all insurance so
health home fire flood whatever
all insurance premiums ever
three point zero zero three
percent tax on it is that
correct.
And thank you and chairman and
senator do we know what the
total amount that reason right
now that three point zero zero
three percent tax so so mister
chair and terms of the the the
agree at the amount that has
been built up as right in the
neighborhood about three point
two billion dollars so that's
basically the informat.
Mister chair representative I
believe that the health
insurance premium tax brings in
about two hundred and twenty
million annually.
Yeah chairman and senator thank
you for that about two hundred
twenty million annually and
chairman is in a senator we
there are additional
distributions off that tax I
believe ten percent of.
Uh.
Tax derived from property and
vehicle insurance goes to the
fire protection fund is that
correct mr chair represented
herbert yes and and just to
clarify for for this bill for
about one fifty one it would
only be we'd only be looking at
interest up for the health
insurance tax not for the
color yeah so thank you chairman
and and senator yes i'm i'm just
exploring this tax and what it
how is distributed so we were
taxing all insurance and had one
of the distributions is to the
fire protection fine and it's
ten percent of.
Insurance from property and
beer.
The.
Vehicle insurance business yes
so
and and now we're proposing a
new one for mass fund
that after the senate finance
community minute it is to be
five percent of the receipts
from health insurance.
Chairman and senator are there
other distributions.
In addition to these the fire
protection fine and potentially
the.
Chairman representative harpers
so from the health insurance
premium red tax revenues last
year the legislature voted to
send ten percent of those
revenues to the law enforcement
protection fund so law
enforcement does get a piece of
this money and to my knowledge
that's the only distribution
from health insurance premium
taxes there there may be others
from premium taxes generally but
we've specifically been looking
at health insurance premium
taxes for this one if I could
just add the health care
affordable of fortibility fund
comes out of that as well we
heard that bill last night on
the house floor it's at fifty
five percent of it goes to.
The circumstance.
The.
Thank you chairman thank you
senator and representative.
So.
The.
I guess just trying to again
understand the distributions
from this
is there
trying to remember we recently
raised the.
The.
This premium tax was in the rom
of one percent to erase the by a
couple percent when the feds
recently yeah that's the sir tax
chairman can I ask the secretary
to clarify the distinction
between the premium tax and the
surtax for us madame secretary
please
yes please.
Because we could I pick you up
with them in his shuffle seats.
Yes some of the confusion is
that there's also a sir tax on
the uncertain line.
A couple years ago we
we increase the surtace from one
percent to it I believe it's two
point seventy five percent three
point seven five thank you and
so that is what is split between
the health care affordability
find in the general fund.
Okay chairman and.
Senator and secretary thank you
i'm
III do not have that all
straight my mind so I I
appreciate you help me
understand this.
Okay and I think.
Uh my glass question
I think we all understand the
need and we'd like to do more
right that ten percent that it
started out with in the senate I
think that was great I get it
had to go to five percent of it
to the budget this year I my
understanding is chairman center
this is a part of house bill to
mister chair representative
harper yes it is
I think you chair and in senator
so so I guess what my last
comment just kind of goes to
page five and the fire.
Which
talks about the
state and local share of these
costs and how
we're starting to look more like
an outwire compared with the
rest of the states
you know right now looks like
the state share
for a new mexico is about two
thirds and the local shares
about a third
that's increased.
Um over the last five years the
national average is about fifty
five percent state share forty
five percent local share
and if we pass this.
Our ratios can go even more
other directions so can you
speak to that
so mister chair represented a
heartburn it's a very good
question tied it and told the
other questions as we deal with
it we continue to go ahead and
see particularly in our smaller
communities where less resources
are available in order to boy
and provide this service so what
we inticipate is that it'll
continue to be in that direction
where the smaller communities
are going to rely on more of the
state support as we move forward
thank you to adjustment and
mister chairman of however I
also add you know that data was
really interesting data from the
US into spiral I think one piece
was missing though it only
looked at the expenditure side I
didn't look at the revenue side
if if you look at the revenue
side local government shares of
revenues or proportionally lower
so you know if you're looking at
revenue on one access and
expenditures on the other access
new mexico's kind of in the the
bottom left quadrant there and
and that did all also add
include school districts so I
think it's a bit hard to you
know make specific conclusions
about counties immunity
because we know our funding
structure for school districts
it's fairly different than other
states as well
yeah yeah chairman and senator
thank you for that yeah
yeah just looking at that table
in that chart it was it was a
little challenging because
we have some
in our metropolitan areas that
you know I mean for example in
this hand out you know lost
crucials you know has any
operating costs of twelve
million rate
and so they're they're obviously
making a huge impact of a huge
share at the local level for
that
compared to the state share but
then you would look at maybe
dexter and their annual open
crosser thirty five thousand but
they're currently getting
seventy five hundred so
now the stature was a lot bigger
so how how do you know look at
the different small counties and
big counties and.
And make an average so I
appreciate during the there
might be somebody once to that
information
thank you chairman
thank you representative let's
go to a representatives by
strong academic.
My questions have now been asked
but just wanted to appreciate
you offer bringing this for it I
also was trying to read closely
and clarify between the premium
tax in the surcharge tax and
then had qui.
The.
I mean it's hard to hear that
reality mister chair
senator that this might still be
a drop in the bucket but it's a
drop in the right direction and.
Small town and certainly it's a
scattering between counties and
volunteer fire and ems and
really appreciate that you all
show up when we m.
But thank you thank you very
sure in representative of
borrell.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you representative and senator
for bringing this bill for
so in and looking at this bill I
I see it as a public safety
issue.
Especially when we're dealing
with the health safety and
general welfare of the public
which is what our firefighters
and and our ems folks do on a
daily basis and that's sometimes
twenty four hour shifts times
four days a week is is pretty
taxing we were here for thirty
days and i'm already starting to
fill it
so basically the role and
function of the house when we
talk about first responders they
are the first responders when
we're talking about a car
accident dealing with the
homeless cardiac rest baby boxes
and I was talking mister
chairman yesterday to some of
our emails folks
who picked up a baby yesterday
and just broke my heart you know
went home last night and told my
mom about it and I was she was
just almost a tears over it and
I I all the same
second thing that I point that I
wanted to make was
with regard to the sheet that
you are passed out and I think
it was new mexico
counties and albuquerque fire
chiefs association and point
number two it says the fund
distributed approximately three
point nine million n FY ten and
then it gives a chart
over time in different cities of
the current year mouse fund
distribution mister chair and
the annual cost distribution and
you know in looking at this and
kind of doing a little bit of
my own calculations mister chair
and and senator and
representative and guests
the cost of doing business just
or if we're looking at this from
the true sense of the cost of
doing business.
In new mexico
the fun is not even keeping up
with inflation and that is a
serious point and we're talking
twenty ten and were twenty
fourteen that's fourteen years
of not keeping up with inflation
in an average of mr chairman
just kind of looking at our
rates of inflation
housing food and beverage
increased by twenty five point
seven percent over
twenty ten to twenty twenty
the
was an average of twenty five
point seven and twenty one point
two so like twenty three percent
maybe an average and then
transportation which is a key
component of ems
four point one percent just for
transportation mister chair and
the cost of doing businesses
tonight and I I have to
reiterate that because to me
that's a really important thing
especially in areas like new
mexico where our cities are so
spread apart
and there's not an easy way mr
chair and senator representative
of getting from point eight a
point b
and you know unfortunately we
don't we keep building further
and further out from our cities
and so just from the inner
cities to the
areas in the outline areas I
think about this
and i'm gonna mention an area
that really concerns me mister
chair and and
and senator and representative
of the east mountain area
from alva cookie
then I was just talking mister
chair and and representative and
senator
how there is not really a
hospital in close proximity of
the east mountain area the costs
would be an occasional on.
Constitution so just those
factors alone
you know
are very concerning especially
to a city planner who you know
that is my background
so I think that my second point
and then my third point mr
chairman and senator
representative and guests is the
new mexico population although
it hasn't really grown that much
in from twenty ten to twenty
twenty our sense it shows two
point eight percent of growth
but
and here's the key mister
chairman and
and presenters
the
number of people who have aged
is forty three point seven
percent of people who are now
sixty five years old and older
and we all know that as time
goes by in your health starts to
decline usually it's those
people that are ems books or
responding to mister chair and
so
this is an a no brainer for me
especially when I did my own
calculations to see where this
bill sits um
I you know I commend you off for
bringing us forward and thank
you
thank you mister chairman
thank you representative but I
looks like we have no one else
on the list I have a couple of
comments in regards to this
particular matter it's a
sobering to hear the discussion
and and the disparities with
then rural new mexico and it
makes me believe then that as a
representative of part of roll
new mexico that our system is in
fact broken and so there are
number of ways that we can
probably do things more
proactively and I would say to
representative and do senator
into your expert into all those
that are here and support that
perhaps this is an initiative
that we need to take a closer
look at in the revenue
stabilization tax.
Policy committee during the
interim in regards to how we
fixed this for good to provide
that that assurance for our
people in public safety so thank
you for the presentation at this
point in time represent past the
annual mister chairman I make a
due passionation for senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for senate
bill one fifty one as amended
second the most you have a
second.
Number second two second second
so at this point time is any
opposition to this motion
listing.
Very well let's take a sticker
countries
representative yes
representative to yes
representative channel
representative dunkin yes
representative gavels
representative harper
speaker representative.
First speaker marginal
representative or two yes
representative scott
representative set up.
Representative thompson
made investor gilling
yeah yes and tremendous yes
because i've got to.
Thank you very much mister
chairman.
C revenue streams to the locked
in the state of new mexico or
unique.
To this state in it so much of
that comes from the all in gas
operations in the southeast and
the northwest.
Most of the revenue.
Comes to the state
and as a consequence.
Local communities are thirty
three counties and local
communities have not had an
opportunity to participate.
To the extent that they should
I will continue to advocate for
more of this money getting back
in the local hands to let them
participate in some of this
unprecedented quality gas
revenue discommon end of the
state not only to provide
emergency medical services but
also services.
That is local communities or
responsible for thank you thank
you represent a scout senator
and represent it if you have a
due passenger committee
substitute percent of bill one
fifty one as amended thank you
sir mister committee thank you
very much for your indulgence
for the presentation in the most
importantly the vote of support
for ems thank you thank you
many members we are at the point
where we are expecting
downstairs at this point so we
will roll the remainder of
today's agenda till next monday
we will not come back into
committees this weekend
very quickly we will release in
a gender later on today their
custom mister chairman sorry I
like to
welcome my shadow matter over
he'll sit in the back up there
today he's going to be shadowly
