Here.
Representative Terazas.
Madam Vice Chair Carianna here
And Mr. Chalin.
I'm here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, when
you're ready on the committee
sub for Senate Bill 425.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Thank you committee members.
Good morning. Uh, this morning I
have Senate Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 425,
and this is basically called the
reauthorization bill, Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 425 reauthorizes 423
capital outlay projects that
have been authorized in previous
years from various funds. The
estimated balance in the
projects included in this bill
as of January of 2025 is 262.
$7 million. Projects may be
reauthorized to extend the
reversion date.
Expand or change the purpose, or
to change the administrative
agency directed on this fund,
uh, as we relates to the
extended for extended time on
this bill. We're looking at an
extra 2 years for every, every
project that's in this bill. Uh,
there's a number of reasons why
we're here today and that
includes supply chain delays,
labor shortages, cost
escalations and capacity
limitations uh may have in many
cases delayed these projects.
Uh, you all have, uh,
A chart by county listing the
projects that are included in
the substitute bill, and with
that, Madam Chair, I would stand
for any questions.
Thank you first if you are
participating over Zoom and
would like to speak in either
support or opposition, please
raise your hand now.
Seeing no um comments over Zoom
will go to the room. Is there
anyone here to speak in support
or opposition to capital at
reauthorizations.
your public comment, we'll go
first to representative
Lenstrom.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I just
had a, a question. I know in the
old days we used to get a letter
that notified us that something
needed to be reauthorized. Are
these projects just
automatically reauthorized or is
there a request that comes from
the communities.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, so, no legislators should
still be signing off on the
projects, uh, that are in this
bill, um, or the governor if
they were sponsored by her.
And if it was multiple sponsors,
Madam Chair, you both have 2 or
just 1? Um, my understanding
from LCS is it sort of depends.
Um, I think they do usually try
to notify the other sponsors if
only one sponsor has requested
it.
OK, thank you.
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, man, um, Mr.
Chairman, just a quick question
on, you said they were extended
to 2 years. So could you tell me
exactly what that is? Would that
be 22 years or 2 from 20 years
or 1012 years from 10.
Uh, Madam, madam chairwoman and
representative, that means 2
years from, from this year, so
up to 2027. OK. That's all I
needed. Thank you.
Any other questions or comments
from the committee.
What's the pleasure of the
committee?
And I'm sure I do make a motion
to do pass.
And do pass on the Senate
Finance Committee said for
Senate Bill 425.
Um, any opposition?
See no opposition, Mr. Cha, you
have a
filth. Thank you, Madam
Chairman. Thank you committee
members. Thank you for, for
obliging me this morning coming
so early. Uh, thank you for your
work again in this committee. I
appreciate each and every one of
you and the discussions that
we've had over the course of the
last two months and, and for the
next twentysomething hours. I
wish you all well and and the
strength to get through so you
can go back home tomorrow. Thank
you all again. Have a great day.
And the staff, thank you all.
Thank you. Bye.
