Mr Chairman.
Madam chair here we have a four.
Right thank you
as you know we're get into kind
of silly seasons so we are going
to jump around a little bit on
our agenda to accommodate other
representatives hearing
schedules and so on so with that
I would like to present house
bill one ninety which is a
pretty straightforward and I
think will be a relatively short
presentation
Linda Segal is should be in the
audience let's see if she is
otherwise we'll have to go to
Representative process.
Yes I see her so
really could you elevate Linda
Siegel please.
Yes she was just promoted to
panelist very good okay
miss Siegel do you have any
other experts assist us in this
bill.
Madam chair I believe there are.
A couple of nurses on.
Deborah Walker.
And for Korea
You see them let's see adult
Dougherty yes or I do and I I
don't know about Deborah Walker
do you see Deborah Walker on
really.
It was just promoted the
panelists Gloria if you can
please confirm on your side.
I see Gloria's name.
I'm trying to prevent her
depends.
So thank you everyone we're on
house bill one ninety it's a
pretty straightforward bill and
I think everyone who's had a
chance to look at it recognizes
why we are doing it
during these last two years
nurses have been on the
forefront of supporting so many
of us who have been challenged
by the the COVID crisis in the
pandemic not just those
individuals who
who have
suffered from COVID treatment
for COVID but all the other
individuals who've been impacted
by the fact that the our
hospitals have been
So overworked and we all know
the important role that nurses
play in this bill would would
offer a one thousand dollar tax
credit refundable for nurses
working in hospitals and you
know how how stressed hospitals
have been and how stressed the
nursing profession has been and
that's the underpinning the
public policy underpinnings of
it and Linda did you want to ask
one of some of our experts to
speak to this point.
Certainly madam chair I I might
just.
Remind everyone about the
incredible work that nurses have
done in the hospitals and you're
gonna hear from one nurse who
has been there and the hospital
doing this work a nurse
practitioner and.
We know that we have this huge
nursing crisis and we know that
so many nurses are so stressed
that they're they're also
leaving the profession and this
tax credit for the year twenty
twenty two because we couldn't
do retroactive to twenty one.
What is almost like thank you
our retention something that
says we know what you did there
and the hospitals and and we
appreciated as the government of
New Mexico and I'll let the.
Deborah Gloria speak.
Deborah Gloria.
What are you on.
I'll go ahead and start madam
chair members of the committee
and Deborah Walker I do hold a
nursing license but I have not
seen patients for over two
decades I am the current
executive director for the New
Mexico nurses association and to
let this point and to the
chairwoman point
madam chair we really thank you
and the other sponsor for
looking at this I think this
bill would be and not toward
stabilizing our current
workforce I think all of you are
acutely aware of the accidents
that we've seen and all of our
communities with nurses leaving
the hot there their current
hospital employment over the
last year and exiting the state
so this would be a nod towards
those who are currently working
full time and twenty two
for the full year of serving in
our hospitals so there are many
reasons for shortage there's
many reasons for that access but
this would be one effort toward
stabilizing that current
workforce so thank you again
madam chair we appreciate it
thank you miss Walker and Mr
Dougherty would you like to add
a and a few words.
Sure madam chair I truly
appreciate this being considered
as a nurse practitioner working
as a hospitalist and critical
care intensive just for this
pandemic are the nurses are very
tax they go home with this is
many days we go home in tears
and like Debra said there is an
exit just because.
There is a nursing shortage and
it is very taxing on the nurses
were there supervising their
travelers they're not
incentivized by the hospitals
because they have to use their
funds for other emergency crisis
standards and I just appreciate
those being considered very much
it's another.
Little incentive that will keep
people at our hospitals
throughout the state and our
other facilities that require
nursing because every patient
deserves a nurse.
Thank you Mr major will now go
to the attendees and streamline
their we are limiting debate ten
minutes on each side and each
individual will be given
a minute to speak those in
opposition to this bill please
raise your hand.
no surprise no one opposes this
bill.
Because we love the nurses
there's no question about it so
those attendees in favor please
raise your hand.
Great and these are.
Thank you madam chair Dennis are
representing levels health
systems there's nothing more to
add than what you've heard other
than that level just wants to
let lend its voice to strong
support for this bill thank you.
Thank you Mr Nisar.
Well I think everyone that's it
for the audience I think it's a
testament to the fact that
people are just so completely
and
in line this bill in terms of
its intent in recognizing our
nursing community so going back
to our Committee any comments
questions.
I saw a hand one minute.
Representative Strickler.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair
I had a kid sect COVID and I
spent twelve Dacians Sam
operational hospital from August
twelfth August twenty third and
this the staff was fantastic of
unfortunately San Juan regional
was a hundred fifty employee
shall I of there are ideal
staffing and then they lost
another two hundred fifty
during the pandemic and the
stress was very high and but
they took real good care may my
wife's in occupational therapist
and they escort officer letter
half full range.
The economic relieve their
pressure and and I'm so thankful
for that and a bag of the let me
go home and I finally heard my
pleas congeal up so much faster
home so this is really a a tough
deal
In our hospital especially
that they they have to bring a
lot of travelling nurses.
they they have to pay these
travelling nurses.
A premium to three times more
than than the car and then that
local nurses and there's a real
disconnect there
With the local nurses
just one fair and so I don't
know what to do about it but
this is a there certainly is a
step in the right direction so
thank you madam chair and thank
you panel.
Thank you Representative
Strickler and I can't tell you
how happy all of us are that you
have fully recovered and at your
wife has fully recovered and
even even though you're an of
crusty and cranky on this
committee we still have
a happy to have you here with us
Senator it was a great weight
loss program.
I lost twenty five pounds so
yeah I don't and I got all that
natural immunity but I don't I
got it the hard way yeah well
madam chair good to see you
healthy and two year old self.
Representative Harper.
Madam chair of very much
appreciate great senior this
morning and thanks for bringing
this legislation in front of us.
One I first just.
Commend the the.
The.
Kerrier of the bill of carriers
the chair Chandler and and
Representative Gallegos this
does have a reporting
requirement.
And it does have a sunset it's
only one here so it it was
structured wealth that in in the
right way.
I wanted to talk for a minute so
about the FIR
this FIR shows a nineteen
million dollar hit to the
general fund.
I think that's probably way
wrong I think it's probably I
think it's pry half that
interesting
and so I'd like to I like to
kind of go over the methodology
sure they presented and then get
your thoughts maybe miss waters
thoughts on that so so they.
They calculate TRD used this is
page two in the FIR they
calculate nineteen thousand
estimate about nineteen thousand
registered nurses in the state
of New Mexico.
I think Representative Scott
look this up here this morning
and and his number he got was
twenty one thousand so we're
we're in the ballpark.
but.
the bill says.
To qualify you have to be a full
time employee as a nurse at a
hospital in New Mexico.
And so to me this means that are
travelling nurses probably don't
qualify that means.
any nurses that are not
associate with a hospital so
your your your local docks to
you know like Duke city you know
what you're you're you're not
hospital associated docks that
have nurses they would not
qualify.
you're you're like nursing homes
that have nurses they would not
qualify your your urgent cares
that are not associate with a
hospital they would not qualify.
I mean I would say probably a
third to maybe half of the
nurses in the state would not
qualify so this should be
I have to us.
Can you can you hear my roommate
talking.
Okay a little bit.
Too much okay you know how much
that's been picked up on my mic
but anyway that's off the point
being madam chair I think that
probably a third to half the
nurses in the state one qualify
as this is written and so the
FIR is the fiscal cost is way
off so I guess the first
question is.
Would you agree with that
assessment and then number two.
is there any thought to perhaps
including those
are not associate with a
hospital you know you know what
was the methodology and putting
that that together Madam.
Thank you for that question
Representative Harper I will
defer to one of the experts on
on that.
Madam chair this is Linda Siegel
those numbers are totally off
there are about eighteen
thousand plus nurses that.
Actually have nursing licenses
in New Mexico less than fifteen
thousand somewhere in the range
of fifteen thousand seven
hundred I think actually live
here and.
May practice here we don't even
know if they are practice here
and so if you take fifty to
sixty percent of that number
your for hospital based nurses
and clearly the majority of
nurses.
In our state in most places work
in the hospital so we're talking
about numbers I think.
In the eight thousand range for
actual weight hospital based
nurses.
And and the reason that we
didn't and response to
Representative Harper's question
include all nurses is you know
we thought yes we probably sure
I'd and they all deserve it the
school nurses have been working
hard to clinics nurses every
every nurses worked exceedingly
hard but the pressure on the
hospital nurses are as glorious
that is just so tremendous that.
It's just a tiny token to say
thank you and thanks for staying
and working in our hospitals and
that's why we went with hospital
nurses.
And Deborah may have a comment
on that.
Madam chair Representative
Harper I concur with what Linda
said it does not include our
home hospice for example all the
myriad of practice settings it
is only hospital and I think
before Gloria to speaks about
the stressors.
This is true we yes in my view
from the association to
stabilize our current hospital
based RN's we I'm.
These numbers I think are going
to horrify all of us as we come
out the other side how many
nurses we truly have practicing
who are licensed in New Mexico
and practicing in our New Mexico
Hospital we know we have some at
least one rural hospital where
ninety five percent of their
nursing staff are travelers so
this is just to stabilize those
like war and others who have
stayed with the hospital system
throughout these last two years
an allegory speak as well.
Chair members of the committee
R. I appreciate.
Representative Harper that
you're looking at all of the
nurses in the state but when we
look at the bird in and the
behavioral health and the PTSD
that's going to be affecting
nurses it's going to be the
people in hospitals and I think
that the numbers are way off I
think he even looking at eight
thousand you know the literature
throughout the nursing.
Experience is that eighty five
to ninety percent of our
population works in in patient
settings.
And if you work in an urgent
care you're seeing that patient
for four hours five hours
sending them home sending them
elsewhere.
If you work in a clinic and I
think this might be something
that needs to be tweaked a
little bit a lot of the people
who have been working in clinics
have been called to inpatient
settings out of their area of
expertise and out of their
comfort zone still within their
scope but because it's all hands
on deck to in the graces the pin
pointed in patient and if
they've been working in the
hospital for that whole entire
year not only in during the
stress of watching people die
hoping people die with dignity
making sure they're not dying
alone making sure that they
aren't as scared as the can be
and should be.
Then at you know those people
should be considered as well so
that is something that will
probably have to be looked at in
in the application process I'm
not sure how this is going to be
distributed but there are
patients from our there are
nurses from other settings seven
point of that inpatient setting
but it is definitely the
inpatient hospital nurses who
have been taxed with the burden
of the loss of the use.
Asian families who are still non
COVID believers are accusing us
of lying to them telling us that
they don't have COVID in we're
just going to kill it when we
put them on the reading machine
it's it's been it's been a heck
of a year
so I think in trying to
stabilize.
Why hospital staff and maybe
give a little incentive to
people who are on that edge of
thinking well I can go be a
traveler and get paid the same
for the amount of burn out that
I have get paid more for that
just a little incentive to keep
a more at home in their
community and their hospital I
think it will go a long way.
Going to be.
Thank you madam chair absorbing
miss Walker Mr Siegel
And and I'll just say you know I
have a.
We have a very close family
friend which lives nearby who is
a nurse she's worked at UNM and
Prez and I think she was the
lead runner up two thousand
nineteen nurse of the year and
you know we hear stories from
her all the time so we we
totally understand.
And it's fascinating to you know
I spent several months in Guinea
you know concrete during the
Ebola outbreak helping with the
crisis there and and as
fascinating the people would run
into and say evil is not real or
it was made by the United States
and sent here you know I mean
it.
Are the same everywhere and it's
just it's just sad and.
You know you're there trying to
help people are you know
fighting against you in anyway
so I just want to say you know
all of us on this committee are
are so grateful for for the
works are great nurses do and
And I think this is what you say
a little.
A little thank you that perhaps
we could do to push back on on
all the ways that nurses are
being discouraged from from
working right now.
I I do see madam chair it looks
like Jennifer from LFC has her
hand raised maybe she wanted to
talk about the FIR would would
be appropriate to to ask her to
speak Madam let me see I do see
Jennifer's hand sh you are are
you will this be the conclusion
of your presentation okay sure
an effort to like to maybe
explain a little bit more about
your FIR.
Sure can you hear me Madam.
Absolutely I just wanted to say
thank you so much for bringing
that up madam chair
Representative Harper we will
certainly correct FIR if there's
any resources any of the experts
have out what percentage of
nurses working hospitals versus
not that would be very helpful
for us to site in the F. I. R.
we will certainly that correct
as we move this forward.
Thank you Jennifer I we all know
how hard you're working right
now so we appreciate all your
efforts in this regard.
It's it's very true so so thank
you madam chair though blasting
out of state because.
I got blown up during after we
table do veteran bills because I
would explain to folks on the
line how this committee works.
so just for fun so folks who
know in the tax committee every
bill that has a fiscal impact we
temporarily table.
because if we just let them all
out then appropriations would be
the ones that decide what goes
forward
because we can't we just have
gone out from the budget and I
would turn this committee into a
subcommittee of appropriations
we will do that we we look at
the end of the bill at at the
end of the year we have a list
of all the bills are tabled and
we work in a bipartisan way west
how much money we have available
to determine what
will we'll let out so this this
bill will be temporarily eleven
we tabled.
and and then we're getting we're
getting about to that point so
we'll we'll be getting together
student discussing and and and
if this if you have enough
capacity and and we can do this
I would I would suggest we
consider expanding it to more
than just hospital nurses but
with that madam chair thank you
for the time.
Thank you Representative
Representative Cadena.
Representative Cadena.
Let me see.
Representative Cadena.
Well that's all I mean I know
that she did want to speak maybe
her connection has is dropped
off I know that many of us have
been.
Offering from that any other
representatives wishing to
speak.
Okay Representative Cadena.
Just texted me and said she was.
On the line we can't hear you.
So.
I hear Representative today and
I know you can hear me as you
told me you could but we're not
hearing you.
So.
Okay.
Some problem I'm so sorry okay
Representative Martinez and
we'll see if maybe
representative Cadena can at her
situation resolved.
Representative Martinez.
I'm sorry I missed a missed
understood a text that I didn't
see correctly so.
But I'm sure that was
Representative Lujan seeking
okay so sorry Representative
Lujan did you wish to speak.
Representative Lujan.
Currently not Representative
Romero.
Well I do see a text from
Representative Lujan as well so.
Representative Lujan can you
hear me and I.
Madam chair representative Devin
okay.
Yea
Representative Cadena thank you
that's never our our.
I've often drop for video but
this time of somehow drop for
money my phone and laptop
because you're you I thank you
my apologies for my tech
difficulties and thank you to
the advocates and experts that
joined us this morning I just
wanted to follow up on a couple
of Representative Harper is
points and potentially interests
he has the expansion of this tax
policy but first madam chair and
again it my audio has been thank
you this morning I may have
missed this might speak to how
you made the decision to
consider this incentive as a tax
policy and not through any other
possible mechanism of using
federal funds for I am bonus you
might say or or hazard hazard
pay like how did you all come
down to using a tax credit to do
this great
Representative thank you for
that questions very good
question I'll refer it to Linda
Siegel thank you madam chair we
did talk about the possibility
of doing a bonus to every every
nurse in a hospital or a three
or four nurses throughout the
state and we were dissuaded from
that because it seems more
complicated with how how and who
would determine where that nurse
were did she or he work for the
that period of time and that's
why we ended up with the the tax
credit because then it would be
up to the taxation department to
verify that through that W. two
and some verification by the
hospital that that person had
worked there so we wanted to do
the bonus but we couldn't figure
out a way that wasn't extremely
bureaucratic.
Okay that's helpful madam chair
and expert my I just want to
clarify that is this a
refundable tax credit.
Representative yes it is.
Madam chair I don't see that in
the language but I also see
Representative Parker seeking is
that I'm not sure if you're
referring to something else
maybe I'm let me ask speak let
me refer to Rep Linda Siegel
okay.
Madam chair representative Dan
yeah it's a it's a credit off of
your income.
So you never right see see it
other than it comes right off
the top of your income
Representative.
So madam chair representative I
adore nurses I love nurses I
have assisted at the nursing
chosen families that are
listening but when I think about
the intention and impact you are
trying to have which I a hundred
percent a thousand percent
support I'm worried that we're
potentially not doing as much as
we could to get actual dollars
into the hands of folks that are
more than deserving in this
moment impart depending on
someone's filing status whether
their household size like that
may mean that they have a lesser
tax liability or potentially
a bigger tax return but it's not
I just want the public to
understand it's not like each of
these listening we'll be getting
a thousand dollars that they
didn't directly help otherwise
so I just wanted to raise that
question and then right because
again I when I've I've heard
from these experts and advocates
I was imagining that people walk
away with a thousand dollars as
that as that incentive as that
potentially bonuses that hazard
pay for what they've done and
and and like someone shared
earlier I've I've also had had
loved ones my.
My father died a year ago last
week of COVID after an extensive
stay in ICU and I just think of
how monumentally appreciative I
am for the nurses and other
folks that made sure they could
get him every second of care and
chassis had it surviving and
fortunately he did not that was
before the vaccines were widely
available.
But so that was my first point
is that this is not that the
nurses are going to get a
thousand dollars although I I
would I would hope that could be
possible in some other manner
the other piece they have and
this connects to make comments
around the rural health tax
provider credit as it's been
explained to me that kind of
incentive signing on bonuses
hourly rates being paid to
nurses to move into the
troubling system are gigantic so
even when I think about like
this thousand dollars a
traveling nurse could make that
in a matter of days so I again
appreciate that this somewhat
like someone that is a tiny
token but I'm not sure the tax
policy the tax system is that
the best way to demonstrated
tiny token especially since it
could be watered down based on
that filing status and when that
thousand dollars hardly makes a
dent against the other economic
incentives nurses are seeking to
move to different systems to
move in and out of hospital
cares to move into the traveling
system and when I think about
that I know that the name is a
seating I know for example that
CNA's are not nurses even though
they have that next to the title
but I think about like when we
look at the lower income levels
of the folks that are being paid
less that that thousand dollars
for instance to see an eight
could potentially be pretty
transformational because of how
long and how many hours they
have to work to make up
something like that so those are
I general comments and questions
about really trying to focus in
on getting dollars like this to
nurses but I would also add on
to Representative Harper's
questions are are are
expressions of interest in
expanding to nurses I would love
to see consideration to folks
like C. N. A.'s who are doing
some of also the back breaking
frontline high risk work but at
a much lower hourly rate so I
support the idea would love to
see some some focus and fix on
it if this is indeed does move
forward.
thank you madam chair I'm so
glad I finally got to join you
all in the ideal land.
You representative Cadena S. I'm
happy you were able to join us
as well I believe Representative
terra Lujan was trying to get on
is that correct Representative
Lujan.
Fortunately I don't thank you
madam chair yes Representative
Lujan.
Thank you I am having some
technical difficulties this
morning here and I just wanted
to say briefly before if I lose
connection I just want to thank
the sponsors for bringing this
piece of legislation forward my
mother is.
A registered nurse now will be
retired to two years but again
forty five years of service as a
nurse to our community hospital
in Santa Fe NM and her work
By what real community nursing
is about and.
taught me and others in our
community to the.
That we cannot take our
community hospitals and
community nursing nurses for
granted and there is a big
concern we have travel nurses
and such as a discrepancy with
pay in other.
I'm balanced in an equal
Practices that have been going
on for for many many years which
I have openly and she has taught
me to be against but during the
pandemic right now we know that
you know the numbers have only
on a multiplied and I just want
to say thank you to the sponsors
for for allocating away of of
how we can actually understand
this and maybe look and look for
some kind of relief for our
nurses are front miners and what
is going on right now very
critical in critical work but
you during the pandemic it's
only intensified said that's all
I want to thank you from the we
we section or something right
now at the I appreciate the time
madam chair.
Madam chair you're on mute.
Hi I'm on mute
Thank you for that discussion on
I want to thank the nurses who
joined us stand and all the
nurses in the state who have
been supporting us throughout
this very difficult time you
really have been in the trenches
and now it's been very hard for
you so I appreciate your help
continue willing just to support
the profession and continue in
the profession so
thank you and I'm ready to
entertain a motion.
Madam chair all up move to
lovingly and gently temporarily
table is called.
Thank you.
In that any opposition to the
Ebeling motion I see none so
thanks again for joining us and
safe safe safe and helping us to
all of you wellness to all of
you thank you.
Next we have
house bill eighty I believe
Representative Serrato as I'm
finished up or other work and
and Representative Dixon as well
so run house bill eighty angel
investment credit refundable.
One of you Representative
switched to begin.
I think it is started if that
works for you Representative.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
we also have the witness of
Jason Espinoza to help with any
questions.
Right so is it if we could
elevate Mr Espinoza that be
great.
Yes.
And.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
the to the committee for hearing
yesterday today and bring
forward the commerce and
economic development committee
sub for each B. eighty which is
amending that angel tax credit
this bill would change the
current level tax credit which
is set to expire in twenty
twenty six hi increases the cap
on eligible can company annual
gross to ten million from five
million increases the annual
aggregate the credit from two
million to ten million and
increases the credit for up to
forty percent for many
businesses and up to fifty
percent with those businesses
with a majority of ownership by
women or communities color and
then finally it would make the
tax refundable which I'm seeing
from other states like Minnesota
and New Jersey will attract a
number of investors from beyond
our state investing in companies
in New Mexico on you know this
is an aggressive the trip
attempt to attract capital from
outside of New Mexico encourage
investment especially in
businesses that are owned by
women and communities of color
especially since we are one of
six major communities of color
states in the nation you know we
spoken to a number of
entrepreneurs organizations that
argue that if New Mexico the
lack for good ideas it's just we
don't have the resources or the
capital to really invest in
those critical stages to make a
difference and again you know
this will expire currently set
to expire in three more fiscal
years on and so looking at it
from that perspective it's
almost a pilot to see if this
refundable map model would
actually work for us but at this
moment you know we are in a
moment that there's been a
significant increase in active
investors number investments and
in the mount invested following
the pandemic so we're hopeful
that this can also support
growth in our state as well with
that I believe those are opening
comments less Representative
Dixon you want to add anything
and we'll get we stand for
questions thank you
Representative Serrato will now
go to the audience and those in
opposition please raise your
hand.
I see no one in opposition those
in attendance to support bill
please raise your hand speak.
Okay Jennifer Weber.
Good morning chair Chandler and
committee members my name is
Jennifer Weber and I am here on
behalf of the New Mexico to
recovers in support of the H. B.
eighty which expands the angel
investment credits the chamber
has supported efforts to expand
this credit for years it's a
good program much more than it
currently does the chamber's
economic competitive analysis
and the state's twenty year
economic strategy highlight the
need to increase venture funding
in New Mexico in order to build
out our entrepreneurial
eco system and to create new
businesses and jobs as we work
to diversify our and our economy
New Mexico has only about one
third as much venture capital on
average is the rest of the
country in addition the chamber
believes that to make the state
more economically competitive we
must also address systemic
barriers that block the equality
of opportunity for all
communities in New Mexico we ask
for your support for HB thank
you.
Thank you miss Webber heather
make Daniel.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee I apologize my
name is Terrence it's Gerald I'm
so okay.
The chamber.
but I'll keep it brief we're
really pleased to support this
bill angel investors help take
those innovative projects and
taken to the next level as full
fledged operations businesses
that offer something new and
unique employer community
members and of course contribute
to our local economy we're in
strong support this bill and the
economic growth that will invite
and we we urge the committee
support as well thank you.
thank you ms McDaniel and we see
if there's anyone else no I
don't see any other hands raised
will be now go to the committee
Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
to the Sanchez I had the
opportunity to speak with
Representative Serrato earlier
today to discuss this bill which
I'm supportive of and we're
we're trying to find capital I'm
just curious just because the
FIR had kind of stated a bit but
just going into the fact that
not much of this fund has been
utilized less than half in the
past up to twenty twenty is what
we see from the New Alice's on
against personal income tax I'm
just curious with the increase
that you're looking at to ten
million how is this actually
going to
you know get out as far as being
able to you know see that
opportunity and and sees that
when we see that the numbers
right now are currently low.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you Representative Romero here
for our conversations in the
past and also for that wonderful
question what I have is
empirical evidence more than you
know anything health at this
point which is really the case
with refundable because we one
of three that would be doing
this in New Jersey they pass
this back I believe is twenty
nineteen and they're cap was at
twenty eight twenty million
produce significantly higher
than ours for how much was the
the cap on it and what they had
also experiences we experience
which is that not it was not
prior to being refundable it was
not being fully utilized and and
then the investors were somewhat
lower and then once they had
shifted it they found that it
was completely utilized and they
have repeated
remasters coming back because
they typically eyes as you know
very well the typically have
specific industry or niche
focuses and so they would
continually come back in and re
invest in that way and so they
would see that over the year
that that was happening so for
the first time in their history
of having an angel tax credit
that it would actually was
actually fully utilized and yes
so that would that's probably
the one that I would give an
example to that I would point to
thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I think part of
it too is just being able to
help folks understand what the
benefits are and how to
translate that to folks coming
in and and utilizing their funds
to reinvest into New Mexico and
I think that's part of some of
the challenge one that we do
have some great tax credits
available like this
there's just a lack of education
I think in some of it so as far
as just the community of of
angel investors that we
currently have and how this
would sort of help us expand can
you just describe what what it
is that we would be doing to be
able to expand that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative do you mean like
the outreach that would shift or
do you mean
that we're just perhaps those
that are already invested how
they might be able to benefit a
bit more from this as well.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative you know what
we were talking with various
investors about this and and I
mean I had it to do so as well
as I think a deeper insight into
this but briefly when we were
talking to investors of on this
already they were very eager
because they were already
investing in New Mexico and and
there are multiple groups here
in Santa Fe in other places as
well and they the again I think
I said this to but their first
reaction was this is great I can
re use I can use that that
refundable to re invest in this
because for them this is the
money they used to invest in
businesses on K. would you like
to get into more details I left
anything out.
Certainly madam chair
Representative Romero members
the committee I just real quick
just to reintroduce myself
because I have the chance this
morning suggested as a today
representing both New Mexico
idea which is the state's
economic development
professional association as well
as the New Mexico technology
council
so just to hit on those points
are you fat Representative
Romero what we've identified and
what you mentioned in your
comments as though the lack of
exit the state capitol in the
state so if you look at the
fiscal impact report as you
noted the tax credit as averaged
about one point two million in
angel investment credits between
twenty seventeen to twenty
twenty at the cap is at two
million so really what that
signals to us and the economic
development community as well as
the small business community is
that we may have exhausted and
reached the peak of accessing
that capital here in New Mexico
because you were still carrying
you know small business start
ups report difficulty reading
here from venture capital firms
that there still a lack of early
stage funding available in the
states consists Pacific lead to
that point you know when we look
at the amount of angel investors
in New Mexico in the southwest
region so when you look at New
Mexico Arizona Colorado Utah and
Nevada they're the only account
for three point eight percent of
all the angel investors across
the country with that when you
look at taxes alone they have
four percent and so really what
the bill does with the
refundable portion again just
open up to out of state
investors similar to us looking
at economic base jobs we want to
incentivize out of state money
coming it be invested into the
state so that we can grow the
grow the pie here in New Mexico
and the one of the things she
recently the security US
securities exchange commission
noted that regions such as the
Mexico with fewer high net worth
individuals qualified to make
these investments have a
particularly large negative
impact on minority and women
owned businesses and so I really
want to plot the representatives
with this bill that included
the.
At section really increased
incentive incentives to make
qualified investments and
majority of women are percent of
color on businesses and it does
benefit the existing investors
as well as create creates an
increased incentives to right
now you can take your credit not
to exceed twenty five percent of
the qualified investment under
the proposed bill if it's a
qualified investment major women
under person of color on
business that can go up to fifty
percent and then overall does
increase it from twenty five to
forty I'm so we really see the
benefits of access to the out of
state capital and then creating
a increased incentive for people
within the state but really we
see the beneficiary of this
legislation not just the
investors but as the
entrepreneurs who are seeking to
raise the capital they're
ultimately the beneficiary if we
can increase that risk risk
capital and state.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and thank you
Jason and that brings you to
really my next question I think
is really focused on how that
equity piece works you know
we've been trying to sort of
tightness up ones and we
promised taxpayers in regards to
cannabis that we would be
spending any money and so we
were able to bring it in on on
some of these equity programs
that we have and I'm just
curious how you know it talks
about being able to look at
procedures and rules how how
does that sort of tie in to to
getting again that capital out
to the targeted businesses that
you're looking toward and also
could it potentially help our
cannabis entrepreneurs as well.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
thank you Representative for the
question so just going to where
this kind of stemmed from
Minnesota has a different
program and how to encourage
investment in communities of
color and women owned businesses
and you know what what's
interesting about that one is
that it hasn't been effective to
be quite Frank part of it is
that they have an amount in
there I in that the tax credit
it's set aside and if that's not
fully utilizing it opens it up
to any in that any companies
that point that's available to
that really hasn't worked to
this point which is why we
started looking at instead a ten
percent increase our what's
refundable to encourage again
just that direct relief and in
my experience talking with
various flat again businesses
that are looking to invest you
know I came across a cosmetics
company that was with no one the
pharmaceutical that working on a
madam Li Yuxin you know.
Product you know that was with
no another one that was
supporting with restaurants that
was you know thank you know
person of color so again we we
see that these are you know the
majorities that are owned on
that and we we utilize the
language for another bill on
that creek could deal with some
of the concerns that taxed red
hat on to make sure they could
get that the important
information from federal
databases and others to make
sure they have that Jason did
you want to speak to the rest of
the representatives question
that.
Slipping my mind sorry.
Madam chair representative
members of the committee at the
Representative Serrato answered
that really well and I think you
know any time you know I I think
related to outreach and other
things anytime you create an
extra incentive it's gonna cost
investors to take a second look
is one of the things that this
credit does is it lowers the
risk of that investor because
they they're they're getting
this tax credit and so we can
lower that risk potential risk
they're gonna take a closer look
at these types of companies and
maybe make them an investment
they may not have in this type
of business.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I'm I'm really
curious to see how this performs
and I'm grateful to you having
looked at it and you know trying
to figure out how we can bring
more capital into the state and
with that I'll just listen to
what Representative Harper has
structure is I know the in depth
analysis of thank you madam
chair thank you Representative.
Thank you Representative Romero
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair
thank you.
and representative for bringing
this forward
I have a just a couple comments
and couple questions and maybe
some.
I'm I'm a little worried that
maybe what you're proposing here
might actually have the opposite
effect in some ways so what what
see if you agree with me or not.
okay so first
just to kind of set the table so
we have exemptions we have
productions and we have credits.
And exemptions.
you know you sick of like we
don't you know we had exemption
for our wages for the gross
receipts tax that an exception
means we don't collect any data
on it it's not part of the tax
basis is not even included.
otherwise every time I got a
paycheck I have to log in to TRD
is website and put in there that
I got salary but it's exemption
gross receipts tax.
Thank.
No deductions.
deductions come off you know
like when you're doing your your
ten forty when you're doing your
personal taxes you have like a
standard deduction you know you
can deduct your your charitable
expenses whatever does come off
the amount of tax double income.
and then you take that number
multi a tax rate.
So essentially for every.
Donor of adoption you get like
fifteen percent off on your
taxes something like that
because it's reducing them out
that's taxed by your tax rate
whatever tax rate it's.
And and we have some more
information about about
deductions or do about
exemptions.
What credits are really kind of
the most powerful way to.
I'm give someone money from the
state because it's really a one
to one almost a credit is comes
off the very end when you
calculate how much tax you will
not have a credit.
You apply to that amount.
And so having a an endorsement
tax credit says a lot already
that we're really trying to spur
this this gross it comes
offer the bottom not off the top
like adoption.
And we've talked for a long time
this committee over the years
about whether this
credit should be refundable or
not.
And and one of the big arguments
that I've heard against this
over the years.
Is the reason you would make it
refundable.
So that if someone does you know
if they don't have they don't
owe money to the state they
would actually get money.
Given to them for this
investment.
Right if if I'm a business owner
or I done well and I'm I'm a
venture capitalist and and I I
the state you know fifty
thousand in taxes.
but you know I get an angel
investment credit you know up to
sixty two thousand twelve and
I'm losing that twelve and a
half percent what current law
says you can still move that
forward every you can move that
for for five years so I I think
it's very.
it's set up to really benefit
but now we're saying we're gonna
pay you that twelve thousand
dollars.
we're we're we're gonna take
state money and pay these these
investors
and then it also opens up like
you all set madam chair and
panelists to out of state folks
now folks who have no New Mexico
tax liability now we're gonna
give them.
Sixty two thousand five hundred
dollars for every you know
qualifying investment they've
got.
I'm so.
I guess madam chair and and and
palest.
Do we do we really think it's a
good idea to take New Mexico tax
dollars.
And send it to someone.
Out of state or.
Or if the purpose is really to
spur investment maybe maybe the
state should just invest I don't
I don't know help me understand
why we think.
Over the many years we've all
thought this is a bad idea help
me understand why we think it's
a good idea now.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for the
question you know I I I hear
your concern and I think the
biggest reason what what shifted
in my mind yeah I have been here
as long as you know you are the
chairman has so but from my
perspective on the big ships is
seeing again what's been what's
affected what's been effective
in other states and what's
effective in New Jersey this is
a good example is what's wanted
to is that in this moment of you
know increasing investment that
we're seeing you know across the
board I think is an opportunity
and again this would be set to
expire you know we look at try
to finagle language to make it
more of a pilot program but
because of the existing
expiration date it was already
party pretty much modeled on
their so from that perspective I
feel like it's an opportunity to
see how this would really work
for us from another aspect of
this you know.
We are seeking an investment in
the early stages of a company's
growth when it is that well hi
Representative postharvest and
so we do have the state
investment council does have
their private equity fund that
they do you know invested
however there is that you know
there is a.
A tendency to.
They will very very conservative
with to those funds because of
because it is yes I see what
they what they do with their
funding this does give us the
opportunity to encourage more I
would you know private
investment in the state of New
Mexico to encourage and and that
in of itself you know will.
We're business community in that
sense so you know there is a
difference you know there and I
I do advocate for you know state
invested in our in our companies
as well and you know there's
other things that you know but
with that I'm working on with
the representative and and with
you know others as well to
increase that element is to but
we really want to see growth in
our in our state's businesses I
would say that you need to
encourage private investment and
again you know hearing from
folks that are the you know are
in the state and investing in
hearing that this would go back
into growing more businesses you
know I don't necessarily see it
is just winding the pockets of
people that are outside right
state I see this as encouraging
business and in entrepreneurs
within our state.
Thank you madam chair and and
Representative Serrato I I I
appreciate that I write my story
coming from and I and I
understand we need to have more
capital S. I. I know this is a
problem I just really think
making this credit refundable is
not the right solution of that I
mean you look at our tax code
and that refundable credits are
usually for the the low income
folks who don't really have a
tax liability I mean you have to
and and that was done on purpose
right for our New Mexico state
income tax you have to make
about forty thousand dollars
before you start paying income
tax if you make less than that
you actually get a that's a
negative income tax rate up to
ten percent rebate money given
back to you right and so in
general refundable tax credits
are are bad pot tax policy when
it comes to spurring economic
development that kind of thing
so so I'm just.
I'm just that fact is we a
little pause I'm a little
concerned about that
I'm.
The other I guess the thing that
I wanted to bring up pricing
perhaps we're we might be going
in the wrong direction on this
bill.
is is correct if I'm wrong but
right now current law.
Is that for every dollar
invested by qualified investor
twenty five percent of that so
twenty five cents
can be done their credit for
twenty five cents I guess their
taxes.
and that is up to a total of
sixty two thousand five hundred
dollars.
So you do the reverse mass right
sixty two thousand times five
hundred.
Six two thousand five hundred
times for because twenty five
percent means so much invest two
hundred fifty thousand dollars.
And have this benefit.
Right if they if they invest
more than that they no longer
get the benefit of the credit
because it's limited to sixty
two thousand five hundred
dollars does does that make
sense.
All right so so now in the
proposed legislation we're
saying that for every one dollar
invested it could be fifty
percent credit so every one
dollar invested you get fifty
cents of a credit.
Well that sounds great except
you're still keeping the same
cap.
The two thousand five hundred
dollars.
So now you only get a benefit up
to a contribution of a hundred
twenty five thousand dollars.
So who then would donate more
than a hundred twenty five
thousand dollars and lose the
credit.
The benefit the credit so you're
you're you're effectively and
maybe I'm misunderstanding this
but to me it looks like you're
effectively.
Gonna get investments cut in
half.
Because they're still count for
this six two thousand five
hundred dollars my am I reading
that correctly.
The thank you madam chair in the
Representative you know I would
see this I remember when pastors
are destined I'm just looking at
the tax credits the receiving
they're looking at that the
value of the company the you
know the the long term growth of
this company as well and so this
is to again to attract folks to
our state into again this this
expanded refundable element
which had not existed before so
what I'll expected it is that
you you know you're looking at
from two angles on to is that
it's refundable that really
finishes I think that thank you
as well Jason did you want to.
Madam chair representative
Harper members the committee.
Yeah just to add on to that and
respond a little quickly to just
regarding the comment about the
refundable nature the credit
there are two targeted economic
development credits that are
currently refundable both the
high wage jobs tax credit is
refundable as well as the film
tax credit so there are existing
programs that are existing
economic development programs
are refundable and and if this
we're going to affect this would
be the third and I think when
we're looking at that section
we're we're increasing the the
I'm presenters a qualified
investment from twenty five to
either forty or fifty percent
based on the investment type.
That needs to sort of be looked
at in the context of the
refundable portion to because
right now is you said they'd
have to carry that forward it
for five years it's not
refundable I and I think it's
Representative Serrato seven
we've talked to investors refers
specifically what will say the
in state folks if they can get a
higher percentage that's
refundable that's money that
they're then going to reinvent
best backed into the small
business start up community so
it's somewhat of sort of but
creating a virtuous circle
within the investor the company
in the state of New Mexico by
allowing them to really increase
the amount of money that they
have to make that capital
investment so we see that as a
benefit that we think will
actually increase dollars when
and.
Yes so so madam chair and
Representative Serrato and and
mistrust and also.
With all with great respect I I
completely disagree with that
if you want to increase the
percentage of the credit you
have to also increase the
maximum amount that they get
back for each qualified
investment.
otherwise you know if an
investor says okay I've got a
million dollars.
and and I'm gonna get a fifty
percent but I got this cap here
they're gonna invest are twenty
five thousand this company on my
five thousand this company
artist of thousand in this
company.
Under this proposal instead of.
Two hundred fifty thousand this
company and for fifty thousand
this company in terms of
thousand in this company so
you're you're gonna hurt the
amount of investment that one
company could receive by moving
forward with this approach.
if if I was doing this and I'm
not I'm not and I was going to
increase the cap from twenty
five to fifty percent I would
double.
The the amounts that each person
can get back in the qualified
You know that the the split Max
when I can get that but for a
qualified investments the tax
credit.
And and you did bring up we do
have to.
To tax credit it's that our
economic development related
Jenna reimbursable one of the
film tax credit yeah there's a
high wage jobs tax credit I've
been on record for years saying
that both of those are top work
terrible credits and terrible
tax policy
I think our state would do offer
government does that
so I'm just trying to be
consistent here I I think the
current angel tax credit is a
great credit.
I think it helps.
could be improved yes
I don't think this is the way to
do it
make it refundable or changing
the credit percentage in this
way.
But I want to commend the panel
want to commend the
Representative bringing this
forward and and being focused on
try to how do we improve our
provincial and Katelyn vestments
I think working together over
the interim.
Coming to rest up
and presenting you're gonna
you're gonna talk a lot of
people have been around the
block many times to allow people
to contribute and you'll have a
great bill that everyone will be
happy to pass during the sixty
day.
so madam chair thank you for the
time.
Thank you Representative Harper
let me see if there are any
other.
Questions.
So no
I just remind everyone this one
does and so out with the fiscal
impact and I I did speak with
the Sanchez in advance and let
them know that our practices to
temporary table all of these and
then we kind of huddle at the
end and talk about what what
item seem appropriate for
packager are moving forward so
thank you very creative thinking
representatives and I appreciate
your interest in an attention to
something that I do think it's
very important and so I went
with that I am happy to hear a
motion moved to temporarily in
the table.
The second.
Second.
Any opposition.
I see no opposition thanks for
thanks for coming to our
committee look forward to seeing
you again no doubt and that will
be going on to our next item.
Determine the.
Okay.
We are now on.
I am let's see the item one
forty six it is.
Yushin of copper tax I believe
Representative todos esses in
the audience if we could later
maybe is elevated.
I am madam chair thank you thank
you very much the floor is yours
Representative thank you madam
chair thank you committee for
your attention and your time and
so I'd like to introduce I I've
got to expert witnesses on that
I'd like to invite madam chair
yes please hello.
Did you catch those names madam
chair the same again I yes
Representative not no problem
it's T. J. through he'll.
And Tim some motor okay.
T. J. Trujillo and Tim Zamora if
you could elevate them Kimberly
that be great.
Right.
Thank you madam chair you just
tell me when I got the green
light you have the green light
Representative thank you madam
chair and and committee today
I'm from us.
The committee to
entertain
I do pass I'm using you guys on
that we'll talk about that in a
minute but if this is going to
be an act relating to taxation
find to provide a temporary
distribution of taxes imposed of
percent or resource tax act on
copper to counties for coppers
is severed and so basically
Madam chair of committee what is
happening is.
Thank you this is very much or
heavily.
weighed in as far as income with
our copper mining.
Industry and so in twenty twenty
our because of COVID they shut
the mine down in in April I
think it was in March that the
ship of the money down and it in
this state closed until twenty
twenty one January of twenty
twenty one that.
The income for for the counties
is based on production and
because of production it wasn't
since we don't have any
production or very little
production in that year it
impacted our County tremendously
so what I wanted to do madam
chair and committee is asking
for this is a temporary
distribution it would sunset in
two years it would just help us
relieve the budget impact that
had for County and and only ask
for fifteen percent of the net.
Money that's going into the
general fund after the
distribution so I'd like for TJ
three zero two it if you with
your permission madam chair to
expand on that chair Mister
Trujillo.
Morning madam chair good morning
members of the committee.
Today I'm appearing before you
in my capacity as an attorney
with trio law group.
The as an attorney I practice
administrative law natural
resources law and tax law
more poorly today it's a
pleasure to have opportunity to
help us this is my friend from
my hometown Grant County be able
to take a look at a critical
issue for them.
Madam chair of.
We respect of respect to keep
things up to the point and and
respective type timing issues
you have and managing committee
simply safer right now and is
that the crux of the built in
section two
of the bill that really is
pretty straightforward and and
what it does I leave the details
for questions and and responded
at a future point to some of the
details if necessary thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Mr Heo does Mr
tomorrow wish to add anything.
Yes madam chairman that you're
one thank you very much for
having a state house bill one
forty six is to mention by
Representative that I says is it
provides temporary relief to
Grant County our copper
production taxes is a
significant portion of the
revenue that goes on.
Supports our
operations in the inter inter
county
the only other.
Revenue source that is higher
than the property tax to the
revenue due to our copper
production is property tax we
have lost over one point two
million dollars since July of
twenty nineteen and I expect
by this summer
We will have lost almost one
point seven million dollars that
these losses it and they've
increased every year.
since twenty nine July of twenty
nineteen are losses of increased
every year and I expect that's
going to that's going to improve
on but we're not there yet and
and that is why it's just a
temporary.
The this temporary leave will
help us significantly to
continue our operations for
County and pending any questions
madam chair woman it is that
order that's all I have right
now.
Thank you Mr more
Representative Terrazas to do
one at anything before I go to
the audience.
Okay.
I will now go to the audience I
guess there yeah I just wanna
make sure you're there.
there I just I didn't push my
mute button I apologize so much
your just a couple quick points
I this this the distribution
chains would start on July first
twenty twenty two and and on
June thirtieth twenty twenty
four a matter of two years like
I said and the estimated revenue
impact for FY twenty two would
be zero but FY twenty three
twenty twenty three would be for
about five hundred twenty five
thousand if FY twenty twenty
four five hundred forty thousand
and then it would sunset so I
just wanted to.
Show that it's a modest ask and
it's it's more for the relief in
in the middle in in their budget
so with that Madam question
madam chair I stand for
questions thank you let's go to
the audience I see a hand up who
I assume is in favor only
Trujillo.
Twenty Trujillo please.
Can you hear me Madam I can't
thank you good morning madam
chair members of the committee
my name twenty twenty on the
registered lobbyist for Freeport
mac Moran Grant County the
copper company the in grand
county.
Just a quick note hello I want
to make it to the three point
stance in strong support of this
legislation.
Let me make it clear reports
that in anyway benefiting from
this legislation this
legislation does not increase or
decrease what we owe on the
staff Freeport has always
supported the communities in
which we do business there what
this legislation does is puts a
one time mandate to the
significant budget reductions
that breaks down is Senator
when the chief operations shut
down in April of twenty twenty
do COVID.
State budget forecasts for
twenty twenty two on the
resource excise tax is about
seven point six million report
an average pays about five
million of that per year the
take you fifty percent of the
money to the Freeport pays out
of grand county would be a
doctor involve part five hundred
thousand dollars for two years.
Thank you Mr Trujillo anyone
else in support and then we'll
go to opposition anyone else in
support.
But I'm the one who wishes to
speak in opposition please raise
your hand.
I see no comments we'll go back
the committee now.
Are there analysts are the
committee members who would like
wish to speak to the bill.
Hey I'm trying to raise my hand
to trouble okay okay.
Representative Strickler.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative process
You know this this pandemic it
really did so everything off
kilter San Juan county so I'm Y.
we we really had a.
shortage of everything from
steel to copper you name it cost
of materials and labor have gone
up and when the money shut down
that's that is it is a cash flow
for this for the for the county
so I understand why you're doing
this it's a it's a short term.
It's a help so give you a little
relief
and appreciate your brain for a
I don't know if we have the
capacity for this or not but
it's a it's a it's a I think
it's a reasonable request we
have a lot of solar projects in
San Juan County and and they've
they've been delayed
dramatically because of of
material shortage so thanks
happen and the.
Thank you very much of Madam
chair and Representative trusts.
You representative
Representative Representative
Scott.
Thank you madam chair
Representative.
What.
If this legislation was to move
forward what percentage of the
total annual county budget what
we would be the representative
was just half million dollars.
R. Madam chair representative
I'm gonna go ahead and let our
expert witness times a more a
our county manager there speak
to that building.
Yes thank you and for the
question act to kind of put.
That run the numbers here real
quick but what are general fund
is approximately fourteen.
Really fourteen million a a it
could fluctuate a little bit
from there five hundred thousand
would be a small portion.
Considering
fourteen million but the overall
that we received overall that we
received from copper production
we're at.
We we typically receive between
sixteen to twenty percent of our
budget.
So what we're looking at is just
the losses that we've received
when I say we're gonna be
looking at one point seven by
the end of the by the end of
June that that is just the
losses that we received to the
five hundred thousand would be
of five hundred thousand of
about forty million.
Okay thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr chair that answers
my question thank you thank you.
Mr of representative madam chair
for that.
Madam.
Representative Harper sorry
about that.
Representative Harper did you
wish to speak or did I
misunderstand now I was muted
that's what you're telling me.
Anyone else wish to speak on
this item Representative
Montoya.
Madam chair I just moved to
temporarily table with the very
temporary on the.
Okay
we have a motion to temporary
tables is there a second and I
probably don't even need to ask
the the line.
But all second anyway chair.
Anyone in opposition discussion
madam chair of course I'm sorry
I didn't see your hand
Representative my hand wasn't up
thank you madam chair sure thank
you.
It's up now yeah but it wasn't a
but I spoke yeah okay.
I had Representative sorry thank
you very much madam chair
representative that assisted
just this reading the.
The bill I think this is just an
ingenious way to to provide
relief for Grant County.
And you got you know seven dash
one dash six point twenty.
and it just it just shows you
how.
How cumbersome are our taxes are
as it relates to to extraction
there's there's four taxes
involved in this section the.
Oil and gas conservation tax act
the oil and gas emergency school
tax act the oil and gas at a
lower in production tax act and
the oil and gas severance tax
act
We go to you know this summer we
kind of look at all of those I
prefer to have one tax that
equals the same of all those for
you know
Anyway my question madam chair a
Representative says does is
grant kind of the only county
that mines copper this would
only affect one county at a
thirty three.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative my friend yes Sir
we're the only county Madam
chair representative of that
produces copper and so it's it's
important that to that was
teasing earlier that I wanted to
pass this to the really small
ask I was teasing earlier I know
the guys temporally table there
most everything and so I was
just teasing but yes Sir
Madam chair representative Grant
County is the only place you can
get copper out of in New Mexico
thank you madam chair of the US
and then it was mentioned as to
why there's a stress on the
county budget is that in
relation to the.
To the copper market or or what
is the.
What is the reason for the
stress on the county budget out
dining grant Madam chair
representative no Sir actually
it was because during when the
when when COVID hit
I'm gonna tell you that Freeport
did.
At the time the right thing to
shut the mine down we had a Cup
of an outbreak and so to be
responsible three point one
ahead and set the operations
down but unfortunately that of
course it's the the county
budget because they're so as you
heard the amendment the county
measure express is twenty
percent of the budget so when
your tax basis or excuse me
revenues based is twenty percent
and it's based on on production
and they shut the mine down that
just and and and shut it down in
March the last nine months of a
production in a year three
quarters of your years is gone
it trong the impacted our our
county and so this this was a
way Madam chair representative
of that we could put as as a Mr
to hill earlier spoke a bandaid
on this problem it's not going
to make them whole but it'll
definitely give them the relief
that they need and although we
know
you know it's for out of the
fourteen million that that he
was talking about this is this a
small amount but that other
money is is is is accounted for
and this is the money that they
need for other you know to to
continue and handle roads and
other projects for the general
fund and so we appreciate you
I'm asking that question madam
chair representative.
Representative my.
Thank you madam chair
representative that I says
appreciate the time manager
thank you Representative I just
have a question and maybe a
couple of comments
Representative good.
Communities around the money
receive any our money's any
federal support any other
additional kinds of
income as a result of the
pandemic can someone and if so
how much money.
So madam chair and general
administrative yes they did
although it comes with hand
cuffs in in that it can only be
used for covert relief or COVID
situations and so the and all
that your amended all that the
our our expert witness from the
manager's office speak but this
this that's the difference is
that that money that you're
talking about comes with with
stipulations where is this money
that we're talking about would
come back to the general fund
and they could use it for other
things outside of COVID direct
direct comment issue so I'll let
him answer that further if you
don't mind madam chair yes I
would very much like that thank
you Mr is more.
Yes madam chair we we did
receive the county did receive
the
our overall package of five
point two million five point two
million two point six in this
first year that we have received
and then two point six will
probably come this summer later
on this summer what we have used
that for is it just like
Representative that says mention
is for items that were directly
a result of the pandemic we have
not used it for is anything for
our just our operational budget
to run our roads or to run our
general operations step and
that's where that's where a five
hundred thousand is it is a
small portion of of our of our
forty million dollar budget but
it is so you do and if it was
five hundred thousand dollars
capable to buy material to put
on our you know over seven
hundred miles of dirt road that
we have so any any assistance is
appreciated.
Thank you for that answer Mr
Zamora and Representative well I
didn't I don't believe all that
money was quote could handcuff
the money not right about that
Mr I mean Madam.
It is eight hand cut it but it
does have to be related to
pandemic related and and what we
have not done here Grant County
is put that toward our general
appropriations to fund types of
like our our our our material or
equipment for the road
department is is a perfect
example but it is definitely
pandemic related.
And Mr city manager are you not
aware that the federal
government will be providing all
sorts of infrastructure support
in the in the coming years and
no doubt Grant County will be
eligible for some of that money
would you not agree that there's
going to be quite a lot of money
flowing in to local governments
as well as a state that I am
madam chair I absolutely hope so
as I absolutely hope so in.
Thank you for those answers
Representative Terrazas of the
for any closing brief comments
before the I think there's a
temporary table out there my not
right yes okay the other brief
comments before the doctor just
a brief comment is it's only
fifteen percent of the net
that's why it's so small madam
chair and and so thank you for
considering the temporary table
we hope that we can gain the
community excuse me the
committee saw support and then
bundling up us up on our small
portion that we need that would
help all of our of our citizens
of Grant County thank you so
much thank you any opposition to
the temporary table.
I see no opposition the bill is
temporary table we are now on
house bill one sixty seven
chairwoman Georgene Louis is
here chairwoman do you have any
expert witnesses with you thank
you madam chair yes Richard
Hughes of you will raise your
hand please we can promote you
to a panelist.
And thank you madam chair for
accommodating my schedule we're
also having our committee as
well of course.
Floor is yours representative
one analyst great thank you so
health bill one sixty seven
would allow
And amount paid to be credited
against tax due to the state to
an Indian tribe if there is a
transaction that occurs on
Indian land so we're talking
here about gross receipts sales
compensating or similar tax that
are levied by Indian tribes and
I I can let my experts Mr Hughes
also expand on this
Representative.
All right thank you woman
Richard Mr Hughes.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Lewis members of
the committee we appreciate the
opportunity to present this
bill.
To the committee today I'm here
is the attorney for the pueblo
of Santa Ana.
This bill house bill one sixty
seven is intended to facilitate
the ability of tribes in the
state to expand and diversify
their economic base used by
enabling them to try to attract
motor vehicle dealerships to
establish facilities on their
lands when center began to look
into this possibility however
the problem of double taxation
quickly became apparent as a
major obstacle to the prospect.
The tribal attain some revenue
from a lease to a dealership but
would also want to establish a
text string from sales of
vehicles that are made by the
dealership.
But those sales would also be
subject to the state's motor
vehicle excise tax four percent
tax on the the sales net of.
Right it's and no dealer we want
to locate on tribal lands yes
the sales of its of its vehicles
we're going to be taxed both by
the state and by the trial
sensually doubling the tax
burden on those sales.
Essentially no one would buy
from such a facility and no deal
which would invest the enormous
amount of money that
establishing a dealership one of
those circumstances would
require.
I should say that this
legislature has an excellent
record of working with tribes to
facilitate economic development
on tribal lands in to allow
tribes to create tax revenue
streams otherwise would not
exist.
AS in the areas of gross
receipts tax gasoline tax
cigarette tax coal and other it.
This bill simply follows in the
well established path while
allowing tribes are able to
attract motor vehicle dealers to
their lands to impose taxes on
sales of those vehicles that
would then be credited against
the state motor vehicle excise
tax.
Well we expect that this would
have at the very most very
modest impact on the state's
revenues could be very
substantial for the tribes are
able to take advantage of.
I would note that this bill does
not create any advantage the
tribally located dealerships but
it merely levels the playing
field.
It makes it feasible for
dealerships to operate
profitably on tribal lands when
it's they find in their
advantage to do so.
Thank you would be happy to
respond to questions.
Thank you Mr Hughes are Carolyn
Lewis any concluding remarks
before we go to the audience
thank you madam chair we're
ready for questions okay great
all those in favor of the bill
please raise your hand.
Eighty Bullington is.
Thank.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is JD bowling
to speaking on behalf of the
pueblo governors the registered
lobbyists and the public gonna
supports this legislation we
applaud the sponsor for bringing
it forward while it has an
obvious benefit to the public
Santa Ana it is written in such
a way that other pueblos can
benefit from this legislation
and we urge strong support for
the bill thank you thank you
Randy trainer.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members Randy trainer
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico automotive dealers
association.
The dealers association supports
the reasoning and purposes of
house bill one sixty seven we
urge your approach thank you
thank you Mr trainer three
setter.
Thank you madam chair members of
the industry and on behalf of my
clients hello Santa Clara okay
we get this let me.
We strongly support the
legislation.
We believe it's important to
help eliminate that possibility
about double taxation the state
of Missouri thank you very much
thank you Mister said or anyone
else in wishes to speak in
support.
Now in opposition anyone wishing
to speak in opposition.
Okay.
Go back the committee.
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair and
Chair Lewis you're you're
bringing another great tax bill
from of our committee are you
sure you want to join our
committee.
Madam chair and Representative
Harper thank you but I have my
hands pretty full right now.
Of now I I can understand and
appreciate that so.
I just wanted to give a quick
example of how this is really
good tax policy and essentially
is asking state in Mexico to
treat the pueblos like we treat
every other state in the union
so I mean we all know that when
you buy a car in New Mexico you
don't pay gross receipts tax
you'll pay sales tax.
You pay motor vehicle excise
tax.
And in New Mexico that's four
percent and I think three
percent goes to the general fund
and then the other percent split
half and half between the state
road fund and the local road
fund.
Now what happens if you buy a
car out of state.
Well if you buy a car in and
like Arizona
and you pick it up in Arizona.
You have to pay the Arizona
motor vehicle excise tax.
Right.
But when you bring it over to
New Mexico start using it here
and register it here.
New Mexico's gonna say Hey you
bought a new car we're gonna
charge you tax well.
Well okay one minute here we're
we're we're doing double
taxation now you're you're
already pay taxpayers owner.
So what what New Mexico does is
it gives you a credit against
the tax that you paid in
Arizona.
And so so just speaking broadly
if
if the tax rate in whatever
place you bought the car was two
percent when you pay that two
percent tax their new bring arts
New Mexico register it will give
you a credit for that two
percent rate so you'll end up
paying two percent to New Mexico
you pay a total of four percent
all together.
And then the other the other
extreme what say there's like a
seven percent tax in the state
are you purchased the car you
pay seven percent there.
you bring the card in New Mexico
and you get a credit for the
entire amount.
Mexico doesn't get any tax but
you paid seven percent
elsewhere.
So this is important because it
speaks to Mr Hughes comment that
this doesn't create a methadone.
Some reverse incentive to
purchase a vehicle on public
land.
And so here the simple being
you know what state someone buys
a Tesla dot on tribal land.
they would pay the the the
vehicle excise tax that public
jurisdiction has.
And.
And then if we pass this bill
just like if you got out of
state you get a credit against
the New Mexico tax so if the
public rate was two percent.
You have to pay two percent when
you register the car as well as
you're paying four percent
total.
So it's not like I'm gonna rush
to the public to buy a car
because I'm gonna pay less tax
because in the end I'm still got
to pay for percent.
And in fact if the public rate
is higher than four percent
that's a disincentive because I
could go somewhere else to pay
for percent instead of the
higher rate so this doesn't
disturb the playing field at all
it keeps everything equal and
treats.
The the public just like we
treat any other non New Mexico
government so I I think that is
this is good tax policy right I.
I will say
We've had a bill present almost
every session for last several
years to allow
our lost the change that yes I
could set up shop somewhere in
New Mexico and I've been
supportive of that legislation I
don't think legislation should
dictate which businesses can run
and which ones can't in New
Mexico.
And when I saw the testament to
the pueblos in open to shop
there.
I am you know I gave them a
virtual high fives like that's
right and they're to pueblos
when is New Mexico's lost we
should have passed that bill a
long time ago
But it's a it's it's you're
always came.
So I appreciate.
This this bill this this is good
legislation My one question
madam chair and representative
for Jean Lewis is.
Just like our gross receipts tax
like to bill you cared before.
We have a twenty five percent of
that amount goes to the state to
help us demonstration of the tax
and all of that.
now we're talking about
establishing something very
similar for a motor vehicle
excise tax.
Has there been any discussion
about doing something similar
for.
New Mexico not not for
administrative purposes because
it's just a credit to the tax
department has nothing to do
with us but we will be losing a
little bit of money to the state
and local road funds has there
been any thoughts that maybe
some percentage of you know we
have a similar agreement or some
percentage of this money that
would all be going to the tribes
could go to help pay for roads.
Madam chair representative
thanks for the question I'm
going to defer to Mister Hughes.
Thank you Representative Lewis
madam chair
of and and Representative Harper
very interesting very good
question but in this case we
feel it in gross receipts tax
situation the.
Tribes in the state agreed to
divide the gross receipts tax
revenue seventy five percent of
the tribe and twenty five
percent of the state because
both jurisdictions in that
instance has the power to impose
a tax on the sales issue.
Yeah in this instance we feel
that that kind of Division first
of all we think it's it's the
the administrative.
Infrastructure that have would
have to establish a tax revenue.
Would not justify the amount of
of the tax would be generated to
the state but but more
importantly.
The important thing about this
bill is that it would create the
possibility of motor vehicle
sales in the state that
otherwise could not occur at all
because as Representative Harper
you of a pointed out at the
present time New Mexico law does
not permit it the manufacturers
such as Tesla to sell directly
to consumers in the state only
by having the sales like this
occur in Indian country could
these sales occur at all so we
don't feel that there is any
justification really for the of
tried to share the motor vehicle
excise tax that it opposes on
these sales but with the state
the state doesn't have the power
to of.
Propose that tax on on sales
outside of Indian country
because those sales would never
occur and there would be no
being no loss to the there's no
loss of state revenue fund
because the statement would
never those sales would never
occur outside of Indian country
I I might I might note that in
that regard we take significant
issue with the conclusion of the
FIR which says that all these
Tesla sales that occurred of
outside of Indian country would
generate hundreds of thousands
of dollars the the Rhode Fund
but that simply couldn't happen
because those sales could never
occur outside of Indian country
and would only occur with
Indian country with the
enactment of this bill
consequently we what we've
thought about it considered yeah
I do have a division of the tax
we we felt like in this instance
unlike the gross receipts tax
situation it simply was not just
for.
So madam chair and and ensure
Lewis and Mr Hughes
Yeah I can I can understand
appreciate that argument
Hi I'm and I don't think I'm
gonna hold us up and request
that we have an amendment to
this bill that would do that but
I do think that.
You know as we continue to
wrestle with the fact that
electric vehicles are going to.
In in in probably a decade be
more common than than combustion
maybe two decades we have to
figure out how we're gonna
continue to fund our roads.
And and whether we do that
through a a registration tax
armored vehicle excise
clearly rude after work together
since we all benefit from the
roads in the state on a solution
and I would just hope that the
the pueblos would be willing to
come to the table and and and
some of this revenue the W.
generating I would hope that
they be willing to discuss
sharing that was.
The agreement that goes directly
to roads.
The last point I want to raise
and it dovetails perfectly with
your comment Mr Hughes and madam
chair.
I completely disagree with the
fiscal impact on this FIR.
Are our analyst Kevin powers
actually called up Tesla spoke
with one of our sales people and
he said right now what they do
is you know you can drive around
and explore it but after you've
decided to purchase that they go
online.
And purchased online and it is
delivered directly to the
individual where they live and
so they pay the four percent
motor vehicle excise tax there
where they live it's not
delivered to them in the Pueblo
so right now the state is not
losing any of that motor vehicle
excise tax so that the current
snapshot should show zero impact
no fiscal impact now if we pass
this and and Tesla decides to
change that model they decide
they're going to start
delivering from their their show
room then we would see an impact
there but right now the way they
they sell there's no fiscal
impact.
And and honestly I mean I buy a
car from Arizona.
That's just that's just how it
works that the state does not
get that revenue I paid four
percent to a or or more Arizona.
So I see this is just as great
tax policy and not having a
fiscal impact
and so madam chair I I think I
would be supportive of a leading
this bill out of our committee
without a temporary table but I
of course defer to you madam
chair thank you.
Thank you Representative Harper
I saw Representative Scott seein
the minute ago is he still with
us.
Madam chair still with you.
Thank you for recognizing me but
the.
Harper.
Very thorough job for us.
The questions that I had
and specifically Madam chair
representative it was with
respect.
To the portion of the excise
tax.
That goes to state local road
funds and the.
This legislation.
My.
On those two revenue streams we
have an estimate of what that
number would be.
Madam chair and Representative.
Mr Hughes do you have that
number.
I I do Madam chair
representative Lewis
Representative Scott.
It is our view and I I I I of
the state I'm in complete
agreement with us Representative
Harper on this we totally
disagree with the the for your
given the FIR which is hundreds
of thousands of dollars within
that simply is not correct as I
said the the sales that would
occur if this bill were enacted
the sales of the F. I. R. soums
of the bill only refers to sales
yes let on but but what we.
We disagree with that but but on
that on the basis of that
assumption it and then finds
that there is a an impact of
hundreds of thousands of dollars
and and that simply is not the
case yes.
Tesla began selling vehicles on
pueblo land.
Excise tax and that tax would go
to the to try to those sales
would be transaction that could
not occur in New Mexico
whatever.
so that there would be of no
payments to the.
Of state road fund whatever yes
this bill were not enacted
people want to buy Tesla is as
good as those Mr as
Representative Harper said they
can do it online and then and
then the the payment is made.
Or they go to the next order of
Salt Lake City or to Denver and
by the vehicle and again there's
no revenue to the state road
fund whatever consequently it is
our view that the this bill does
not have any impact on the state
roads from frontier
In any event.
Madam chair representative Mr
here's.
This bill limited Tesla what if.
Ford General Motors elected will
of.
Dealership on tribal lands.
Madam chair representative this
is not limited to Tesla.
So Madam chair representative Mr
here's in that circumstance or
would.
Is that correct.
Mr excuse me madam chair and
representative I'll defer to
Mister Hughes.
Thank you madam chair
representative Lewis
Representative Scott there would
be a modest impact we we
calculate that the the potential
hit the road fund would be in
the order of two hundred dollars
or so per sale based on of the
estimated the average cost of a
of a vehicle from of Garcia
motors or Larry Miller Hyundai's
And nothing late so hundreds of
thousands of dollars that the
FIR predicts the tens of
thousands of the very most a
very modest and relatively
negligible impact is just the
likelihood Americans.
Okay.
Representative Mr Hughes thank
you for this call.
Thank you Representative Scott
happy to I see no other hands
raised I'm happy to enter excuse
me Representative Maestas oh
sorry.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative lose my my
background.
It doesn't where is it the back.
Well I say it's very hard to see
us so sorry that a I'll put a
green screen back to thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative Lewis just a
quick quick comment and thank
you for the innovation of this
bill and for clarifying that
this is not a test ability and
it's a automobile bill.
and and I appreciate the
gentleman Mr Hughes.
And in his logic but I must.
I just want to make the point
that it's incorrect to say it
could not occur it's incorrect
to say that Tesla's could not be
sold in New Mexico I could is is
can't I I could not dunk a
basketball
But yes I could easily sell cars
throughout their New Mexico if
it's simply entered a you know
way
Your dealership agreement with a
local dealer so right wrong and
different good policy bad policy
it can happen it simply doesn't
happen as a choice of the the
corporate entity and and and
good for that corporate entity
because that that law may be
archaic maybe bad policy but it
but back in the day it was to.
To lower the ability of of the
big three to authorize you know.
That the car market so it had
good intentions back to the day
it may or may not.
It could should be on Dawn or
should not be undone but just
say it could not occur it is
categorically incorrect thank
you.
Thank you Representative Maestas
I just want to at this point
many I think the fiscal impact
is virtually is negligible if at
all and I would also point out
to me as a matter of fairness
and equity you know we a certain
practice that we have employed
for for years in terms of
recognizing giving
It Sir recognizing the payment
of excise tax and other states
we hadn't anticipated sale of
motor vehicles on native
American lands and this is just
a it's really just leveling the
playing field and and it's to me
it's almost like an
administrative change that it
knowledge is a new business
practice that we hadn't
anticipated before truthfully so
thank you Representative Lewis
for beginning this bill forward
and happy again as I say to
entertain a motion.
With the passenger.
The second madam chair.
Moved by Representative my Estes
and seconded by Representative
Representative Cadena.
Just Kimberly would you call the
roll please.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
A great car.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative are.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Maestas yes.
Representative right.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
Yes I'd like to explain about
yes.
Representative Romero.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
Thanks.
Representative.
Yes Representative.
Madam chair.
Yes and Representative Montoya
please explain your vote.
Thank you madam chair I I have
also
I agree with so with
Representative Harper's analysis
of this I I do still.
Just a little bit of heartburn
with
the fact that
As far as roads go
That there needs to be a funding
source there's a there's a lot
of of.
roads that the state and and and
the tribes and pueblos share and
I I think at some point we're
gonna have to come to some sort
of arrangement where there is
some costsharing especially if
there's ability to tax.
vehicle excise tax and and the
the ability to tax gas as well.
we all share these roads and at
some point I think we're gonna
need to do
to come to some sort of
agreement on how we how we do
that
but in the meantime just kind of
being consistent I I do believe
with that should not be in a
lesser position tribe should not
be a lesser position states
around us so thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative Montoya
well it's ten thirty the floor
session should beginning should
be beginning shortly so I would
recommend that we're we're Raul
house bill two oh seven and at
this point the meeting is
adjourned thank you thank you
Representative Lewis.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
