Everybody good morning to the
sponsors for our first billing
with that any do let's get to
house bill ninety two geothermal
electricity generation tax
credits represent royal hour
representative to hand
good morning mr chair and good
morning members of the committee
and the audience and those
viewing.
I'm here to present house bill
ninety two.
And before I do that i'd like to
go hidden just and mention that
senator or disappear was.
The other lead sponsor i'm not
sure if.
Be here with us this morning but
just so you'll know he is and he
will come up here sit with us
and then i'll introduce the
thomas solomon who will be
expert witness for at this bill.
And at what point will you
instruct me to enter the
amendment I think if if you can
introduce it now and then we can
talk about it and then we can
then go back to the bill wanted
his amendment.
It is being handed out at this
point
and you will receive mister
chair amendment number point
two two seven six nine two point
one okay that's what I have and
is it sent as it's passed out
we're welcome from the let's
move the amendment for
discussions with most made with
their moment for second think
we're okay.
And now.
Everyone has the amendment from
them
very good
members emotion made to move
itself please explain the
amendment.
Thank you mister chair and
so this is going to be.
This discussion in presentation
is going to be a little bit
different in the sense that
since we proposed and handed in
the amendment.
Therefore further.
Examinations and we reviewed the
commentaries that were made in
the previous committee and we
have.
Made some.
Corrections and amendments to
the existing amendment.
And so i'd like to go ahead and
go through that and as we go
through the amendment I will
make the corrections as they
have been proposed with does
that make sense mister chair it
makes that good then kills it
please sell the original
amendment for the number I gave
you
has.
A number one.
And as I mentioned after further
examination and review in
discussion.
That section number one.
Is related to
or we will relate it to keeping
the investment tax credit.
The.
However in order to do that.
We go to page one.
And beginning online twenty.
And continuing through page two.
And continuing through page
three.
We're going to strike the entire
number one so basically we're
striking the entire number one
and that is reference to
beginning line twenty on page
one.
All of page two.
And all of page three.
So we're just striking th.
Address all the questions then
we proceed to.
Item number two.
The.
And that will remain unchanged.
But representative if if you can
just let's do it this way why
don't you just walk us through
in your men if you have an
amendment to your men yes is
walk is through then your
amendment that needs to be
amended amended or whatever that
is the let's not go through each
the one it needs to be taken out
or.
So
mister chair if you would allow
we have with us pamstokes who
was
gonna help us help me walk
through the amendment just to
make sure procedurally that that
is clearly understood.
Chair.
So the amendment as it was
written
you'll see strikes section one
which is the whole harmless
provision that would kept the
locals health harm was from the
gross receipts that cover
setting tax to date deductions
that section is going to be
stricken and also the amendment
it also strikes the income tax
credit that would just be
against pet so it just leaves
the corporate income tax credit
I believe how they would like to
change the amendment is to keep
the income tax credit in the
bill and just strike the whole.
So then I know memory sheet
which parts days which part
goes.
Number mister chair members of
the committee number one stays.
Nope sorry number one comes out
number two stays.
The.
Stays
I i'll go through them.
And III think where it were on
the right track yeah we asked
yes so if we we can just make
sure that we get this right so
we can proceed but that's that's
make sure that we're correct
here.
So what I had mentioned at the
beginning striking the entire
beginning on page one starting
online twenty
all of h two and striking all
page three remains that's
amended no.
What you're in essence going to
do is strike the entire number
one on your amendment right and
that's what we've done so when
you go to number two
we're keeping number two that's
okay
and then you go on tonight
number three
i'm sorry you're just going to
go because we've already
stricken page two and three.
And then you continue.
It's gonna continue ended at
strikes page two and three
period.
Okay and then we're just
renumbering you know I i've i'm
a little bit at this point that
wasn't easier than this
you know I at this point I I
don't want to make it have a
make a mistake and have you guys
working on the fly and then mess
it up you know because I think
that.
As much as I want to go through
at this it seems that there's
we're still trying to figure it
out at least you're trying to
figure out you're on your and
what needs to stay when needs to
go and I don't feel comfortable
moving the screen working this
way so what do we do this let's
hear the bill
as it would have been amended or
is you did it to be amended and
then we can have you revisit us
again perhaps on wednesday.
With with this amendment and how
you want it and then will pass
and then we'll just take action
then unless you want to do the
whole thing on on wednesday but
at this point I just I I don't
feel comfortable with those
general work like this publicly
be.
Mister teren and I understand
and.
At this structure I would prefer
to go through hold on one second
I come for with the exp.
We're going to go head mister
chier and presented as has been
amended as you said.
Is is that what you're
suggesting or do you want us to
come in with a clean amendment
yeah yes ma'am representative so
if you can come through and in
my secretary just remind me that
when we have and members like
this it's we have to upload it
up to pause the meeting to
upload it positive upload yet
the website so that the public
has a bit to review it as well
so I think just that let's let's
work clean and um that's hold
off and and and if we can roll
this and then you can come back
and I I can I i'll assure you
that you can come back and walk
but you're on top of the list
again but this let's let's
undertrying to be helpful now
that mister chair appreciated
that that was my initial
inclination coming in here so I
i'm I appreciate it it's not
complicated it'll be a really
clean amendment in in very easy
yeah let's get a right and then
what will come back in and then
we'll just have you back on on
wednesday whenever you're ready
for what with them and okay
okay thank you again thank you
very much
let's move on then to I don't
know if they're here but next
enter agenda.
Text if not if rubber their
hoping we hill or good ola is
not in attendance
we can what text him let them
know that they're up next but
then in in the meantime I don't
mind going next and then we can
talk are with with our experts
that are literally.
One husband one forty.
You want to go to do it now
okay all right we'll we'll hold
off and and we will proceed then
do house build two fifty three
capital out they changes
representative smaller and
myself.
Thank you mister chair when
you're ready
thank you madame chair woman
thank you many members house
build two fifty three it is a
novel concept that takes into
account
capital outlay and its processes
and the dollar figured that we
have to work with and any number
a year and and that number
always fluctuates up and down
because of the volatility of in
this case oil and gas with
provides as the opportunities to
make those investments across
our state and so in him in my
experience it's it's a buster
boom right I mean my first
session in twenty seventeen we
had no caperally this year last
year we had a record amount in
terms of capital outlay how do
we create consistency across the
board that we can insure that if
we are writing a roller coaster
that a year like this year and
in case of last year we might be
able to then use some of the
dollars that we have.
Core and court excess of begin
banking that so that we can
utilize that in the future and
so it's a way to try to insulate
that bust in boom cycle that we
see not only just in our in our
budget but also how it reflects
in how he was capital outlay
dollars and how that capital
outlet dollar number is
quantified so house build two
fifty three excuse me make
several changes to the severance
tax bonding act with the goal of
mitigating risks to the capital
outlet program and supporting
the legislature's ability to
make robust investments in
capital outlet projects today
and into the future.
The capper ali program has
unprecedented capital capacity
right now but the revenues that
support the billion dollar
capital packages that we've come
to enjoy are expected to decline
eventually with the big
questions of not
of if it's going to happen but
when it will happen.
Capital outlay the state's most
resilient program on oil is most
reliant excuse me an oil and gas
revenues and though the
legislature has taken steps to
insulate the general fun from
oil and gas volatility we have
no.
Back up plan for the capital
outlay program today.
Additionally the dramatic
increase in dead capacity in the
seventh text bonding program
presents an opportunity for our
state but also a risk to our
credit ratings.
This bill established his
mechanisms to address the
separate but yet related
problems and built long term
resiliency for our capital
programming.
Amendments to the seventh tax
bonding act would mean that by
doing this directly tang
available capacity to medium
debt ratios which were
constrained levels at which long
term debt is issued every year.
These constraints were still
preserved significant levels of
bonding capacity and far more
than it has historically been
available because our debt is
expected to sore with all and
gas revenues this bill is needed
to prevent the state from
becoming overlaverage.
And to protect our bond ratings
from falling even further and
the end in some cases the lowest
in the nation.
House built two fifty three also
includes mechanisms to turn to
day surpluses in the future
recurring revenue for capital
projects it does this by
distributing the savings from
reduced long term bonding
capacity into a new fund
dedicated solely for capital
outlet.
This fun would be managed by the
state investment council and
become planned be.
For capital outlay as oil and
gas revenues continued to
decline or will or may soon
decline.
Secondarily the fund would act
as a rest as reserve for our
debt ready to cover existing or
future debt services in the
event of a sudden oil.
Price crash or in some of the
drop in revenues that could
otherwise put our ability to
repay at risk.
Finally the fun was been off
five percent every year starting
immediately to be appropriate by
the legislature for capital
projects.
Distributions in time will grow
to more than three hundred
million dollars per year by FY
fifty.
Assuming the legislature does
nothing else to build the but
the fun beyond what is
stipulated in this bill itself.
Appropriations can be made for
capital projects but the cost
with the total cost of less than
five million for planning and
design of higher capital
projects and at this point.
Madam chairwoman we will stand
for any questions.
Thank you mister chair we're
going to go the audience for any
insider comments first to those
that may be here to speak and
support of hb to fifty three we
have any any.
We'll start here on my rate.
The.
We will go to our audience on
zoom if you would like to speak
and support of this legislation
hb to fifty three please raise
your hands now.
The.
Will go to those in opposition
anyone here to speak in
opposition of.
The.
Not seeing anyone will go to
zoom if you'd like to speak in
opposition to hb to fifty three
please raise your hand.
Not seeing anyone over zero
would you like to make any
comments before we go to
committee
at this point madam charlman
committee members you know that
the same way that sp twenty six
and thank you for the artist
member two to remind me of that
number but the same way that sp
twenty six helps to insulate our
our budget is the same way that
this bill seeks to insulate
capital outlay and we have to be
able to plan for the future and
that's the reason why chairman
small also signed on because he
recognizes that if we have a a
once in a generation opportunity
to do something different and
that the practices of the past
the institution that we've
inherited
never set us up in this fashion
that it's been coming upon
ourselves to begin to at least
look into these types of of
options as a possibility and so
knowing that I I wish to make it
should have prefaced this that
this is absolutely a
conversation starter it's us
thinking outside the box it's us
taking bold steps to knowing
that we have
we have problems in in in how
the structure is is developed a
designed and so if we can do
things now to begin to look at
how things are done in the
future I think we'll all be
better set up for those that
come.
They're being said madam.
Thank you mister terror will go
first to representative
townsend.
The.
If you could
represent it can you.
How this cash over.
This catch provide were
identifying to use in this span
bonding capacity.
Just walk us through how how I
actually.
Yeah.
Madam chair and representative
towns and that's a reason why by
brought made brain trust here
with me and and I would be
nothing and I think this state
would be nothing without these
two individuals that really
carry the week.
Is mail are easy as I like to
call him who is our chief
economist with the legislative
finance comedian as well as
california's well who is our
capital outlay guru for our
state is well.
Absolutely
thank you manager and represent
thousand so did the funds in the
seventh tax barning fund come
from the severance tax so
collections on oil and gas going
to the bonding fund and at that
point there's a series of
formulas that apply to help
determine how much could be
available for long term debt
service and then short term that
service with the long term are
the bonds in the short term or
what you just identified the
sponge notes that they're
commonly called sponge sponge
bonds or notes and those are
usually an overnight debt
and so depending on.
Revenues over the ten years
expectations for revenues over
the ten years depending on the
lesser of the current or the
prior year depending on how much
prior that service we had
depending on how much authorized
but an issue we'd have depending
on here marks that there's a lot
of factors that go into this
program that make it kind of
compliment complicated.
But ultimately the long term
revenue expectations are what
help determine long term debt
availability now this bill has
been a considered for the last
year we've been doing study on
this and presenting this to lfc
and and the revenue
stabilization committee to talk
about the particular problems
that we foresee over those next
ten years and in part how the
large jump in capacity for long
term debt in particular might be
setting new mexico apart from
other states in terms of are
amount leveraged or debt per
capital debt per personal income
that could put us far above the
national average maybe then
three times as much debt as the
national average and so this
bill in particular would try to
tie that long term death only so
does not cap short term that and
still allows long term that to
grow with personal income growth
or per capital growth it traced
a tie that to the national
averages to help secure our bond
ratings from falling even
further and take those savings
only in that reduced long term
capacity and that savings as the
amount that goes to the new
capital fund.
I hope that was clear as mud
where we got to the med part so
but but I appreciate that I
understand that last in recent.
We were notified by moody
that are capaci.
Was really kind of a maxed out
because we hadn't seen a.
A population growth and so our
debt per capita was exceeding.
There.
Typical threshold is that
correct.
And.
What is that member today.
Do you know.
Mister chair I don't know if
kelly knows off the tover had it
was published in the latest
affordability study which I
think ali might have already.
Mr chair representative.
So.
For five twenty four according
to the board of finances jan-
january twenty twenty four
estimates
we would have six hundred and
sixty six point five million
dollars available for a long
term debt
and currently they're projecting
about that same amount for the
next several years.
The.
So madame chairman
representative if we go forward
to me a lot.
It would appear to me that we
are going to dampen.
Not significantly but we're
going to damp in our capped all
out late in these flesh years.
For the hope that this ban would
grow to the point that it would
be the balancing at.
When is in my following
correctly
so madam chair and
representative are there
maximum numbers put on either
one of these bonds you don't
want these funds that are being
generated and should there be
i'm just asking I don't know.
Madam chairman representatives
and they're there or not they're
not maximums but hopefully.
You can be comforted a little
bit by the fact that as the long
term bonds are reduced that also
creates more capacity in the
short term notes that can be
issued and so really a lot of
this is about shifting from a
long term debt into short term
debt more cash focused rather
than.
And that's good yeah.
Ma'am chair and representative.
Based on the last two years said
that have been very fla.
What was the number that you
expect.
You know.
Madame chairman representative
of course you know with the
coverage that it's very
difficult to estimate oil and
gas it could be about two
billion dollars which could
spend off.
Five percent about a hundred
million a year and for cap.
Representative it.
Ascertain.
Whether the bonding the risk
associated with not doing it
doing and we quantified that I
mean if we get a downgrade and
movies but what is the value of
that.
Madame chair and representative
townsend depends on of course
how far the downgrade is the new
mexico is currently tied with a
handful of other states for
the lowest one rating in the
country if we were downgraded
further.
I believe would be the only
state in the b category so they
could.
Present a challenge in an
attracting you know purchasers
if we're the only state and the
be category.
It also depends on how much debt
we issue at that new rating so
if it's at the billion dollars
we're currently seeing our
billion dollars a capital out
the capacity that we're
currently seeing.
Could be forty million dollars a
year and additional interest
costs I believe that was off the
top of my head the last time.
I'm cure.
If we are I mean we're close to
being.
One of the more risky.
Bounding capacity.
Which should be a good marker
for us that we need to do
santander I get it
we need to do something to the
level of plan filled out
but should we be doing something
in excess.
The.
In european madam chair
representative I know it's kind
of outside though.
The scope of this particular
bill but I know it's exactly
what the bill strang.
Madam chairman.
I think we've taken those steps.
General fun dollars.
But not every year's going to be
like.
Again as a conversation starter
I think we have to start
somewhere.
Then then again that we
have turned the question done
that we can massage and work
through during this interim
session I think it's worth th.
We have a an opportunity to.
Ourselves up.
Worries our cheap economy.
The.
Appreciate that the memphire and
rep.
Downgrad.
The.
You know the devil.
Thank you very much.
Thank you representative.
Thank you ma'am sure chairman
and it's great to see you both
secure.
I'm gonna go to weave into some
of.
Represent towns questions but I
really just want to start
elected fifty thousand foot
level here so I think this could
be actually really good but I
want to.
Okay so we have
I I think mancher and chairman
kind of two main issues that
were trying to solve here.
The first is
when you look at how we find
capital outway projects in the
state
I think more than any other
program it is dependent on the
gas
right and we right now work
we're doing great with oil and
gasper that could change in the
future and so are looking at how
can we find capital outlay more
sustainably going into the
future so I think that's one of
the main points of this bill the
second minimum chair german is
because we've been flush with
this revenue and we've been able
to allocate money for need to
cap alley projects but our state
population has been flat the
race you have debt to population
is going up by a lot and that's
something that moody's and other
national bonding agencies look
at in it starting to impact bond
rating which makes it more
expensive for us to take out
that.
Um chair chairman
I thought the two main issues
were trying to solve today
articulate that properly madame
chairman.
Okay thank you matcher chairman
I appreciate that okay so then
pulling the next layer back to
that
what's this bill does a couple
things but again have high level
is were were start we're we're
creating two new fi.
And one find is called so you
capital development reserve fund
and man i'm sure chairman if i'm
understanding this right this is
almost an allegiance to a
another permanent fund another
endowment fund where we're we're
building up a corpus.
And then the second is the
capital development programs
and this is more in alligators
to like our general find but
only for capital outlay projects
right so regards a kind of a
capitality permanent find that
grows and then uh if I rerain
the bill every year five percent
of that will go into this
program kept a program fine and
that's what we're gonna use to
spend on capital projects that
you're
not sure in chairman can I
understanding that correctly
madam chair and representative
yes you're correct at a partly
at least yeah yeah
any
new answer matter folks like you
madam chair representative
harper so on the spending
account I think it's important
to keep in mind that at least as
kind of currently envisioned
with the numbers under the these
bills this would be sort of a
supplementary source for capital
appropriations in addition to
the bonding program
assuming it still has life and
you know one of the kind of
additional related benefits
potentially of constraining the
long term bonding capacity is
that you'll extend the life of
the bonding program with the
revenues we expect to have
coming into it and their
fluctuations relative to the
status quotes we'd have a higher
level of capacity in the bombing
program itself for a longer
period of time then we would if
we had nothing which then this
fund could supplement with the
supplementary benefit growing
over time
and then potentially in the near
term you know the general fund
could also supplement so kind of
we're looking at a more mixed
funding model for capital than
we've had in the past
so.
Madame chair and chairman and
cali thank you for that
clarification yeah so just to be
clear this the second fine that
is essentially like a general
appropriation find for
capitality projects only
we're not saying that's the only
place we can go for capital that
way in this bill this is gonna
be something in addition to our
current process
madame chair representative of
yes and you know I think trying
to build a full replacement
source for the capital program
at the level where used to
funding it right now you know
just through a trust fund would
be difficult because they would
have to be very large
so you know we're we're trying
to take this bill would take
steps towards having that
putting that kind of insulative
plan in place for capital but
would not be sort of the only
revenue source availab.
So manager and chairman and
kelling is he thank you for that
clarifying that new ones there
this are now going to the next
layer of the
how are we funding this reserve
this capital that way permanent
fund right what what are the
influence how is that working
and and understand how that
works I think it's a good idea
just to quickly go over how it
works right now under current
law how how are capital outway
and in all the different
earmarks or find it and I used
to have all this memorized one I
carried some draws about it so
you're gonna have to help me
feel in some of the gaps here
but um just very generally
madam chair and chairman we have
severance tax dollars that come
to the state whenever minerals
are severed from stay owned land
and then also we get some from
federal own lands we get l.
Your manager and is he driver
that exact percent madam chair
representative I think you might
be confusing tax with royalties
yes.
So we get some terrorist manager
insurance we get seven tax
dollars whenever we several
minerals from is publicly on
lands there was come into the
state and then every year based
off of that revenue a
calculation is made
and in that calculation said
based off of this new revenue
how much can we bond against and
as part of that calculation is
there all this revenue is coming
in first we have to take care of
our existing bonding.
Right and and whatever you know
whatever is out there already
that it's so tracked away and
then we've got left over
you know this new revenue how
much can we bind new
and then you figure out that
number then we start looking at
okay now we're going to divide
that into a bunch of slices of a
piece of of a pipe rate
and i'm gonna go over some that
I know that you need the jump in
and help you with the rest so I
know that
uh chairman mountain
with ten percent
or is a nine percent out nine
percent goes to water projects
and of that nine percent you can
make a smaller piece of that
goes to the water trust board to
help administer the projects but
my percent goes to water.
Four point five percent goes to
tribal
the
tribal for stressful projects
for another four point five
percent goes to colonious
and then there's another new one
that goes to housing
and is that also four point five
percent two and a half percent
goes to housing
and in and then there's another
section that goes to public
school capital outlay.
Don't remember what that number
is it's like
thirty or forty some.
The.
And then.
And I can if we now have a
section that is dedicated to the
service tax permanent fund the
users be the left overs.
And in the last part is seniors.
And the seniors is our
executive and legislative
capital outlay
and that's rush it's russell in
the twenty ish.
And that's that's kind of how
you make that whole pie and then
whatever's left over.
Goes to the service tax.
And and the and the new ones
there is there were several
years where the service tax
permanent fund didn't get any
money at all.
Because we would sponge behind
the last little bit that was
left over
and that's just the way of
converting something that you
could bind directly in a cash
and we use that for general find
when we're having trouble with
balancing the budget.
Um it's offer a long time the
service tax more fun was really
in a bad place it's doing a lot
better now.
And one of the reasons why it's
not better is the last couple
years with not bonded for
capital outlay and this year
we're proposing that as well we
can use roughly.
Excess um
oil and gas tax revenue to just
pay cash instead of borning so
as there is such a fun is doing
a lot better okay so chairman or
manager chairman that's kind of
how it works right now.
Can you maybe just walk through
hour planning on changing that
formula I don't think we're
talking about changing the pie
car velts at all actually that
very first step when you're
talking about what's coming in
and how much you know we
supprect off to pay off existing
debt.
Where we're looking at how much
of that goes.
Over to the pie versus perhaps
some of that going into these
new fi.
Madame chairman represented
harper i'll take a stab at it
and maybe the other two will
wanna back me up but
really from the pie metaphor
this is changes just to that
last twenty percent it's kind of
at the end of the process not at
the beginning so a lot of those
other pieces aren't really
affected by these changes and so
in that last twenty percent as I
was
woefully trying to explain
attempting to explain to
representative towns and it's
trying to shift that twenty
percent more to cash then long
term debt so of that twenty
percent how do we try to keep
the amount of that twenty
percent that's going for long
term debt in accordance with
national median standards which
include also all add
income so even if our population
stays flat but you all are
successful in supporting it
rising personally comes the debt
can grow with it
and and guarantee and with that
lowered only long term capacity
there is some shifting to cash
and then there's also some
savings in that savings from
that twenty percent goes to the
new fund and so in part because
only that twenty percent is
responsible for the savings the
funds generated and that new
fund are really only going back
to support that twenty percent
at generated the savings to
begin with it that.
Madam chair representative
harper if I could just add one
thing to that related to your
comments on the seventh tax
permanent fund in the health of
that.
The the revenue is that our
envisions being captured in this
bill art sort of ones that were
not expecting to flow into the
severance tax permanent fund
otherwise and that you know is
he when they're making their
long term general fund estimates
are not depending on so we
looked for a mechanism that
would essentially you know do no
harm to the earmark programs do
you know harm to public school
capital outlay do you know harm
to the permanent funds and the
general fund relative to kind of
what we're expecting to happen
there now and what our long term
revenue estimate.
So many chair and chairman thank
you that's a super helpful I
feel like i'm i'm understanding
this onion a lot a lot better.
Uhm so so I guess then just the
kind of peel off that next layer
just looking at okay how exactly
are we doing that because I
appreciate we want to you know
do not harm to all these
different programs we're just
looking at the excess and and so
i'm just i'm looking at
I guess it's page two of the
bill
we we in section b where we're
adding now.
You know when it talks about the
division estimating the amount
of bonning capacity available
for seven tax bonds
were were basically saying
there's two different methods
now instead of one ad if if I
understand this right
item number one here
under be paragraph b one
estimate provided for equal
annual insurances over the
expected term of bonds with
greater than when you're
anticipated to be issued by the
state where the finance within
the fiscal year and compliance
with the requirements of this
section.
I i'm reading that to be
essentially
current yeah what we currently
do now.
And and then paragraph two here
is a different estimate
that provides for issue and
for each year that's projected
to result in stable levels of
state tax support of dead.
And here here's where it here's
where I think it's really
important relative to the median
debt ratios state debt ratios
published by the national
missile bond rating agencies so
so if i'm understanding this
right we're saying okay normally
it would just be the you know
for newer number one but now
we're gonna say it's gonna be
the lesser of one and then we're
gonna make a calculation based
off of these is by national
bonning agencies to make sure
that we're not in a place where
we start.
Damaging are bonding ratio
and and so expecting that to be
lower.
And and so we'd start actually
probably most of the time start
following that formula is
manager and chairman is that
rate.
Madame chair represent her for
that's right except in the event
that revenues decline and if
revenues are lower than where
median at reshoes would be were
still allowed to take the
maximum that were capable of
taking okay so i'm sure chairman
thank you for that that
that's helpful.
Okay and then obviously we have
a little bit of
a chart here that kind of shows
you know what we'd expect using
this formula kind of looking
into the future it's on the fire
page three there's a nice kind
of estimated growth into this
fund
and we can see it actually in
order to it takes a little bit
of time and grow because we're
trying to do not horror to all
these other fines but
things he has starts getting
some
some meaningful
balances here in in just ten or
fifteen years and if this is
supplementing.
What we're doing even though
what would
it would be slightly lower in
and not so many years might
actually have more total capital
out way option funding auctions
a.
And I think amount here and
chairman I think might my last
comment is and thank you for
this this is really helpful
understand this approach
I just always you know when when
you look at like your mortgage
right and you look at how much
is going on principles one how
much is going to interest and
you realize that after thirty
years you could have bought two
and a half houses and set up one
if you were just had cash
and the same thing with roads
right when i'm looking at
hanging we need some some road
repairers and roads and you go
well you know we bonded it so we
only got one highway instead of
two and a half.
Right I I just love the idea of
going more towards cash
I I think that's wise
in another other states like my
own came and talked to us and
they they do cash we taught his
cash and they can do a lot more
because they do cash and so I
love the direction this is
taking us
and I also just wanted to say
manager and chairman um if
things continue to go well with
your own gas industry for the
next several years I imagine
that we're gonna still be using
general find for capital outway
rate
with which is great short term
non recurring money put that
into infrastructure that's
amazing right so we could build
this fund up even faster than we
see here
maybe not as fast as he
early childhood uh permanent
fine but
it is kind of love the wisdom
here of trying to develop
something similar that we have a
way to find capital
and we do it smart more smartly
with what's with cash like
things.
It's more stable when we have
the isolation of gas industry
and if not some time in the
future we we truly run out of
our gas how we get a fun capital
so I just really love this idea
and I want to think i'm sure
chairman and all the staff for
your brilliant minds working on
this.
Thank you next we have
representative dunkin
bank manager mister appreciate
this
in the last couple of years it
appears that we're trying to
kill them the goose that lays
the golden egg and so with that
in mind i'm trying to figure out
how we're going to get the
moneys that we will need for
bonding from when farms and from
solar and I don't know how th.
So my only statement be.
While we still have the golden
goose at this lane that golden
eight force.
Benefits from for years and
years very similar but represent
harper has said.
So that would be mainly comment
if there's more I would.
Thank you representative next
we're going to representative
but I go thinking out of chair
and I I do appreciate and I know
this is just for discussion are
representative when to thank you
for bringing this forward I do
appreciate my colleagues asking
the questions about the the
bonds and how the the taxes work
and so on because they're
probably have more knowledge
than I do
but I have a more detailed
question than having served on
the flood control board for six
years in albuquerque
on page four
and i'm just thinking about the
details of how some of the stuff
would work because of course you
have your municipalities or your
counties or whatever and then
you have the the reservations so
i'm thinking about especially
for water projects
and I don't know if you've got
on that floor to think about
this representative one time out
of chair but in terms of it says
on page four it says on
line ten it sells shall not be
used to pay for indirect project
costs and I as I think about
that and I think about you know
our cooperate co operative
agreements especially when it
comes to water and
the preservation of our of our
water and and the cleanliness of
our water often times we have
sort of inner governmental
agreements or is this directed
to pay for new new water
projects and i'm a little
confused about how it would be
used
and I don't know that if we've
gone that far to clarify that
but.
I'd need some clarification on
that manager madam chair
represented a brego
so the
what your referencing on page
for as all existing status.
So this is the existing statute
that governments that you are
not programs that representative
harper mentioned which portion
of our senior seventh tax buying
capacity.
And how is that currently done
managed here and representative
when
madam chair represented a brego
so currently the nineteen
percent for water projects goes
to the water projects fund that
is administered by the new
mexico finance authority and
overseen by the water trust
board sort of the same with
colombia administered by animal
fair overseen by a board
four point five percent for a
tribal project i'm goes the
tribal.
As well and the new housing
america.
I guess i'm just getting into
the prilly into the weeks here
but madame chairman
representative wanted
so
these this new capital funding
that this new capital phoned I
guess or these two new ones
would
I understand infrastructure but
when you're dealing with water
that flows across a lot of areas
not just tribal
you know how are those
deciphered I mean
is it intergovernmental
agreement.
Madam to represent a forego so
with the new funds
those would be available to the
legislature to appropriate so
they're not the fund is not
gonna be similar to the earmarks
in terms of with those you are
send the money to somewhere else
essentially and those boards
that oversee.
Again this bill is changing
nothing about the earmark
program so that would continue
to be administered by the water
trust board for water projects
as it is now.
The spell doesn't change
anything about that the money
and the new funds would be
available to you all to
appropriate and sort of
following you know whatever
process you determine and we're
not changing the capital
appropriations process as an
exist by the legislature now
the program finds the only
things that spell specifies is
that it would be those moneys
would be available for
appropriation by the legislature
for planning and design or for
construction of capital projects
under five million dollars with
essentially the I idea being
you know going to representative
harpers comments are in
particular or something that is
unusual about our capital
program and according to the
part of finance for the only
state that uses long term debt
to finance small dollar capital
projects so that this this cash
you know at least initially
would be available for the use
of cash financing those smaller
projects so that you know the
debt could be prioritized
towards larger projects.
Financing infrastructure
and I and I appreciate that so
i'm just thinking hypothetical
matter chair and and
representative so if let's just
say
I don't know and pick up one of
the tribes santa clara wanted to
create a water infrastructure
project
on the reservation and it you
know as I mentioned the waters
that are flow into the river so
or out
the
agreements are
intergovernmental state
agreements that how that works
but made of chair and I i'm
probably getting a little bit
ahead of it but I want to know
how i'm sort of backing up into
the spond and so and so maybe
maybe this one wouldn't be the
place to look for that type of
funding we're looking maybe at
what a trust board or even the
the tif fund or tif.
Managed by intergovernmental
agreement but this would be a
supplemental if necessary is out
if the effort the money were to
be were needed but madame chair
and representative it would
absolutely be a supplemental for
any project across our state
less than five million dollars
and again with the intent that
for the smaller dollar figures
that we intend to start using
cast versus trying to bond out.
And this is man chair
representative this is per
tribal lands rate
not only representative it's for
it's for everybody for everybody
got it.
Next we are going to
representative.
Thank you
mister chair hate following for
something that I don't
understand
so.
The money's
flowing into the several tax
permanent foreign
or impression that I can
statement
are bond rating is.
Determined
so.
So the bonding capacity of the
servants tax permit
by the formula
s outstripped
the.
Bonding capacity that would be
appropriate.
From the from the moody's
agent.
I tracked so far made on german
representative absolutely on
track
okay
so what we're going to do
twenty percent of the money's
flowing he entered the seventh
tax permanent fund is capture of
those.
And put that into another
reserve fund
that can be
okay or the or the money's into
the severance tax permanent
fund.
Excerved for.
A process long term bond is
that.
Madam chairman representative
scott one one wrinkle in in the
thought process is there's
there's a fund that sort of the
money stops at first so the
severance taxes going to the
bonding fund first and then it
gets spent and bonded and
potentially distributed to this
new fund and then what's left
goes to the permanent fund so I
think if your question is the
last piece of the twenty percent
in the bonding find is available
for long term debt then yes that
is.
That long term debt
name chair mister chair long
term only
madame representative scott long
term and short term it's
available for for both and
so
this bill in particular limits
only or reduces only the long
term and the short term is still
allowed.
And grow
with high revenues
but madame chair is changing the
short term would be now
pulled out of the service
touched
into this reserve
madame chairman representative
scott
nothing out of the permanent
fund only out of the bonding
fund and
only the cash generated from the
savings of reducing.
The.
Okay but the bonding fund is
completely dependent on severage
tax from fund
manager just severance tax
revenues severance tax roof.
Okay madame chairman that's all
the questions I have for now
but know that I still retain
not enough
understanding to ask intelligent
questions
thank you for your answers.
Got your still on
if you.
Manager.
Um members we have a do pass
motion on fifty.
The.
Representative hopefully i'll
take it from over here you have
a question.
Members if you're all give me
you'll indulge me and we have
another question from
representative channel before we
go to that motion thank you I
apologize I was presenting.
Was this very in lfc this summer
and so my question is why wasn't
it brought to rest
up madam chair
yet I really feel like restop is
an important committee in terms
of considering these things
madam chair and i'm glad that
lfc's taking it on but I really
feel there's needs to be a
partnership between the two
committees madam chair and and
and madame gen representative
you didn't you missed the
presentation but in regards to
your question this was presented
in in legislative finance
committee as well as resident
during the december.
Thank you.
Thank you representative or test
we have a dupass motion on HB
two fifty three
we're going to go to the role
now
represent a burrito yes
of casting on yes representative
chamber yes
a representative yes
representative gagas
represented harper yes
representative hernandez
mr speaker yes.
Representative or test yes
representative scott.
Yes.
Representative serato.
Representative townsend.
Madame.
Yes mister chairman.
The.
Thank you coming members
thank you mister chair that's a
do pass on hbt.
Next we'll be going to HB one
forty.
It's getting on them to house
bill one forty clean car income
tax credit representative hoping
to be hill and your presenters
the floor is yours whenever
you're ready.
Thank you very much mister chair
members of the common thing
saucer for accommodating our
timing issues this morning we
are here to talk about each b
one forty
we have an amendment would you
like to deal with the amendment
first mister chair would you
like us to go on the bill first
and then I speak on the
amendment that's gonna be men
so the amendment is going to be
two two seven six seven nine
point one okay they're being
ended up right now so give us a
quick second.
Point two two seven six seven
nine point one.
Line and most of the made move
the amendment so please when
everywhere so all this does
mister chair members of the
committee is on page nine after
certified inserts per direct
current fast charger or full
charging unit just to make that
more clear as to what the the
certified credit is going
towards and it is the same on
page twenty one line twice.
Very well that's it question to
come from the committee on near
the minutes
they're being done is there any
opposition to the amendments as
presented.
Saying that you remember your
bills been amended thank you
very much for you sorry okay now
we go back to the now the
amended bill mister chairman and
members of the committee this is
the clean car tax credits it's a
governor's bill that creates new
personal income tax and
corporate income tax credits for
the purchase and lease of clean
cars as well as the necessary
charging units the spill builds
on years of legislative debate
and dialogue but also include
some new features intended to
make the credit excessible to
only mexicans into incentivised
the lowest emission vehicles.
Credits are proposed for both
new annuals to your goals with
used vehicles being eligible for
half of the credit amount as new
vehicles as time goes by more
electric vehicles will be
available on the use market and
including a credit for use
vehicles insurers lower income
new mexicans can also make use
of these credits.
And worked with vehicles would
receive the most generous credit
with plug in hybrids and phil
solve vehicles receiving a
reduced credit the credits are
also proposed to be both
refundable and transferable this
feature this these features will
allow the vehicle purchaser to
transfer the credit to a
dealership immediately to
receive what we call cash on the
hood on the day of the purchase
refundable credits and sure
lower income consumers can
benefit fully even if they have
limited income tax liability.
All of the credit the credits
proposed in the spill would
phase out gradually until sunset
in completely on january one
twenty thirty and the credit
available for a traditional
electric vehicle charging unit
will be up to four hundred
dollars but an enhanced credit
of up to twenty five thousand
dollars will be available for a
direct current fast chargers and
fuel cell chargers fast charges
and feel so charges are much
more costly and are expected to
be feasible only in multi family
residential complexes in
commercial facilities and with
that mr chairman I like to pass
an introduced and the dream team
here sitting at the table with
me
first going to start with sydney
so what introduced yourself
hi sydney lineman deputy cabinet
secretary of the new mexico
environment department.
Good morning members of the
committee stephanie sharon clark
secretary of the taxation and
revenue committee also mentioned
we have an a linden policy
director for the energy minerals
and natural researc.
Morning dream team
and where that mister chair we
are ready for questions then
destined thank you let's go to
the audience all those in favor
of house bill one forty please
stand up or raise your hand and
then we'll go down the list of
school here sir the federal.
Thank you next year sir.
While electric vehicles are
great they are not quite in the
reach of the average new mexican
in terms of price and this bill
in the tax credits there in and
for the chargers
accomplishes that objective to.
Yeah.
They consider next on that same
road not looking for the back
yesterday where do mister chair
members of the commit.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Thank you thanks coming up it's
been.
Thank you next row and you were
all not yesterday
that's right morning thank you
mister chairman that was because
my ten are speaking on the
greater commercial cities
satisface with supports this
legislation this bill creates an
instead of for positive change
rather than a directing policy.
Refundable personal corporate
contacts credits will encourage
buyers to transition to an
electorate or hybrid vehicle and
the program will run for six
years which gives consumers
enough time to switch to a
clinton works with their budget
so we appreciate the bell
spotter for bringing are this
legislation for and providing a
cursement to make the choice to
clean our emissions vehicle
thank you thank you thanks for
coming up let's go anywhere else
in the side and sport if not
it's go here to this sale yes
ma'am thank you
chair many members my name is to
do i'm an energy and
environmental engineer I look
for solutions to the problems we
humans have brought upon
ourselves especially
and the current climate crisis
and retired navy commander I
raised my hand and supported the
constitution and i'm a christian
and all those three tell me to
protect lives ninety percent of
air pollution is from our false
fuel emissions and a lot of that
is from transportation do you
want us to continue to read the
toxic air causing premature
deaths and any chance of a
liverpool planet for my
granddaughters and years so this
is a great bill let's make it
happen I want company i've been
driving electric for ten years
even one that barely got me up
to santa fe and I did come up
here.
Let's get on track for a clea.
Thank you for your presentation
that's going back sister mr
german members the committee of
charles market speaking to you
this morning.
As you've heard it will make.
Yeah.
Yeah.
All you public health
reduction.
Yeah.
Thank you next year hi i'm
analytic well our policy direct.
Obviously very strong support of
the bill and I just want to let
the committee know that if you
have questions about the
administration of the
certification my agency is ready
willing to prepare to
admister that certification
given funding to higher people
to do it
and you have questions about
that particular aspect of the
bill.
Thank you yes next intervision
chairman
obvious for the new mexico.
Yeah.
To run the number of vehicles
qualifying to capture for
continuing those conversation.
It brings the qualified vehicles
more beach of the average
consumer for that reason we do
stand.
Thank you yes ma'am
mr everyone's community and
people core with western
resource addictives here to say
that we are strong support of
this bill this is probably over
my tenth time being in front of
this community asking for an
experience and i'm really glad
that this year we have a really
good bill that does even more
than the ones we brought before
in the includes used vehicles i.
And so i've been driving an
electric vehicle for seven years
i've had amazing financial
benefits so non saving the
planet i'm also sending myself a
lot of money for seven years.
Changing my tires once I want
those kind of benefits to every
new mexican even those that will
never.
For I really support this this
legislation
thank you very much yesterday
and support mr chairman numbers
of the committee my name's
charlie marcus represent the
alliance of all modern
innovation
as an industry we have been
pushing forward
electronic electricity vehicles
these are things
people purchase without people
do not come you don't build it
and they call you have to have
it sent in order to make that
transition so for those reasons
we support this bill
thank you mister mark is anyone
else in support of house bill
one forty.
In the room anyone online
support of house will want forty
we have a few online that's go
to
semi can you me.
If I can think you terminate and
members my name is damning
calling the claim in energy
director with conservation
motors and message and this is a
priority bill court organization
in november last year the
environmental improvement board
a doctor the advanced claim cars
too and advanced clean car
standards and this was a
critical staff in your medicine
coverage are necessary mission
schools as transportation is the
second high source of house gas
emissions in our state with the
increase of ebay is coming into
the medicine market these types
of tax credits are necessary to
insure that electric vehicles
are real mexicans and also
economics statuses thank you and
I urge your support
thank you but one two
h
good morning can you meet
yes good morning mr channel
numbers in the committee my name
is page nine mexico voices for
children and we stand or have
someone forty this tax could I
add another needed to be when it
comes to cleaning up the
transportation sector in the
area then you can elect vehicles
and plug in hybrid portable and
if this is love to all
we especially appreciate have a
credit available use electric
vehicles
and how it was transferable to
the card dealer these three
teachers will make the credit
and the many academic and help
benefit from east more
accessible pretty much
by lowering those costs you
producing an electric vehicle is
reasonably urgent support for
one forty
thank you let's move on to
stephy
staffy good morning
yes I can't hear me thank you
very much my name is deputy wise
would I live in tourists and
I drive in even and it costs me
the equivalent of forty five cm
gallon together around.
It's very convenient and I would
like other people to have this
opportunity to I am also the
author of a website called
electrified new mexico which
covers solar eb and he perhaps
and other means to lower costs
and our claim at footprint and
in one thing that has become a
very clear to me is that with
outstate incentives a lot of
people are left out we need both
state and federal incentives to
help new mexicans so I would
greatly appreciate this bill
match thank you for turning in
let's go to
order.
Good morning this determine and
members of the committee my name
is the clean energy leader and
the founder america of
prosperity works.
The.
The major obstacle to the
adoption of uses cost eighty p
one forty is an important step
toward broad deployment of
electric transportation
benefiting our families
communities and the environment
this credit card with the
federal greatest what every
purchase within reach of many
new mexicans this will move for
goals toward a clean environment
forward.
Quickly and we appreciate your
support for hb one forty thank
you very much
thank you let's go out to carry
carry good morning.
Good morning mr chairman of
members the committee my name is
carry robin the brunder and i'm
registered lobbyists for
advanced energy united we do
support this legislation in in
particular are very pleased to
see the tax credit for the
direct current fast chargers in
the bill we think this is really
important especially for retail
spaces in for multiple housing
so that we can make sure that
we're having the infrastructure
for you charging reach all the
corners of the seat in the
communities that we thank you so
much mister chairman
thank you looks like we've come
to the end of the folks that are
in support of house building
forty online so it's go to those
in opposition in the room
opposition of house bill one
forty please raise your hand
seeing none anyone online in
opposition of house bill on
forty.
Let's go to paul talk good
morning.
The.
And ask you to immute yourself.
Got it good morning mr chair
members of the committee my name
is paul gasoline and president
of real grandday foundation they
stand in opposition to this
legislation
we are in this state pouring
vast amounts of resources into
electric vehicles this
technology has been around for
more than a hundred years it has
never been the superior
technology and we are wasting
precious resources from our
state very recently a report
came out of the baby held that
he's required new tires every
seven thousand
two sets of tires every single
year that's in the environmental
tragedy also we also reports
from chicago due to cold weather
evs are unable to be charged
turned into a even charger
parking lot and sentently put
evenings are not ready for claim
time also this is not
progressive
tend to have progressive
policies in new mexico but this
wouldn't actually according to a
study published in the energy
research social science journal
said that the majority of ebay
orders are white
a multiple vehicles and have a
higher income compared to the
general population about sixty
percent of eb owners have an
annual income of more than one
hundred thousand while only
twenty percent have an annual
income of less than fifty
thousand for those of the many
many other reasons I earned you
to oppose this legislation thank
you thank you both joining us
anyone else it looks like there
is not okay so at this point
it's come back to the committee
first on my list I have
representative or des thank you
mister chairman politics for
being late that's not the reason
I was late
surrey just
never
talked with you later
thank you.
Thank you representative hockey
hill for bringing this forward I
have a couple of questions
how will these credits help
somebody who has who does not
have a large.
At thank you mr chairman
represented hortez so part of
the design of this particular
rebate is it's what we called
cash on the hood meaning if
someone wanted to go to a
dealership and make a purchase
of an electric vehicle they are
able to get certification
through emner that they are
eligible for the rebate and then
essentially emerged processes
the paperwork and a cheque is
issued to the dealership which
then essentially offers the
rebate back to the person
purchasing the car
thank you mister chair
representative how old long will
that like how long will that
take to happen I think mister
chair represented more tests i'm
going to look to a secretary
firm tax arrived to take that
one sure mister chair and
representative or test so the
transferability will allow the
dealership or or some other
energy but probably the car
dealership to purchase the tax
payers credit from them at the
time of sale and then the
dealership will file a personal
or corporate income tax return
to claim the credit and so it
the the customer would receive
it up front and it could even go
towards their down payment on
the car potentially
and the dealership would receive
at a tax filing time right thank
you the commissioner terror
think you wrap
thank you secretary so what
happens if you buy that vehicle
somewhere else in a couple of
months ago I was in a hit and
run accident I didn't run I just
actually hit
to be clear and that my truck
was totalled it me weeks to like
figure out this out and said you
know go shopping for a new car
and I was kind of surprised I
I actually couldn't find any
evidence I was really interested
in that so what happens with
folks who are like trying to
take this take advantage of this
credit here and you must go they
cannot find a vehicle that they
could take advantage of what
what about other states can they
get the credit in somewhere else
thank you mister chairman
representative or tests
unfortunately the credit would
not.
Be applicable in other states
however there is a process for
the the credit to be
transferable between private
parties so there's still a way
to get access to the rebate even
if it's not ****.
Chair if I can add to that
representative or test the
sponsors correct that to be
eligible from the for this
credit the vehicle needs to be
purchased from a new mexico
license dealer or a tribally
licensed steeler like for
example we have dealerships
license done santa anna number
and so if you buy the car out of
state unfortunately you would
not qualify for the credit and
and the intent there is not to
you know limit our customers
choices but to incentivise the
purchase of those vehicles here
in new mexico and i'll also say
that the timing of this credit
um overlaps with the clean car
rules and so over time the clean
car rules are providing that
manufacturers provide more and
more even is to new mexico so
that problem should be
alleviated over the next year's
thank you mister thank you
secretary
I was kind of surprised by the
cost of the eve charging
stations the fast charging
stations
seems remarkable how expensive
it is so can you tell me a
little bit about that why
how much are they typically are
they that much or is that just
in the credit how far will the
credit go the twenty five
thousand
thank you mister chairman and
representative or ten so yes
the high fast harder that we
call level three chargers dc
charters are shockingly
expensive a lot of it has to do
with welcome to my world the
last eight months that I have
been dealing with an
infrastructure
it requires a tremendous amount
of electricity and of course
connection to electricity
eventually we're going to have
an even infrastructure charging
great that's going to have a
charger every fifty miles on
every interstate right so every
one of those charges is going to
require a connection to a
transformer or and another
another electric source and so
that takes energy it takes time
it takes resources and and takes
oh yeah more energy and so
that's what makes them.
Incredibly expensive but again
that's another reason for us to
incentivise because level this
types of chargers are the kind
charger that will allow you to
get a fall a charge in twenty
minutes and so i'm for economic
development perspective if you
are at the mall you want to do
some shopping and you also want
to charge your car then it
actually incentivises.
Those types of the installation
in those types of chargers
because you know there might be
something that we could park put
a surcharge on later other
people could put a charge on and
so essentially yes it's
expensive but with any new
technology the more we use that
the better we get out of it and
the better weekend at it the
less will be great thank you
mister chair thank you
representative right only my
daughter's only wish we had a
mall and house alas we only have
la wamar
last question how will the
will the federal tax incentives
would work with this I want to
kind of get it understanding of
what happens when you go to a
dealership
to purchase the vehicle you are.
Matter mister chair and
representative or tells i'll
take a stab at that but then
sydney I think also has a little
bit more knowledge of aspects of
the federal credit so I I know
that a new aspect of what the
irrest is delivering on this is
a a more streamlined and more
immediate transfer of the credit
to the tax payer and frankly
that's not something that we can
promise to be able to do with
with tax and rav in the in the
coming years it's just it's a it
project that we don't have
funding to do but the the
federal one and the state one
can take they can stack one of
the only differences between the
state credit and the federal
credit like many of the
definitions the line of the
federal credit also allows a
credit for light to pick up
trucks suvs and bands with an
msrp up to eighty thousand
dollars and the state one does
not we we've kept it at the same
language as last year where we
were allowing new vehicles up to
fifty five thousand dollars msrp
and so we won't be it won't be
available both the state and the
federal on those larger
passenger vehicles thank you so
much mister chair representative
secretary of the city.
Thank you that's moved down.
Okay that's going to do a
representative harper
thank you chairman and madame
chair and secretary and
secretary almost.
Yeah I I appreciate all being
here
and I have a a couple thoughts
on the structure of the bill
that will will come to but I
just wanted to first make
a couple quick comments the
first.
Chairman madame chair is that
this committee already passed.
Part of our tax package and
chairman manager
what happened to it.
Mr chairman representative
harper it some where they're in
the governor had decided that
this was an idea she want a
hundred percent wanted to get
behind and this went from being
a billy passed last year to now
a governor's bill that hopefully
we're gonna pass again this
year.
Yeah so so madame chairman and
madame chair
what happened was the
legislature last year deci.
And send it to the governor and
she will know veto.
Now this year she's decided it's
her idea.
And now it's time for us to pass
it again.
I get a little frustrated
whether it's republican or a
democrat
to have gone through the process
of passing something
having that shut down and now
being told.
Do it because I am on it.
The.
Another comment chairman and
uh
representative art manager when
it comes to.
So the comments we heard in the
audience.
I could go on for quite a while
on on some of these comments
that we've heard.
I'll just take one because I I
find it fascinating the
statement that these vehicles
are inferior.
Two electric burger to gasoline
vehicles
I I think anyone was
a little bit of time to do some
research would find that these
are completely superior and
everywhere except one
in fact electric motors were
invented a long time before
internal combustion motors they
have you are moving paris the
require oil to give you instant
torch.
Um less maintenance no
transmission I mean they're
there are so many reasons why
electric is superior to internal
combustion
the reason why henry ford did
not develop a electrical call is
because he would have had to
have a trailer at the back of
the model tea was a huge battery
on it and that would have let
him go halfway down the block
before
running out of juice right so
the problem is energy density.
And when you look at all
advances in energy going from
burning wood to burning call to
oil to
nuclear all of that has been an
increase in energy density.
And so tessler I mean the
vehicles are amazing their
incredible technology but the
reason I think are even feasible
is because of the battery
being high enough now energy the
density that you can go for two.
And when you look at energy
density of current testle
batteries versus gasoline.
There's still a hundred times
less.
Right so so that's the challenge
here is we need to increase the
energy density of batteries.
To be similar or greater than
gasoline that's that's the only
reason why we all didn't start
driving electric cars.
Uhm that said getting to the
bill chairman and madame chair
there is some good questions
here about how will this help
you know all new mexicans right
folks that might not be a four
evs and yeah my I understand the
bill is structured in a way to
help that chairman and manage
here in my mind that's not the
purpose of this b.
The purpose of this bill was
very similar to the reason why
fifteen years ago
government energy and it he
started giving incentives to
solar panels.
So that more folks would buy
them so that there would be more
production which were drive down
the costs
and spur or indeed to also drive
down costs
so so my mind this bill is more
along those lines we're trying
to help spur and industry
provides a more sales so that
you have more or indian to
batteries and and more
development of a note more
reduction and.
Eventually sell them for less.
Uhm.
Now that said a chairman and man
i'm sure I really like how you
have essentially a built in
sunset and a phase down.
Credit we talked about that.
III believe you mentioned it on
friday when you were here
manager and.
I really believe that is how we
should also be structuring our
solar
that industry can now stand on
its
on its waves you're doing a
great job I think we should be
facing that out given the
industrial associate landing.
Um my appreciate that you have
that built in here.
Chairman of madame chair the
sunset in essentially twenty
thirty and and a facing down
kind of over three steps.
So.
For a minute sure I guess my my
question when I my first
question is when I look at the
fiscal impact right.
It cannot goes the opposite
direction of what you would
expect.
Right so we start with the tax
credit up here and then it's so
it as this
but our fiscal impact starts
here and does this can you talk
about that
mister chair and representative
harper
the reason it does that has to
do with the assumptions on the
number of electric vehicles and
they're associated charging
units that will be purchased
over time so each year we expect
pretty dramatic growth in the
number of electric vehicles
being purchased in new mexico so
the volume of credits goes up
and therefore we feel is down
the amount of the credit to try
to target a forty five million
dollar fiscal impact in any
given fiscal year.
So chairman i'm sure secretary
thank you I appreciate that and
I I guess i'm i'm
this is one per room
a little.
Concerned about the structure of
of the bill I mean I do
appreciate that the coming down
in the sunset but.
Um.
I do worry that this could
potentially run away
do we really want to spend fifty
million dollars that could be
going to whatever else.
Towards incentivities in folks
to the purchase to help the
industry out.
Uh german and manager we talked
about the credit for the solar
being in a challenge right.
And then they we've hit the cab
and they don't get the benefit
that they were promised so i'm
just kind of wrestling with this
here normally on
that things like this we try to
make sure that
they don't run away by putting a
ca.
Intention is to keep the
surround the forty five million
dollar mark you just talked to
me about what went into your
saw and discussion process
regarding not putting a cap at
that at that amount.
To chair and representative
harper I
yeah I feel the pain of all the
members about the calls that you
get about the solar tax credit
and I know my colleagues at the
energy minerals natural
resources department too we've
got taxpayers in that situation
that in good faith when about
installing a solar energy system
expecting to receive the state
credit as well as other rebates
and find out that really through
no fault of their own just
timing issues that they are
intelligible for it and so
we we want to avoid that
situation here and particularly
because in the outers the number
of of taxpayers who make claim
this credit of our assumptions
are cracked is much larger than
in the solar tax credit the
credits are smaller but for a
much larger number of people so
if we get to a point where
they're capped out we could see
potentially thousands not tens
or hundreds.
So it's a dream in this year
sector I I can appreciate that.
This is obviously your bill not
mine I I perhaps would have had
the sun said in place where it
was at
included a cath but then allowed
people to carry for.
And then if you have a some
folks that stacked up.
After it signed s.
Chair and representative harper
we can we can of course
consider that idea about it I
think coming off of the backlog
that amount few years ago in the
film tax credit remember in
twenty nineteen I think we
appropriate about a hundred and
thirty million to
wipe out that years of backlog
that built up and I don't think
we want to repeat that now in
the film tax credit it was a
bigger number that was more
material to the general fund as
a whole but I I think the
committee and and the body sort
of
learned that you know putting
putting people first in line for
the next year or even two years
out is is probably not a great
idea either that it also delays
pretty significantly the amount
of time it takes for a taxpayer
to receive the credit and for
example if if dealerships are
have transferred a lot of these
credits to themselves and then
have to wait not one but two or
three years that probably won't
be a good customer experience
now
yeah so it's a chairman manager
and secretary yeah I had thought
about that example.
Yeah I I understand the pros and
cons but here like the film
tax credit rate this is good
there is a sign set and the film
tax credit did not have.
I don't think we're quite bl.
And and I think we've got
representative or test already
asked the question the last
question I had which was about
the refundability and
transferability and this bill
i'm in general I hate
transferability of credits
because um what what this how
that generally works is a
business
you know doesn't have enough tax
liability right they're not
paying enough tax to be a claim
a credit and so don't go to some
some broker and they'll send all
these credits you know for you
know seventy cents on.
And some business will buy a
credit I just I don't want that
actually really don't like that
system at all I think it's.
Not with the intention was but
here here that's different
because it's essentially just
directly tr.
So I understand why we would do
it here
and it's just to add to that
mister chair and representative
harper we also specify here that
the transfer can only be made at
the full value of the credit so
there's no sense on the dollar
contemplated and
you know I in some credits that
might make sense and and I share
some of your concerns about that
as well
but in this case we want to make
sure they're going to be so many
different brokers if you will as
many brokers as there are
dealerships and we want to make
sure that all the taxpayers that
purchase the vehicle get the
same fair treatment and they get
the full value of the credit.
Thank you matcher thank you
chairman
thank you representative that's
going to represent a chairman
thank you mister chair thank you
for bringing this bill for it
concept I support it but I do
want to raise the issue of
income
up for middle class upper middle
class and wealthy people are
focused on evice
and i'd like to find a way to
incentivise middle class and
lower income people and I don't
think this proposal really
addresses that concern mister
chair issue or value what's
called a value mister chair and
I would like some thought being
put into a kind of a graduated
approach where you know it's
inversely
progressive I guess you might
saw if there is such a thing
mister chair but you get where
i'm going with this any reaction
to
thinking mr chairman thank you
church handler so yes this
actually was contemplated as
part of the exercise of putting
this bill together in
essentially on this first round
as we're looking at.
A beginning program right that
we will continue to analyze get
data from potentially changed if
needed
looking for an income
component would have been
extremely taxing for trd for the
tax taxation revenue department
it would have put them
essentially in a in the
situation where they're asking
car dealerships to collect you
to from people or if that you
don't have an income or if you
just live off social security
you're you're going to create
kind of awkward situations in
which you might actually be
putting
someone who would be in the in
in in place to looking for a
vehicle in a situation where
they may be uncomfortable
especially as it as it relates
to their income so we definitely
see the problem definitely agree
with you you know that we don't
want to instant device you know
metal and a higher class folks
only being the ones with access
to these vehicles but having an
income component just made
things especially in this
beginning round very very much
complicated for the division
thank you mister charin and
representative chandler just
like to add to what the sponsor
mentioned
yeah there the sponsor sort of
touched on some administrative
i'm concerns and difficulty is
with an income tiered approach
and and the department and I
believe emnerdashwere we're
thinking that way last in last
year's credit to
because the energy minerals
natural resources department is
at some point in time
contemplated to be processing
and certifying thousands of
credits per year we need to make
sure that the processing them of
them is very streamlined and so
there is a cons there that's one
concern is is adding that
component to it adds another
hurdle in in just getting that
credits cleared
there's also a concern about if
if you.
Let me give an example if if i'm
a lower income with however that
could be defined in the bill if
i'm a lower income vehicle
purchaser who goes to the
dealership and I say and it
given point in time maybe it was
last year or maybe it's a
current year that I haven't
filed a return for yet i'm low
income and then the dealership
transfers that credit from me if
I never end up actually filing
or I am not actually low income
the dealership would probably be
stuck holding the bag we don't
want to see that there's a
concern to with.
If to the extent these are
transferred to dealerships that
low income tax payer now has to
provide a copy of their tax
return to their dealerships and
they don't think we want those
floating around out there and
mass but all of that said that
has to do with the the
administrative and
confidentiality concerns with
that but in low of that remember
that we're offering the used
credit on vehicles up to twenty
five thousand dollars very
moderately priced and it's
refundable so if the taxpayer
has little or no tax liability
they still get the value of the
credit and his transferable so
they get the value of that
credit at the point of sale
towards their down payment
potentially
all of that combined we think
does it accomplish as the same
effect of wanting to make sure
that this is usable for lower
income new mexicans.
Mister chair and thank you for
that answer it's a follow up on
your point about the use vehicle
I looked at that I thought okay
well maybe people with more
modest means my be inclined to
buy used vehicle because of
course mister chair they will be
have a lower cost so why
couldn't we increase the credit
on a used vehicle because that
that that would have a greater
impact on the lower income
people potentially and
so I just wanted to throw that
out there I know this is going
to be tabled and considered for
the package so these are
thoughts i'd like to have
considered mister chair when we
work on the package but that's a
thought
because the new vehicles the
test the buyers they're going to
buy it mean most of them are
going to buy it I get that
mister chair so that's one thing
the other thing in you don't
have to comment I see you noting
and that's great
I like that so the other thing
mister chair is
here in the twenty five thousand
dollars one I I get to companies
mister chair and our sponsors
would view that as i'm sure that
somewhat directed it but our
pombar home owners putting in
these these twenty five thousand
dollar chargers are not mister
chair
through the chair representative
chandler it's a great question
no these aren't the dc fast
charges the level
out
cost upwards of two hundred and
fifty to three hundred thousand
dollars
you see them at highway rest ups
and but but you wouldn't see one
in that and just a regular home
or a multi family
thank you mister chair and one
last gratuitous comment if I may
you know I think it's great we
have this plan to charge the
unit the whole all the highways
and all that but if you've been
following it.
Who's maintaining those charges
on the highways that's an issue
i'm just putting it out there
it's not so much attacks issue
but that's all wonderful but if
you go to a charger after going
fifteen miles and it's not
working and nobody's taken care
of it we are gonna have a real
problem and people are going to
be disillusioned with the
electric car market mister chair
thank you
thank you representative as good
representative that
thank you mister chair members
of the committee.
This is an exciting to beat mr
chair this morning
and i'm grateful that I can just
make some quick comments because
we have some young people here
from southern new mexico I think
from west case his public
schools and gas in public school
so I am grateful that they get
step in and see democracy at
work and then that i'll take a
few minutes to check in with
them as well
mister tere I think you and
representative I had some of the
similar concerns
it's been frustrating for me
mister chair and secretary that
when we as a committee have
asked for income considerations
income caps income tests that
the answer has been that those
are burdensome for the
administration i'm in certainly
mister chair secretary
representative we hear what's
happening in dc with the intent
to poor funding out of out of
the irs but I would hope here
when we look at our state body
that we can make sure you all
have the funding and staffing
and resources you need to
implement good policy and so
when I hear just like we did
last year when we are talking
about the one time rebates to
new mexicans and some of us
raise concerns that they were
getting out to new mexicans that
frankly didn't need it instead
of more dollars leverage to the
new mexicans with less means and
that was the same thing we heard
that it would be a headache
convert in some in and
overwhelming to build a system
to get rebates of higher
quantities to the new mexicans
that could have most done
change their lives with them
whatever that may be so in
reading this mister terr and
representative secretary.
I had the same flag I think I
shared with a couple of members
even this morning that so far
the only potential catch we're
having is that you have set
those caps that the new vehicle
would be priced at fifty five
thousand or less and that the
use vehicles would have a market
value of twenty five thousand or
less so I appreciate those
considerations it's also
assuming I imagine that people
have more means would be buying
vehicles that were more
expensive
well that may be too in some
cases we can't see what
certainty that's where it's
going so it be it becomes a
little bit frustrating
especially hanging the public
comments to hear most of the
commenters say this is designed
to get new mexicans of less
means into this market I don't
think that the way the bill is
crafted is actually successfully
doing that um I appreciate the
the suggestion I really brought
to the table by my colleague I
think other things to look close
throughout if if you are can't
figure out how to income test
this to look more at the
refundability potentially
consider that the refundability
is that they use market a
vehicle only and not the new
vehicle there's a lot of things
that we can do and but I
appreciate you for bringing this
for red
and thank you for the
conversation so far thank you
mister chair
thank you represent now it's got
a representative
representative I just thought
mister terra just thought you
hadn't seen me earlier as I went
raising my hand I feel like a
five year old kid
thank you representative and
mister chair for bringing this
forward we did have a
discussions about some of these
issues that were raised by all
of my colleagues previously in
their previous committee
I come from a little different
place in terms of um
looking at this bill and
a one explain that.
Um I have two brothers who are
auto dealers and I happened to
be registered at the auction in
albuquerque to help them out
from time to time
and I don't do that on a regular
basis but I do if they need help
you know so the one question
that I really concerns me mister
chair is that these credits are
not transferrable across state
lines
but they are transferable across
tribal and new mexico lines that
to me.
Is a real disincentive
especially for car dealers and
i've been known to go to
colorado to the auction in
colorado springs a few times to
help my brothers when they buy
and sell cars
i've been known to go to texas
with them to the auctions in
texas so if we're truly
encouraging mister chair and
to my colleagues
this market of bine and selling
electric vehicles across the
state
because is you can see
especially traveling from
albuquerque you can see these
big
regs that are carrying
automobiles across state lines
and I know that for a fact
because i've been them i've
actually been there one of those
rights travelling across state
lines bringing vehicles to new
mexico
so it just perplexes me a little
bit that were not creating a
system that actually creates
some market to bring those types
of vehicles into new mexico so
that's my first point mister
chair
my second point is with regard
to and I really would love for
you guys to take a look at that
issue a little bit harder is how
we can create
a you know a tax credit that
really works with the market
because I don't really as my
colleague sitting next to me
representative where tells
mister chair mentioned earlier
she was looking for a vehicle in
the state and couldn't plaind
one
so if we're really going to
encourage that market and we
really need to think about how
we're
structuring you know and I don't
know if you have time to do that
in this bill but.
Certainly we need to think about
that market
the second thing that I wanted
to mention was with just with
regard to
electric availability and you
know for those of you know i'm I
am I do represent burner leo but
I have a lot of family abnorth
in fact I have and I was telling
representative guy echoes I have
a cousin who lives right next to
my mom
who'd has no electricity
she lives on wood
and so
truly the the market then I see
my family whose involved in
selling vehicles involved with
are selling vehicles below five
thousand dollars because that's
all that they can afford and so
i'm trying to wrap my head
around how just this and I I
don't think this bill is the
bill that does but how do we
encourage people to purchase
these sorts of vehicles when
they're looking out vehicles
that are below five three
thousand dollars
and I that's not really meant to
be a question it's really meant
to be a statement more than
anything mister chair and a
representative thank you thank
you representative let's move on
then to represent dunkin.
Thank you mister chairman
I think.
And probably gonna have since
some people in this room today
and and i've never done that
before have never done that
before I
called I told the ci twenty five
bill in the reason I called the
I twenty five billions of you
take santa fe take out.
We don't have the infrastructure
nor do I think we'll ever have
the infrastructure in our state
to be able to for that
individual way of use that so
how do we address that.
While we're talking about giving
a credit to somebody.
Thank you mister chairman and
and representative dunk and so I
think it's really important to
emphasize today that this is
just the first phase or a
beginning of this program as we
were discussing the clean car
clean truck rules that were just
recently promigated the
discussion of possibly
a
bringing in
different counties at different
times right classe county's
first class be count is crassy
those counties that we know
definitely have the capacity for
the infrastructure right did it
start meeting these standards so
that we give our other more
rural counties the ability to
catch up and so as part of this
process we intend to probably
come and sit in front of you
again another day sometimes soon
and talk about the expansion of
this credit to
light and medium and heavy duty
trucks which are going to cost
even more than the fifty five
thousand dollars base price and
I get it also require additional
infrastructure but that gives us
time and then also gives us the
ability to create data streams
and set a six to see how well
this is working for the state
because it is one hundred
percent our intention you're
you're a hundred percent correct
represent representative dunkin
this this type of bill is hard
for the rule folks and your your
constituency absolutely but it's
not let it's not meant to leave
them out it is meant to be.
The start of a process that will
eventually let them in we just
need that data and we need the
ability to expand the credit and
work on what we're already
working on so that we can make
it fiscally responsible but also
expandable in a way that works
for every new mexican and I
agree if you right now this this
bill may not be it within four
corners but it's a start and
that's definitely where where we
intend to begin but we
definitely do not intend to end
here
thank mister think
representative soul along with
that then are we also going to
come up with a bill that helps
fund court small co ops and and
others that generate a power so
that they can actually put the
infrastructure in it some point
in time
thank you mister chairman and
and representative dunkin i'm
actually working on another bill
called power up new mexico and
that is going to indeed impants
another way to incentivise
infrastructure development
throughout the state it's also
going to help us work with the
prc and are local co apps so
that we could work together
collaboratively to understand
where our power deficiencies
exist where we are overpowered
where we can perhaps
we send a lot of power when the
power to california and texas
and maybe divert some of that
power to keep it here at home so
that we can
stand up the infrastructure that
we need for everybody here in
new mexico cause that's not
something that we have done a
great job of recently as i've
learned as a chair of
transportation infrastructure so
that is absolutely a hundred
percent part of the plan this is
all part of the structure this
this is of a very complicated
thing that we're trying to do
here this is one piece of it we
have clean cars with tax rebate
we have infrastructure
developments we have the the eve
charging grid development
throughout the state it is.
Not going to be perfect but it
is happening in tandem and the
more we pay attention to the
process and again collect data
and strategize based on the data
that you do receive the better
job we're going to do at it and
and that's what we intend to do
thank you mister and
representatives I think are your
dream team had a
response as well
through the chair think you
representative dunkin I wanted
to add that in another piece of
legislation that any media is
working on the clean fuels
legislation actually is it a
provision that helps rural
utilities invest funding and
infrastructure to.
I I believe the gentleman said
it best when he said that you
have to give these incentives
for us to take out of this
market and I truly believe that
I also believe that real parts
in the mexico.
We do not believe that we're
going to see it's worth a
billion dollars to put in
electricity and use for four
hundred people.
That live in a fifty mile area
i'm so
you know I guess I guess.
I'm gonna go back to what I said
this is a night twenty five.
I'm ready sport but thank you
for the presentation mister
chair and representative dunkin
sorry to
get and at the end of your land
questioning but I just wanted to
add I I do see your point about
I twenty five versus rural areas
but also keep in mind that the
bill incentivises individuals to
be able to buy a garage charger
so if if you have an electric
vehicle you know it may have a
range per charge of up to four
hundred miles currently so if
you put it in your garage and
charge it overnight that really
is quite a bit of range and
that's changed in recent years
thank you mister chair
man sector I have I have
constituents th.
And thank you.
Let's not move to representative
of two thank you mister chairman
that you chair thank you
secretary for this bill I I do
questions and it gets some
concerns but I I my anticipation
is that you may not have the
doubt on hand and that many of
your supporters made of emailing
it to me so that's fantastic I
love it just wonder I just had
general questions about this so
i'm curious about the eavy
adoption rate I would say new
mexico versus in saturday mexico
and if that's part of this at
all if you have any of that
data.
I do
mister chairman representative
said after I believe it at at
this point were a little under
two percent adoption rate of vis
an of all registered vehicles
madam chairman representative
chip sherin representative sorry
the switch
and do we know the adoption it
is outside of new mexico
mister chairman and
representative I do not
nine percent thank you mister
terry thank you representative
and then similarly
I just make sure you hear this
rate so this this
refundable tax.
Credit that is transferable is
for cars under twenty fifty five
thousand dollars.
Mister terror and
representatives around the
that's correct fifty five for
new cars thank you matt mister
thinking representative and then
okay and i'll just finish with
this negative those numbers help
me honestly to understand how
much more we need to encourage
the adoption of this in the
state versus in other places
that it that remains a question
you hear a lot of chatter about
you know where the markets are
going and so it's good to kind
of see that
you know I I will say there's
two things that are argued to be
one is the the price take to be
quite frank twenty seven million
dollars for a two hundred
million dollar tax package so
one eighth of our our tax
credits are going towards this
adoption i'm not so against that
but I just want to be thoughtful
about that be especially because
I think there's a lot of
economic development we need to
be doing in the state driving
these things without being said
I really love that you're
including these charging
stations across the board
again one of the somebody I
think it was a representative
harper was saying earlier about
the concerns of the doction and
those elements but I mean most
of the people I know most of
what I hear is that where I can
charge it that's when was many
people I know are attracted to
hybrids right and we talk about
All the time and it is a
significant road weights it's
where people come in and are we
are an outdoor recreation state
you know we know people are
going to get every part of it so
we will see more adoption of
eavies if we see the
proliferation of more charging
stations about is my
anticipation I think i'm sure
their studies that would agree
that just because the court
correlation the last thing i'll
say is going back to my concern
about how sizable this is again
going back to what based her
cadence said that refundable
only unused might make sense to
help keep some of that price
down I just i'm looking at if
we're going to have these tattoo
the package were this is twenty
seven million out of two hundred
million that's an eighth of this
so then I room for seven more
projects right what are we doing
with the money we have right now
to keep driving that I don't
know if you have response to
that but that's all I had mister
share mister chair
representative throttle i'm
certainly these are all
fantastic ideas and we will take
them back and discuss them and
and see what changes.
Thank you represents them as
move on then to represent her
scott.
Thank you mister chairman not
true.
To follow up on
the dunkins line of questioning.
I don't believe
that the folks in my district
really in south eastern mexico
will be able to take advantage
of these credits because they
all drive pick ups
and the old drive pickups long
distance as the energy incident.
It was mentioned earlier
is direct contributor to him in
its fact.
Better is don't go as far as
guess.
And that contributes to rachel
and out in the middle of nowhere
there is never going to be a
charging station
i've seen
somewhere
I picked your other other
electric vehicle told trailer.
The.
It was running a gas generator
plugged him to the electric
vehicle
and that's about what were faced
with in southeast new mexico so
could you address me.
You say this is just the
beginning.
But we are so far from these
vehicles being practical in the
rural communities I don't see
that
over the lifetime of this
legislation.
Could you address concert
mister chairman and
representatives scott so
rained anxiety absolutely is
real I will share with you that
I have yet to drive an electric
via cold because I have reading
to exiting I travel to places
throughout the state like jal
you know and I need to know they
need to be able to know that i'm
going to make it there but part
of the discussions we've been
having as part of this bill
there there aren't very many
options for light to medium to
heavy duty trucks and the
electric vehicle site comma yet
but we are getting there we do
have a couple of options we are
probably going to come back here
and another year or two with the
rough one fifty lightning as an
option of either because the
msrp has come down or were able
to give a little bit more money
as part of the rebates and I I
wish I had she had jerry bell
does here from dot to hold up a
copy of the the map that we we
just finished for twenty twenty
three but we installed five
hundred thanks either level two
or level three chargers
throughout the state in places
like jow in places like silver
city
where you normally would not
think one would be would please
be placed there but eventually
mister chair representative
skype it's going to be the same
type of revolution that we saw
with gasoline
gasoline vehicles it's just
simple economics at one point
again station was put in a place
in a rule community because
they're needed to be there one
indian to beat their needs to
their needed for one to be there
so as economics continue to take
over as part of this revolution
and we are in the middle of the
technological revolution and
there is always a little bit of
pain or a lot of better pain
that a company is that it will
be the same thing there will be
charging stations available.
They will be operational the
state will have service
agreements although you make
sure they work and will get at
to a place where people have
options for the vehicles that
they want to drive and options
for being able to charge them
where they want to charge them
it's just going to take a little
bit of time.
And mister chairman madame chair
I asked to respectfully disagree
I am aware
of car dealers dropping product.
Rather than
invest in.
The.
Repair capability the charging
stations and the infrastructure
required to support all of these
electric vehicles because.
Customers simply won't buy
and until
until the physics and two of the
until the energy density
and charging time of the
vehicles catches up to somewhere
around gas.
You will not have
the adoption that you're looking
for you pay people.
In the still
one question mister chairman
madame chair and for circuitary
clark
I understand that there's a
little less than two percent of
the vehicles
are operating in the state right
now or electricity can you tell
me what percentage of the state
vehicle fleet is electric.
We would need to get back to you
I know that number exists I do
the chair at the number exists I
just don't happen to have it off
him
mr chairman adam chair
things have been around for a
very long time
her test money that there's
people then drive them for ten
years
and if there is a compelling
reason to home
I believe the adoption rate
would be much much larger than
two percent and i'm going to
represent that there are no
state vehicles that i'm aware of
operating out in these rural
areas.
For the very reasons.
Yeah.
Thank you matter chair.
Thank you mister chairman that's
all come to the representatives
got anyone else with question to
comments from this committee
if not all that's a couple
commentary so our household
entered into the e v a trend
recently and more for my wife
for her to be back and forth in
the albuquerque despite there
have taken it over now since I
drive back and forth from sandy
at a here and and anxiety is is
in fact real and I found out
that
that it is a and I twenty five
bill absolutely the way I look
at it I have to agree twenty
five bill because when I go
anywhere outside of my twenty
five special long highway by
fifty two other proportions of
my district I I am not taking
that vehicle i'm taking the
diesel drug just because i'm
sure it will get me where I need
to go
and it's not because I died and
it's not because I know that he
decides out wordly but I think
it's to be transparent and frank
that we bought the vehicle
because we we that it was cool
it was a necessary because I
wanted to see the environment
because we do enough harm on the
farm with our number of diesel
tractors and the rest of the
feet that they were forcing it
to have to make the farm work
rate so it balances out I guess
but what I was most surprised
about is in regards to when you
buy a vehicle like that the
depreciation value on these
vehicles is extreme it's worth
not even half of what it what we
pay for a brand new so to
supplement them with a new car.
In the in this kind of way.
It almost makes me think jess
are withdrawing our money away.
What we're helping but then in
regards to how the depreciation
back to works because technology
can't keep up right because
there's always gonna be up a
larger battery capacity that is
always gonna be something else
technologically that's going to
replace that testler the four to
whatever else manufacturer has
so
that that that was shocking to
me but in in my questioning now
is with the incentives that you
have for cash on the hood right
you mention that is that for the
manufacturer's ms or ap is that
them the negotiated price are
you stuck in having to pay their
sticker and then that's it can
you talk to me about that.
So mr chair and i'll alternate a
sydney if this if the think
isn't cracked but the msrp
is by model and it you know and
it in the definitions in the
bill it excludes add ons and
perks and things so the msrp is
sort of a gateway for which
models qualify so they're for
example would be certain models
of testler that do and don't
have an msrp before outines that
qualify after that you know you
may choose to to get those out
once and if you do and your
purchase price rises the msrp of
that basic model is still the
same and and then to the point
of that thing is it is when i'm
going with this is the add on
this where it gets expensive
really fast and in a state like
new mexico geographically you
need the add on to get the extra
battery capacity to make it work
here so how does that work
chair lent it's a great question
so it is the best I message.
That is that it decide has to be
less than fifty five thousand
i'm so no options no add on that
means that there are a couple of
models of safe for what f one
fifty lightnings that could
qualify for this there's a
number of
test less what you would
normally think of it a high end
vehicle that could qualify.
Okay so so then appreciate the
answer to that so then you're
you're reassuring them in this
committee that the models that
they would qualify for this are
the ones with the longer range
that would be adequate for a
state like the mexico when these
are not the short range two
hundred mile capacity vehicles
that are more for urbanized
areas grabbed at chairline date
that's a great question I think
there are some that are going to
be short arranged there are some
that are certainly longer range
for example I was looking at up
this morning one of the of one
fifty lightnings that qualifies
I think is a three hundred and
fifty mile range so it's not
perfect it's not the four
hundred or four hundred and
fifty mile range but it gets you
up into like the longer range
vehicles seem with the testing
model three long range
to represent hockman vehicles
point earlier this is sort of
step one we know that we likely
need to come back and look at a
class of vehicles with perhaps a
higher limit like eighty
thousand dollars matching what
the feds due for trucks
for these for many vans we know
in new mexico these aren't
vanity vehicles people drive
them because they really need
them and so that may be a
following conversation that we
have once we have more of the
data and if it's if it's
we determine it's needed and
then then if as a follow to that
then so when you look at then
your
your rebate for used vehicles
under twenty five thousand
dollars right III think it's
been known then that used e v's
may have issues in regards to
battery capacity once it's hit a
certain mark right so are we
then targeting those with less
means to get into this market by
then saying here you go here's a
vehicle that has maybe half a
battery that you can charge
connect your yourself on write
off i'll give you myself your
thing by it but i've used it for
a few years and and you can
recharge it to about thirty
percent
another great question
what we are seeing in terms of
battery degradation technology
and there's actually a lot of
this reacher.
Research going on at cnd are
right now they're kind of
leading the way is that it
really does take thirteen years
to get to a point where you need
to where you see i'm in many
cases a significant drop off in
capacity not in archie says
people drive in different ways
people charge in different ways
if you charge all the time at a
dc fast charger it is harder on
the battery than if you're
charging at home which is what
made you to ninety percent of
people do
my understanding of the science
behind it as those batteries are
placements are also getting
cheaper and cheaper to do are
more understanding better how
long those batteries can last
were modeling it better and so I
think for now you may see the
older models that are ten years
old have a really large drop off
in their state of health or
their capacity but these newer
vehicles that are coming out now
that are probably likely to
enter the used market in the
next two or three years ages
that they're totally different
they they don't are not seeing
that drop off and capacity in
the same way I I have a friend
that would send you enough
follow up with him
that happens
and then finally I I want to go
to the point that that represent
harper hit on earlier that
madam secretary can you remind
me last year what our tax
capacity was supposed to be at
in regards to our tax package
mr chair not to be glad but I
think it depends on who you ask
last year
they went a bit but a billion
dollars right of capacity when
we're looking at things openly
there were there were
legislative proposals frameworks
to do about a billion dollars
the executive was five hundred
million and then.
Last year's bill that is this
year that that is here but it
was today what at that cost last
year what was the out of year
cost.
Plus one million for charges
okay and so by my recollection
last year's bill this section
was via an item vetoed because
it costed too much at ten
million dollars
and so this year we have less of
a capacity working with we have
two hundred million dollars.
And so we're trying to fit a
bunch of initiatives into the
smaller package and so what is
this year's bill going to cost
mister chair and to represent
harper's points about the vetoes
last year one not dwell on it
but I do feel the need to sort
of correct the the purpose of
the vetoes and it's it's all
contained in the veto message on
hospital five forty seven from
last year but
you know I I think the governor
has said publicly that there
were many sections of last
year's bill that were line item
vetoed not because of particular
policy or fiscal concerns with
those individual sections but
with the omnibus bill as a whole
as I mention a moment ago last
year the governor's framework
called for about five hundred
million recurring tax cuts
and we received she received a
bill that grew to one point one
billion more than double that in
the outers in the main reason
that it grew so much had to do
with the gross receipts tax cut
of half a percent faced in over
years but there were many other
sections that were fully
anticipated to come back for
consideration again
credit that was vetoed last year
was not vetoed due to concerns
about the credit itself however
the the messaging also from the
governor's office you know
talked about we need to do fewer
more meaningful thing it's not
dozens of small things and so
that I think that really diving
into this and committing to it
and and incentivising it this
year through a larger credit in
a bigger investment in this is
consistent with that thank you
and then they're going back to
my question what is the outward
out
figure for this year's but yes
thank you mister chair in the
FIR from tax and raven lfc were
an agreement on the fiscal
impact in the first three years
it starts at twenty seven
million in f way twenty five
forty one million in effort
twenty six forty five million
and effort twenty seven and then
there's a way you know four
years out there is a range forty
five is what tax and rev.
Believes in lfc puts a range of
forty five to fifty one million
and four twenty eight okay so
and I and that I don't mean to
to push
the administration but I think
it's worth to note in this in
this committee that we've gone
up from last year's bill which
we passed and we could support
from ten million dollars which
were together we don't have to
go there but I I think that the
rationale behind the the line
item was was a little bit.
Awkward but at the end of the
day now we come back with a
forty five million dollars in
the out and they out years and
and and now it's a good bill.
Because there's more
money being spent apparently on
this and so III I think we have
to
come to a point where we we we
regulate our expense or
expectations about what we're
going with this and all of the
other initiatives
environmentally related that the
government has as a priority if
we intend to really truly do
something I think all of us are
here to do in that's great good
tax policy versus pick winners.
Throughout this state and in
some cases as identified by
representative dunkin losers and
I get it I mean I I get exact
represent a large portion of
rule new mexico as well travel
to mexico that that doesn't even
have access to elect.
It's difficult for me to say all
yeah that that's that's that's
power up by twenty five every
fifty miles in and I see the the
grandparents on the nab ownation
that that that don't even have
electricity at this point so and
I hear that it well on that at
the same time I think it's worth
to note that this is an issue
that we need to create equity
upon in and I think that's why
we're here to create good tax
policy and not pick winners so
if there are no other questions
or comments at this point in
time I would ask for our vice
german please make a motion to.
Thank you mister chair I move
that we too ball
HB one forty.
You mister.
As amended
as the motion that to temporary
table house build two fifty
three as amended
second by have reason harper
seeing no opposition thank you
for your prestation this morning
if thank you.
And at this point in time we
have come to the end of our
agenda we do have a packed
agenda this week member so we'll
come back and will get that
agenda prepared for you to send
