them, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
good morning, everyone. My name
is Patty Lundstrom. I represent
House District 9 and uh very
happy to be here this morning.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
good morning, uh, committee
members. My name is Doreen
Gallegos. I represent District
52 down in the southern part of
the state. Glad to be on the
committee, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, committee members, um,
Representative Christine
Chandler from Los Alamos, House
District 43, and happy to be
again on this committee.
Morning care committee members,
uh, Sarah Silva, House District
53 representing East Mesa of Las
Cruces and Chaparral and White
Sands orange, glad to be here.
Hello everyone, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, um,
I'm Christina Parajon. I
represent House District 25, and
that is in the central northeast
Albuquerque, and I am so
thrilled to be here. I'm so
excited to be on this committee,
thanks.
Thank you. And let's start with,
with uh Representative Montoya.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Montoya, uh, from
San Juan County, uh, back on
this committee for a two-year
hiatus, so
This will be my 9th year.
On tax.
No breaks.
Not necessarily.
Tax policy doesn't necessarily
excite me like represented on.
But I'm glad to be here.
Let's go uh next.
Representative, uh, Hernandez,
that's why I don't wear a bow
tie. That's not what you went
through just now. Hernandez. I
need a mirror.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
Representative Fernandez, Rio
Rancho, uh.
If you're on this committee with
excited to.
Be here again thank you.
Thank you. Representative Henry.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning members. My name is
Jonathan Henry. Uh, I represent
House District 54, which is
Chavez, Eddie, and Oteroin.
Thank you, sir.
You can be here.
Ranking member Duncan.
Good morning, Mr. Chair Mark
Duncan, uh, District 2 in San
Juan County.
Good to be here.
Thank you. Let's, let's think
back to our Speaker of the
House. Hi, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good morning everybody. Javier
Martinez, District 11, downtown
Albuquerque and parts of the
North Valley.
And I'm the proud to be the
chair of this committee. I, uh,
Representative Derek Lente
represented the sixty-fifth
district in the house. That's uh
parts of Rio Riba County,
Sandoval County and San Juan
County. And with that, if we can
go to the staff, they can
introduce themselves, start back
here if you would please.
Thank you all again, uh, for,
for showing up this morning and
uh before we do go to our, our
presentation this morning. I
want to just share a couple of
things with the members here. I
know that some have to step out,
uh, in a while, but objectives
of our committee, obviously
we're here to um do the business
of the people, uh, preferably to
make good tax policy.
up to
Uh
Obviously
Listen to proposals, uh, try to
make good tax policy on behalf
of the citizens of New Mexico,
um, in this committee, it is my
intent to start our meetings on
time, 8:30. It will be our start
time. Uh, I like to start on
time to, to make sure that I
respect.
You're also uh time during the
day so that we can get in and
out uh even better, um, at the
same time, I want to make sure
that uh when we are here that I
am, I am respectful and that we
are all respectful of one
another. I, I think I've always
run one of the committees that
I've been able to chair in this
uh in this institution, the same
way, and that is to mean that it
doesn't matter if you're
Republican or Democrat doesn't
matter where you come from in
this state, uh, it doesn't
matter if you're uh a male or
female. The fact of the matter
is that each
And every one of us will be
treated with respect, each and
every one of us. I will treat
you with the same dignity that I
would do anybody else, and so
with that being said, uh, I
won't play politics, meaning
that um
Going to like the 24 hour rule,
right? I'm a stickler about
that, that if there are any
amendments, substitutions, or
anything like that. I expect
those from committee members. I
expect those from people
presenting, uh, 24 hours prior
to us hearing that our staff
will be uh diligent in making
sure that you all receive those
in a timely fashion, and if they
don't meet that,
Don't look at me as your bro and
say, come on, buddy, let me, let
me, let me just present it. It's
not gonna happen, right? I want
to make sure that that we all
have a fair shot to make sure
that we understand what's being
presented in front of us. And
with that being said,
communication goes a long way.
I'm looking at ranking member
ducking now that uh used to be
ranking member, uh Harper uh
last year and, and Harper and I,
we would have about 2 days a
week where he'd come into the
office and we just talk about
things that were important to
members of your side and things
that he had ideas.
on, and, and I valued that. And
and I hope that we can continue
that type of, of, of
communication with, with you,
but not, not only just you, but
all of your members, please feel
free to come through and and
visit and, and likewise, if I
can go to your place, I will go
and visit, but that extends to
obviously the members on our
side as well that if you have
issues, concerns, whatever it
might be, please feel free to
reach out with with me as well
as making sure that our
committee assistants know, uh,
if you have any issues as well,
we will be, uh, we'll try to be
as accommodating as possible.
And so that being said, we did
have a couple more members
arrived. So if we would please,
we were just going on and we did
introductions, so we'll start
with Representative Tarazas.
Thank you, thank you very much,
Mr. Chair. Uh, thank you for
sharing all those.
Uh, how, how you're gonna run
the committee? I appreciate
that, uh.
I, uh, and, and I heard your on
time thing and I just want for
the people here. I, I did talk
to the to the chair yesterday
and our ranking member saying I
was gonna be a bit a few minutes
late.
This morning because we have
Grant County Day, but you know
I'm from Grant County, uh, and
that, uh.
Aron and Hidalgo County, but I
live in Silver City, District
39. It's gonna be a pleasure to
sit on this and use a little bit
of my accounting background that
I hadn't used in a while, so.
It'll be nice to be here. Thank
you very much. Ready to learn.
he represent to us, and I wasn't
trying to make an example of
you. I just, I was just saying
this is what we intend to do.
And, and our vice chairwoman.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Thank
you. For those of you in the
building, I'm sure you've seen
the, the hallways are crowded
with providers who've come from
all over New Mexico, um,
including several from Donana
County, my, the pediatrician
that my daughters attend, among
others. I'm grateful that I got
to catch up with some of our
hometown providers, but, um,
it's meant a lot to me to be
part of this committee.
I think the perspective that
we've leveraged with the support
of our speaker and leadership
team is to really, um bring
equity into conversations about
tax policy. And as I've said
since I was elected, you can see
and in real time understand the
state's values. When you see how
we spend our money or we raise
our revenue. So this committee
is at the heart of that, and I
look forward to the good work.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Vice Chairman and
finally, um, you know, this
committee is a bit different
than other ones that you may sit
on in regards to how we, how we
do business here. A lot of the
bills that we will hear, we'll
hear them, but we'll table them,
especially those that have a
physical impact and so just
being on on.
Be aware of that, that, you
know, obviously other
committees, you want numbers,
you want to try to argue your
side and get the votes and
whatever the most part here, uh,
we're gonna hear a lot of bills,
but then we'll table them with
the intent that we're gonna come
back at the end of the session
and hopefully create some kind
of tax package that's meaningful
and that being said, it's been
my practice that I've instituted
over the past couple of years
where uh we will take
All of the bills and we'll have
our staff prepare those, uh, in,
in a form sheet and we'll begin
to jot down which ones are most
important to you and then we'll
make a package out of those on
both sides and try to
collaborate in terms of what
works best for for this
committee itself. And so when we
get there, we'll walk through it
a little bit more, but just know
that that's, that's really the
way that this committee
operates. There are, there are
some though that will come
through here that um may not
have a physical impact, and so
we'll take a vote and for those,
we'll make sure that well in
advance, Mr. Duncan or ranking
member Duncan.
Uh, I'll make you aware of those
that, you know, just, just so
that for clarity, transparency,
and for intensive politics, if
you will, um, you can get your
members noted that we will vote
on these measures, OK? So, that
being said, uh, one thing I did,
I jumped the gun. I didn't even
allow for us to take a roll
call. Um, so if I would please,
Erin, could you please call the
roll.
Good morning, members.
Representative Chandler.
Duncan.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Henry.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Represented Montoya.
Represented
Go on.
But.
Representative Silva.
Excuse me before I.
That that representative
Terasas, OK.
Madam Vice Chair.
Good.
He was good
as again, this is my first time.
And
Representative, no chair
that's it.
Yeah, I, I'm here. OK, very
good. We're we're all here.
All right, folks, we're all here
and we're ready to begin our our
presentations and we're we're so
fortunate to have secretary from
taxation and revenue uh
Secretary Chardon Clark as well
as Ishmael Iitorres, who is the
legislative Finance Committee
chief economist, uh, here to
talk about one.
Acts 101 and or money matters in
whatever way you want to
organize that, but uh.
Having had been on LFC for the
past couple of summers, I've
been uh a part of these
conversations and have been
presented this number of times
and I just find them so
valuable, especially if you
don't, if you haven't been there
to, to learn more about this, it
is very meaningful, so without
any further ado, folks, the
floor is yours.
Good morning.
Committee, Mr. Chair, and, and
everyone, um, I'm Stephanie
Chardon Clark, I'm the cabinet
secretary of the Taxation and
Revenue Department, and I know I
haven't met some of the new
members and I look forward to
working with you this session.
Um, I've been with the
department since 2019, um, we
will be sending you a lot of
bill analysis through the LFC
and directly in a 60 day
session, I think Thaksin Rev
will complete something like 200
FIRs, including the substitutes
and amendments, so just know
that we're, we're churning them
out as quickly as we possibly
can, and we pay very close
attention to.
the agendas of this committee
and the Senate Tax Committee and
make sure everything is, is up
to speed for for both of you.
Um, I have to apologize in
advance. I'm waiting uh to give.
Uh, testimony and support on a
bill in another committee, so I
may get a text if I leave very
suddenly our chief economist
Lucinda Sito is going to take my
seat and you'll be in very
capable hands.
Alright, so without further ado,
we'll start the general fund
revenue estimate, um, big
picture on this presentation,
uh, New Mexico is sort of unique
and I would say fortunate in
that we have a consensus revenue
estimating process across both
the executive and legislative
branches, um, there are some
states where you get a
legislative revenue estimate and
an executive estimate coming
into the session and so not only
do you have to negotiate how
much to appropriate and to what,
you also have to negotiate.
How much revenue you think there
will be and so a couple times a
year, the group of career
economists from four state
agencies, those are tax and rev,
DFA, the LFC and the Department
of Transportation get together
and form consensus on this, so
it's one less thing for you to
negotiate when session comes
around. Um.
In these presentations, we
follow pretty much the same
format, uh, I usually go through
slides that describe what's
going on in the macroeconom uh
in New Mexico, the United States
and globally, and then kind of
translate that into how that
impacts New Mexico's major
revenue streams. And then I turn
it over to my counterpart with
DFA in this case, Doctor
Delgado, sometimes it's
secretary props, uh, to talk
about how that economic forecast
impacts what will come, what's
expected to occur in general
fund revenue sources. That's the
big picture.
where we're going.
So I'll start on slide.
For, and I'll, I'll move pretty
quickly through these, but if
you want me to slow down and and
take more time on any of it,
please do just let me know.
Um, so slide 4 gives a little
bit of background on the
subscriptions that
we have copies of the
presentation you have copies of
the presentation, folks?
Yep.
to be handed out.
No problem.
No, it's fine.
Give me a second to take not 1
but 2 breaths.
I appreciate that. OK, I think
you have multiple presentations
on that, this is the one from uh
Texan Rev and DFA mine's very
written on at this point, but it
looks like that.
This is the 7th time using this
same presentation.
77 times. This is the last one I
think.
Famous last words.
Looks like everybody has them
now, good. OK, so again, I'll,
I'll be on slide 4 is where I'll
pick up, and so this slide
describes the baseline forecast
that the state subscribes to to
inform the macro forecast, we
subscribe to a forecast for
Moody's from S&P Global, there's
a group at UNM called the Bureau
of Business and Economic
Research that does this just for
the New Mexico economy, and then
we have some other services, uh,
like Ricetead Energy that is
very helpful for oil, and of
course we use federal data from
BLS and census, things like
that.
And so not to go through all the
details here, but a couple
highlights, the baseline
forecasts are basically in
agreement right now, we see the
probability of a recession, uh,
in the national economy is low,
there's not a forecast for
recession in the forecast
period, we expect inflation to
continue to trend downward
towards the federal funds target
rate of about 2%, um.
And the Fed to continue to cut
the federal funds rate in coming
quarters.
On the next slide,
Besides, 5 and 6 kind of go
together. 5 is the forecast for
national GDP growth where 6 on
the next slide is the forecast
for state GDP state gross
product, and you can see um the
revision upward in the forecast
between the blue line and the
gray line. So that's basically
just indicating to you at a high
level that from the August
consensus forecast to the
December forecast, there was a
slight upward revision in the
GDP forecast. And, and it, and a
recurring theme here will be
that the US economy.
For just slightly better between
the August and December
forecast. Do you, you know, you
always hear the jobs report, it,
we added a few more jobs than we
thought and we revised upward
the past job numbers. That's
kind of the theme here and so
there was a slight upward
revision, um, and you can see
the forecast growth for GDP
though are pretty moderate, um,
growth rates for the next years.
It was expected to grow by 2.2%
here in calendar year 25 and the
expectation is for 2% growth in
calendar year 26, so.
Positive growth, but moderate.
Slide 6 has the same data for
New Mexico, and again you can
see that the growth is expected
to be moderate, 2.3% in the out
years, um, oh, I, I'm sorry,
0.8%, um, in the out years and
so positive but moderate, and
that will make its way into the
revenues. On the next slides, we
turn to the labor market, um,
you can see on slide 7, that the
US economy has surpassed the
jobs that we had before the
pandemic, um, but again, that
growth curve.
is very moderate in the out
years, and that will make its
way into things like our
personal income tax and our
grocery seats, tax revenues. So
positive but moderate growth.
On slide 8,
let's see, you have the same
data, but for New Mexico, uh,
one highlight of our recent
forecast is that the New Mexico
job market recovered more
quickly than the US, we reached
our pre-pandemic number of jobs
more quickly than the US, which
is really wonderful, especially
considering that uh it was the
opposite following the Great
Recession that started in 2008,
New Mexico took much longer than
the national economy to recover
its jobs and and economic
activity. So that's a, that's a,
a positive.
thing. But again, if you look in
the out years, the forecasted
job growth in the forecast
period is very moderate, and
that will moderate revenue
collections in the coming years.
Slide 9, if you're interested,
has some detail on employment
growth by sector. Um, you can
see that across all of New
Mexico between October 2023 and
October 2024, we added 12,600
jobs, and then we've provided
the detail across all the
different sectors that
contributed to that growth. Some
of the most notable gains were
in financial activities, state
government, leisure and
hospitality, um, and education
and health services.
OK, on to the next slide 10, we
look at what's going on with the
New Mexico and the national
unemployment rates and the
takeaway here I think is that
New Mexico's unemployment rate
is about equal to the national,
I think there was a new number
released yesterday in New Mexico
is at 4.4% currently, which
remains pretty much on track
with the national.
And that is expected to stay
very flat over the forecast
period.
Turning to slide 11, we present.
some data on inflation and
interest rates, um, so inflation
has come down, uh, very
significantly since the peaks we
saw post COVID and the, the most
stubborn factor that is still
contributing to inflation is
inflation and the cost of
shelter, housing, uh, whereas
energy and food inflation have
come down pretty considerably,
which is good, but we still
have, as we all know, for
different reasons, issues with
housing supply and housing
affordability. And then on the
right hand side, we've just got
charted.
The federal funds rate and we
now expect the federal funds
rate to come down a little bit
more quickly than we did at the
time of the August estimate, but
the Fed, we still think is
targeting uh uh to come down to
about 2.98 or 3%.
OK, turning next to some of our
major revenue streams, um, I'll
talk next about oil and natural
gas, um, oil is not only a
contributor to the general fund
through direct revenues from oil
and mineral leasing and things
like that, but it's also a major
contributor to the grocery seats
tax and the corporate income
tax. So, what's happening in oil
both prices and production
volumes is very important for
the general fund.
So, uh, a big takeaway on this
slide 13 is that the price
forecast for oil was revised
downward by $6 for the current
fiscal year, and something
really notable that and I think
it's time to kind of stop and
give ourselves as policymakers,
you as a a pat on the back in
past years, a 6% downward
revision to the oil price
forecast would have been
catastrophic for the budgeting
process. Um, there's different,
there's different rules of
thumb, but a 6% downward
revision.
to the current year we're in
would have reduced revenue to
the general fund in the old days
by more than $300 million. So
you would have been in a
position to have to sort of
scramble and and close that gap,
but because of some very smart
changes to law that have been
made in the past, um the most
recent just in the last couple
of years and then more before
that, there were, there were
some more, we were basically
taking windfall oil revenue, and
rather than dump it into the
general fund where we can grow
the budget at a rate that we all
know is unsustainable.
That revenue just comes off the
top and is being transferred to
places like the severance tax
permanent fund, the early
childhood education trust fund,
and the tax stabilization
reserve. So we've really
insulated the general fund from
a lot of the oil volatility, and
as you'll see in future slides
that oil.
Price reduction that I'm talking
about now didn't have any impact
at all on what's expected to
come to the general fund.
Instead, it's impacting those um
side transfers to other places
for future endowments and
reserves, which is great.
On the next slide, slide 14, uh,
we look at, uh, the relationship
between oil prices, oil
production, and rig numbers, and
so, um, for many forecasts we've
been basically saying that the
number of rigs active in New
Mexico is hovering around 100, a
little bit above 100. And what
the takeaway from the rig count
is, is that rig count or rig
activity is, is what is subject
to the grocery receipts tax. So
when there are rigs active and a
high number of rigs active, that
means GRT.
is active in Eddie and Lee
Counties and flowing to the
general fund.
Rig count also leads to
production volume, which of
course leads to other general
fund revenues and corporate
income tax and all of that. So
there's rig count as a good
leading indicator of what's
going on in a lot of other ways.
Um, it won't go through all the
detail here, but you can see for
the current year FY 25, we
revised upward somewhat the uh
production volume forecast, but
then took it down by the same
amount in the budget year,
there's up and down revisions
throughout the forecast for
volume.
On the next slide, we turn to
natural gas on slide 15, um,
natural gas is a lesser, um,
revenue stream than oil at this
point in New Mexico, it's still
important and natural gas is
very much tied to oil in the
current environment. Oil is, is
really leading the charge, but
the natural gas is coming up
with the oil production and some
of the constraints with oil
booming so much in New Mexico in
the last several years, we have
uh capacity constraints to
pipeline that natural gas coming
out with the oil and get it to.
market and get it to refineries.
Um, so there have been, um, some
revisions to the natural gas
forecast, um, but for FO 24, we
think that it, it looks like we
produced 3570 BCF at an average
price of $3.16 and we expect the
oil forecast to basically or the
natural gas forecast to kind of
follow the oil forecast. It's
the, is the microphone coming in
and out a lot or is that just
me?
I don't know what to do about
that. Maybe that one. OK.
a shot.
Alright, let's try.
All right. Um, next, we'll talk
about the grocery receipts tax.
OK, better. And you know, and
actually before I um move off of
natural gas. I
Good question and two of the
last committees, so I'll kind of
answer it prospectively. Why is
natural gas so volatile? Why are
these, why are these spikes in
price going on a natural gas.
The reason for that, or, you
know, oil, uh, pretty much
trades globally and is subject
to factors that are outside of
our control, things like OPEC
decisions, or in oil producing
regions, uh, you know, things
like that, global demand, what's
going on in the China economy.
So that's all kind of outside of
our control, whereas
Natural gas is very much more a
regional market, um, not that
there aren't things we can do
that impact it, but a very hot
uh cooling season or a very cold
winter or a hurricane can lead
to these spikes in natural gas,
so that's kind of what those
fluctuations are about. Also war
in Ukraine. I had a big impact
and natural gas markets in
Europe, which trickled over to
us.
Alright, so I'll turn to slide
17 and start to talk about the
gross receipts tax, that's the
single largest general fund
revenue source. And so you can
see that um for fiscal year 24,
uh GRT grew by sort of a
depressed rate of 2%, but, uh,
what I'm going to talk about
with GRT and Pit is that that
doesn't really signal weakness
in the GRT. That's the uh impact
of legislative tax cuts, so it
would have grown more, but for
the fact that
We reduced the GRT for the first
time in 40 years. So that's
built into the 2% growth. In the
out years we're expecting GRT to
grow by a moderate 5% in FY 25
down to 3 and 4% in the out
years. Um, let's see, we added
73 million to the GRT forecast
for FY 25, and we added more to
the forecast for GRT in the next
fiscal years, um, 114 million
for FY 26 and 103 million for F.
27.
On the next slide, I think I'll,
I won't go through this in great
detail, but there's a breakdown
of um what we call matched
taxable gross receipts. That's a
fancy way of saying the grocery
seat's tax base. So basically,
the, the business receipts that
are subject to the base here
we've broken down how much they
grew in each sector of the
economy, struction grew by a
very strong 7.3%, um, and it's
also a large part of the base.
I'll skip to slide 19, uh, where
we provide a little more detail
on what's going on in the GRT
base in Eddy and Lee County, the
Permian Basin, and you can see
there how it really is, is
staggering how much of that base
is made up of the mining and oil
extraction industries and how
much it grew, but again, that
growth is moderating that, you
know, grow very strongly from FY
22 to 23, and much more
moderately in 24. So, you know,
in general, you don't want to
see your revenues.
Peaking and plateauing, but when
they're plateauing at a
historically high level, that's
more what's going on here with
oil and GRT and the Permian.
All right. Next, we'll turn to
the personal income tax, uh,
another very large revenue
source for the general fund. And
here, um, similar to before, um,
part of what's going on is
implementation of legislative
tax cuts, and then there's also
an accounting policy change that
is shifting 190 million from
being accounted for in Pitt
instead to be in sit and New
Mexico, like most states, has
changed the way it's taxing pass
through entities, and there were
in the past, the past serenity
tax was.
being accounted for in Pitt, but
for reasons of form and taxpayer
ease, it makes more sense to be
accounting for that in SI so
there's 190 million just being
moved from one light and to the
other. And that's part of the
contraction and, and reduction
in growth in FY 24 and 25.
Um, for 26 and 27 we're
forecasting about 3.9% growth,
and that tracks very closely to
what UNM's Bureau of Business
and Economic Research is
expecting for wage and salary
growth in New Mexico.
On the next slide, slide 22, uh,
we've provided some data on
withholding, withholding, of
course, is the amount that
employers remit at each pay
period, uh, to anticipate the
tax liability that their
employees will owe come April
15th. And so withholding is a
really valuable leading
indicator for us uh in terms of
what's going on, we don't have
to wait all, all the way until
April 15th to have a sense of
what's going on in the personal
income tax, and it's really um I
think great to see the
strong growth year after year.
We've got the quarterly
withholding data shown here and
at the time of the forecast, we
had 1 quarter's worth of
withholding for FY 25, and
again, it grew fairly strongly
over the previous year.
We're looking at, um, an
estimated 4.
Let's see, for FY 25, we revised
Upward the growth in withholding
from 4.1 to 4.8%.
Slide 23 um gives some detail on
recent legislative adjustments
that are um kind of baked in the
cake for this pit forecast, you
can see, um, cumulatively the
very large amount of recurring
tax relief that we've enacted in
New Mexico in the last several
years. So there's, there's one
positive that's um reduction of
the capital gains or we've,
we've kind of reined in the
capital gains deduction and
especially for newer members, we
used to have sort of a broad,
uh,
uh broad uh capital gains
deduction, we've basically
preserved it for the sale of a
New Mexico business, but reduced
it quite a bit for passive
income, like investment
earnings. And the idea there is
that, you know, we, we, I think
it was the thought of the body
that the capital gains deduction
for passive income was sort of
targeted towards very high
wealth individuals, whereas if
you, uh, you know, if your whole
life's work was to have a
business in New Mexico and your
retirement plan was.
to sell it and retire. We wanted
to preserve that capital gains.
That's, that's very different
than passive income. So, um,
that's a revenue raiser in
purple below that, though, you
can see we've created the new
child tax credit. We've expanded
the working families tax credit,
we've created a social security
exemption. It is income tested,
but 85% of taxpayers who have
Social Security benefits are
claiming it, and um a couple
others, but all in all, um, if
we totaled up the recurring tax
targeted towards families that
we've enacted it together in the
last 6 years. It's about a
billion dollars recurring per
year.
All right. I'll skip now to
slide 25. Um, I mentioned
earlier in the presentation,
these, these, what we're doing
with windfall oil revenue, and
natural gas revenue, and so, uh,
basically there is an LFC
endorsed bill that was enacted a
couple of years ago and uh Mr.
Torres had a lot to do with
that, to give him a lot of
credit, um, it basically said
that we will, we will limit oil
and natural gas reve or oil and
gas school tax revenue into the
general fund to the amount
That was received in FY 24. You
can see in the blue bar on the
left hand side that was 1.145
billion. And at this point, all
revenue above that amount is
going elsewhere. So you can see
the amounts that are being
transferred in orange to the
emerging uh the uh early
childhood education Trust Fund,
and in gray, the newest transfer
to the severance tax permanent
fund and very big picture, you
know, we've been struggling as a
state to figure out how to
diversify.
are revenue-based and with the
knowledge that for one reason or
another in the future, oil
revenues won't be what they are
today, whether.
Uh, that non-recurring resource
all gets drilled and produced
and isn't there anymore, or
whether demand for that resource
goes away because of climate
initiatives, 11 way or another,
we can't count on that revenue.
So by putting billions of
dollars per year into the
permanent funds and other trust
funds were able to transform
this surplus of money that we
have today into money for the
future and in the coming fiscal
years, we will actually see
investment income become the
single largest source of general
fund revenue, which
is great. And it also is one of
the least volatile because the
way we distribute it to the
general fund is based on a
five-year average market value.
So we, we've done ourselves a
huge favor and I I think it's,
it's good to just remember that
and give ourselves collectively
a big pat on the back.
So that concludes my part of the
slides. I turn it over to Liam.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
committee members, my name's Leo
Delgado. I'm the chief economist
for the Department of Finance
Administration, and I'll be
covering the general fund
overview of the slide deck.
So on slide 27, you'll see a
roll up of all the major revenue
programs in the table on the top
left, and I'll just hit the
highlights on this particular
site as Secretary Shaon Clark
did a great job of giving detail
of what's driving the growth
rates in most of these revenue
programs.
Um, GRT, which is the main
revenue program in general sales
is continuing to have underlying
economic growth, but at a
moderate rate.
Uh, the same with income taxes,
uh, quick highlight for the
income taxes with some of the
changes that um the accounting
changes that Secretary Chad
Clark mentioned, the income
taxes should really be looked at
together, both personal income
tax and corporate income tax
with that dynamic relationship
that's occurring uh recently
there.
Um, and lastly, as um the
secretary mentioned oil and gas
revenues now capped at FY 24
levels. The last biggest
highlight and the most important
highlight for this particular
slide is in the investment
income line. Investment income
is becoming a greater
contributor of the general fund
revenue in FY 26, it's projected
to surpass and become the 2nd
largest contributor surpassing
personal income tax, and
according to the Craig's long
term.
Forecast by fiscal year 2040,
it's projected to be the number
one contributing revenue to the
general fund.
Moving on to slide 28.
On slide 28, you'll see the new
money, total new money chart
here.
For you, um, with
Estimating fiscal year 26 new
money to be $892.3 million and
how that total new money is
defined is the updated revenue
estimate for fiscal year 26
minus all total appropriations
for the prior fiscal year,
including both non-recurring and
recurring appropriations.
And you can see the breakdown on
that chart there where we have
the two brackets highlighting
how much that total revenue, um,
as it's been called before the
total pie has grown, that's the
$892 million. Moving on to slide
29, here you have a series of
boxes just giving you some
highlights per fiscal year,
showing how fiscal year 24 ended
with recurring revenue
increasing by 12.6% over fiscal
year 23 and reserves at 3.1.
6 billion or 33% of recurring
appropriations.
In fiscal year 25, revenues are
anticipated to increase by 1.6%
over fiscal year 24 and
estimated reserves are at 3.9
billion or 38.4% of recurring
appropriations with the caveat
that it does not include 2025
legislative actions.
And again, total new money for
fiscal year 26 at $892.3
million.
Moving on to slide 30. Here you
have a high level overview of
the general fund financial
summary, and what this table is
showing you is just some detail
about a tool that uh leadership
uses for the state to get a
picture of where the state is in
terms of its finances. You have
detail on in terms of the
beginning balance of general
fund reserves, total revenue,
spending on recurring and
non-recurring bases total
appropriations and wear
reserves.
stand as of the latest forecast.
Moving on to slide 31, the Craig
group here has combined a series
of uh downside and upside risks
informed by the various
resources and tools that we use,
they're informed by Moody's
Analytics, S&P.
And um you have a combination of
downside and upside risks. What
I would like to highlight here
for slide 31 is the main um uh a
risk that our cabinet secretary
DFA has highlighted is a lot of
these risks are outside of the
state's control, but um he's
highlighted some of the risks
that are within the state's
control.
And what he has highlighted is
that in the latest uh bond
ratings.
Analysis, uh, Moody's has
upgraded the outlook for New
Mexico from stable to positive,
which is really good news for
the state and one of the
criteria that Moody's has
highlighted for that is New
Mexico's strong fiscal
operations in the near in the
recent past and its strong
reserves at 30%.
Moving on to slide 30.
32. Here we have the stress test
for um from the consensus
revenue estimating group and
what you have here is the
baseline estimates and a couple
scenarios overlaid on top, one
scenario is a better performing
economy compared to the base, a
lower scenario, which is a
moderate recession scenario and
a more severe scenario, which is
the low oil price scenario.
And here where you can see is
how far revenues would deviate
from the base under these
alternative scenarios with the
main highlight that um under the
severe low oil price scenario,
the general fund revenue could
see revenues decrease by about
$600 million in FY 25, 1.4
billion in FY 26 and 1.5 billion
in FY 27 and it highlights the
sensitivity New Mexico faces to
both an economic downturn and um
Oil price shocks and shocks in
the energy markets.
And you have some additional
detail by revenue programs in
the tables to the right.
Moving on to slide 33. Here is
um an additional information uh
overlaid on top of the stress
test, uh, and what we're doing
on slide 33 is we've accounted
here for uh under the low oil
price scenario.
Uh, how much uh estimated budget
would be available and
negatively impacted under the
low oil price scenario. So in FY
25, assuming the same level of
non-recurring appropriations in
FY 24 under this scenario, the
state could see estimated less
budget for non-recurrent
appropriations by 620 million.
And so in our side that we only
carried that through FY 25, I
believe Chief Torres in his
presentation pushed that out
even further to FY 26.
Moving on to slide 34. Here you
have a general fund, um, trend
analysis and the main highlights
here is this is uh a very good
tool recommended by.
Uh, the Pew Research Center,
highlighting when revenues are
above trend, they may not be
sustainable when they're below
trend, they can stress the
state's resources and the last
main highlight is how you can
see the in the current
projection, how the revenues are
trending back to that 10 year
trend line for the state.
And I believe that concludes my
part of the slide deck and we'll
pass it over to Chief Douglas.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, uh, my name is
Ismael Torres. I'm the chief
economist for you all at the
Legislative Finance Committee.
And before I dive into our
presentation, I just want to
introduce one of our other
economists, Jennifer Fabian, and
we will have another economist,
Brendan Gray, and the three of
us will be covering your
committee in the Senate Tax
Committee. You'll frequently
find us on this side of the
room. So if you have questions
on your FIRs or on any fiscal
matters, feel free to call us
over and we're here to help. So
if you need anything, please let
us know. All right, I'll, I'll
be speaking to this.
Brief. It's not very brief, this
thick narrative on the revenue
estimates. So if you're really
interested in learning more
about what, what's covered here
today, I would encourage you all
to, to take a moment to read on
some of our writing here, and
I'm going to breeze through a
lot of this because a lot of
it's repeated from their
presentation. But I do want to
highlight a few things as I go
through this, this presentation.
One is what Chief Delgado
mentioned. The bottom line here,
$13.6 billion in general fund is
what we're estimating to
receive.
in the budget year that's coming
FY 26.
And in our one of the previous
committees, there was some
discussion or conversation or
questions about new money
figures. So I want to spend a
little bit of time going over
new money, and that's
represented in the chart on the
middle of page one.
So typically, historically, um,
non-recurring appropriations
would be made in the budget year
the legislature met. So we're
currently in fiscal year 25, and
typically you all would come and
make non-recurring
appropriations in fiscal year 25
and then make your recurring
appropriations in FY 26. That
has changed recently and
actually in the previous
session, you all made
non-recurring and recurring
appropriations in the future
year, fiscal year 25, which is
what we're in now. And so we're
in a new era where there isn't
room for non
caring appropriations in the
current fiscal year anymore. So
the future fiscal year has to
support both recurring and
non-recurring appropriations. So
you can see that in FY 25 on
this chart in the middle here,
the red bar reflects recurring
appropriations, the green bar
reflects non-recurring. So in
previous years, that green bar
wouldn't have been there. And
that space between revenues
represented by that blue line.
to the red line would have been
your capacity for non-recurring.
That's no longer the case. So,
in a typical year, we might have
said your new money is $3.4
billion. That's the future year
blue line minus the current
year's red line because we would
know that you can spend that on
recurring and have some room in
the current year for
non-recurring. Since that's no
longer the case. We've
added a new term called total
new money, which we hope adds a
little bit of nuance and
understanding for you all in, in
acknowledging that the
non-recurring and recurring must
occur in the future years. So
now that total new money figure
is 892 million. That's the size
that the total pie can grow.
That's both non-recurring and
recurring and so that's the
reason for that change there.
Hopefully, it's helpful, but
that other number is still
listed there for you all just in
case you prefer that figure
instead.
Keeping in mind that of course,
if you plan to spend $3.4
billion in additional new
recurring spending that would be
no non-recurring in the, in the
current session.
He nuance on the first page, but
it'll get easier from here, I
promise. So if you, if you turn
to page 2,
Um, the
table here in the middle of the
page is what we call the general
fund financial summary. This is
the state's balance sheet and
represented here on page 2 is a
very simplified version of the
state's balance sheet. And you
all as as members of the tax
committee have a very important
role in maintaining the state's
balance sheet in your
maintenance or, or um impact on
the top line. So, of course, as
you all are familiar with
balance sheets, you have your
top line recurring dollars, how
much money you're pulling in,
how much money you're spending
in the middle, that's
appropriations there. And then
what that
out to the bottom line for
reserves at the bottom, um, down
below as, as Chief Delgado
mentioned. So you all have to
work with the appropriators to
make sure that your top line
revenues that you all affect
with your legislation still net
out with what is going to be
spent in the middle of this
balance sheet to make sure that
you're not in an
unconstitutional deficit on the
bottom line. So that's the
important role that you all play
in maintaining the state's
balance sheet. In the short
term, and then in the long term,
ensuring that your revenues are
sustainable for the
level of spending that you all
as a body see fit into the
future.
OK, and if you'll turn, skip a
few pages here.
Um, I'd like to spend some time
on page 4.
Especially for uh new members.
This is an important chart that
helps illustrate the, the
revenue surplus that New Mexico
has been experiencing over the
last several years. This is our
oil production, which has
Secretary Shaon Clark mentioned,
has a large impact on total
revenues both from the in the
gross receipts tax and the
personal income tax, and then of
course in oil and gas related
revenue. So you can see where we
were before the pandemic, where
we've surged past North Dakota
to become the 2nd largest
producer of oil and gas since
the pandemic, and
maybe even more astounding is
the chart at the bottom of the
page here which reflects growth
from 2017, and you can see how
New Mexico is actually powering
the total US production growth
in oil and natural gas,
primarily oil.
OK, if you turn to page 5, this
pie chart at the bottom of the
page.
Illustrates the point that
Secretary Chardon Clark
mentioned, which is the
importance of oil and gas in our
total gross receipts tax
collections. Eddie and Lee
County represent almost 1/3 of
total collections primarily
because of the production in in
Eddie and Lee counties. And so
if we experienced an oil and gas
decline, price crash, production
crash, we could expect maybe a
third of our grocer seats tax
revenues to dry up very quickly.
So that would represent maybe a
billion dollars there so you can
see how quickly our general fund
could lose funds in, in the
event of that worst case scena.
ri o
Um, if you turn to page 6, just
another additional note to what
Secretary Sheon Clark mentioned
in the past several years, our
GRT growth was driven by
Oil and natural gas production,
which falls under the mining
category. And if you look at the
chart at the top of the page,
you can see FY23 growth really
led by that mining category,
almost 45% growth from our sales
tax coming from mining that is
no longer the case. We're seeing
the, the um industry slowed down
in the state and so we're seeing
that gross receipts tax growth
slow down pretty dramatically in
the, in the most recent fiscal
year, and we're now seeing our
grocery seats tax being led by
construction and a professional
services.
If you turn to page 7, you'll
recognize these charts. They're
similar to what Secretary
Chardon Clark mentioned, the
blue bars here reflect the
amount of oil and gas-related
revenues going to the general
fund, the green and the orange
reflect those distributions to
other interest earning accounts,
but another point here, not just
in the benefit.
Of what we're receiving now from
those interest earning accounts,
but also the benefit of the
insulation, the math here you
can see FY 23 was a peak year.
We had really high prices in
that year, which caused our
revenues to explode as revenues
have come down, the total
collections are coming down and
we would have seen about $1.1
billion in revenue loss over
those two years.
That we are, we are not having
to experience because of these
insulating measures. So that's
an added bonus there.
If you turn to page 8, here's
the flip side of that. Not only
do we get the benefit of the
insulation, we also get the
benefit of the interest earnings
on those investments through the
power of compound interest and
of course the large growth
imbalances. The chart at the top
here reflects the growth in the
general fund by different
categories of revenue in the
general fund. And you can see
very clearly that the green bars
which reflect that interest
earning coming back to the
general fund from those
distributions to investment
accounts, leading the way, um,
maybe 3 or 4.
4 times more than the average
growth rate on the other
revenues, and of course this,
this revenue source is also the
most stable revenue source in
the entire general fund. So
seeing that it's leading the
general fund in terms of growth
is really good news for us as
economists.
All right.
If you turn to
Um, page, let's see, should I
skip.
At page 13, please.
We'll spend a little more time
highlighting what Chief Delgado
was mentioning with regard to
the stress test. So, as he said,
your economists see how far
revenues could fall in the event
of an unlikely or maybe even
likely scenario on the upside
and the downside. We see that
the worst case scenario for New
Mexico is a price decline that
results in a production crash
and how far that could fall
below existing expenditures. So
the, the bars here reflect
recurring appropriations in blue
and then non-recurring
appropriations in gray. So,
Assuming flat appropriations,
that's no appropriation growth,
we can see how that would look
in the future years. So assuming
you all didn't add in the coming
session. How far would revenues
fall below existing
appropriations. And if you turn
the page to page 14, we've
graphed that out for you at the
top here, and we would expect
that with flat appropriations
you might have revenues below
existing appropriations about 6
$700 million in the current year
and then 2.1 billion or excuse
me, 700 million in the current
1.4 billion in the future year
for a total of $2.1 billion of
shortfall combined over those
two years. And so this is what
we would suggest would be an
appropriate amount to hold on to
in cash in the event of one of
those scenarios so that you can
continue to cover those existing
appropriations. And so that's
again, copying flat
appropriations if you plan to
expand your appropriations
either on non-recurring or
recurring, that would be added
to this amount. So if you plan
to grow appropriations by 500
million, you would add that to.
The 2.1 billion for 2.6 billion
needed in cash on hand. The good
news is reserves are at $3
billion. So you certainly have
enough room to cover those
expected expenses.
All right, I want to end on on
one last note on page 21.
So if you could flip to page 21.
The chart at the top is, is a
pretty famous chart. Um, if
you're not familiar with it yet,
I'm sure you will be because
it's, it's very common. This is
what is called the roller
coaster chart. It's called the
roller coaster chart because it
certainly looks like a roller
coaster represented by the black
lines which represent um revenue
growth and decline over the past
20 years, and, and we actually
can run this chart back to the
1960s and see a very similar
story. And of course that
volatility has been primarily
driven by oil and gas, which is
highly influenced by prices.
And that volatility shows up in
our revenues going up and down.
And, and what that's translated
to in terms of policy making is
a very difficult position for
you all to think strategically
and long term because just like
any family, if you had revenues,
your income coming up and down,
you might be trying to live
paycheck to paycheck and not
have as much of an opportunity
to think long term and save for
the future. We're we're seeing
that shift now a new era being
entered where revenues are
expected to be much more stable
due to the recent measures that
Secretary Chaon Clark mentioned.
Um, which hopefully will, will
provide and give room to you all
as a committee in the
legislature as a whole to plan
more appropriately for the
future. But I do want to point
out that the flip side of that,
maybe the downside of added
stability is lower revenue
growth.
Um, over time, so you can see
we're coming off the heels of
record revenue growth, almost
20% and 22 and 23. That's really
being downgraded to about 2.6%
in the budget year. We expect it
to be slightly below the trend
of about 4% in the future. So a
little bit of headwind that is
the result of that stability,
but we think that that's a
positive trade-off there.
And with that, Mister Chair
we're happy to take questions.
Thank you very much, Izzy. Thank
you Secretary. Thank you, Chief
Delgado. Uh, we do have a number
of, of
Guests that entered into the
room and uh I guess if anybody
wanted to get sick now would be
the time. But uh that's your
veterinarians, um.
But I just want to welcome you
all to the Tax and Revenue
Committee. Thank you for joining
us. Uh, we're, this is our
orientation meeting, first
meeting of the of of the of the
committee uh season. And so what
we're doing now is we're just
going to a general overview of
of the money matters for the
state of New Mexico. Task kind
of one on one for committee
members that are new on this
committee. So, uh, no bills
being taken up today, but we
will begin that, uh, as soon as
we get bills assigned to us. So
welcome again. Thanks for
joining us. Uh, secretary or, or
Chief Torres, were you going to
go over this, this packet at all
or it's up to you all if you'd
like us to take questions at the
end or um we could take
questions on this presentation
and then move on you. OK, let's
take some, some questions and
comments and then uh if if if we
have time, we can go over this,
but are there any questions or
comments? Representative Silva?
Thank you, Chair. um, thank you
committee and secretary and um
presenters, I appreciate the
presentation.
Um, you, I think, um, had
mentioned that.
Part of the analysis is the
forecast is recession, the
likelihood for a recession is
low.
Inflation's gonna stay down and
interest rates will continue to
be cut. Um,
How, how are the outlooks like
how will you know how those
outlooks are faring like by when
might we know, oh, we need to
adjust that outlook.
Thank you, Mister Chan
represented himself. That's a
great question, um, part of the
process for the consensus
revenue group is that they look
at whether it's necessary to do
a mid session estimate that
adjusts and so they're currently
looking at all these economic
indicators and new uh actuals
that have come in over the
months and as a general rule of
thumb, they look at it, they
tally it up and if it, if it
changes less than 1% of general
fund revenue, we issue a memo to
you that says.
There's no change to the
forecast, and if it's more than
1%, then we do a revised
estimate, I would say at this
point it looks unlikely that
we'll revise the estimate.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to Representative Parajon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you all so much for
your presentation. I just have a
few questions, uh, the first is
that on the on the tax base of
the GRT on slide 18, um.
What, what are the unclassified
establishments that are.
Making up the
That are growing so fast and in
the GRT that looks like the.
30%, that's the biggest one
growing.
Mr. Chair Representative
Parajon, so I, I believe the
unclassified establishments is a
bit of a catch all category. So
we'll have to look into it and
um follow up with you if you
want some additional detail as
to what is in um
In that particular sector and as
far as the percentage growth, it
seems like it's a high
percentage, but it, it may not
be as big in terms of uh in
levels.
You know, and, Mr. Chair and
Representative.
I think I'll just add to that
that.
There's, there should always be
a caveat on Texan Revs NAS code
data for the GRT itself reported
by businesses when they
register, so unclassified could
just mean somebody's really not
sure what we're asking on that,
and it, it's not audited because
it doesn't impact the ultimate
amount of tax that gets paid. So
it could just be a lack of
understanding by taxpayers
registering.
And then the second question I
had is, is, as we were talking
about oil and gas, um.
You know, New Mexico, I think
now we produce as much oil and
gas as like a small Middle
Eastern country, um, and talking
about the impacts of how, you
know, we're on this roller
coaster, do we also have an
influence then on the global.
Price of oil and gas, or are we
not at that level yet.
Mr. Charon and Representative
Parajon, I think a major
difference is the state control
of oil production in the Middle
East. That's typical versus
here, um, we represent maybe
about 2% of global oil demand or
supply, however you want to look
at it. And certainly if 2% went
off the market in in one day,
that would absolutely have an
effect. But the, the um small
what what feel like large
fluctuations to us are small
fluctuations on the global
market.
Thank you, Mr. Jared.
Thank you, representative. It's
got a, uh, ranking member
Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I, uh, I'm glad to see the white
coats here today.
Mr. Cha, some of these look
about as old as my oldest
grandchild.
So I
Can't believe I'm this old.
Um, I, I'd like this committee
to know that I am not
Representative Harper.
I wished I had his brain power
for this committee. Uh, this is
not my love language either.
So,
Having said that, thank you for
the presentations.
Madam Secretary.
Um
We talked about uh 1400
government jobs created this
last year.
Can you tell me percentage wise
or number wise, what the overall
government jobs in the state of
New Mexico is, and the reason I
asked that question, are we, are
we being driven by business or
we being driven by government in
our new jobs creation for the
most part.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Duncan.
So I'm looking at slide 9, and I
think, I think you are too. So
let's see, we've got.
Different levels of government
jobs that are broken out, um,
state government grew 2.6% or
1400, um, and then on down the
line, let's see we have
government as a whole, which
includes state, local, and
federal grew to 2900 or 1.6%
local government on down and you
can see federal is at 0. So is
your question where
geographically those jobs are
located?
Thank you, man. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, no, Madam Secretary.
My, my question would be,
How many government jobs are in
the state of New Mexico versus
how many jobs in that class of
workers that are working, is it
55%, 51% are in the job market.
How many of those are government
workers and how many of those
are employed by private sector.
Oh, I understand, so of the
participating workforce, Mr.
Chair, you're asking how many
are are government versus
private.
You want to go ahead. Go
Mr. Chair Representative Duncan,
so the uh state workforce
represents about 5% total
employment of employment in the
state.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, thank
you, sir, for that. Does that
include teachers? Does that
include?
County's municipalities.
Mr. Chair Representative, so
that's a good follow up, so the
5% would be just state
government. It does not include
um education that that there
they would be categorized
differently.
Mr. Chair, I'd be happy to hop
in on that. We, we see about
20%.
Jobs in New Mexico, which is
certainly higher than the
national average.
Employed at government across
levels that would include
teachers, federal as well. Um,
but I, I do want to point out
that these are snapshots in time
and this snapshot in the
executive presentation may look
heavy on the government. Um, we
also have a snapshot on page 28
of ours that shows government
quite low, um, and, and
In the long term, looking at it
from the pandemic perspective,
government was very slow to
recover jobs. Private really
drove the, the employment
recovery in the state over the
1st 23 years, we're finally
seeing government catch up after
the fact. So a lot of these
graphs and charts will show
government leading the way, but
there's a lot of catching up to
do from the pandemic.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that.
Um
Madam Secretary, in fiscal year
2627, the GRT forecasts or
trending upward. Can you tell,
tell us why you think.
What's gonna cause that?
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Duncan, I'm just getting to that
slide so I can.
Look at it while I respond.
So for FY 26 and 27, um,
basically the we're we're
forecasting 5% growth in FO 26
and then 3% in the out years for
the um budget year FY 26, we
have a little bit more certainty
of the forecast, and so we're
looking at tying in, for
example, what's forecast to
occur in oil and natural gas
markets, which is a driver, but
also what's going in
construction and housing starts,
wage and salary, go through all
of that together, um, as well.
is inflation and population
growth, all of its more certain
for the budget year. In the out
years were pegging that more to
the baseline forecast for the
global economy. We still have
built into that what's happening
in oil and natural gas in New
Mexico, but it's going to follow
more closely that trend I
mentioned of positive but
moderating growth.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary, um, you know, if I
were
If I were king for a day.
I would, uh, take that 892
million and put it in our
permanent trust.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Appreciate you, Representative.
Anybody else, questions or
comments on this matter?
Yes, ma'am, it was their
luncheon.
And thank you for a good
presentation. I'm gonna have to
have you guys on some of these
things, but I did have a couple
questions, Mr. Chairman. I'm
looking at your appendix 8A on
your Moody's analytics.
Um
I know you all are looking at
things, uh, now that we have a
new.
A new administration in
Washington, but the first
question I had is when um we
start opening up.
All the federal leasing
opportunities down in the
Permian. What do you, what do
you think's gonna
Captain.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Lungstrom, so if I believe the
understood the question was, uh,
how would
The new federal administration
impact the oil production in the
Permian, what I, what I
understand is that that's all
going to be opened up now as it
was a few years ago.
is a strategic reserve, so.
Remember when President Trump
was in office the last time the
entire Southeast reserve.
So my question to you is, is,
are you starting to look at what
those revenues are going to be
once we, we open that.
On the federal, federal side.
Yes, Mr. Chair Representative,
so, um.
With our resources and the
information we have, uh, we are
looking at that and
From the industry perspective
with the feds streamlining
permits, making a little bit
less regulation for producers
that that may be that may look
more favorable to industry,
however,
Their decisions are currently
being driven by uh focus on
capital discipline and their
financials and return on
shareholders, so there's no
expectation that in opening that
up, there'll be this massive
ramp up in production. It's more
driven by their, their capex
projections and um their
financials.
Now, Mr. Chairman, I think it
would be good if, uh, at some
point we
We would have more information
on that because it would
definitely.
Affect what the revenue stream
looks like. I also have a couple
of other questions on this same
appendix 8A, Mr. Chairman, um,
When we're looking at.
Moving people from the state.
And what that looks like if
that, if that does occur.
And you're looking at income.
acts and you're looking at.
Business activity have we
started to look at that at all
for the state of New Mexico.
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative
Lindstrom, yes, so this slide
came from uh Moody's Analytics
and their outlook from just
before the December revenue
estimate, and they are looking
at what these policies are going
to have an effect on both the
national economy and on states
overall.
to the degree that they have an
impact on the economy will vary
depending on how aggressively
the feds actually implement it
and to what scale and so to
answer your questions, we, we
are monitoring that and keeping
an eye on that.
OK, good. Um, also.
I do need to see uh
I don't know, maybe I, maybe I
need some, some better glasses,
but I'm looking at the general
fund financial summary.
And that's on page 40. I.
have to apologize. I can't read
it. It's too small. I don't
know, maybe everybody else can,
but I'd like to get a clear copy
of that if I could. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Absolutely, we can get that for
Representative Lustrom. That'd
be great. Thank you for the
questions.
Uh, anybody else questions or
comments at this point?
If not, uh, there is a uh
wish that we could go through
this presentation, uh you can
make it quick if you want to,
but I think it's important
information that you can.
Help us with uh we appreciate
it.
And we have Jennifer, yeah,
absolutely
just real quick, um.
Secretary, thank you very much.
I just
If, if for some
For some reason,
We, we lost all of our oil
production because of
Things that the legislature is
doing.
What would that really give us
an impact.
Or New Mexico, how would that
impact us? What would that mean
if we, if we pass things that
would really take that away,
that revenue away.
to chair and representative
Terazos, um, in that scenario,
if there were no future, no, if
drilling ceased, I think is your
question. Uh, we know that the
life cycle of wells is short,
that the production is very high
at the outset of the well, and
then it drops off pretty uh
steeply because of technology.
So depending on the nature of
the question, if there were, if
there was no more drilling, we
would see a significant amount
of revenue, uh, dry up.
Um, there are also though, uh,
approved permits, so if it's a
different question of what if
permitting were to cease, that
would be different because there
are a lot of additional permits
already existing that could be
worked through.
If permitting was stifled,
right?
I thought we run out of oil, but
that we, we stifle that through
legislation or whatever.
What would then if we lost that
that the ability to produce it
for those reasons.
How would that stifle the
The budget, go forth in revenue.
OK
Mr. Chair Representativerasa,
so, uh, currently producers have
a pretty good inventory built up
of those permits, and if in this
unlikely scenario that were to
happen and we hypothetically
assume all permits were to stop,
uh,
I believe, uh, and I'll have to
double check the numbers and
follow up, but the level of
inventory that producers have,
they could continue producing
for several years at the current
pace before that impacted, but
as Secretary Sergeant Clark
mentioned, if there were no new
permits in all drilling stopped
because of those uh because of
the how well work is you have
very high production in the
first couple of months and then
a steep drop off, that activity
has to continue. So if there was
no new drilling and activities.
then it would be very
detrimental to the state.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
we can go forward with the New
Mexico tax overview.
Uh, we're looking at secretary
or Jennifer?
Both of you right, Mister Chair,
members, um, this is a slide
deck that we've presented in
different formats over the
years, we call it the tax 101
slide deck, and I think what
I'll do just to prevent
disruption in the committee,
I'll just kick us off, uh,
Jennifer has the first few
slides and then I'll leave you
in the hands of Lucinda, Sito,
our chief economist with Tex and
Rev, so that I don't disrupt the
flow by getting called away.
Am I getting called away
already?
OK, so without further ado, um,
We're always here to answer
questions that you may have in
more detail on these, but I'll
leave it to the team. Thank you
so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. I've been
introduced a couple of times. My
name is Jennifer Fabian. I am an
economist over at the
legislative Finance Committee. I
have here with me, chief
economist Lucinda Sio from TRD.
text expert extraordinaire, so
we're excited to get into this.
This is gonna be a little bit of
a deeper dive into taxes
specifically.
Sorry, that's cutting in and
out. Um, so we're gonna go
quickly, wanna get you guys out
on time, um, but we are doing
this presentation again tomorrow
for a new member orientation if
you want a little bit more
information and we're always
here for questions.
So we're gonna jump right into
it.
Starting on page 4.
I really just want to highlight
again some of the points that
were brought up.
In the last presentation.
Shoul we try that one?
So on this box, on page 4, it's
just a
The high level overview of the
revenues, um.
Kind of in the major categories.
So the first you'll see is sales
taxes, about 1/3 of our revenue
is coming from our grocery
receipts tax. The next highest
revenue is our direct energy
revenue. So this is the oil and
gas revenue that comes straight
into the general fund, um.
And
That's about 25%, so about a
quarter of our revenues are
direct oil and gas revenues.
Next, we have income taxes.
They're about 50, 22% are income
taxes. That's both personal
income tax and corporate income
taxes.
And then the next bucket is our
investment revenue. And I want
to sit here for a minute on
investment revenue cause this is
really, really unique to the
state of New Mexico.
Not a lot of states have this
large share of revenue, not
being born by taxpayers, but
being spun off of investment
accounts made at Representative
Duncan is already talked about
this this morning, um, this is
quite unique. Um, this is 14% of
revenue that taxpayers in New
Mexico do not have to pay to
support the level of revenue
that we're currently at and to
support the budget and to
support spending. So that's
really, really unique. And this
is largely oil and gas revenue
that
has been put into these
investment accounts that now
spinoff revenue. This is our
largest growing revenue share.
It's rapidly growing. It is
expected to overtake personal
income tax, um, in the next year
or two.
So it's, it's a large, large
share and that's really
really a, a testament to the
work you all have done and
putting money um from this
revenue, this oil and gas
revenue away, um, to spin off
additional revenue.
So now I'm gonna go very, very
quickly through the tax
programs. So we're gonna talk
about the tax rates, how these
taxes are collected, how they
might be distributed to other
funds other than to general
fund. Um, but I'm gonna go very
quickly. This is a resource for
you. You can always refer back
to the slide deck. So starting
with groceries, these taxes,
again, the largest uh revenue
into the general fund.
There's 2 taxes that the grocery
taxes are levied one by the
state and one by locals. So the
state rate is at 4.875% on goods
and services in the state of New
Mexico.
We use a grocery receipts tax in
the state of New Mexico instead
of a sales tax.
This is levied on the seller,
not the buyer. This was largely
a decision to capture some
revenue from the national labs.
We're not allowed to tax the
federal government, but we can
tax their sellers, they are
selling things to the lab, um,
so that was really one of the
drivers of that decision to go
with the grocery receipts
instead of a sales tax.
GRT rates.
With the state share and the
local share stacked ranged from
4.875 to 9.43 across the state.
Moving on to page 6.
Uh, just a couple, um, kind of
policy issues around the grocery
seats tax, I think would be
useful for you all to know as
we're looking at bills that
might come through this
committee. The first is
destination-based sourcing. This
has passed a couple of years
ago. This source is the tax to
the, the final location of the
sale instead of the destination
of the seller. This allowed us
to capture Internet sales, um,
and really helped capture a
larger base of GRT revenue.
The second is pyramidding.
This essentially is the issue
that because we tax both goods
and services. It's very broad
based, uh, an input that might
be taxed once um under a regular
sales tax at the final sale, um,
on the, on the buyer essentially
is taxed under our system,
possibly multiple times as it
goes through a production chain
or a value chain. Um, this is
called pyramidding, essentially
the tax of that product is taxed
multiple times.
I'm gonna basically skip
compensating tax. It essentially
closes a loophole in gross
receipts tax. It's a companion,
uh, tax to gros receipts. It
essentially allows the state to
tax things that were purchased
out of the state for use in the
state at the same rate as the
grocer seats tax.
Moving on to page 8.
A selective sales taxes, so
talking about some excise taxes,
um, the first is tobacco. We tax
both cigarettes and tobacco.
Pretty competitive rates there.
We don't stick out um at the top
or the bottom in, in the rate
that we tax these things. I want
to point out cigarette taxes are
distributed to both the general
funds and to various UNM and
NMFA uses the tobacco tax goes
all into the general fund.
Moving on to liquor excise tax,
um, we're right in the middle of
the pack. We're the 24th
highest, uh, liquor tax in the
state. Um, this is taxed on the
volume of the liquor sold at
wholesale, not at retail, um.
Which is an interesting way to
tax. There are pros and cons to
taxing at the um
On the volume instead of on the
sale price, um, we can get into
that later if you have questions
about it, but want to note the
distributions of the liquor tax
at the bottom, 50% approximately
goes to the general fund and
then a lot of the others go, the
rest of the distributions
basically go to locals, um, for
the DWI grant funds into the
drug court fund.
Uh, we have a tax on insurance
premiums. Uh, this is
essentially in lieu of other
taxation. They don't pay GRT on
insurance premiums, um, so we
charge a tax rate just over 3%
um on insurance premiums and
then health insurance premiums
or tax, um.
was increased to about 3.75%.
This is distributed um to a
handful of different places,
including the healthcare
affordability fund that helps
pay for health um insurance
programs for low and
middle-income New Mexicans. And
then the general fund also
benefits from this tax.
Moving on to page 11.
We have a gaming excise tax. Uh,
this is either 10% or 24.8% of
the net take, um, from gaming,
uh, establishments.
Uh, the 10% is for not for
profits. This is a lot of your
local clubs like your VFWs and
your Elk lodges that might have
a little slot machine or have
some other kind of gambling. Um,
the others are for largely race
tracks and larger, um,
Gambling establishments.
And then we also have a tribal
revenue sharing from the tribal
casinos as well.
Moving on to page 12.
We have our cannabis excise tax.
Uh, this rate is phasing up as
we speak, um, so I started at
12%. It'll increase 1% a year
until it reaches 18%. Uh, this
is distributed to the general
fund and to local governments.
Motor vehicle excise tax is 4%
tax on the sale of new and used
vehicles. Uh, the distributions
of the MBX go to both the
general funds and to the state
road fund, which pays for our
state roads, as well as the
local transportation projects
fund, which are state dollars
that get distributed to locals
for state or for road
maintenance for local roads.
And from here, I'll pass it on
to
A chief economist Sio to go over
the rest of them.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, again, my name
is Lucinda Sio. Thank you so
much for having us, and I wanna
reiterate what Secretary Chad
and Clark said, we are here to
support your committee,
including my boss, Mark Chaiin,
the tax policy director. So I'm
going to take it off on slide
14.
income tax and as Jennifer um
already talked about this is
about 20, including with
corporate income tax, about 22%
of general Fran money, all the
income tax revenue goes to the
general fund and both with
personal income tax and
corporate income tax, we
piggyback with the federal
government in that it defines.
Mike too close. I think they're
super sensitive. So maybe push
it back a little bit and then uh
speak up. OK. Is that a little
better? I apologize. Thank you.
Um, both the personal income tax
and the corporate income tax,
piggyback on the federal
government's definition of
income, so we start with federal
adjusted gross income, and from
there, like many other states,
we then define what we want is
taxable income, so, um, that's
the biggest takeaway I wanna
push on slide 14.
Turning to slide 15, we, um,
like many states, we do
graduated tax rates, so we are
at 1.5% is our lowest tax rate
up to 5.9% and this tax year
starting January 1st, we now
have new tax brackets, so we are
looking at um a more progressive
tax system that um
As Waho's slide here that shows
moves more um lower tax rates
for middle income individuals.
Um
The other thing to point out
that um in addition to um the
tax rate, we have many credits,
rebates, exemptions in the
personal income tax program.
Again, a lot of those are for
the progressiveness to support
low income, support particular
populations as mentioned in the
previous um presentation, Social
security exemption. We also now
are permanently um exempting
some military retirement
exemption, so a lot of different
um
is in the personal income tax
code to support different
populations.
On slide 16, um, corporate
income tax in FY 24, 535
million.
Um, again, as mentioned in the
first presentation, we are now
recognizing um pass through
entity tax in the corporate
income tax, so this fiscal year
25 will represent a full year
passed through entity, so
corporate income tax will have a
slight increase in its share of
general fund with that auditing,
um, excuse me, accounting move
of pastor entity. Again,
corporate
Comes from the definition of
federal government and what we
start out as income for
corporations and um if we if we
move to um slide 17, you can see
just a summary of what is
established as corporate income
and then the subtractions, um,
and additions that we do as a
state.
Um, and I wanna slide 18.
There's a lot of um
complications on how corporate
files and again we've listed
reporting methods, but typically
how a corporation files at the
federal government is how
they'll file with the stage, but
we, they can elect different
ways of filing, we just live
once they select that, we then
have them um file that way for
usually about 7 years. Um, but
again, it's usually tied with
how they, they are set up.
As a corporation and how they
file with the federal
government.
But on page 19, I just want to
highlight some unique pieces to
the New Mexico code and that is
the apportionment factor, that
is how much of their income
they'll apportion to New Mexico
and most corporations are on the
3 factor sales, property, and um
Payroll, excuse me.
So typically that's how they
would file with those three
factors, but we have two
exceptions. If you meet the
manufacturing or headquarters
requirements, you can then
select one factor, the sales
factor, which typically is
advantageous for corporations
who do most of their sales out
of state.
Turning to slide 20.
Oil and natural gas taxes.
We apply 5 taxes to the severing
of oil and natural gas and the
rate um on oil currently is
8.27. It varies depending on the
Avalorum taxes which are um
revenue that goes to the local
governments and that's a varying
rate, um, and then the current
um weighted.
Rate for natural gas is 8.97%.
What I just want to highlight on
this slide is we've typically
are talking about general fund
money from the emergency school
tax, but oil and gas taxes also
go to the severance tax bonding
fund with the severance tax, and
as I mentioned, a lot of revenue
goes to local governments. We
also have, um, the conservation
tax where some of that goes to
the general fund and some to the
reclamation fund.
Turning to slide 21, you can see
those rates broken out, and I
think um.
I will see who put these tables
together, illustrating the
different rates and as
mentioned, the Avalorm taxes
will vary, um, every year as um.
Those are recalculated and again
that revenue goes to local
governments.
Quickly on slide 22, just want
to highlight, you know, we focus
a lot on the general fund, but
the economists are looking at
other major funds too,
especially those top 4 state
road fund, um, for road projects
and then the the permanent
funds, um, and then certainly we
we track revenue to local
governments and other smaller
funds, including on slide 23,
um, the unemployment insurance
tax.
And before I conclude my section
on side 24, we also help.
Collect local and tribal tax
revenue, so on the GRT program,
on the cannabis program, um, on
gasoline. So as a department, we
collect that revenue for the
local governments, for the
tribal governments and then send
it back to them in distributions
and importantly, there was an
administrative fee that we kept,
um, that went to the general
fund to support that
administrative collecting, but
that is now going to be phased.
way and in 29 we're expecting
about 69 million to go back to
local governments with the
removal of that administrative
fee. Um, and
I'll end with the tribal taxes,
just a reminder that they are a
sovereign, um, entity and they
can have their own taxes, but we
were cooperatively with them,
um, and collecting their taxes
and working with them on the
rates and with that I will hand
it back to Jennifer.
Thank you.
So moving on to page 26. I want
to talk about tax policy
principles. So this first slide
on page 26, we're going to be
looking at these tax policy
principles quite broadly. So
this is borrowed from New Mexico
Tax Research Institute. Uh, this
is Richard Inglem's, uh,
organization that looks at tax
policy across the state of New
Mexico and encourage you all to
attend those conferences if you
can, um, they're wonderful,
brings in people from all over
the state and all over the
country to talk tax, so
a nerd like us, we love going to
those. You might, you might opt
in, you might opt out. Um, so,
looking at, uh, taxes kind of as
a, in a general lens, um.
There's a couple principles that
we'd like to adhere to. The
first is adequacy. So
essentially revenues and taxes
should be sufficient to fund
needed services and not more.
Uh, we don't wanna overtax the
economy, but we also need to pay
the bills.
Uh, the second is efficiency.
This is essentially that the tax
achieves the goal as
inexpensively as it can, um, and
that the private economy should
be, um,
Left without as much
interference.
The third is equity that all
taxpayers should be treated
fairly.
Simplicity, the laws,
regulations, forms, and
procedures should be simple,
easy to implement, easy to
understand.
Comprehensiveness, this is
essentially we, that we look at
the tax code as a whole. Uh, we
don't look at one thing in a
silo, but we look at tax burden,
um, and revenue needs across the
state and across tax programs,
and the last is accountability
that exceptions should be rare
and should be carefully
evaluated before putting into
place.
Moving on to page 27, a little
bit more practically, these are
the tax policy principles that
the LFC looks at when evaluating
changes that are proposed
through the legislature, so we
actually will put these on every
tax expenditure FIR. You'll see
these on your bills if we score
them for you, um.
And really this is a more
practical look, uh, less
theoretical than Richard
Anklem's, um, we're looking that
they've been vetted. Have they
been through a committee
process? Have there been
discussion about them in public
settings, typically an interim
committees like the tax revenue
and stabilization Committee or
the LFC.
Uh, we're looking at tax
expenditures are targeted, that
they are specific to the
population that you are all
trying to help or incentivize or
change behavior.
The next two transparent and
accountable kind of go together.
We want to make sure that
there's annual reporting on tax
expenditures that we can track
who's taking them, how much they
cost, um, and that they're doing
the job that they're supposed to
do.
The last two effective and
efficient, also kind of go
together. Does this tax
expenditure achieve the goal
that's intended as cheaply as it
can. Um, and as efficiently as
possible.
I'm gonna pass it back over
quickly to listen to Sio to talk
about tax expenditures and the
tax expenditure report.
Jennifer has the magic angle.
I'm gonna see if I can match
that angle in the opposite
direction. So on slide 29, the
tax suspended to report is a
report that comes from the
taxation revenue Department. It
has been
Published since 2012 by
executive order, but now, um,
thanks to legislation passed, it
is now required by our
department to publish by um
November 15th of every year and
in that statute, it defines what
we should be reporting on tax
expenditures and
You know, there's, as we were
talking about, we have this tax
base for all these programs.
What we look at is where we
deviate from um from the tax
base where we're giving
preferential treatment, but also
I like to say where we're
spending through the tax code,
so kind of where we look at in
the tax code for those types of
policy, tax policy, um,
approaches, but the, the big
expenditures that we will report
on or
its deductions, exemptions, and
preferential tax rates and we as
a department collectively
determine in the tax code what
we think our expenditures, and
we certainly consult with um the
legislative Finance Committee to
see what we think should be
reported on where we actually
give dollar figures to genes.
Where you can look at what we're
spending, what the cost is.
Um, and we find that this is a
very important tool for
legislators as you're deciding
on on.
You know, it's um extending an
expenditure, adding new ones, we
are hoping that this is a tool
for you to um to evaluate those
and we published them on our
website. You can also absolutely
contact us so that we can send
you directly a copy of the
report.
Um,
on slide 30.
Um
Again, as I mentioned, we, we,
we are typically reporting on
exemptions, deductions and
credits, and very quickly I will
highlight as many of you know,
the difference, but just, um,
for those that may not clearly
know the difference. Exemptions
and deductions are taken from
the tax base. I like to think of
it as a box. We've defined the
tax base as Jennifer and I've
describing for each of these tax
programs, exemptions and
injections carve out some of
that box for certain.
taxpayers, so we're not
including in the tax base, so it
lowers their taxable base so
that when the rate is applied on
it, they owe a lower tax
liability. Credits, on the other
hand, are after you've
calculated what is tax due and
it's a dollar to $1 lowering of
their tax liability, um, and we
more often see credits in the
income tax programs.
So moving with those kind of
broad um types of expenditures
on slide 31, we just summarize
here how we group all these
expenditures. We have 5 major
categories, the largest being
citizen benefits, and then, um,
the next being healthcare,
economic development, highly
specialized industries and
environment, um, that's just a
way for you all to kind of see
where, what was the intention.
The original legislation and
where we've
that expenditure, and I won't go
any more detail here. You can
certainly look at our report to
get more detail.
But I think 3032 gives a nice
overview of what the, what the
top 10 were in our last report,
um, at the top there,
prescription drugs, oxygen,
medical cannabis, GRT, GGRRT
deduction. It's been, um, at the
top for a long time, but I want
a caveat the color coding there
on the right indicates our level
of confidence, um, because this
is a deduction that is not
separately reported, so we are
using other data.
To evaluate a green means we
have direct data to evaluate a
yellow means, you know, pretty
good data, but, um, there's the
top 10 and 2 to point out that
are new to the top 10 is the new
child income tax credit there at
number 5, 131 million, and the
sales of services to
manufacturing GRD deduction is
in its 2nd year and now, um,
Uh, number 4.
On side 3 to 33, um, just a
quick highlight that most, most
of the cost of these
expenditures on the state, but
there is a local portion in the
case of, say, gross receipts
tax.
On 2034, excuse me, um.
Just want to quickly recap.
Changes in the in the tax
program from the 2021 session. I
won't read these all want to
reiterate the first one, which
is new pit brackets, um, going
in this tax year. We've now made
permanent the exemption for
armed services retirement. The
corporate income tax rate also
is changing. It's now a flat
rate of 5.9% and as mentioned
earlier, we're now phasing out
the 3% admin fee on GRT
distributions.
And I will conclude with slide
35 mentioning earlier, showing
how with the new tax brackets
were
For middle and lower income were
lowering their tax rate and
shifting it so we don't have
this huge, um, the 4.9% bucket
there in purple we're, we're
spreading out the tax brackets
more um progressively in the tax
code.
And with that, I will turn it
over once again.
Alright, last section. Almost
done. All right, so the last
thing I want to talk about is
tax progressivity. This is
really a measure of who pays.
the taxes. Who bears the burden
of paying taxes in the state. So
on page 37, you can see an
illustration of what this looks
like, a progressive tax is one
in which upper income families
pay a larger share of their
incomes to taxes, then those
families with lower incomes, a
regressive tax requires uh lower
income families to pay a larger
share of their income in taxes
in a proportional tax is
essentially a flat tax. And I
want to look at this in the new
Mexico context, typically we're
looking for progressive taxes,
uh.
The larger share of your income,
like pay the taxes, demonstrates
your ability to pay those taxes.
Typically lower income families
are spending a lot more of their
income to meet, uh, their daily
needs, um, while larger income
families typically have a little
bit more space in their
household budgets to contribute
to taxes.
So looking on page 38, this is a
measure from the Institute of
Taxation and Economic Policy.
They put out a couple, every
couple of years they do a new
analysis of states, um, burden,
basically across incomes.
And I want to point out here
that just a couple of years ago
in 2018, our tax structure was
very, very regressive. You could
see the lowest 20 and the 2nd
20% income brackets we're paying
over 10% of their income to
taxes, while the highest, the
top 1% was only paying 6%.
And you can see in the lighter
blue bars, how that has changed
in just the last couple of years
in a large result of the work of
the tax committee, the
legislature, and the governor.
You can see now that.
Uh, the lowest 20% is only
paying 7.1%, um, the large, the
highest incomes are paying
about, uh, 8.1, up to about 11%.
Um, you can see we've really
restructured how the taxes are
paid in the state with
especially through kind of half
of the population, it does
increase as your, uh, incomes
increase, and then it does kind
of revert back to
regressiveness, um, in the top
half of the income structure.
And just a little bit more
detail for you all. You can see
New Mexico's tax programs here,
grocery receipts, taxes are
regressive, lower-income
families again are spending more
of their incomes and their for
paying more of their incomes and
groceryce taxes.
Uh, property taxes are fairly
aggressive as well, but I really
You can see the, the lowest
incomes are actually getting
money back from the state, their
income tax burden is negative.
And that's really a result of
refundable tax credits through
the personal income tax code.
That's the working families tax
credit. That's the low income
comprehensive tax rebates.
That's the restructuring of the
income tax brackets that this
committee did last year, um, has
really helped shift that. A lot
of times taxes to restructure
the burden. It's often done
through the personal income tax
to offset regressivity in the
grocery receipts taxes and in
the property taxes and this
committee and this legislature.
and the governor as well has,
have done a really wonderful job
in targeting the lowest income,
uh, brackets in the income tax.
And then lastly, just to
highlight what I was just
saying, improving tax
progressivity in the state. Um,
taxes have been cut by almost a
billion dollars, over a billion
dollars if you count, um.
Some other cuts we have, uh, you
all have done in the last couple
of years, um, New Mexico has
jumped 18 spots from the 27th
most um progressive to the
number 9th or the top 10 most
progressive states in the
country now. Um, again, we've
talked about a lot of these, but
expanding working families,
expanding liquor, introducing
the child income tax credit, um,
all of these things have
contributed to that shift. Um,
so I just want to commend you
all.
And with that, I will, we can
both stand for questions. I know
we're getting short on time.
Thank you for listening to us.
We really appreciate it.
You're right on time. Thank you
so much for the presentation.
Are there any questions or
comments from any of the
committee members. We have some
on this side who I sort of.
Representative Therasas.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I, I just
One of the things that really
caught my attention, and I'm
sorry I got you, uh, Mrs. Clark
and Mrs.
I'm Jennifer Fabian with LSC mhm
let's try that again.
and Lucinda Sio.
OK. Well, thank you for your
presentations. It's really
interesting. I really what, what
caught my attention was
The, the, um,
Recurring revenues that you're
getting from investments, 14%,
and then you made a, you made a
statement that it was gonna
increase quite a bit more,
almost, uh, uh.
Over, uh, it was gonna go beyond
uh the income personal income
taxes did I understand that
correctly?
Yes, Mr. Chair, Representative,
that's correct. I think in our
forecast we have it overtaking
personal income tax, 26 or 27 in
the next couple of, of fiscal
years. That's incredible. I
think Mr. Chair, the only reason
I'm, I, that really caught my
attention is and and again I'm
new to the committee here is the
intent of the committee or and
and uh is, is to
Offset personal income tax in
the future. I'm just asking in
general, uh, to, you know,
offset some of those people I
was looking at the brackets
here, maybe in the middle class
income, maybe even share it with
businesses to make us a more
attractive state like like uh.
Like Florida where they
eventually.
Eliminate personal income tax. I
don't know if that's a, I just
thought I.
As that if that was the intent.
I'm new here.
And, and if I may, uh, to your,
to your point, representative,
uh, the intent of this committee
is to create tax policy that
benefits the people of New
Mexico, right? And so what, what
we've done here by way of these
investments is we had this
influx and injection of dollars
from oil and gas revenue,
really, and that instead of just
throwing the budget more and
more and more and growing
government more and more and
more.
Again, we we credit and I think
it was already mentioned before
that we have some really
intelligent uh individuals
working for legislative finance
committee, uh, the gentleman
right here, Ishmael Eitorres,
who is the chief economist, came
up with the concept and the, and
the idea instead of just
continuing to grow this and
spend it, let's put it away, use
today's dollars for tomorrow's,
uh, use, right? And so that's
where they're talking about
these investments and it's
really the investments for a
rainy day for a number of other
initiatives, but we haven't
identified really.
In terms of where we want to
spend it.
Truly and how to utilize, but
it, it's, it's the matter of
taking volatility out of the
budget by which oil and gas.
Contributes to
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I
appreciate that a lot. I, I, and
I didn't mean it in a dollar for
dollar scenario, but, you know,
share it a bit of that was just
my question. The other thing is.
I, I was in just for my clarity.
When you're
collecting what I heard here,
Mr. Chair, is that uh the state
of Mexico is, uh, collecting
grocerycets tax from um from our
um tribal areas.
And so were you just, you, were
you giving that back, Mr. Chair?
100% back with an administrative
fee. Is that the way I
understood it?
Mr. Chair Representative that is
correct that we collect on
behalf of local governments and
tribals, um, where the tax
incident is in their destination
location and then distribute it
back to them and we were
previously um subtracting an
administrative fee which will be
phasing out for both local
governments, um, municipalities
and counties and for the tribal
governments. I think that's
great. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
That's, I just wanted that
clarity. Thank you so much and
thank you for allowing me to
that question.
And, and to the, the committee
members, the new ones and even
those that are returning, ask
questions. You have to ask
questions and we have a great
staff here that you can call
them or text them and and
they're very responsive and they
know their stuff so let's
continue with uh uh vice
chairwoman Kadena.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for your fantastic presentation
as usual, uh, for those of us
that have been around tax for a
minute, we know that we don't
usually have a room full like
this. Um, we're usually a
committee that has a much
smaller audience. So I
appreciate you all for coming as
you have for many parts of the
communities we represent to be
here, very visually impactful,
right with your white coats, um,
ah, but Jennifer, as you might
imagine, I have a couple of
questions on how and just again
for.
Engagement and learning of the
committee, but also for the
audience we have in the room
today. I imagine you all know
New Mexico is one of the few
states, one of the handful of
states that does impose um GRT
on healthcare services. So their
particular ways that we've.
Pointed tax release relief
efforts to try to continue our
work in retaining providers,
expanding providers, we have
things like the rural health
techs.
The real health provider tax
credit we have um the birth.
Worker, workforce retention
fund. There are many, um,
standalone pieces that we've put
forward to try to.
Make New Mexico a financially
feasible place for you all to
continue to raise your families
in practice. Um, in my recent
memory, our most recent attempts
to do that were um with Cha
Gallegos Representative
Gallegos. Last year it was like
the hospitals coming forward
with a self-imposed tax in order
to raise reimbursement rates for
those services, um, and then
with Cha Lente here in our big
tax package of 2023, I think was
that 5:47.
He had House Bill 547 and one
piece of that that came out of
our compromise with the Senate
was the
GRT exemption for the co-pays
and deductibles.
If I remember right, we had a
sunset on that.
Of maybe how many years, um, Mr.
Chair, I, so that.
Just came online, but as it
stands, we'll be phased out
soon. Um, but for you all, all
the expert economists in the
front row here and I miss you
grads, I always like to shout
out, especially at the first
meeting of the year, um.
When we see a room full of
providers like this.
Do we have, um, a 2025 cost
estimate on what
Expense it would be to the state
of New Mexico if one day we were
able to afford moving in a
direction like.
Exempting healthcare services
from the chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
I'm not aware of a cost estimate
that we've done that exempts
all, um, health care from the
GRT would be quite expensive.
There's a lot of spending in
that industry, um, certainly
happy to score any proposal that
comes forward. I also just want
to point out on page 31, just
eyeballing, uh, the kind of
total healthcare expenditures
that we have is um close to $60
million at this point, um, I
don't know if Izzy knows of, of
a back of envelope.
est im ate for that, but, um,
we're happy to
to work on that.
Um, Mr. Chair, and as we wrap
today, certainly this is our
first meeting of a long session,
um.
It's a conversation I think we
should be having. There's going
to be a significant cost to this
someday. And what I've offered
in front of this committee over
many years is I'm not convinced
the particular approaches we
have put forward are actually
retaining or engaging or
recruiting providers in the ways
we might hope. Um.
The real health tax provider
credit. I've appreciated Chair
Garcia or Representative Garcia,
for his, um, long-standing
effort to just add providers to
that list year after year, but
as I've said often, um, that
credit maxes out at $5000 and I
imagine, uh, with.
How we hope you all are paid
after years of education and
training, that $5000 credit
isn't helping you make a
decision about whether you move
to Texas or Arizona or New
Mexico or whether.
The, the practice environment is
the right place for you here or
in our neighboring states. So
for instance, we, we spend
little pockets of money on the
real health tax provider credit.
I'm not sure.
That that's the right way to do
it, or if we should be in a
longer conversation to account
for many of these factors. So at
least I'd like, we'll see what a
proposal looks like at least
like at least to get that number
in the next few weeks so that we
can begin and continue
conversations that many of us
have had, including about
medical malpractice with Terry
Lindstrom over many years, um,
and the concerns you all have
raised, so thank you for being
here. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Anyone else questions
or comments?
OK. Oh, I'm sorry.
Representative, thank you Amber
Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm gonna
take a piggyback off our vice
chair.
So we do a tort reform.
These guys here, men and women
both, um, in my part of the
world anyway, they're gonna go
to Colorado and a drive up 45
minutes to them.
That's where we need to start
the conversation along with
everything.
Chris said,
One of the, and I've just got
two comments, Mr. Chair. One of
the reasons I ask about the
Talked about putting the $892
million into the trust fund was
That gap of those folks who are
on the sidelines that could be
employed that are not looking
for jobs right now is huge. In
the state of New Mexico.
That means those of us who are
paying taxes.
That's where the bulk of this is
coming from.
That's why I'd love to put all
that money into there.
Now, having said that, I would
love to have this conversation
about how we're going to tax
renewables.
If renewables and cannabis are
going to replace oil and gas. We
better start talking and serious
discussion about that.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, ranking member
Duncan. Anyone else, questions
or comments?
Seeing none, folks from the LFC,
folks from the tax department.
Thank you so much for sharing
your intelligence with us. Uh
again, members of the committee,
reach out to these individuals.
Uh, please grab their, their uh
mobile numbers because they are
very responsive. You text them,
call them, they are, they are on
the spot and they are very
helpful in regards to helping us
understand better uh some of the
implications of things that
we'll be seeing later on in this
session. Uh, a couple of
housekeeping points, uh,
Uh, he saved the day. There are
a couple of dinners next week.
There's a joint, uh, Senate and
House tax dinner on Monday.
Uh, at 6 and, and, and the
flyers are going out right now,
the yellow flyers. And then
there's also our committee
dinner, which is next week.
On the 5th
At 6 o'clock,
And so uh we'll, we'll send out
the invitations for that as
well. And so, also, please note
that uh as, as by virtue of
being a part of this committee
that you will likely be a member
of then in the interim, the
revenue stabilization and tax
policy Committee, and, and I
would encourage you so that uh
if you can garner some more
information from that, uh,
please join us in that interim
committee because you'll learn a
ton of more stuff related to um
Everything that that the title
represents uh in regards to the
tax stabilization and, and
revenue aspects of, of the state
and how it works. So that being
said, I appreciate all of you
today and uh we will see you on
Friday. Have a good day.
