Summer as well so
we have one item on our agenda
and is house bill two its the
household release bill I will be
presenting and my vice chair
will be meeting but before we
get to the bill since we haven't
met before why is and there are
some new members of the
committee could just have a
brief introduction of each of
you and then we'll move forward
on the substantive part of the
meeting so let's just start from
the end and go for
Representative Lujan.
This is their first time in in
committee up Representative
Terrazas Han I represent house
district forty eight here in
Santa Fe capital city and that's
most of our metro area here
the City of Santa Fe happy to be
here excited to get this work
done thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Montoya from San
Juan County Representative
cities of Farmington and Aztec
and.
Communities of the plaza and
short distance.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee and to
our guests here today I
Representative Andrea Romero hi
Sir house district forty six
northern Santa Fe County we
start in the City of Santa Fe go
throughout the Pojoaque valley
Sir for sovereign public not bad
for it Madam so and just to get
all the way into the city of
Espinoza.
Good afternoon Representative
Derrick let day I represent
house district sixty five which
includes the counties of Santa
Rio Arriba and San Juan
Representative.
From the town of early on hello
Sandia's seven pueblos I met I
Navajo Nation chapters the agree
Apache nation so start from
north Albuquerque all the way up
to Colorado welcome everybody
it's good to see everybody
person I do miss the.
The thank you madam chair good
afternoon on Tania Maestas
district sixteen which is up in
the west by of Albuquerque
Bernalillo county.
And the northern half of my
district madam chair is home of
the state championship boys
girls looking at the stock's.
Good afternoon I'm
Representative Pamela Herndon's
of house district twenty eight
and I just want to know is so
exciting to see this many people
interested in tax and tax
policy.
So I am in the northeast heights
and if any of you in my district
please come up and say hello and
even if you are so thank you.
Right right now all I Santa Fe
the next former speaker of the
house.
thank you madam chairman Jason
Harper Representative C. R. the
Rio Rancho area.
And I just have to still stay
this is the best most beloved
Committee.
You're doing a great job.
Good afternoon I'm Josh were
Hernandez districts sixty which
is the other half of Rio Rancho
that Jason doesn't have thank
you everyone for being here.
Good afternoon madam chair but
the news downtown Albuquerque
and parts can now we could see
right we went over it was also a
key
Great to be back in person I do
not mean as soon as we could
have been this happy to be here
in person and looking forward to
the debate today.
State representative Larry Scott
representing district sixty two.
Which is the northern portion
pops.
And most of the rest of
centrally County.
Let's see everyone here and.
Also but to be back in person.
Representative James stripper
district to San Juan County
Representative the south half of
a Farmington go out to the
landfill to the sterile that it
went to the to the west and
rural parts of the San Juan
County led to be here thank you
madam chair.
Again welcome everybody I'm
Representative Christine
Chandler I am from Los Alamos I
represent district forty three
it's a pleasure to be on
discussing this important bill
today M. as a formality I'd like
to ask the secretary to take a
important role call just to get
us off the ground here thank
you.
Representative Harper your.
Representative.
Your.
Representative here.
Representative Maestas.
Here.
Representative.
Representative Romero.
Representative.
Your.
Representative Strickler you're.
Vice chair here.
Yes.
Here.
Thank you for that just a few
preliminary comments and then
all in the gavel over to the
vice chair or vice chair so I
will be presenting house bill
two today that is what we're
calling some people are calling
the Revit bill the household
release bill and I'll be
presenting that momentarily in
terms of how will be conducting
the hearing vice chair current
and what year is it meeting I'll
present the bill will go to by
journal go to the audience I
request that people who wish to
speak please keep your comments
as brief as possible we want to
get this bill down to the floor
so we can get money out to
needed to our New Mexicans and
so we're gonna limit the amount
of time allocated to two minutes
I believe there is an
interpreter and we're happy to
have you and so will will be
accommodating that
anything else any questions.
So thank you I will present.
So let's see can you hear me
sounds like the Mike is picking
me up great all right.
House Bill to is a bill that
provides rebates in the amount
of five hundred dollars for
individuals one thousand dollars
for married filing jointly to
all virtually all New Mexicans
in the state to a file tax
returns.
there's a second piece of the
bill and by the way that we're
proposing that the payments go
out and two pieces one in the
spring one in the fall.
The second piece of the bill is
A provision that provides
payments to individuals in this
residents who are not filers non
tax filers in the state we are
proposing to create a fund of up
to twenty million dollars that
will fund these payments it is
modeled on a program that we
we do legislature enacted in the
past and it has been implemented
by health and Human Services in
cooperation with the tax
department and it's very similar
in that people must apply there
are qualifying criteria there
are of evaluating criteria that
TRD will apply to ensure that
only those who are entitled to
receive the payments received
those payments
and that's essentially it in
terms of what this bill does and
the intent of course is to
support families and citizens in
the state who are experiencing
very high gas prices almost
unprecedented gas prices in the
state and the ripple effect that
that those very high high fuel
costs have on every individual
in the state and with that madam
chair unprepared to answer
questions after public comment.
Welcome to the.
Or.
Well now go to the audience
forty four public comment is
there anyone who wishes to speak
in opposition to the bill.
Is there anyone.
Who is personally attending
would like to speak in
opposition to the bill it.
Okay seeing that are there any
is there anyone who would like
to speak in support of the bills
here.
Thank you please stand to
introduce yourself and you have
two minutes for your comments
thank you madam chair members of
the committee good afternoon my
name is Judy will intend I'm
here speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce which supports this
effort to share our historic
surpluses driven by the state's
energy production directly with
New Mexicans many of our
taxpayers are also small
business owners all know what
they are going to.
Right now our consumers and
businesses are experiencing
runaway inflation and some type
of relief maintenance just to
comment on the bill the chamber
strongly supports this rebate
plan but it also urged the
legislature to continue to
address the fundamental problems
in our tax code that make our
state less competitive we need
to address that issue so that we
can continue with economic
growth and can continue to
attract investments here the
second comment that the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
which is to be on the record is
that in the chambers opinion it
would seem to be just more
straight forward with this
approach if we just limit the
rebates to those tax filers who
have the appropriate tax
identification numbers thank
you.
Thank you very much.
If you would just please step
forward if you would like to
make a comment.
Thank you.
Please introduce yourself and
then the number that you noted
that it.
Thank you
for.
All of the people and I think
people.
Your.
Media estimated at this time the
holidays get but that most Mr
and miss me after about our
models you're looking at
affinity with the your available
all right yeah you spelled you
can place the.
This is yes is the economy plus
a separate.
You'll you'll federal.
The posting salaries and
benefits of medicine but also
make you that much you see more.
It.
Well that that really in those
areas which I would just put the
new at that because the money.
Good afternoon my name is not
enough on site is a member of
the center for workers of so
most impressive New Mexico I
received the economic stimulus
but I am still in need of
economic support.
And.
many families and I in the and
workers of immigrant workers we
support we pay taxes we support
our economy and we do declare
taxes and this demo just this
economic stimulus is a yes
that I would use to purchase
clothing from the children and
to be up to date with payments
from a vehicle thank you very
much for this opportunity to
give my testimony.
Well let me number this program
in those that you think will
that role with.
So it is late but they Sliq
almost one point one you.
Hi my name is floor amendment
and those that and I I come from
the hospital and part of
someone's and Preludio.
Secondly we and that but when we
see impuesto that this yes I
think that you I contribute and
pay taxes US of thirty years ago
since thirty years ago the wood
on them up on them yet the is
the.
I mean when that the the me but
that lack of and went on that is
to see that cake at the one
which took when you that me
going you that during the
pandemic my community I was
faced with a lot of needs will
get us that's also open up but
up with but at schools but will
the cattle local but I'm news is
yes I'm just because political
means.
In our community we had to spend
our state means to be able to
purchase basic needs like food
and other basic necessities
you'll be in so get in in the
twenty that that rule that go to
school but on that is item is
castles or makes you spent this.
I believe that in my rural
community the resources were
nonexistent or very scarce.
In the middle man you let ME but
up but part of me but thank them
the COVID mail got.
These funds would help me be
able to pay my mortgage and pay
for my vehicle which are just.
Right.
Hello in the new number is not
my vote I don't yes I members
etcetera anywhere that
individuals in but a lot of any
such individuals they meet at
this because the separate apps
are how it is consumed me
employment but the other month
the sink when we can get those
in the scoreless those are
Fotis on them but SLO's if I
mean if this that pulls me
start.
Hello good afternoon my name is
not a lot of that and I'm a
working mother and member of its
and they wanted a chance an
immigrant rights of workers
justice organization and I look
at the New Mexico with over five
thousand five hundred members
which of whom are low wage
workers and extended families.
The bill up on the man.
Me is there any up in our State
FY impact that our fifty over
the top are holding PSLE process
questions send us the people
drop out of state laws by well
that'll be list they put that
guy like I sent you on this is
yes but you guys Mr Perot Mr of
program the assistance now if we
look what is clear the National
the purpose of this is sincere
but it's in this call models is
this the most is the one of the
this in playoffs.
Since the beginning of the
pandemic my financial stability
was impacted I lost hours of
work as a kind of cleaning
houses which made it more
difficult to pay our bills the
house mortgage and the basic
methods for survival our
families were excluded from
traditional economic assistance
program such as a stimulus and
unemployment.
Someone called me that they can
do we get this.
Yes I hold it in the comment
that was but I will sync with
those gone Mr no matter the in
order to provide you me I mean I
think with both a conte would
get up on me this this battle is
host okay is this battle in on
me he called in beef fat and Mr
I mean yes he could conceivably
jump in Estevan Wetzel.
We are a community of taxpayers
undocumented workers pay taxes
using our I. T. number every
year my family pay taxes and we
contribute so much to the
economy of the state it is only
fair that the New Mexico state
of New Mexico and base in our
families and include us on this
rebates.
But is that what people miss
Bailey must get for you in the
present up with that and they
get you that yeah motion from
the last act as you are multiple
unicorn on the call you could
begin doing yeah.
Is there for your nose plans
that we then we shop.
But even if you still there was
a community that yes yes.
For this reason I ask you to
support and pass this bill that
will help many families like
mine and that did not receive
any financial support this
support can greatly benefit our
community thank you.
Thank you.
This mean on this and that the
whole state of the house I don't
know that we don't mean you
stimulus and the other one that
in that age.
Hello my name is summed up but
also that I am a domestic
workers a day care of children
and I'm a member of simple.
This this deal with that comment
which is that is this for me yes
I just opened up a program
that's been infants and this is
the most fun lessons that
Aniston's from Eunice second
which of course is like with
that order your December seal
this video depicting them into
the midst of a horse twenty in
the US and was kind of them of
the west but does is that.
This time I would have been hard
for families we've been looking
through how to sustain ourselves
to continue to survive.
And a lot of our a lot of us
we're cutting hours from work or
were fired from our work which
had a even farther hurdle in our
ability to sustain ourselves.
What
tell us when we just can't seem
to agree that the market is that
if you get the less I mean that
is that the least the benefit
comes but and you can see it all
the simply out what this program
is that you that's what this
does the imposed emissions tests
on.
This economic impact it's even
harder for families that were
excluded from traditional
packages buckets of economic
relief and unemployment and
other programs that were offered
for families to be able to stay
afloat during this emergency the
public health emergency.
let's see say it was about the
little device that a handle the
idea explaining that as a
condition is that the office I
know that is going to be in the
political at the community with
families what is so get
injectable into the military and
economic part of the last with
us from here.
Yes we continue to work every
day continue to support our
state economically and continue
to work even on unhealthy work
conditions to be able to
continue to offer food at the
table for families this rebate
and economic relief should be
offered to all families in New
Mexico thank you.
Good afternoon my name's on our
unit and not from Hopson Hey
beat believe it there for forty
six years I have much sharper
children that work in the oil
industry.
And eight Texas I live in a
rural community that has been
impacted by the pandemic that's
why it is important that we are
that are Amy Grant workers get
their stimulus reimbursement as
well as we are Representative as
well okay we are representing
six counties and their needs my
committee paid big amounts in
Texas is that are employed as
our employees oil employees have
contributed to the state for
thirty five years thank you very
much.
Hello in the army number is
eight yes D. A. N. as possible
sooner yes and also the name of
the Clovis even so close so
members of the so most important
to you.
Good afternoon my name is please
reject us and this is my wife
Lucy let me get us we are coming
from Clovis and we're members of
someone support you.
Most of this and we affect the
the building to build up on the
map please you're talking about
my the state science and the
leachate yet even as possible
muscles in New noon Garcia home.
Our families found are we found
ourselves very affected and
divided during the pandemic
for sixteen years I've worked
for the city yes.
And very and with a very very
long hours of work and very very
low wages and salary.
In the settlement was up we end
up and was that a the importance
of the issue and that is but the
one is all you idea the staff
hand thing econ one also doesn't
this almost on it was still and
the COVID is so say it say down
up when we put down the path
mistletoes Katie as almost and
it was you.
And we came to support the
national rebates because it's
it's very important for our
families and us as workers.
Okay and I said yes is on route
this is which MAS important to
participate on we just sort of
gets whether must vocal.
And in rural areas.
Policies like these are a lot
more important because we work
hard long hours and salaries are
low.
At the moment the last part is
that I keep the commandments the
most that all.
But I move that could put us and
all separately mass at eight.
It wasn't the most little more
it just feels like in a
subscription you get also a
that's all of us this.
we feel very appreciative we
come from communities that
usually are don't are not
speaking up it raising their
voices so we feel very thankful
to be here and be heard.
The yes very thankful.
Thank you.
Senator once the speakers in the
audience.
What to speak.
I will go to the to the virtual
audiences there's no one from
the virtual audience so you
Michael okay
thank you madam chair on and I'm
happy to take questions from my
colleagues thank you I think
members of the committee would
like to have questions for the
presenters.
I see one.
Thank you.
Thank you.
I will start with the
Representative Lujan.
Thank you madam chair
thank you
and check.
President Reagan this is for
work on this piece.
I think it's really important
and I just have to say have we
look at have did you look as you
were coming to how we were going
to
incentivizes this rebate at the
profits in the margins from gas
and oil and what they are what
those profits in this March look
like right now.
madam chair and representative
we did not factor that into our
self assessment on this bill I
understand that I'm just asking
for you looking at that is there
any do you have or could you
make any comment or have any
information for us to to to
understand or know about this
time on that Madam chair
representative no thank you
madam chair I appreciate that I
just want to make that comment
because I mean that's where we
find ourselves here today and I
don't think that that's being
not mentioned at all chair
Representative Schmitt this is a
this is why we're here and we're
seeing these these profit
margins that we've never seen
before and I knew we understand
that you know the volatility of
the gas and oil industry right
now and and what that means for
our state especially and I'm
just wondering and maybe even
the secretary manager would
could be spotted are we looking
what are those margins that we
may be anticipating due to these
hikes in prices for this next
fiscal year check madam chair
and Representative Lujan I can't
really speak to profit margins
of the company is but what I can
say that the from the general
fund revenue estimating
perspective and maybe that gets
to the point the the group that
does revenue estimates
economists from all the agencies
have gotten together and feel
that revenues are trending about
five hundred to seven hundred
million dollars higher than were
expected as of the December
twenty twenty one forecast and
so that certainly plays into why
the state is in a position to be
able to offer these rebates.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Secretary I really appreciate
that and again in getting to the
point of of never before seen
types of of margins and see what
that means for us is revenue for
the revenues of our state and I
think this is a very responsible
position that we're taking and
and that we are we are coming to
this this place in the way that
this is been crafted and I want
to really
Really revisit this do that
through the internet and see how
you know what this means for us
of our state documents to thank
you for the time and all the
energy in in input that you you
helped madam secretary with this
happening this bill together
thank you madam chair appreciate
the time thank you.
On the net Representative
Hernandez.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay.
But folks are interested
can you tell me
we're or.
Why we came up with the the
dates of
June thirtieth and then between
September first and September
thirtieth at states that these
are going to come out.
yes Madam chair representative
thank you for that question so
as I pointed out and as you
pointed out we're doing two
increments one in the spring and
that is intended to address hi.
Gas prices and related increases
in costs to our citizens in the
state residents in the state
we felt that it was prudent you
have those payments separated by
fiscal years so that one is in
one fiscal year and the second
payment obviously a spread out
into the second fiscal year.
In a in addition the way we
structured it the payments in a
sense follow the increased costs
because you know that people are
paying these costs as they go
and so one payment now will
help.
You're right some of the stress
that people are feeling
financially and they'll have a
second rate payment to to do
that as well
in terms of which month you know
I think there's some flexibility
there so the first payment is
intended to be receive sent no
later than the end of June our
hope really is that it happens
in may and then we were looking
at September you know it's just
a space question but certainly
there sum up what little wiggle
room in terms of the second
payment.
In terms of assisting our our
citizens thank you for that I'm
certain that that actually works
perfectly I would like to move
up kind of an on the fly
amendments that we had talked
about record for this meeting
set to move seconded tax rebate
from September first and
September thirtieth to August
first and August thirtieth it
still stays within the second
fiscal year but really does get
this release into the hands of
the people who.
As as fast as we can within
state guidelines so yes so I
would like to move that
amendment it's not I consider
that a friendly amendment and
just to clarify it would be on
page sorry now it's to page two
section the number two.
Fourteen fourteen.
So.
Sure yes I suggest that for me a
long so for the.
And that would be H. two line
fourteen strike both currents
and stuff and we're.
September.
Answers in there
August.
Thirty H. to line fourteen.
just just to clarify madam chair
do we care that it's August
thirtieth and not August thirty
one of nine I mean I'm I'm a
gnostic on that point.
Okay
however we it is the thirty
first is the last day of the
month we were just discussing
whether or not that that matters
to the tax department yeah.
Looking at the webcast that
question along to the Tuesday to
Tuesday.
That doesn't matter and here we.
Watching is here.
Is there for the discussion on
the amendment.
So madam chair.
Yes Madam chair of rules
chattered speaker so so I take
it that's probably was the
thirtieth is better than the
thirty first because then you
can thank checks to come in
this.
August first and August thirty.
And I will make a formal motion
thank you madam chair.
So that is it acceptable
amendment on to me madam chair
thank you madam chair thank the.
It was amended.
Yes.
Which of those options is that
further discussion on the
amendment.
This is their opposition to the
amendment.
Seeing that you have amended
bill.
Thank you thank you but back on
the the discussion of the bill
as amended Representative
Hernandez the to have for the
comments no thank you madam
chair Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair.
Chair and secretary it's great
to see you this afternoon
I want to first thank you.
I just stated publicly that I
really appreciate your reaching
out to me weeks ago and had
discussions about where those
things were going you took my
feedback and provide us the
opportunity to the bills we
could find there any technical
issues I just really mental and
I want to thank you for that
I have several technical
questions because I just wanna
make sure that we all understand
how this works because I've been
in the hallways in the
Appropriations Committee and I
see personal confusion I wanna
make sure we're deciding whether
we like this or not we just
understood helps.
So madam chair and in that.
Chechen word will first talk
about the first.
Going to use of the bill which
are the rebates.
So.
To qualify for a rebate.
I'm reading this right one has
to file this page one one twenty
four one has to file an income
New Mexico income tax return not
just the federal so the New
Mexico income tax return.
Why would.
For taxable years taxable year
of twenty twenty one.
Right so Senator can't move in
twenty twenty two with our tax
return and then call I I read
that right now I'm chair madam
chair and representative yes
okay so that's the first thing
right so this can move in so it
has to be filing a tax return
for the twenty twenty one which
means they have to be.
You know doing some business in
New Mexico that.
And then we have to focus
returned by may thirty first of
twenty twenty three.
So correct Madam chair
representative.
So so Madam chair that means
that the we'll go to some of us
going to section two.
That means that people have time
if they found extension
whatever.
thank you I just returned
this year or even up to.
They.
First of next year additional
cost.
Okay.
Okay so next question
All they have to do that Madam
chair is file a return.
They don't have to have a tax
liability right a lot of double
tax chair chair.
To madam madam chair
representative correct yeah so
so this is a it's a it's a
rebate it's a credit if they owe
nothing on their taxes they
still get this five hundred
dollars per one thousand
dollars.
And here in Representative
correct okay excellent
and that makes sense madam chair
and check me because.
What we're talking about an
income tax return right so Madam
chair other other taxes in New
Mexico the people pay besides
income tax madam chair that's a
tough one.
All we know about the famous G.
R. T. that we pay that's right
the property taxes.
That is taxes.
Madam chair appreciate that and
despite strong strong foundation
to talk about the G. R. T..
but
Yeah right what will we.
It's a great.
The speaker was and I have a
long term.
no.
But you know it all seriousness
just because someone doesn't
have an income tax liability
does not mean you're not paying
tribute actually one or with gas
tax Pompeo
you'll get married of taxes.
I I I understand and agree with
why we're doing this credit
versus.
You know I got adoption which we
would not be able to receive
money if they did have a
liability.
Okay and the Madam chair we have
two payments readiness in two
parts we just changed the timing
of one thousand a wise move to
explain why the decision was
made to do it in two parts in an
appropriations we talked about
the fiscal reasons but I believe
there are other reasons besides
just having this fiscal year and
you have to especially here are
other perhaps some other
benefits of splitting into two
payments well again I mean at
one point I didn't I've heard
conversations about.
Profiteering meaning someone
gets a five hundred dollar check
or thousand dollar check there
there is concern that there
could be some advantage taken of
those individuals by inflated
prices and so that was one point
that I it has been brought to my
attention another again is as I
said we're kind of following
the fact that people are
experiencing these increased
costs incrementally and so we
are following those increased
costs incrementally so they'll
be a payment of two hundred
fifty in June the payment of two
hundred fifty in July and a
payment of two hundred and fifty
now in August so there is there
is some kind of design in terms
of how we're thinking through
these these payments Madam chair
that's the second was looking
for in just so people understand
that that payment you mentioned
July is not actually with this
bill that was the legislation
the period last year last.
Session H. go one sixty three I
believe Madam chair
representative magnificent bill
one six.
Thank you San.
yeah I just wanna make sure
folks understand that and chair
and chair I just want to also
mention.
I understand the reasons why we
might want to split rebates
among several months there's
also another side to that coin I
I mission in order that was
years ago when we talked about
this to talk about you know you
go to file your federal tax
return in April can you get a
good return back right you get
one thousand dollars.
All these and and one of the one
with the big better if these
folks money spread out to could
it be easier to throw over the
table for once instead of just
have a big check all it's it's
me that that makes sense but I
spoke to some of my friends who.
Are in that situation and I get
that the check is you know.
We use that money to to our car
repairs or to buy a new washer
dryer fridge so we actually
would prefer to have one big
payment and we can we can manage
the food on the table the rest
of the month he gave us you know
extra fifty Bucks a month you
might not end up getting dollars
you need to buy a.
So that is what those interests
are going to present both sides
of the coin
but with that I'm sure I'm sure
I I understand why we're doing
this in two payments and I I
think I can not I can agree with
that approach Madam chair
representative also point out it
might soften some of the
inflationary yeah maybe.
Yeah.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay next question chair and
chair it is yes rebate taxable
income.
Madam chair and representative
no.
And and how do we do that Madam
chair on.
Representative madam chair
representative there is a
provision in the bill that
provides for that specifically.
At Madam chair I appreciate that
so I know that the COVID lease
payments from the feds also
language in in their
legislations the these dollars
are not considered taxable
income.
and I.
And I am just I must of missed
in the bill tonight to ask your.
In the bill
yes madam chair and expert to
provide.
Thank you madam chair
representative appropriate think
more taken his research this
pretty extensively and I'd like
to defer to him.
Madam chair Representative
Harper I I don't to I'm not able
to point to the exact place
where that is in the bill
however it is a matter of both
federal and state law but that
type of of money isn't part of
your adjusted gross income or
modify person come we did
research this question with
respect to last payments that
were authorized by the
legislature so we're pretty
confident that answer and as
you've stated the federal
government is getting the same
guidance and because in New
Mexico we basically age I'll
federal AGI for personal income
tax returns were we should be
fine thank you Page three line.
Three seven thank.
Yeah so so so madam madam chair
thank you for that disruption
actually.
Yeah this is about tax
liabilities saying for example
if I owe two thousand dollars
instead of getting a check they
could just subtract that one
thousand dollars for liability
to the state not only that was
that's that's what the.
Yeah.
Yeah times.
Yeah yes it's your tier.
What's.
Is made.
Yes.
To Representative Harper in
regards to this on that point on
his point
page three and and reference the
tax liability so if.
If a taxpayer owes the
government money then this money
would go towards that payment to
the government correct thank you
that's exactly right.
And just as it may right so
there's an option.
It's not just automatically
script Madam chair
representative for tax year
twenty one correct.
Okay so Madam chair I appreciate
hearing that I I I I I I agree
with your assessment all we get
offline and you just talk about
the need to mess with
clearly but I think it's great
to know that when we don't talk
to our constituents and can say
that this one thousand dollars
are getting for five dollars are
getting you're not gonna have to
enter in your federal tax return
to your as money that you got up
because if you remember when you
do your tax return and if you
would receive money back from
the state income tax returns
districts would that as income
for your federal tax return next
year that's taxed so that will
not be the situation here this
money will not be taxed.
Okay
All right so.
Not going to.
Again that the rebate Madam
chair.
For someone to file New Mexico
to tax returns they have to find
some numbers either of to
provide social security number
or a
the I. N. number like if there.
Business I just would be a flow
through entities price three
number or A. I. T. I and number.
Madam chair so so someone who
files a tax return.
Could be a just a lawful
permanent resident could be
documented legal
We have all kinds of people as
long as the social or I TI N.
number thank you filing income
tax return with the state of New
Mexico is that correct Madam
chair representative correct.
so thank you I appreciate that.
The.
State
I think it's someone who is not
here legally has gone through
the effort to get an idea number
and it's filing a tax return.
feel perhaps are getting some
benefit.
you know it in my mind.
That would justify them again
being eligible for this
treatment
so I just wanna make sure people
understand.
That question.
And then there was an
interesting question raised
appropriations I centers or you.
madam chair and chair does talk
about
making sure folks in the rural
rural know about this.
How do people get to hear about
this
Is there I mean before I come
talk about the section here
section pastry section do about
you can
have this.
Go toward your tax.
let's say someone doesn't hear
about it
Is there a way that
because part of the tax return.
Tax filing process bill this
rebate.
Into their taxes for next year
and also examples you Mr right
so the federal comment relief.
If you did not receive the
payments when you're doing your
tax return right now the
question is did you receive your
payments and if you don't don't
check that box thank you for the
payment through your tax return
this year.
So do we have something were to
hear something like that Mr.
Madam chair representative I'm
going to ask the secretary to
answer that question.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Harper I follow
your question I think the key is
is that the top of page three it
specifies the to be eligible you
have to file that New Mexico pit
return for tax year twenty
twenty one by may thirty first
twenty twenty three and so
whether whether you filed on
time or through an extension or
even after your extension you
just have to meet that may
thirty first twenty twenty three
deadline.
Got it yet so I'm sure.
Yeah I think.
I probably.
To do a better job of let me
restrictions to little bit socks
I understand that.
After the rebate it's the
returns filing that triggers
rights yes or to trigger then it
didn't happen.
but for folks who don't file
a return.
Yeah I don't hear about it.
aside from just outreach let's
just say
so I I guess we look at it again
being heard us and your answers
right can be you have to file
and that which that's a
perception to which will talk
about your but you just just
what.
Okay.
All right thank you
Okay so so I I think I hope that
helps me to understand remain
part of this.
and help me just to talk through
it so thank you so last
time really session to.
this is the the payment portion.
on previous H. three storyline
left.
So this is really designed for
folks who have not filed
charges are right madam chair
and representative exactly and
in fact it explicitly states
that yeah so Madam chair
how much
it just so we just we know we're
right on the tax.
How much income can you make
without being required to file a
tax return.
Madam chair representative thank
you for asking that if you are
married filing jointly about
twenty five thousand dollars in
the single twelve hundred five
hundred you know twelve thousand
five.
Yes ma'am chair and chair thank
you I I know you have that ready
the tax I will I'll just add to
the state might I just want to
do that the numbers are actually
slightly higher if you're over
sixty five.
Is a different if you're over
sixty five you're single you can
make up to fourteen thousand
dollars not have to file and if
your
married filing joint it's twenty
eight.
thousand five hundred dollars.
And then if it's a as house ways
and it's like twenty thousand
what's what's the two decent.
This amount of money if you're
pressed only making social
security
and nothing else there might be
several folks you don't you
don't find.
okay so that's a good people
talking about.
so the eligibility here you've
got kind of a three point yes
here.
the first is.
They have to not be dependents.
I'm sorry first is.
That's right that's the first
one popular pendant.
a recipient of the rebate
legislative session.
Madam chair that makes sense
right in all I got a double
dipping right yeah exactly.
I guess the the question I have
here
there might not be the answer
Madam chair and.
How do we enforce that.
Madam chair representative on
and and secretary.
We madam chair and
Representative Harper taxed Rav
will work together with HSD as
you'll see in the bill this
twenty million for this non
filers payment is appropriated
to HSD and we will collaborate
with them to validate the
application data.
And so basically will use dozens
of data sources that may be
contained in our data warehouse
that we use in our ordinary
course of business of
administering and enforcing the
tax code to verify that the
person exists and that they
didn't claim the rebate and so
will will be a.
Verifying both identity and
making sure that we're not
double dipping preventing that
S. measure ensures thank you
that's right.
This this is something out for a
second just again understand we
we talk about HSD here
administering it but I believe
they're only getting ten
thousand dollars to administer.
whereas.
TRD is getting six hundred
thousand dollars so could you
maybe just explain to us how
it's actually Mr chair the happy
to madam chair and
Representative Harper
my understanding is that the HSD
is rolling this is going to
utilize an existing web based
application portal that was
already developed between our
two agencies for the rounds of
public assistance payment for
those individuals who aren't
eligible for federal stimulus so
we'll use that that we've
already made three rounds of
payments through I will adapt
the forms change the eligibility
criteria the programming and use
that so the applications will
come in through H. S. B. and HSD
is administrative cost is low
because they feel that they can
do the adjustments to that
interface in house with staff
and then once the applications
close the data will come over to
us and we'll put it through all
the
all the processes that we is to
identify and eliminate fraud
duplication all of that that
will do our administrative costs
are estimated at about six
hundred thousand dollars and
that can be broken down into
about three hundred forty five
thousand dollars in materials
like mailing postage envelopes
paper stuff like that a little
bit of labor and about two
hundred twelve thousand dollars
of contract assistance for
urgent tax vendor to actually
program the criteria and all the
programming into the Gentex
system.
Thank you Madam chair so yeah I
think it's reasonable understand
we're recession using an
existing portal at HSD but the
tax department the one doing all
the.
And so I'm kind of going back to
my question Madam chair
understanding what's on this
application will be collecting
all part of the application
Social security number or
nineteen a number of that
individual.
Yes madam chair Representative
Harper the bill provides that to
be eligible for the payments
through HSD the applicant must
provide either a social security
number or and I ten number and
that languages on page four
lines nineteen and twenty two in
the state that.
Yeah so so.
So madam chair chair I think
this is another important point
right as we're looking at.
Who can qualify for the payment
these are still people that
either have a social security
number or haven't hi TI and
numbers and then you can use
that number as part of process
to make sure that those were not
listed as a dependent
in a in a New Mexico.
Tax return correct.
Madam chair that point yes
please
on that point madam chair.
if they have not been a tax
filer.
How do we know if it is a to
handle what would qualify as a
dependent or not if they've not
filed taxes.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Montoya
the data warehouse that we use
and again this is the same data
we use for audits and compliance
in our regular course of
business but we have all the
state and federal data sources
in there so even if someone
hadn't been a filer with tax and
Rev we still have data to verify
their existence for example we
might have workforce solutions
data or IRS data or Human
Services Department at all kind
of feeds into us where we can
use it to verify identity.
So so madam chair.
And and madam secretary
So I I I understand that process
but there are.
The families there are I mean we
may have information but without
a.
Eight eight
someone who's filed taxes.
I think there would be no way to
know whether or not.
Someone would be considered a.
dependent or not from the
standpoint we don't know who is
to depending on someone else
for.
provision.
Robert.
Dependents are listed on the tax
return filing.
So they have the we have the
textures are filed my two years.
This is with our social security
number on my return.
So my daughter would go to try
to give these payments she lives
as and I returned.
If you have the status has.
By definition must have appeared
on someone else's tax.
Madam chair and and madam chair
that's a really exactly my point
if someone is not file taxes.
Ever.
There could be someone who
would.
B. appropriately filed on
someone's taxes as a dependent
but in this instance since they
have not.
You can have multiple people in
the same household receiving
money because there is no.
There is at from and once again
we're talking about the they're
not the not the.
A rebate proportion but just the
payment portion if someone had
I'm talking specifically about
someone who's never file taxes.
Thank you madam chair and
representative.
I've been reminded that this
will be based on household so
they're also addresses which
they will be able to check
against.
I'd also note that
If it's someone older than
eighteen that person will be
excluded as well and I would
also note madam chair and
representative there will be C.
at yes I'm sure there is an
attestation piece to this
application process and under
penalty of perjury so there are
multiple checks in the system
Madam chair representative.
Okay yeah no okay so so madam
chair if I could I just a couple
of last questions are always
good discussion the
conversation.
measures to clarify that the
last statement about eighteen
years I believe that's a why
twenty two year you have to be
at least eighteen years of age
as part of twenty twenty one to
qualify so people under the age
of eighteen would not qualify
for this.
Madam chair representative
that's correct yeah thank you.
Okay.
All right so.
so again for this payment
portion representing in this
legislation twenty million
dollars.
trees rebates and we know that
that will cover the entire
amount of people are estimated
fault in this this category.
Madam chair representative is
that this is kind of set up on a
first come first serve basis.
Madam chair representative madam
chair representative correct.
thank you but I want people
understand that if you fall
within this.
Category this file.
And you you miss out you know
where those first ones that show
up.
At twenty nine dollars expired
does that mean state will not be
able to benefit from
Madam chair representative I'm
not necessarily because they
could file a tax return.
Yeah so it's Madam chair that's
that's exactly right those that
wanted to make was that
yes there's only twenty dollars
here we don't expect that cover
everyone but they could simply
file returns and then they would
get a rebate.
Take care of first.
Legislation.
Correct
Madam chair I also was.
Want to say
they're actually lots of good
reasons why people in that
category should file and I think
many of them do
because to be able to qualify
for one of the programs that the
state has you need to file your
tax return to be about things
like elector for working
families tax credit or our new
child
taxpayers are lots of ways where
people who are low income
can I attach it to come back
with lots of
Lots of.
Of funding to help their their
family situation so I I actually
think I misleading out here.
I potentially see.
It might be better policy just
instruction to to once everybody
file your taxes because you
might benefit from.
But but I also understand the
hard this is our so I'm not
going to distract I missed again
is leading our out of state.
There are lots of reasons why do
people this categorisation
styles.
Yes I those were my questions
noticed in the build up really
well I know it helped me and I
give us thank madam chair you
and secretary of market TRD team
and also give eighty when I was
a lot of.
Hello from the LFC team up this
was really a well drafted bill
passed.
I appreciate the opportunity to
to match thank you
Representative.
Next question is Representative
my thank you madam chair thank
you Representative Chandler
madam secretary just from a
practical standpoint the checks
will be mailed to the address
that taxed Representative has on
record hello folks receive the
rebates you madam chair and
representative my Estes it
depends on so profiler if they
have directed us to send their
tax refunds in the past by
direct deposit that's what we'll
do if they directed us to mail a
check to them that's what we'll
do and then in the for the non
filers for the payments through
HSD they will have the option an
application to direct us whether
they want to direct deposit or
check.
Thank you thank you madam chair
Representative Chandler madam
secretary and and you anticipate
madam secretary doing it.
Like alphabetically or how do
you roll out all these tens of
thousands of payments
madam chair and representative
masses it's all automated you
hear a lot about Gen tax system
but basically the intelligence
will be programmed into Jan tax
so that it will run of you know
run a file every single night
once the bill is affected once
were scheduled to pay our
rebates and it will just
automatically.
Do everything I think yes thank
you madam chair this for our
friends in the media managers
to.
It might remind folks those
weeks to you know go to their
mailbox sooner rather than later
things like that
also just a quick comment madam
chair of their gender I think up
the shout out to my fellow
classmates two thousand seven.
Representative Strickler I think
the representative speaker
myself.
The only folks that did the
rebates before I think it was
Senator a chair.
Right.
Always a weight so just yeah so
speaker show up at nine.
So the we did the rebates and
await and
At history proves that that was
bad public policy.
because the banks crashed six
months later and you know the
roof roof fell in six months
after that so I was always leery
of rebates always there you know
cutting taxes you know until
everything kind stabilized this
is different you know this is
different for several reasons
madam chair that one as folks
been through two years of of
just pain and suffering and
economic strife
And then secondly what you have.
Exorbitant.
Gas prices at the pump and so.
So state the state coffers.
Not not because I mean court
correlate to the price of
gasoline at the pump the higher
folks pay at the pump the more
money because of the state
coffers as a result the
residuals we receive from from
the production of crude oil in
the state of Mexico and then and
then lastly the whole the whole
busted boom cycle.
Those days are over we those
days are over we could with our
reserves of roughly two point
six two point eight.
Billion in reserves we could go
through a bank crisis of a
weight well price crash of
sixteen back to back years and
still not cut a single program
so we we kept a flat budget so
we're in a really good place
financially.
And so we can afford this and it
is solid good public policy is
very timely very timely but just
with one last comment.
with the rest of oil production
in two years ago I was three
hundred sixty eight million
barrels of oil produced in the
state in Mexico I think last
year was over four hundred.
Million barrels this year this
previous year and may have
approached four and fifty.
If you were to take the month of
January times twelve it would be
close to five hundred million
barrels of oil this year and so
if you just do with math let's
say.
Conservatively speaking for art.
Order fifty million barrels
times eighty dollars a barrel
that's thirty so that's a thirty
six billion dollar economy.
Thirty six billion dollar
economy and so madam chair of
our sector we could pilot many
both your jobs.
by adjusting our our tax code
consistent with.
With oil production and and and
eliminate all others
So you don't think about a
future years that.
So think about in future years
as we as conversations of us
conversations of.
Of a that was the magic words
guaranteed income and things
that each of these concepts that
were important to us for to
humanity I ten years ago alright
I'll be talked about in future
decades of the New Mexico could
lead on on those efforts as well
as many many others thank you
madam chair.
Just a technical question to us
I'm gonna go with it is that the
L. on page five fourteen two
weeks to remove that I heard
only about September and we
place it with this for that then
leads to.
To still in place so do we have
a problem with the dates there
because you can still file your
return as late as January twenty
twenty three in this state you
have money left over but the
second rebate is only going to
be given to the twenty twenty
two the way this is written so
do we need to a clarification to
that.
And madam chair I.
Question I think it's okay so.
Fees and on page two starting
online to do it it talks about
the timing to receive rebates
for residents who filed by may
thirty first twenty twenty two
want to share that if they filed
early by may thirty first twenty
twenty two that they receive
their rebate quickly but then
see talked about residents to
file any time after may thirty
first twenty.
Twenty two
Later filers would provide that
will just give it to them as
expeditiously as possible I
think we're still okay.
Okay I was just wanted to say is
as provided in section the.
That I just want to make sure we
were not.
And okay and madam chair that if
I may on on that point on page
three.
Our lines wanted to the reason
we thought that part deadline of
may thirty twenty twenty three
that that that will give us one
month before the end of fiscal
year twenty three to make any
final payment so that the fiscal
impact of this are contained in
FY twenty three that they don't
go forward to twenty four.
It's very
Yes this bill fails at.
How would your department
administer.
Payment.
He is also going out
Yeah.
With activated this bill on.
I see.
Madam madam chair Mister speaker
we we would not have a good way
to do that we looked at that and
if the bill were to pass without
an emergency clause the bill
would not be effective until
after we had been already
required to make the first
rebate payment by June
thirtieth.
And also the appropriation to
the department to do the work
would not have been effective
for us to income for the funds
and contract to do the work so
I'm wondering if the money which
want to add chair.
Second and then.
Yes teens I am cautiously
optimistic have a diversity
clause and it fails.
Lame costs this is the all.
Not.
To get it I would.
Yes we have your.
Where and and secretary that you
will still proceed
In the event we do have an
emergency clause.
Proceed to get this out
is a is the yeah
I'd like to move.
Page two.
I strive to the word.
It certainly.
Two hundred.
Yes that will be the date.
Sure that.
Deadlines that the movie maker
after today this.
madam chair Mister speaker you
absolutely have my promise that
whenever the bill becomes
effective and however works will
get money out ASAP will actuated
as quickly as we can my only
concern with July thirtieth is
that if the bill were in were
effective and therefore
appropriation were effective
date July fifth.
That would only give us twenty
five or so days to program the
system hand actually the
payments.
So I think the tax department
would need either August
fifteenth or August thirty first
you can see you could start the
program.
This past.
Mr speaker and madam chair I'm
not sure we can because we want
to have the funds to encumber to
follow the procurement code
which of the six hundred
thousand dollar appropriation
bills.
Global.
Operations budget I'm not
confident Mr speaker madam chair
that we can it's very tight.
In other words I I I I think
you're you're just saying we can
cover different funds and then
swap them out but I'm not sure
that we could okay well then you
can give it to you if we choose
to thirtieth August thirty.
That would work.
So that should be used to I I
strive to consider their of.
August.
Madam chair
speaker Egolf that is a.
From the amendment.
Excuse me do you have a comment
to make to the I.
This okay.
Okay so is there any opposition
to the amendment session of
discussion further discuss
thank you Richard Representative
Jared secretary of this because
you want to consider too thank
you madam chair do you want to
consider.
July thirtieth that way the two
checks are simultaneous or or
did I miss that.
That was secretary of state.
It is oversee cost six thousand
dollars.
To take effect on July five six.
At the lines that I have.
Thank you Mr speaker so I up
which totally up it will get to
that but I support it thank you
much.
Further discussion on the
amendment I think just the
Representative Lujan yes in
changing that deducted in.
Trying to follow everything you
do does that mean that there be
double checks both it could go
out and this madam chair and
speaker I mean there is that
potential but remember this is
just the safe.
Go to try to I do not anticipate
that we're not going to reach
the.
For the secretary is that if
there's an emergency clause a
taxable out.
Late may early June.
What we already passed right to
live in the next general out in
August.
if there is receive lost and
there would be two payments in
July or August.
And and madam chair Mister
speaker if I could say there if
if we ended up in the unlikely
scenario that there isn't an
emergency clause that we end up
making being.
The second payment later than
expected due to this ammendment
let's say we make it in August
there's nothing that would
prohibit us from.
Exciting both payments in the
same direct deposit for the same
warranty to save banking fees
and Senator we would we would
combine the two if they were not
in the same month so should we
just use.
You know I try to make sure that
the taxpayers and get the same
amount of money.
It is that there is not an.
I think that madam chair thank
you thank you for that for that
answer but at Sir I think I'm a
bit confused so if there is an
emergency because it passes then
when you get to work on this.
It immediately media at Lee
budget sheet madam chair that
do not say that there was a
procurement.
because the issue with that
to clarify madam chair and
representative with high.
I would only have that
procurement issue we would only
have that delay if the bill
passed without an emergency
clause if the bill passes with
an emergency clause it becomes
effective on signature are
appropriation is immediately
available immediately contract
we immediately do the work we
immediately work to get that
first rebate payment out as soon
as possible but no later than
June thank you and if it passes
without emergency clause and
this amendment would give us
time to make sure that that
first rebate payment isn't just
null and void thank you Madam I
appreciate that clarity that's
what I was looking for so that
everyone can understand how this
works because there's a lot of
discussions thank you.
Representative Montoya for the
debate discussion on the
amendment.
Madam chair.
We are looking
at.
Pressing the dates potentially.
And I'm and I know this kind of
just goes back to.
We were we were talking about
separating the two payments over
a period of time.
It may be easier and I know it
be less expensive to administer
if we just make this one payment
and I and I don't know as as we
see potential compression.
Of of of the time schedule we're
not talking.
September anymore we're talking.
Between June and and and August
for two payments.
I mean between chair would
potentially June first portion
as possible.
And.
August thirtieth and I'm not not
sure would just make more sense
to at least consider a single
payment.
It would there be certainty if
you get emergency clause could
go out right away.
I'm just not sure if that at
this point.
We don't consider it would be.
More streamlined to do it in a
single payment.
It's just a comment I'm not even
suggesting at that eight and
amendment I'm just saying that.
Maybe we consider that.
Goal has been to.
Active to two fiscal years so it
is much better for me research
situation and from we have all
these twenty three the me
immediately create a problem
with the tax stabilization
reserve.
Budget it just revenue just
consent August we could be a
situation and the compact and
special session to fix FY twenty
three because the forecast
balance in the tax stabilization
reserve in also be the case
Appropriations contingency I
could be so low that the
treasure could not sign warrants
and that would be a lot of
positions one in the end so.
I really just doing this is like
a safety health.
Expectation is there will be an
emergency clause.
Hearing this and that will
happen
this is just simply in case
anything goes awry we don't have
the taxpayers deprived of the
thirty limited to try.
Additional update of the
amendment Representative Harper.
The thank you madam chair and
speaker
So I think.
Right now is just laid out there
would be one payment in general
from this bill thirty one
payment in July house bill one
sixty three and then be another
payment in August from this
bill.
The goal is to provide relief as
quickly as possible to spread it
out.
I think this early draft needs
that goal.
No.
I just I don't.
Everybody on the floor but also
there's no problem.
So the question is do we want to
change what the goal is.
But we want to change it so that
these are compacted.
It perhaps in one payment.
And and in a consequence of that
would be this doesn't get out as
quickly as we hope we're gonna
be waiting till August for the
first check instead of June
first.
so just.
Things about see also the
speaker made a great point I
don't go into.
The probation of this bill is
due to tax policy the way the
appropriations or stop.
In the sections three and four.
how this is we're expecting
roughly three hundred for three
million dollars more the general
fund and we expect.
And then we're allowing two
hundred million here in sections
three from the tax stabilization
reserve up to two hundred
million to be transferred so
that we can use it for this
purpose at the start of the tax
stabilization reserve we can't
use it for this purpose so all
this money to next fiscal year I
believe speakers right we could
have an issue where
we have to come back and take
more money out of taxes to pay
for it
it's my understanding that right
I'm I'm not appropriations see
us on offer as you so I would
say.
my recommendation be although
Henderson license because.
Recommendation to leave the bill
as we first.
that we we don't want us all to
appreciations we get the money
out were quickly spread out over
three payments.
and and I I don't see.
Okay.
Okay well if it's Representative
Harper promises that you will
get.
What.
I am confident of receipt or on
its commitment to.
I withdraw my amendment in
instead of that I'll just.
Second.
Is we have a discussion though.
The managers referring to.
Thank.
Thank you so we have a I did
pass that and the public.
a motion for do pass and the
second all in favor Medicaid.
But we need to roll call.
As of mid that thank you.
Local.
Raul.
Ask questions we for us this.
It was due
this once.
What has.
Madam chair.
That makes leave a comment.
Sharks here.
So we're putting up the bill as
amended.
Sure speaker discussion on.
What what what what specialist
so let me just say we have a
motion for to pass and a second
so I didn't see any other hands
for discussion so.
I thought I was looking okay
well we'll we'll go back I'm
sorry we'll go with we.
So let me we'll go in that order
Representative Strickler and
then Representative Scott
Representative depending and
Representative Montoya.
I think we've learned our lesson
on on the budget process to be
very very safe on our budget
forecast for all prices because
we've had this problem before we
over estimated the the price
Dick and the in the prices
collapse so in this case I think
that past history of in twenty
at.
Correct me if I'm wrong
Representative Maestas but in
twenty fifteen we had a big
price collapse we had a hundred
dollar all prices drop down to
forty dollars and twenty twenty.
Just two years ago it it dropped
down to thirty six dollars and
dollar sixty seven so that's
what we had a budget crunch.
in twenty twenty one so fast
forward to today you don't
violations raging.
Madam chair madam chair and
but the cash flow for the state
is really flowing in so.
You know if we have to do this
is a it's kind of a good think
is were taken out of the surplus
that we're receiving and all
guests revenue so was price of
all goes up and natural gas goes
up then that nine percent
service tax and all the other
taxes we bring in a flowing in
and where those numbers again we
we're we're above forecast by
three hundred million or five of
four hundred million dollars for
this fiscal year madam chair
representative I believe level
beyond the twenty eight percent
cash reserves we have Madam
chair representative believe
it's three hundred million that
all look to our expert from LFC.
Madam chair Representative
Strickler you're actually
projected to and reserves at
twenty nine point four percent
at the end of the session given
more tracking now we're about
three hundred million dollars
higher than the the December
that's correct why twenty two.
So when you consider those extra
revenue you can see the spending
of this bill that's where you
get reserves looking at about
twenty percent give or take a
percent or so I just want to
clarify that a lot of that
strength is coming from gross
receipts tax and personal income
tax revenue.
In addition to on gas because it
will result say them and chair
Madam chair you will use in a
sixty seven dollar price stick
forget a hundred five dollars
and and so it's a it's just a
big it's a big surge that we
were counting on it coach yes it
could go.
Down just as fast as it we as
we've seen in the past the
twenty twenty for example so
and I know that the
the industry is securing as many
drilling permits as possible to
drill for additional wells
having a delay in that regard we
have a kind of a log jam in in
securing those drilling permits
no up in the San Juan it's
really a slow process of the
even more revenues coming in
once so strong permits are
issued and it just a just kind
of an update the San Juan basin
because H. well that we drill up
tears five million dollars these
lot of gross receipts tax are
being paid on that project and
because of inflation to be the
cost of going to with the cost
of going up so those costs are
going to six million and again
that that generates more gross
receipts tax so we're all in
this together we
and I think this rebate system
is much better than eliminating
the gasoline tax this is a much
better approach so we don't lose
any federal funding you know if
you know some states are
limiting their gasoline tax and
that's not that's not good and
so I think we're doing a much
better job here taking advantage
of this extra surplus and I
giving it back to people as
quickly as possible cause
inflation interesting
everybody's lunch especially the
lowincome and the middle income
folks so thank you madam chair I
just just want to make a few
comments said that all gas is
really helping pay for this as
well as your to
On the drilling and completion
of these well so thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative.
Representative Scott.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair madam secretary.
Like to follow up just a little
bit on.
I'm somewhat confused.
I'd like to follow up on.
Representative Harper's.
Questions with respect to
section two and section one.
For example.
A person has to have filed a tax
return.
In order to be eligible.
For the right to secretary Madam
chair representative yes that is
accurate and.
Section two.
A person has to be eligible to
file tax returns.
In order to qualify.
Sure.
Read.
For the day.
Madam chair and representative
Scott I think I would phrase it
a little differently in section
two to be eligible for the
payments through HSD you must
not be eligible for the rebate
the tax rebate okay.
Madam chair well chair madam
secretary I understand that
you're not eligible for the
rebate because you didn't fall
over top.
Potentially yes Sir.
Madam chair madam chair to apply
for the rebate you have to be
eligible to file a return.
Madam chair representative I
don't understand your question
are you talking about section
the first section or the second
section.
Services things I.
Yes.
You have to have Madam chair
madam chair.
Madam secretary you would have
to have all the appropriate
identification numbers in
section two to be able to file a
tax return.
Correct and and madam chair
Anyone could be eligible to file
a return if they are required to
do so if they're low enough
income or you know certain
certain there are certain
reasons people are eligible to
file a return but they're not
required to do so so they don't.
Madam chair madam chair madam
secretary appreciate.
So.
So you have the capabilities
under section two.
Stated that if we get off of
this twenty million dollars.
Point you just follow return and
get their rebates incentives
thank.
So.
It's very obvious question is
why do we need section.
Madam chair representative
because there are individuals
who are not have not developed
the habit of filing a tax return
because their income is too low.
Madam chair if you want your
movie.
In spite of that bad habit.
You should file just follow
return.
Is that true.
Madam chair representative if
you meet the particular
deadlines that are in the bill I
think it's accurate but I think
we need to recognize madam chair
and representative that there
are populations in the state who
do not have come to justify the
filing of tax returns and the
application process for this
second piece frankly will be
somewhat easier on as opposed to
filing a tax return which is a
more complicated document
potentially so there's an
application process you have to
you know it yes to certain
things provide certain
information but in my mind in
the secretary madam chair and
representative can correct me if
I'm wrong it's going to be a one
pager kind of an application
whereas tax returns madam chair
tend to be more daunting for
some of us madam chair I'm
reluctant to admit but I
actually have my husband do the
tax return to because I don't
want to and an ironic thing I
know from the chair of the tax
committee but it that's the
truth.
so I mean it will be a simple
process in terms of for those
filers who are not you know in
in the in the system in terms of
filing tax returns madam chair
representative and madam chair
madam secretary do we not have
one pager.
Tax returns available for state
tax.
Madam chair representative I'll
defer to the secretary hi
Representative with and madam
chair would you mind repeating
that.
Madam chair madam secretary do
we not have one pager if you
will tax returns available for
simplified tax filers state
level Madam chair representative
we we do have a simplified
return but the reason it's so
simple as that it begins with
your federal return and so you
have to have a federal return
which some do and some don't to
be able to make use of that very
simple state return I just want
to supplement with
Representative Chandler said a
moment ago to with you know this
the simple web based application
that agency will have compare
that to especially if you're not
used to filing you might have
hundreds of dollars of tax
preparation costs that you pay
an expert or you might need it
you know to buy a software so.
I think there's a cost savings
to especially to those lower
income folks by allowing them
the non filer payment.
And madam chair madam secretary
that'll be an internet process.
madam chair and representative
Scott that's correct that that
web based portal that HSD has
already developed for the past
public assistance payments will
be adopted for this purpose.
Okay.
And we move on so are there any.
Anti donation considerations
that would come into play here
with section two items.
Madam chair representative I do
not believe so because there is
a provision in our constitution
that allows for
exceptions for indigent and low
income and that's how we operate
within so for example with
terror we that's not a problem
and other sorts of programs and
madam chair and representative
that's why the original HSD
program was not a problem as
well so we did consider that
thank you for the question but I
think for in good shape as far
as that question goes in the
secretary has to some
supplemental.
Madam chair and representative
got a just I agree with that and
I'll just add to that that I
think the state clearly has the
authority to set its tax policy
to raise and and reduce tax
liabilities for any individual
so they need not be low income
for the state to also be able to
offer tax relief.
This section to would not the
tax relief it would be.
I'm.
Madam chair representative
correct and I believe my answer
address that point okay.
Chair madam chair I have to move
to time absolutely torn.
Because what we do and.
It is certainly an admirable
goal.
To get the money back into the
hands of the citizens of New
Mexico but.
That said this is a terrible tax
policy.
This committee needs to
recognize that the LFC tax
expenditure policy principles
are all being violent.
And madam chair madam chair sure
doesn't appear to me to be any
direct benefit for example on.
Axes.
There's no direct benefit to the
small businesses that are.
Are being impacted.
These increased expenditures
because.
A train wreck.
church sixty gallons of diesel
on our is not going to see much.
As a consequence.
Okay this policy and.
Madam chair Madam chair we have
heard.
GM he.
Insist Committee.
We can't simply throw tax reform
G. R. T. report.
Again we've heard well it has to
wait till next year.
Because we don't have some
money.
And now.
Circumstance where we do.
Where we implement.
Reforms that would move the
state forward not just this year
and next local maps for every.
And we are not.
Taking advantage of that.
Just.
Also watch madam chair thank you
madam chair and secretary for
each page.
Thank you Representative stop
Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Terry I was also able to Steven
and watched the webcast of HDFC
this morning I first wanted to
appreciate all the folks that
came out to offer their insight
and expertise
and they're reminders about why
tax policy matters why we've
payments matter and the weight
that being held by hard working
New Mexicans every single day
and certainly for some of us
madam chair madam chair it's
been a really hard couple of
years.
And I just feel to date but I
wanted to say I have one more
time in the face of a boat like
this.
Is doing what we does not mean
that we're doing that equitably
and I know madam chair madam
chair we have these
conversations one of the pieces
I really appreciated about house
bill sixty three that
magnificent piece of legislation
was that there was a means test
on the rebate that we provided
back to New Mexicans so those
New Mexicans that have had the
privilege of financial ease and
financial stability.
The state for will not get the
the same rebate to come back
into their checking accounts are
savings accounts went to like.
And when I think about how much
our families are holding right
now I have I think about the
questions they repeatedly
brought to our fantastic
secretary Schardin Clarke
throughout the COVID nineteen.
And the economic recession that
was connected to that when I
continue to ask the secretary
and others
The US that that if you
secretaries in different
iterations.
I want to continue to learn more
about how this pandemic.
Increase
different groups of people in
New Mexico and we thought early
on that it was the low income
earners that lost those jobs we
sat early on that it was women
of color that lost those jobs we
thought really on that it was
moms that had to make different
economic decisions in the school
shut down to go home and raise
their kids in the face of
overwhelming odds at a fight to
survive every single day so I'm
so glad that we are turning back
some of the economic surplus
that New Mexico has in our
properties right now I'm putting
it back in in the hands of
they can make those decisions
that are best for they and their
loved ones but I do wish that
we'd have room to be more
tailored and focused to make
this money go further to make
sure this money got back to
those working New Mexicans who
are going to have a
transformative time with that
thousand dollars.
data continues to show us that
folks with less means less
income when you find that Mr
they call us back into the
economy so we those appreciate
Representative Scott's comments
here about what this means as
economic development or is
fiscal policy for New Mexico
because I think moving forward
we we know that would folks that
are living check to check get
that little burst.
Tensely exploring opportunities
or catching up on bills or sign
up their kids for soccer that
they could never afford to do
but those those monies are
coming back into our communities
they're coming back into small
businesses when folks already
have hearing get this section
thousand dollars.
It may not even be noticed it
may just say it's likely that
account or investment that
already has a lot of money in it
and is it coming back so I want
to appreciate all the hard work
that went into making this I
think it's just a step in the
right direction I am proud to
vote for this bill but I also
hope that in New Mexico when we
have times of service that we
can continue to get better at
focusing our pages so that they
live and economic development
tools so that they land as a
real resources for the families
that are caring and and and
holding the weight of New
Mexicos systemic problems and
and look forward to doing that
work with so thank you madam
chair madam chair thank you
Secretary.
Representative Kevin
Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam chair
Chairman
I I do believe that we.
R. running.
File.
Of the anti donation clause in
section two
The if I could madam chair if I
could
repeat what was stated in
response to
Representative Scott is that we
can determine tax policy that
that that the reason that we
believe we can do this is
because we get to set tax
policy.
however madam chair.
and that chairman
Sh I believe we are only sending
tax policy if it's actually
associated to a tax.
So in the event of section two.
It is it is not directly
associated to anyone paying for
filing taxes not even paying
just filing no one in section
one is there a requirement that
this is a.
This is not right from the
standpoint of.
a rebate would be if you have
some sort of liability in in two
terms I mean we we can call it a
rebate but it in reality it's
not going and state tax
liability necessarily.
so so madam chair
Madam secretary I I do believe.
That this does have anti
donation.
Problems in section two.
I think the reality is.
But we violate this who would
bring a lawsuit.
To uphold the law to uphold the
constitution.
I think that's a very low bar
for us I think it's a very very
low bar for the legislature to
say we're gonna pass this even
though there are potential anti
donation.
Issues.
But the likelihood of anybody
challenging this in court that's
going to be going to look like
somebody is heartless board I
think that's what we're we're
talking about.
And I and I think that's a very
low are considering.
That as has been stated
throughout that debate today
that if someone doesn't.
I for section two.
And they're not in line to get
that it doesn't matter because
they can go file.
They have that opportunity to go
I.
And it seems to be leading
section one in place and
stripping section two would make
sense because we're not keeping
anyone from being able to to to
get these funds I don't believe
there's a single person who
would be denied these funds as
matter of fact I think in
reality that those of fiscal
impact report would potentially
be wrong if more people see this
there they decide that they're
going to have filed in the past
and they're going to.
so that's just.
At not gonna bring up this is
this this committees gone far
enough and I manager we're gonna
have today on the house floor
likely in the Senate floor as
well but I do believe that we
have problems here
if if as a speaker you off on
that house for this morning
stated that there are no anti
donation problems here because
this is a tax rebate section one
is a tax rebate section two
madam chair madam chair one is
not a tax rebate it specifically
states separate section.
And it is specifically called
relief payments and I don't
believe that that we as a
legislature under the oaks that
we take to uphold the
constitution I don't believe
what holding the constitution in
this instance
so I I I'm not gonna be able to
support
the bill as it is hopefully on
the floor will see some changes
that could help me because I I
do believe that.
I've sat on this committee for
several years now and I have
always this.
Supported getting money back to
the taxpayers especially when we
have a surplus so I I really
would like to see that I would
just like to see us do this in
the property fashion
one other thing madam chair and
that is
The the governor's proclamation
stated that we are having to do
this because of.
Because of the war which then
created high gas prices.
I would just like to say we
would be in a much worse
position today had on the last
day of the session we would not
have been able to stop the
Senate bill fourteen which is
the the clean fuels essentially
regulatory tax which if cost
fuel prices to jump thirty five
to fifty percent at fifty cents
a gallon I believe is what what
we were told so
I just it's just a little
confusing to me when we're here
for the purpose of trying to
give people money back because
of the impact to their direct
fuel costs and for all the goods
that are brought into New Mexico
and are shipped in all we see
the prices rise on all
commodities that are trucked in
what and or brought in by rail
so I I think this is a real
issue I'm glad we're addressing
it
I'm just I'm split as a as I
heard the representative of
Scott save earlier I'm split on
this section one I I really like
section two
I just have a hard time getting
around the fact that we are if
not directly violating the anti
donation clause I feel like we
were we were skirting it as
closely as we possibly can and
if we're challenging court I
believe that that we have a hard
time defending this thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative Montoya
is there any further debate on
the field about this the wanted
on.
To accept.
We're back on the motion for a
do pass and the second and I
will have a roll call of the
bill as a man.
Just to clarify so we took it
back to the original version on
page two.
Line.
I.
One moment we did not.
Enter.
One amendment.
We.
the same dates and all right we
proceed with the overhaul of the
bill as amended what time.
Representative Lujan yes.
To us.
Yes.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative that's.
Yes.
Representative one yes.
Representative Maestas yes.
Representative this yes.
No.
Representative yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
It's.
Interventions yes.
Well then you.
Madam chair you have a do pass
thank you very much and vice
chair if you'd be happy to close
out the meeting that would be.
Thank you.
