Representative Duncan.
Here
Representative C Gallegos.
Representative Henry.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Pajon.
Representative Silva.
Representative Terazas.
Madam Chair, Vice Chair, Kadina.
Yes.
And Mr. Chairman, I am here.
OK. Very good. Thank you for the
for the roll call. Thank you
again. Good morning once again,
uh, representative Lindstrom, if
you wanna.
let's get on the, let's get in
front of us on House Bill 19 as
amended. If you all recall, we
did hear this in our committee
already, so the intent is to not
have to have a full hearing
again on the merits, but other
than knowing that there was
money appropriated in hospital 2
for this initiative. And at this
point in time, we, what we're
doing is now looking to pull it
off the table and um.
and hear it for a vote.
Is there motion moved right,
represent lunchroom.
Mr. Chairman and thank you
committee, uh, when the bill was
presented a few weeks ago, we
went through a very extensive
hearing, Mr. Chairman and and
committee and had a lot of
public uh input and of course
because of the process of this
committee.
And the fact that it did have uh
an impact it was rolled, it was
rolled, so now we're coming back
and um.
Asking for a for a due pass,
basically what this is is an
economic development bill which
focuses on the use of existing
infrastructure assets, but we're
hoping for is to create economic
diversification with this piece
of legislation, trying to avoid
New Mexico continuing as a
bridge state when it comes to
economic development.
want to be in a position for
trade, uh, reshoring and
onshoring.
And uh we want to basically
provide an option for this
country when it comes to supply
chain disruption.
And with that, uh, Mr. Chairman,
if there's any questions.
happy to answer them. Thank you.
Any questions on this bill?
Representative
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative. Can you tell me
what was. Thank you, chair.
What we amended, Mr. Chairman
and Representative, we added
some information that the unions
had asked for. They wanted to
make sure that in the P3
component that we were um tying
back to very specific language
that they wanted to see.
Does that satisfy your
questions, rep representative.
Uh, I do have the amendment if
we, if we need to talk about
that and certainly our experts
out there.
That would be great. Thank you.
Do you want me to talk about it?
Um, oh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, if you could
just point me to the page or
where it was amended, that would
be great. OK, Mr. Chairman, if
you look on page 14.
Uh, between lines 11 and 12.
And it basically we're adding uh
language that provide that
operations and maintenance of a
trade port project.
Are to be performed by the
public partner except for
broadband, telecommunications
and energy infrastructure
components.
of a trade port project, I
think, uh, also, Mister
Chairman.
Um
We had on section 10.
We just want to make sure that
the P3 follows um.
The public works, those were the
two pieces, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Uh, can I get a
motion?
OK.
a motion made by a due passed by
representative Terazas is their
second.
Representative Chandler seconds
it. Uh, any opposition to, to
that motion.
Seeing no opposition
representative, you have a do
pass. Thank you.
And what we're gonna do is we're
gonna go to.
9 next because uh we have some
members that need to go out and
uh present some other bills.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. After 199,
we'll go back to 207 and end
with 293.
Uh,
when you're ready on House Bill
199. Thank you, Madam Chair.
House Bill 199 and first allow
me to introduce my expert
witness who is Miguella Fisher.
Uh,
LFC Deputy Director.
199 is in LFC endorsed bill
allows the taxation revenue
Department to share certain
texts that
The legislative Finance
Committee for use and
evaluation.
What the certain text that
they're requesting is aggregate.
as well as some other uh
business tax data so that they
can help them formulate their,
their economic outlooks for the
future, so that being said, the
bill requires data to be shared
through a data sharing agreement
or an MOU, the bill also
provides that no data can be
shared, that is otherwise
prohibited by the state or
federal law and House Bill 199
is one component of a series of
efforts designed to strengthen
the LFC's evaluation unit and
with that, Madam Chair and
committee members, I was stand
for questions.
Thank you, we'll first go to
Zoom for public comment, please
raise your hand if you'd like to
speak in support or opposition
to HB 199.
We now go to the room, please
line up if you'd like to speak
in support or opposition to HB
199.
no public comment, we'll go to
committee.
Representative Lindstrom.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you, Mr. Chair.
I, I, I just surprises me that
we've never done this in the
past, you know, I
For several years I served as
the LSC chair and I always
thought when we got our FIRs
that this information.
Was easily access accessible,
but can you tell me why it
hasn't?
So thanks, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Lindstrom, uh,
right now in state law tax
information is held confidential
and LFC doesn't have express
interests or express access to
it, we're really unique among
our sister offices in other
states and not having access to
it, um, and we've we have we
have a smart staff and we've
found ways to, you know.
Give you guys good analysis
without that information, but
it'd be a lot easier. Um, one
example, uh, in 2022 I did an
evaluation on our JTI and LEDA
programs, and I wasn't able to
look at how the impact of those
programs stacking with other tax
credits like the high wage jobs
credit impacted business like,
you know, would it, would it be
more effective if they were
bundled together or separate,
you can't do that without tax
data, and so that's some of the
um sort of analysis we'd be able
to provide if we had access to
this data.
So Madam chair, um, expert.
Ah
How much do you think we were
missing? I mean, when we would
put together a range of what
those impacts would be. But do
you think it's, it was
substantial as you were putting
together FIRs for different
bills.
Uh
Madam Chair Representative
Lindstrom, I again, I would hope
not for the FIRs. We're
certainly not doing the level of
analysis on the evaluation side
that we could be doing with this
data though, and that's Madam
Chair, that's critical
information. I'm glad you're
carrying the bill. Thank you.
Other members
Representative Terrazas.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
And thank you, uh, Linton,
expert was with this Mrs.
Fisher. I just, I just wanted to
clarify a couple things. Number
one, I, I love the idea of
sharing that information we saw
earlier in the bill.
Uh, earlier, a couple of weeks
ago where
Your figures and the figures
from the tax uh were completely
off.
Uh, like quite a bit of
But with a quite a wide range.
My only concern is when you say
that it's, it's gonna, I'm sure
it's gonna remain uh
confidential.
Um
It's opening it up to how many
people in in LFC.
And I'll just throw this out
because I'll just get this done.
I'll see and
Do they have confidentiality
agreements that they have to
sign them at that point and how
deep do they dive in?
Like
Certain industries, I don't
think you'd look at certain tax
returns or anything like that. I
think you're just getting
information, but I'll let you
answer.
Madam Chair and uh
Representative Trazos, so a
couple of things the bill does
require um that make sure that,
you know, everybody is clear on
who's responsible for what, what
the penalties are, there are
penalties, confidential
information, not confidential,
and that would, you know, hold
to us to the same as it does
when we're dealing with health
information from HCA or things
like that, um, I know that we've
talked with TRD too. They also
their staff have to do training
mandated by the IRS to look at
this data.
Um, we would have to do the same
thing too before our staff had
access to it, and we'd likely do
it on their system, like really
not let it leave their system.
The bill also has provisions to
not show individual information,
no PII, no personal identifiable
information at all, and then
everything aggregated to no less
than 3 taxpayers, so we wouldn't
be able to, you know, we usually
don't need to know, you know,
what's Michaela's income to, you
know, look at larger policy
impacts.
We're looking at aggregate
information anyways.
That's all I have. Thank you,
madam.
Presentative Duncan.
Just one quick question, um,
where's TRD with this? Are they
on board?
So, Madam Chair Representative
Duncan, we've talked with TRD.
They, I think, probably have a
little bit of wordsmithing that
they'd like to do to the bill,
which we've talked to them
about, you know, maybe doing it
if it gets to the Senate, but
they're OK with the provisions
of the bill, they don't
necessarily want to do a lot
more work, you know, but I'm
hoping right now we've been
relying on their economists to
do this analysis for us because
we don't have access to the
data. I'm actually hoping that,
you know, relieves some of that
burden for them in the future.
So they
They've been working with us on
it and I think besides a little,
you know, hesitancy about taking
on more work, they're OK with
it.
Thank you, man. I'm sure that's
all.
Oh
I do have one question. We've
heard the Secretary of TRD
talked about how they don't
currently do dynamic scoring,
um.
last question about the ways
that you all might.
Better integrate your economist
and, and your analysis, um,
would that relate to the
capacity that your agencies have
to score differently, um, Mr.
Chair.
Madam Chair, yeah, most
definitely, I think we, um, at
the LFC are also I know the
economist team is looking to
purchase Remy, which is, you
know, a nice software, so
between having, you know, the
new tools and the data we're
hoping to, you know, provide you
a lot better.
analysis information in the
future.
Thank you. What's the role of
the committee?
Thank you. Is there any
opposition to that motion?
Hey, Mr. Chair, you have a pass
on HP 199.
be going next to HB 207 with
Representative Duncan filling
in.
Representative Duncan, the floor
is yours, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And and represented Duncan, you
have an amendment on this bill.
being handed out, there's an
amendment on this bill.
And, and for full disclosure,
I'm sorry.
This is.
207. Yes, ma'am.
That that this uh this amendment
was, was timely and and it's
being provided to the committee,
um, so with that being said,
similar movement.
2.
I'll like that, yeah, good.
Uh
We start with the amendment and
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Most of the, uh, sponsors of
this are, are uh in other
hearings right now so I'll I'll
step in real quick, um, this
amendment changes um from the
7000.
Or I'll adoptions, um, it takes
it down to 5000, and if there's
a special need, it takes it up
to the 7500.
This is a tax credit.
For adoptions.
Is that the extent of the
amendment, sir?
That's
I think that's it.
As much as you can see, OK, and
then just for a full disclosure,
uh please the, the number on the
bottom left.
0.230791.1. OK, that's what we
all have. Questions on the
amendment, Representative
Lindstrom.
Is there a definition, Mr.
Chairman,
special needs.
Representative, when we talk
about your.
No.
Number 3, H2 special needs
child. Is there a definition,
Mister Chairman, Representative
on special needs, is there some
kind of a?
Definition that you all use,
that's pretty standard
throughout the state of New
Mexico and maybe there's
somebody in the audience, Mr.
Chairman, that can answer. And,
and, and by all means,
Representative Duncan, I know
that you're filling in. So if
you have, if there's an expert,
are you the expert for this
bill?
Come on, can you come up to the
microphone and speak in the
microphone, please. I don't know
who you are. This is weird.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Jim Jackson, uh, with
the disability coalition, we're
not really the expert on this
bill, but we did work with uh uh
Representative Dao on this
amendment because we were
concerned that we, we were
essentially eliminating the
incentive for people to adopt
special needs children, so, uh,
Representative Lunstrom in
response to your question that's
in.
The, the amendment um on the
bottom of the first page of the
amendment, uh, we've essentially
reinstated the definition of
special needs child that was
already in state statute, though
it was eliminated in the
original bill, but it would be
put back in and uh it may not, I
don't know that it's the best
definition, but it's what's
currently in statute.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
That, that helps a lot.
Seems like they are these folks
are hard to place kids.
OK, thank you.
Thank you. And, and you can, you
can take your seat again if you
want to, unless you want to
continue to be an expert
witness, you can sit right
there. Representative Chandler.
Yeah
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Is this a recurring tax credit
every year of $5000 tax credit.
Thank you Mr. Chair and
Representative, um.
Yes, ma'am, I, I do believe it
is.
And, and, um, Mr. Chair and uh
representative, we have a
multitude of child-related tax
credits, so this one would be
stacked on top of because then
uh.
Adopted child is a child, you
know, it's a child of the
family, so we're giving a tax,
you know, we have the working
families tax credit. We have
various rebates that are based
on the number of children in the
family, for example, liter has a
ties into the number of children
and income and so on and so
forth. So you're saying on top
of all of that.
We're gonna add $5000 for an
adopted child where.
In other circumstances, it's
something else. You know, I, I
would support it for the first
year, but I, I, I'm struggling
to understand that because we
have been extremely generous in
terms of our child related tax
policies in this. Thank you.
Thank you.
I understand your concerns. And
what is the fiscal impact, Mr.
Chair?
Um, Mr. Chair, I don't have that
with me.
I believe it was 9 million.
Represent uh Chandler and, and,
and representative sponsor.
Looks like FY 26, it's between
9.2 to $19.2 million and then uh
looks like it stays at that
scale until uh FY 29 when it
jumps up to
Minimum 10.1 to 19.1 per year,
so it, it escalates absolutely,
but the floor being a 9.2
million.
Well, I, you know, Mr. Chair, I,
I've really big on supporting
families. You can look to our
welcome child act that's coming
out pretty soon where we're
going to be hopefully giving
rebates to family people who
adopt and have children, so, you
know, I think we need to be
looking at the totality of all
this, um, but I know this will
be rolled, Mr. Chair, and we'll
have further discussion. Thank
you.
Thank you. Let's goresentative
Terasas.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
on the amendment, yes, um.
Covering the, the, the special
needs and the, the adoption that
we had, uh, excuse me, the
special needs, uh.
Amendment
Uh to
Follow up on on the discussion
was just brought up. There were
297 children, roughly about 300
children.
That were adopted here.
Um
You know, and we have about
1800.
2000 children that are sitting
there in foster care.
So, you know, uh.
I know it's
I know Mr. Chair,
Representative, it, it is
something.
$9 million or up to 9 $19
million. I was looking at the
FYR but.
To me it's very.
Small inn.
In
When you look at the entire
budget that we have.
And we
We spend stuff like this this
like nothing in, in our budget.
So I think this is for a good
cause.
These children get them at home.
Give him someone that will love
them, take care of them, and
take that.
Extra
Uh, responsibility when there's
a special needs child so that
I'm.
Thank you. Anything else on the
amendment?
Saying none. Is there a motion
to support the amendment?
The
motion made so I did
any opposition to the amendment?
Seeing none, your, your bill has
been amended, uh, anything else
before we go to the audience?
I think in the um.
To
Representative Chandler's Point.
Um, this does look like a large
amount of money.
But if we can get kids into
families.
Perhaps when they're 1415, 16,
the what we spend on them then,
be it juvenile or when they
become adults and, and uh are
incarcerated for things being in
a family is much cheaper in the
long term.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to the audience for question
or for uh support or opposition
anyone online?
No one online, anyone in the
room, support or opposition of
House Bill.
207 as amended.
If your expert since he was not
really your expert. He's here to
support it? No? You don't want
to support it.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, our
organization is actually kind of
neutral on this, but we do, we
appreciate that we're putting
we're this amendment has
reinstated the additional
incentive.
Uh, for special needs adoptions
and it does.
While it would increase the uh
the uh tax credits for all
adoptions, uh, it would that
would have also the result of
increasing the the subsidy for
people who adopt special needs
children.
Very good, thank you. Anyone
else, uh, support House Bill
207.
Uh, anyone in opposition House
Bill 207 is amended.
Say no, back to the committee
for their discussion represented
Lundstrom, then representative,
uh, Gallego after.
Mr. Chairman, I'm wondering in,
and this is a tough position for
the presenter that there might
be a friendly verbal amendment
to have, have worked up for this
bill, that it be a one time.
Tax credit.
I that that I know you, you're
you're not.
You're not really signed on this
bill, Mr. Chairman. OK. All
right.
Just wondering if that might be
a way to help move this bill
along.
Represented lunch and we, you
know, this because this is gonna
be tabled in this committee, we
can always bring it back to have
that to have that discussion,
um, but
All, all, all credit goes to
you, uh.
I remember Duncan for for taking
this on. Uh, I don't I realize
you're not in a position to make
a decision on behalf of all the
other ones that are on this
bill, so we can bring that back.
The time is appropriate. Thank
you, Representative Gallegos.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative, um, I was
actually gonna make more or less
the same recommendation, um, of
course, I think it's an
important bill, it's an
important topic, um.
You know, part of the problem
is.
It's hard to get families to to
take on these these difficult
children, I mean, it's a lot of
work and um if we could look at
a sunset, um, I think looking,
Mr. Chair, um, to at least get
people invested into making the
commitment that would be what we
need to do to to bring people
in, um, I think if you could
discuss a sunset and and then
look at the FIR as to when
those, um, and it could be used
as a recruiting, uh, method to
make sure.
that people at least come in,
they know that they they've got
that as a resource and then
maybe looking at, you know, what
we've got other bills out there
that we can use to really
emphasize and we've got that
money to to bolster and and help
this particular subject along.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Gaos, I, I made
notes here and I'll pass those
on, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representatives. Let's go to
Representative Henry.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh just
to go along with their
questions, and I know you might
have better answer, but maybe
you're expert. What happens
right now? Because I know right
now there is a credit, is that
correct?
Is that a one time or, or is
that
Reoccurring
That's
Chairman and and representative
that is uh $1500 a year.
That was just, I just wanted to
make sure I understood that the
credit that's currently being
given.
does happen every year.
Thank you for that.
Thank you. Anyone else questions
or comments from the committee.
Representativerasas, thank you,
Mr. Chair. Yeah, just real
quick, I mean, I, I know we're
all trying to make this work
out. I, I think, Mr. Chair,
representative, looking at $5500
per family.
We're looking at something
that's less than $400 or $500.
Uh, a month
When you look at it, you break
it up.
Or
Difficult kid.
probably has needs a lot of
help.
I think it's, I think the the
reason that.
From what I'm reading here.
Um
You, you're changing that, you
know, to difficult kids that are
difficult to place, and I think
they need.
We'll probably need a lot of
that money and $400 today is, is
not a.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Anyone else, questions or
comments?
No, uh, can I please get a
motion to temporary table this
bill.
Made a motion made by
Representative Gallegos. Is
there a second, seconded by
Representative Silva in the
opposition, saying none, uh,
rank Commander Duncan, thank you
for stepping in.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you. And if
you can share those sentiments
with uh with
Representative Doo.
And uh we can invite her back,
um, when the time is
appropriate.
Next on our agenda, House Bill
293 eliminating Social Security
tax, Representative Senator
Cortez, and Murphy.
Or others, Representative Brown.
Good morning ladies. Good
morning, sir.
The floor is yours whenever
you're ready.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, good morning. I'm
back.
Um, just as a reminder, I'm
representative Senna Cortez and
here with me is Representative
Brown, who is one of the greats
and doesn't need uh an
introduction. She has worked on
this initiative for many years
and I am just beyond grateful to
do this. My expert is Rick May,
and he's our policy director for
our caucus. He's also known as
the numbers guy.
Before you is House Bill 293 in
simple terms, this bill seeks to
stop the state's taxation of
Social Security benefits in
total.
I'd like to share the heart of
this bill before I get into the
how of this bill.
Um, for those of you that don't
know, I grew up with very humble
beginnings. I was the kid whose
dreams were so much bigger than
my family's income and just to
paint a picture for you of my
neighborhood that I grew up in
across the street from me, uh,
prostitute conducted her
business out by the hour, and if
that wasn't bad enough, we had
gang members on the opposite
side of the street with
shootings and police and
detectives that were always up
and down our street.
And if that wasn't bad enough,
we had drunks in the back who
fought their roosters and their
pit bulls, and that's usually
what I would watch through my
bedroom window, um, you see many
people in my neighborhood, they
became teen moms. They were,
they got addicted to drugs and
many of them were fought, they
fought and were were killed in
gang affiliated wars and I, I
should have been a statistic,
and I, I could have been a
statistic, but my late mom and
dad would always tell me.
You're gonna leave your mark on
this world and you're gonna go
to college even though we can't
afford to pay your way. And I
remember having that
conversation with him when I was
in the first grade, thinking, oh
my gosh, I'm gonna have to
figure my life out and I did
just that, you know, my life is
the product of of choices and we
get to create the life that we
want by the choices that we make
and I worked 4 jobs to put
myself through college and now
I'm, I'm, I'm proud to say that
I'm a doctor in my field and a
state.
representative, and none of that
was because I grew up with a
silver spoon in my mouth, but
I'm just the product of, of
working really hard.
And again, I say all of that to
say is we should incentivize
people to, to work hard and
fight for the same American
dream and I don't think I'm, I'm
special. I think there's many
people like me who have who
fought for this American dream
too, um, and I believe that we
shouldn't put a tax on a cap on
success or penalize the people
that are working hard and as a
matter of good tax policy, I
believe the state shouldn't be
taxing income.
That has already been taxed in a
worker's working years.
As you know, inflation continues
to rise and our seniors are part
of the vulnerable population
that is being impacted right
now. And I know that we've heard
bills in committees about
grandparents who are also
raising their grandchildren,
they need Social Security tax to
not be taxed. And again, this is
also money that was most likely
taxed in the workers' working
years. You're gonna hear that a
lot today.
Just for some quick facts for
credit cards in New Mexico in
January, CNBC reported that the
average credit card balance per
resident of New Mexico is about
$6000 on the low end and on the
high end, it's $10,000 in New
Mexico is in the top.
in the United States for that
credit card usage.
The week before last, the Labor
Department reported an increase
in inflation for the 4th
consecutive month, and here are
some numbers for you since I
know you are all the numbers
people.
In January 2025, inflation is at
3% and that's up from January
2024. Shelter Cross, which are
the home prices rent, it's up
4.4%.
For inflation, which like
groceries and energy, it's up
3.3%. Meat prices are up 3.2%
beef and ground beef.
5.5% and I know eggs have been a
hot topic and they are up 52%.
Currently 41 states do not tax
Social Security benefits.
There are only 9 states that
still do and New Mexico is one
of those states.
In most cases, the money saved
would be used to buy necessary
goods for our seniors, and
that's groceries and gas and
rent and buying necessities for
their grandchildren, and in
turn, this would produce more
GRTs for the state.
So I'm asking for for you to
expand the purchase power of new
Maxiins, which means there's
more money flowing in our
economy, and it makes it a
favorable environment for other
businesses here in New Mexico.
Removing the state tax on social
security would likely attract
new retirees and businesses to
our state again diversifying our
economy.
Let's keep our retirees here in
New Mexico.
The attract our new retirees to
New Mexico. And the only way
that we can do this is to not
tax Social Security across the
board. Again, this is money that
was most likely taxed in the
workers working years and
remember, a lot of these people
are fighting for the American
dream, just like I fought for
it, and I say, let's keep them
here in New Mexico.
They're worth it.
I'd like to open up the floor
for Representative Brown and
then after her my expert Rick
Bay would like to add to.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, I, I've been before
you a number of times trying to
repeal of I really would like a
full repeal of the Social
Security tax here in New Mexico.
Um, I was very encouraged, um,
uh, I think it was a year or two
ago when Governor Michelle Lujan
Grisham came out publicly
endorsing.
Um, uh, a repeal of the Social
Security tax here in the state,
and she was talking about a full
repeal.
And as you probably know, we,
uh, Mr. Chair, we did make some
good adjustments.
Uh, but the point is, um.
And there are certain income
levels now above which the state
tax would apply.
However, um, we're still on the
bad list because we technically
we still do tax, Social
Security.
And um
I am, I am not alone in saying
that I'm your retirement years,
one of the things they do is
start thinking about where they
want to live in retirement and
very common to go to uh websites
to Google, if there are all
kinds of websites out there and
they look one of the first
things they look at is which
states tax Social Security.
They don't go into the details
about, well, you know, New
Mexico exempts to a certain
level, but then after that,
there's this cliff effect and
the tax hits hard.
So we're still on the bad list,
and when I started working this
legislation, um, we had, I think
1213, maybe even 14 states that
tax Social Security it's going
down now it's 9 states as
representative Senator Cortez
has mentioned.
So I guess in the back of my
mind, Mr. Chairman, I'm
wondering, will we continue to
tax, still stay on the bad list.
And we'll be, will be uh the
last holdout.
Uh, so we'll see where we end
up, but.
I think um this is a bill that
would really help the middle
class.
So, um, a married couple filing
tax up to $150,000 of of their
combined income.
That doesn't go as far as it
used to and representative
Senator Cortez just gave you a
kind of a bird's eye view of
some of the inflation factors
that people are facing.
In previous years,
Representative Armstrong and I
have suggested variations on
this bill.
But if we don't get that and we
ran a companion bill that said
we would adjust for inflation.
We went back and forth on that
one, but we ended up with sort
of a compromise, uh, the one
that that is the current.
But this is.
Something I, I think a little
history is helpful, Mr.
Chairman. Social Security was
never meant to provide a source
of tax revenue for the states.
What happened is, and uh and it
wasn't in the federal government
said we need to shore up the
system, so we're going to start
taxing and as it was pointed
out, this has already been
taxed. This was done through
payroll deduction, have a choice
in the matter.
And there are studies that show
that if people had controlled
that money themselves instead of
paying it into the government,
uh, they would actually have a
better return today.
So that's just kind of a little
footnote to the whole thing.
But, Mr. Chairman of New Mexico
started taxing and we kind of
piggyback off the federal
taxation system, but we actually
started taxing in 1990.
And if we were to have that
question today, should we tax
Social Security income. I think
we have a very robust debate.
What happened in 1990?
It was towards the end of the
legislative session. It was
midnight.
And there was a tax bill under
consideration. It was fairly
lengthy.
And
Someone had put in a paragraph,
and nobody really caught it.
About taxing Social Security
here in the state.
And so it never had a full
debate. Um, it just kind of
snuck in there and after the
bill passed, well, it is what
people go, what did we just do?
We're taxing Social Security
now.
So it was sort of an a
misadventure, I think.
In taxation and um for many
reasons that they've already
been stated, uh, we think that
this tax we'd like to see a full
repeal, so we can just be done
with it.
And um
There's something about double
taxation that just seems to me
not to be good tax policy.
And um, so anyway, and our
reputation as a state, I think
would improve.
If we just um repealed it in in
uh in full.
So with that, Mister Chair, I
think maybe Mr. May would have a
few words to add.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Rick May.
I'm the policy director for the
House Republican Leadership. I
just wanted to add a few items
for your consideration as you
debate this legislation that you
may think about number one.
Uh, there is in the current law
there basically, once you make
$150,0001 you become all of your
Social Security becomes taxable.
So there's a major cliff. So
there isn't a phase out or
anything, so you, you go from $1
you have no tax, one more
dollar, you have a full
taxation. That seems, I think,
uh, I think a sponsors would
agree that's kind of very
inequitable in in treatment of
various taxpayers.
Number 2, I would also point out
that as representative Brown
just pointed out, um, the trend
is of the states is to eliminate
taxation. Yes, a few years ago,
just in 2022, I believe, or
2021, there were 12 states that
tax Social Security. Now we're
down to 9, and West Virginia is
in the process of eliminating
their tax so there will soon be
only 8 states that provide the
tax. And then thirdly, I would
suggest that in the FIRs that
you have.
It states, well, this could be
some major erosion of our text
base if we would provide this
kind of tax break to seniors.
And just to remind the
committee, the FIR is
approximately $33 million a
year. If you look at that as a
percentage of our $13.6 billion
in general revenues, that's
0.24%. So it's less than 0.25%.
So I think
In a $13 billion budget, I think
we can find uh 30 $40 million
I've got a suggestion if you
want to hear that one, but, uh,
40 $30 million within a 13.
billion dollar budget really is
not really a threat to anyone's
revenue base or any threat to
any benefit that the budget is
providing.
And then finally, I would
suggest that you think about
Social Security as
Representative Brown just
mentioned, Social Security is
really not a pension benefit.
It's not like an annuity, it's
not like a pension benefit you
get from an employer or, or
maybe even para or ERB here in
the state. It is really part of
the social insurance contract
that the federal government has
created for all of us the same
as they have a social contract
with Medicare and railroad
retirement and other benefits,
and we don't tax Medicare, uh,
and I don't, and I'm not sure
about rail.
retirement, but I think at least
Medicare is a good example where
it's a benefit that we all pay
into. It's a benefit that we all
receive when once we reach a
certain age, and I think it, it
needs to be looked at again as
part of the social contract,
social insurance, and therefore
it's probably worthy of a
different tax treatment.
So, those are the points I would
like to make and I think we all
stand for questions, Mr.
Chairman, and thank you for the
opportunity to be here today.
OK, thank you, Mr. May. Thank
you, Representative Brown and
represent Senator Cortez for
your presentation. At this
point, you're comfortable with
let's go into the audience for.
OK.
Let's go to the internet first.
Anyone online and support or
opposition.
One is a supporter of
OK, we have one person online.
Either you're in support or
opposition.
Carla Sontag.
Carla, good morning.
Good morning, sir. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee. I'm Carlos Santag,
president and CEO of the New
Mexico Business Coalition, and
we are in strong support of
this. I think that the hit to
the budget.
To take this action is minimal
in comparison to the revenue
that we will create by keeping
our retirees here and attracting
new ones. This is really a big
deal statewide or US wide when
we're looking at only 9 states
that are taxing Social Security.
Many people feel this is very
unfair because that is a tax
they've already paid.
On their wages. And so this is
not something that ought to be
taxed again. And I just want to
point out to you, if you look at
an outside source of the effect
of sound tax policy.
In rich states, poor states. It
really illustrates where our
state is in 20.
19. New Mexico was ranked
twenty-ninth in the nation for
tax policy, but by 2024, we had
fallen to 38 and taxing Social
Security is one of those key
elements that rich states, poor
states is looking at to compare
us nationwide. So we're
competing for those retirees to
keep them into to attract them,
and I would encourage you to
support this. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else?
No one else online, anyone in
the room, support or opposition.
in the room. So let's come to
the
I'm sorry?
You support, do you want to make
any public comment, you're
welcome to.
Other than you just get the
thumbs up.
Thumbs up.
Come on, come on up real quick
and you can speak into the
microphone.
Have
You wanna come up and make a
statement in the microphone.
If not, then.
OK, thank you. You got one
thumbs up in the, in the
audience. Let's go to the
audience, I mean to the
committee for questions or
comments.
And Miss
Hold on real quick, we're gonna
come to the committee, OK?
Representative Terasas, thank
you, Mr. Chair. No, I, I think
we need to work our way to
getting off that list. I think
it's
Something that we need to work
our way there. I know that we,
we got a table this, but
Uh, because that's just what the
committee does, but at the end
of the day.
It would be nice for New Mexico
to get off that list and.
And uh hopefully attract more,
more, uh.
Or retirees. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Montoya.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
uh, Representatives, uh, thank
you for, for bringing this. Uh
thank you for uh.
To this legislation.
Um
It's
If we're just talking good tax
policy.
Taxing a benefit that's already
been taxed.
It is something that we need to
deal with.
Over time, this is something
that
As, as, uh,
We've sat.
Uh
And heard from experts about
what good tax policy is.
Um
We,
we ultimately know what good tax
policy is and and
Taxing a benefit that everyone
is compelled to pay into.
It's not like we have an opt-out
clause.
Um, I, I think, uh,
It is something that deserves a
very, very serious consideration
by this committee.
Um
I, I realized House Bill 2 has
already passed out of here, so I
didn't see any room on there for
any tax breaks.
Um, which is usually where
We see
That, um, so,
I don't have any illusions about
this year, but I do believe
going forward this is something.
That that we need to discuss.
Next year is a a budget year.
And, and I think this should be
a
Highest priority for this
committee is, first off, let's
let's do everything we can to
make sure our tax system is, is,
first of all, fair.
And everybody who's paid into
this
Uh, with the expectation of
being able to get it back, uh,
it, it just happens to be folks
who are in another state who
have also paid into Social
Security, it's a little more
fair for them in another state.
And I think that that that's one
area where I, I believe we need
to
Come and say, OK, we're not just
talking about fairness.
Within the state
But
This is the trend. This is
where, where other states are
going.
And I think it's something we
Or for what appears to be a
pretty minimal hit to the
budget.
It is something we consider in
the future. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you,
Representative Moto. Let's go to
Representative Silva.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters.
Um, I.
I don't support this bill. I, I
think it is, uh, primarily
benefits higher income, um,
households and according to the,
one of the analysis, this harms
households under 30. And so when
you talk about all the economic,
um,
Issues that families are facing
higher prices at the grocery
store, higher housing costs.
These are primarily impacting,
uh, households that are just
trying to get started.
And I think that there's a way
that we can create tax policy
that um doesn't give the short
end of the stick to one side of
our families in New Mexico, all
benefiting higher income
earners. Um, I do think that
there's something that we can
do. I can't remember the term,
um, where there's not a cliff,
but after that $150,000 plus a
dollar, but then it's more
incremental, um, I think that's
something that I would be open
to considering, but um also
because it's taxed at the
federal level, you know, I don't
think New Mexico can fix all of
Reagan's problems that he
created for us. And so, um, I,
um,
Yeah, this is deeply concerning
to me also, given that the
federal government, uh, the
house just passed the budget
that is giving deep
tax cuts to the very, very
wealthy. And we're gonna have to
try and make up for that in New
Mexico at some point, uh, if
that passes. So, thank you,
Chair. Thank you.
Representative So, thank you for
the comments. Let's go to
Representative Lundstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
actually like this bill.
I like it for a couple of
different reasons, Mr. Chairman,
um, when I think about the fact
that the tax.
That the federal government
levies and the money comes into
the household that is based on
net and then it's retaxed, is
that correct, Mr. Chairman, uh,
presenters.
So
So my concern is is that when
I'm looking at exactly how many
taxpayers actually claimed this
exemption under current law.
And that we heard a bill earlier
um, this morning, Mr. Chairman,
that we haven't been able to
keep real close.
Accurate information.
Bill that you just had, Mr.
Chairman.
Are we missing folks though?
Have we been missing folks
because I know that if LFC who
prepared this FIR hasn't been
able to get in personal income
tax data.
At the level that they would
have liked to. I'm.
We haven't had
We don't have more people.
That
be affected by this either to
the good or to the bad on this.
Um, I'm, I'm hoping, Mr.
Chairman, that your bill passes
so we can have much more
accurate information into the
LFC staff.
On issues exactly like this.
I do know from my constituency,
Mister Chairman, there is a lot
of concern about having.
Social Security taxed by the
state.
Um, because it is something
that's already been taxed when
the people were working.
Uh, maybe there is a way that
this could have a step down, so
to speak, from the 151.
1000 as an example, um.
And I hope that we can work on
that, Mr. Chairman, if this
isn't going to be included in in
your tax package this year, but
I do support the fact that we
should not be taxing Social
Security. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Lungstrom, before we go to the
next comment, I'm not here to to
uh defend the LFC, but
nonetheless as a member of the
LFC that bill that we proposed
today wasn't the fact that we
don't have any data that is
supported by anything else, but
the fact is is that the data
that the LLC is looking to have
from TRD is a little bit more
that they can fetch on their
own, uh, rather than rely on the
TRD to provide them the data
that
That they're looking for to
provide us the analysis that we
we need. So, uh.
I hope it passes as well. So
before we, uh, as we move on.
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, man, I wish we had more of
Ronald Reagan's policies.
Uh mister, I agree with the
presenters on this. Uh, this is
a tax that's already been taxed.
In a bipartisan effort, I and
And thinking of repair home.
I want her to have a full and
good life and retirement in New
Mexico and for that reason, I'm
going to vote for this.
Right here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Wait, what? It's going to
represent Pajon and your good
life you're gonna live here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representatives, um.
Point of personal privilege to
respond to that.
Um.
Because I wanna have a a good
life when I retire if the earth
is still left, uh,
Representative Duncan, I oppose
this policy, um, I, I do have
some concerns and, and you know,
I think part of this is also
maybe I, I, because I, I am on
the younger side, um, I don't
understand how the Social
Security piece um works because
I keep hearing people say that
it's already taxed.
The income is already taxed, but
I thought Social Security was
just a tax that comes
automatically out of your
income, so um.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
can you explain that?
Mister Chair represented Parajo
I love our expert responded.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, I
think the way, why people say
it's taxed is that when your
your contribution to Social
Security that comes out of your
paycheck every 2 weeks or a
month or bimonthly, whatever.
Those are uh after tax dollars,
so you pay a tax on the income
that you don't receive because
of the part that goes to the
federal government. So you are
paying tax on that, and that's
why people say, and then the
double taxation comes into play
when a state like New Mexico
then levies a second tax on that
income when you pay your income
taxes as you receive that as a
benefit. That's where the tax
and then the double tax.
comes in
and Mr. Chair, if I may, to
respond to Representative
Silva's question.
Uh, yeah, I read that same
comment in the uh FIRs but
somehow this is harmful to the
lower end.
And frankly, I don't see how
that's true, because this bill
only deals with people over
$150,000 or more.
I tried to explain that this
0.24% of this revenue loss would
have no impact on any benefits
or any program that the state
budget provides, so.
This chair, if I may, I, I don't
think that's really uh a valid,
um.
Concern. Now granted, it may be
a concern about the upper income
issue, but that's, uh, I think
obviously a philosophical
question, but I don't believe
that there is any negative
impact on anybody on the bottom
end. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair and um expert, OK,
so what you're saying is that.
The Social Security income tax,
which is 4%.
The Social Security tax is 4%.
What is the percentage, the
Social Security payroll tax.
I I think uh approximately 10 or
11%, I think, I don't know
exactly. Kevin, do you remember?
Seems like you would want to
know that but it's more than 4%.
It's somewhere around, it's and
then of course your employer
also pays that tax, so there's a
double tax, yeah, about 150,
yeah.
Yes, yeah.
Yeah.
Of 15% sounds about right, yes.
Uh, Mr. Chair and um.
So what I'm hearing is it's,
it's 10%.
It's about 7.5% times 2, I
think, I believe. OK, 7.5% times
2, you pay 7.5% and your
employer pays 7.5% and of course
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
even though your employer pays
that money. In essence, that is
reduction in your salary that
you would otherwise receive from
your employer. Right, OK, so
the, but the 15% that gets taken
out and you're you're calling
that.
That that's what you're saying
is the tax on the income.
Because you're saying you are
getting the money taken out of
your paycheck 15%, and then when
you pull it back out, you're
then taxed again.
But the 15% that gets pulled out
of your paycheck is the dollars
that go into the investment pool
for Social Security, Mr. Chair.
Well, Mr. Chair, yeah, Mr.
Chair, yeah, I, so I think
you're like half right
representing Mr. Chair.
The, the mouse text the, the
taxes that are paid by the
employer, obviously you as an
employee don't pay.
The employer gets to make a,
that's a business deduction you
can deduct that from your taxes,
but that 7.5% that you do pay,
yes, that is, yes, you are
correct in that and, and that's
the percentage. So for example,
let's say you make
$1000
a week and you get paid weekly
to make it easy.
Well 7.5% of that $7000 is going
to be paid to the federal
government.
Right for your Social Security
benefit.
Well, you don't receive that
7.5% in your paycheck. I mean,
you don't take that home, you
pay tax on that, even though you
really don't get the benefit of
that, of that money.
So that's why that's the first
tax and then again as I
mentioned earlier, uh Mr. Chair,
Representative, the second tax
comes in play when you are
forced to pay it on your state
taxes, the tax on the benefit
that you receive while you reach
uh 62 or older or whatever you
claim Social Security benefits
and and experts, so the.
What you're saying is that you
pay.
Um, you pay personal income tax
on the $7.5 that you give to the
federal government.
Representative, yes.
So, Mister Chair and
Representative, so is this um.
It is what, what happened to
that $7.5 when it goes to Social
Security, Mr. Chair, and
representative.
Mr. Chair Representative, great
question.
Uh, when he goes to is he goes
to um the trust fund. There's a
Social Security trust fund in
the federal government.
Social Security is basically a
um
Uh, as I said, a social
insurance program. It's not a
program.
And it basically you're the
dollar, the way the system works
is the dollars that you
Pay in today into the system,
goes to the beneficiaries of
today.
It's not a savings account, I
think, I think representative
earlier the representative
mentioned that, you know, the
money is.
Is there because people pay into
it, so it's a, shall we say a
pay as you go system.
Got it, and Mr. Chair and
Representative, so does this um.
Does this trust fund, does the
state invest it?
Or does it go directly to my
grandpa and grandma.
Mr. Chair, the, the balance of
the Social Security Trust Fund
is invested in.
Government securities by the
federal government.
The state of New Mexico or any
other state has no investment
power powers, no investment
responsibility for that Social
Security trust fund that is
solely a part of the federal
government.
So, um, Mr. Chair and um
representative so does.
That balance in securities, does
it yield some kind of rate, does
that do those dollars grow?
Mr. Chairman Representative,
yes, that money that's any
surplus.
And that fund is, as I said,
invested in governmental
security, intergovernmental
securities that pays an
interest, that's all part of the
national debt calculation,
where there is that interest is
deposited in the trust fund and
those that interest is used, Mr.
Chairman Representative to pay
monthly benefits
and experts, so what is the
percent of that?
That grows that inter.
Um, in that, in that security.
Um, Mr. Chair, Madam, uh,
representative, I believe it's
probably the current T Bill rate
that is charged and I don't know
what the current T bill rate is
at the moment, but I assume it's
probably somewhere around 5%,
6%. That's a guess, Mr.
Chairman.
OK, Mr. Chair and and
representative, so what, what
you've told me right now, the
information that I have is that,
and I, I hope it's correct. I'm
relying on you as the expert to
have this information correct,
but what you're saying is that.
Um, so that's $7.5 that comes
out of the paycheck, for
instance, from that $1000 a
week, that does get invested
into a trust fund of sorts and
that that trust fund that's
managed by the federal
government and that that does
grow and what I'm trying to
understand is, um, you know, if,
if I'm a person that's putting
in the $7.5 and we're saying
that yeah, we're paying some
kind of tax on that, but is that
tax less?
Or more
Then how much the money is
growing in the pot.
Madam, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative Mr. Chair
Representative.
First, I think you have to look
at this as Social Security, so
If I could kind of understand
the, the
The thrust of your question.
Your, your money that you pay
into the Social Security system.
It's not like there is a
gigantic file somewhere or
account where your money goes
into that account and you have
a.
You know, you're growing a
balance, Mr. Chair, for your
benefit. It doesn't work that
way. A lot of people think that
it does, but it doesn't work
that way.
And it just goes into the bigger
pot.
And then it goes into the bigger
pot, then it just takes money
that whatever is needed to
provide those monthly benefits
every month. So it's not like
you are providing a contribution
that's directed specifically
towards your retirement, it's
really, as I said, it's a social
insurance program, so it's
dispersed, you know, with,
without, you know, throughout
the entire population. Does
that, is that what you're
getting at, Mr. Chair
Representative Mr. Chair
representative, I think not.
Um, but I can move on. I, I
think that like, uh, what I was
trying to get out here is, you
know, if you are putting in your
dollars, um, I I believe are the
Social Security does seem like
this is one of the safest ways
to um to put your money and
invest it. I understand there
are other like um, um, better
ways to invest it because there
are um financial planners, for
instance, right, that are
really, really good at investing
money and in that case, if you
have a very large sum of money.
and you're investing it, of
course, the returns will be much
larger, um, but for folks who
are middle class in New Mexico
and I'd like to understand
better how you define that, um,
for me, the the in New Mexico,
the median household income is
60,000, so folks who are in the
60,000 range, um, that to me is
is middle class and are you
saying, uh, Mr. Chair and
representative that the middle
class in New Mexico it's a
little bit higher.
And 75,000.
Mr. Chair, representative, I'm
not making any comment about any
income levels, but I, I again, I
think the premise of your
question, Mr. Chair.
Is that
The, the way this system is set
up.
It is a progressive benefit
process. You replacement amount,
the replacement, in other words,
the amount of money you put in
and all those things. It's, it's
again, it's based upon, you
know, it is somewhat
progressive. So the lower income
people paying Social Security on
a percentage basis, gets a
higher replacement value then.
High income, but again,
Everybody pays in is eligible
for a benefit.
There are certain requirements
that have to be met regarding
age, your benefit, you have to
have so many different quarters
in order to qualify just because
you pay in the Social Security
one month doesn't mean you
qualify. I believe you need 40
quarters of private employment
to get a benefit. So, I mean,
it's a complicated system. It's
not, uh, it's not just I paid in
and for a couple of months and I
get a benefit. It's a long term
investment and because it is a
social insurance.
The purpose of the fund is not
Like a pension program like
Perra or ERB where you benefit
where you receive contributions,
you invest.
And then you pay our benefits.
The purpose of the program
really is to pay out the
benefits. It because again, it's
that social component that
you're trying to help people
meet their everyday.
Expenses, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
thank you, um, expert, yeah,
that, that's actually what I was
trying to get out of my
question. So yeah, you hit it
right on the nail that this is
um more of a progressive system
where, um, and I mean, even even
what I understand from Social
Security.
It you
Right, the, the percent, the
amount that you get back is
based on your salary, like how
much you make, right? So the
amount that you're paying in,
you're already getting out.
Some percent of however high
your income was, so Mister Chair
and um.
And, um, representatives, is
there a reason why you uh just
decided to eliminate it
completely. I mean, um, I think
we share similar values here and
that we wanna, um, ensure that
this is a benefit that our
elderly can access.
Um
My question though is, you know,
I think and and tell me if this
math is incorrect.
Uh, but if you.
If you are getting $100,000 out.
Of Social Security.
You would have had to put in.
$100,000 a month, so I
represent, I see you shaking
your head, but I haven't asked
the question yet, um.
If you get out $100,000 sorry,
not a month, a year.
That's like your social security
benefit payout, how much over
your lifetime would you have had
to put in Mister Chair and
representative.
Mr. Chair Representative.
I don't believe that anyone
Receives $100,000 a year from
Social Security.
Uh, I think the benefits are
much more modest.
And that
Uh, if you recall, there is a
Uh
There's an income limit that
you.
Pay taxes and then you don't,
so.
You know, I, I don't know the
average benefit for Social
Security should have probably
looked that up, but I, I don't
think anywhere near.
I don't maybe Representative
Taraz, he's a businessman. He,
his employees are probably are
obviously invested or engaged in
this, but I don't think there's
anybody who's getting $100,000
from Social Security. I would
guess the average benefit may
be.
35, 40 at the maximum level, but
that would be purely a guess, I
guess, it's a guess.
So how much would you have had
to put in to get $35,000 it's
it's based upon the number of
quarters you pay in and whether
you meet that qualification and
then they go look at your income
and there's a formula that that
that that they use, so I'm sorry
representative Mr. Chair, I
can't.
I, I don't have that actuarial
information, Mr. Chair and
Representative, that's OK. I'll
ask Chat GBT later on and they
will tell me,
um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I, you know, I,
I, I really see where you're
going with this, and I can see
where um.
You know, you want to, I mean,
it does appear that there is a
cliff or, you know, the the way
that we're taxing it, and I
think it does make some sense.
to adjust that, Mister Chair and
Representative, um, but.
For someone who is my age 20.
8, I'm gonna be 29 soon.
Uh, you know, I think a lot
about the future and the kind of
retirement that I'll have, um, I
hope it's one that's similar to
my grandparents who are like in
my life and present and that I
would get to see my grand
grandchildren and live together,
um, but you know, Mr. Chair and
Representative I at at this
moment, I just don't feel like I
have enough information to make
a decision on, on this kind of
bill to really feel safe and
secure that uh my investment,
investment.
of Doreen's son, the Reverence
chairwoman Gallegos his son that
the that uh, you know, Late
you're your daughter and your
children that they'll have a
safe and secure retirement
benefit. Social Security has
been a lot in the in the media
because you know this is one of
those, um, one of those things
that really needs to be balanced
at the federal level, not just,
not just here in New Mexico, so,
um, Mr. Chair and representative
for that reason, I, I can't vote
for this. Thank you.
Thank you. I don't think it's a
questionnaire continue our
discussion. I want to recognize
there's 4 young men that are
sharp dressed that walked in,
and I want to just say good
morning to you guys. Where are
you guys from?
Very cool. Welcome.
OK, let's go to represent
Terasas.
Thank you, um, thank you very
much, uh.
chair and represented, I, I was
hearing the discussion so like
taxes are, are real simple, OK?
And, well, maybe not that.
It's a total of 7.65%.
Paid by the employee.
Matched by the employer.
If you're self-employed, you pay
both.
OK. So, no, it doesn't matter if
you make a dollar or you make.
It, it, it doesn't, the sky is
the limit you, you get paid, you
gotta pay into those FICA taxes.
There's a maximum out there. I
don't know what it is.
Um, but
You pay 7, you, you pay uh you
pay that tax.
6.2% of that.
On your part
As an employee
Is what you get taxed through
payroll taxes.
Every single paycheck that you
make.
Your employer is matching that
same thing, so it comes out to,
I don't know, 2.4% tax.
OK.
The rest goes through Medicare.
Uh, to cover up those and assert
tax for that.
the Social Security, this is
the, this is what where people
get confused. You don't have
your individual account.
You don't have an individual
account.
Everyone is pouring money into
one fund.
And then based on
Your earnings throughout your
lifetime, what you contributed,
you'll then get it's there's a,
there's a formula there. It'll
calculate back what you will get
in a benefit.
Now here's the, here's the
problem, OK?
There are people, and I'm gonna
talk more trade talk.
And I'm gonna say, Mr. Chair,
there are people that never see
a dollar.
It's not a guaranteed benefit.
If you pass away,
It's gone.
Your spouse
And file or if she never worked.
Or if she worked, she can file
for her own or half of what you
made.
What you earned.
But what happens if, what
happens when if you, you, you're
61 years old and you were gonna
retire and you pass away, you
don't get anything.
Now your spouse can file for
that when she becomes of age or
he.
But you can't, there's no
guarantee you're going to get
that.
So even if both of you do get
it.
And we're both getting the
Social Security once the, the
spouse passes away either either
spouse if you're married.
Um
Then you apply to Social
Security and they dropped the
lower of the two and you keep
the higher of the 2.
So, so if I'm getting, I don't
know, $1500 and my wife's
getting $1000.
And I passed away, she's gonna
get the 1500, she loses $1000.
So the, the point that I'm
making, Mr. Chair,
Representative, is this isn't a
benefit like you would in a
retirement account where you
funded your account.
Then you get your money and it's
yours.
Um, now, there's people that
break that my grandmother's 103
in a few days.
She broke the bank on that one,
but
Most people don't do that, OK?
So, the, the point that I'm
making is, is it's not your own
individual, it is a benefit, but
it's not an individual account.
You are taxed. If you think
about the, the tax that you're
paying over a lifetime.
It's quite a bit of money,
right? We're already being taxed
what they're trying to say,
you're already being taxed,
you're paying that percentage of
tax.
Every time you work, oh.
But that you're already taxed,
it doesn't matter, it's gone.
be taxed again when you receive
this benefit on money that you
funded
is where they get the double
tax, and I hope that that helped
out. That's all I have Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representerrasas.
Should have been on the spill,
already on this bill.
Let's go to Representative
Gallegos.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
thank you for bringing up this
bill. Um, I think it's a
discussion that we need to start
to have, um, as, as, um, I think
New Mexicans are aging. We're
seeing that that the senior
population is definitely
growing, um, as you know, Mr.
Chair, um, our budget has gone
out and and it's not in our
budget, but I think this is an
opportunity, especially with
Chairman Lent his bill, if that
should pass and that we have
more access to more information,
Mr. Chair.
That, um,
You know, we look at maybe doing
some type of memorial or
something, um, in place to to
talk about it during the interim
because I think just, I mean,
just the tutorial that we heard
from Mr. or uh Representative
Therasas, I think is, is, um.
Good information to have. I
think the information that we
can pull from Chairman Lentis's
bill.
Um, will be good information to
have, so we can make those kind
of decisions because, um, for.
For this type of policy change.
It it's gonna take not just uh
you know, you talked about when
when the bill was passed,
representative is, you know, it
was in the middle of the night,
it was something that was kind
of put in there and nobody
really understood the impact. I
think that, you know, we have
been having some of these
discussions, Mr. Chairman, um,
but to have all that information
would be a game changer.
And so I would hope that you all
would go back and be able to to.
Whether it's a memorial,
bringing it to the inner, um.
LSC group that that's where to
have start those conversations
as well, so that would be my
recommendation, Mr. Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative.
Anyone else? Questions or
comments?
Mr. May, close this up.
Mr. Chairman, and going back to
Representative Peron's, uh.
Point.
I want the community to please
understand that.
The passage of this bill.
will have no impact at all on
the financial future of the
Social Security system.
Totally separate.
Uh whether we tax or don't tax
Social Security here in New
Mexico has no benefit. So, so
her concerns, Mr. Chairman,
about the security of the
system, this legislation will
have 0 impact on the long term
benefit or safety of the, of her
retirement. I just want to
clarify that
that's helpful, and in regards
to representing Asgo's point.
I believe and I, I'm looking at
my file here, I believe the tax
and rev.
Rev estimate for this bill is
exactly the same as.
Uh, LSCs so tax and red, they're
using the information that they
have access to.
Which of course LFC is trying to
make an educated guess, but in
this case, they do actually
agree on the same number.
Thank you.
You don't say anything?
OK.
She she's fighting she's
fighting an illness, but she
wants to say something. I am
deeply concerned about what's
happening at the federal level
for my, um, my security and my
future and, and so I think, uh,
just as chairwoman Gallega said
there is more information that I
need to have in order to make a
decision, I think would be
really useful for the body to
make a decision on this kind of
thing. Thank you, Mr. Cheng.
OK. Well, we won't have to make
a decision today because we're
gonna table this. But what I do
want to say though is before we
go to final comment is that I, I
think the discussion like this
is, is well worth it. This is
why we have this process here to
openly discuss issues like this
because, you know, when you have
some people that
Or on one side of the aisle
saying they support it and then
you have some that are on the
other side of the aisle support
it or some against it. I think
there's a, there's an
understanding that needs to have
a better discussion to help all
of us understand it on on a
level that we can feel either
you still hate it or maybe
you're coming around or you love
it. And so the point I'm I'm
going to make here is simply
that I would welcome this
discussion again in the revenue
stabilization and tax policy
interim committee that again all
of us will be on uh during the
interim. And for those of you
that are
are not members of this
committee. You can, you can ask
to be on that committee, or you
can have a proposal that we
could probably try to get on the
agenda so we can have a better
and length lengthy discussion on
this, um, or, or see if you can
put it on the legislative
finance Committee, uh, interim
committee agenda as well and and
have people look at the numbers
and have people study it in a
way where, um, you know, what
we've done in the past hour
doesn't give it justice, but at
the same time, we can provide an
entire session towards it. I
think it, it can provide.
shed some light on some of those
questions that may be unknown or
at least in some cases clarify
some of these questions that
we've had today. So I'll, I'll
give, I'll give us all that
much, but uh invite the
discussion because I think it's
well well worthwhile for all of
us to, to have a better
discussion and understanding of
where, where we're coming from,
but Representative Brown, you
wanted to say something?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee.
Uh, I think this is more of an
issue than most people realize.
So let's take two state
employees just as an example,
one has been a school teacher
for 40 years, uh, the other
perhaps works for a state
agency, pick the one you want.
Um, so they have retirement
savings or either well and ERB.
And um as we know, there are
kind of three legs to the stool
in retirement, one is pension.
Social Security and then
investments if people were, you
know, moving in that direction.
And so you actually end up with
combined income, you're gonna
exceed what the exemption
allows, and then there's that
cliff effect.
So, um, I, I think we really
need to look at this, um, and I
agree with you again, however,
we can solve it, but at the end
of the day for me, Mr. Chairman.
It's a matter of doing what's
right, and I think people have
an expectation who worked all
their lives.
That they paid into Social
Security, and they expect really
truly that to that benefit to be
there without an additional tax
beingenna perhaps Mister Chair,
members of the committee,
whether you stood in opposition
or a support. It was a very
meaningful deliberation and I, I
hope that we can continue it
because our aging population
deserves that. Thank you so
much. Thank you,
so can I get a motion.
Miss Chair, I moved to
temporarily tableless. Is there
a second?
I bite by Therasas in Parajon.
Um, position, your bill has been
temporary table. Thank you.
Couple of housekeeping before we
we do leave committee. Thank you
all. I appreciate you. Um, is
that
Believe it or not, we're coming
up to a point where we need to
start wrapping our committee up
and so that's probably a good
thing and sigh of relief for
some, but that means you, you
made it past the halfway point
of this session. So I'm looking
at my calendar and I'd like to,
um,
Cease hearing uh potential
inclusion uh bills for the tax
omnibus package by next
Wednesday.
That's a week from today. And so
that way we can have an
opportunity so that our staff
can prepare the number of bills
that we've heard so that you can
begin to look at those and then
determine what may fit and then
I'll I'll have better direction
once we get to that point. But
um at this point, just an FYI so
that if you have, if you have a
bill or if you have friends that
have a bill that that uh want to
get hurt, let them, let us know
ASAP because um I'm thinking
next Wednesday, uh, just to keep
in accordance with our calendar,
uh, will be the last day we'll
hear.
Uh, bills, uh, in this committee
will hear bills after that
because they're there will be
maybe bills that come through,
but at the same time, uh, just
for inclusion into the tax
package. So that being said, I
appreciate the work today. We
are adjourned.
Sure.
