8 hours in relation to the tax
package. And so as we begin this
discussions, um, I guess I, I, I
will take the prerogative to at
least open up the the meeting,
uh, since you all decided to
come to our side of the, of the
building. Thank you for slumming
it for a few hours here. Um, we
appreciate you coming over, but
before we begin, I'd like to
allow us to
Introduce ourselves, uh, as
respect to this tax committee,
uh, ranking member Duncan.
Good morning. Uh, it's good to
see everybody here. Um, I wish
we weren't here even, but uh we
are and I'm uh Mark Duncan, I
represent District 2 out of the
San Juan County.
Good morning, everyone. My name
is Christina Barajon, and I'm a
representative for House
District 25 in Berlio and sit on
the tax committee.
Uh, good morning, Peter Worth,
Senate District 25.
Uh, good morning, everyone. uh,
Joshua Sanchez, uh, Senate
District 29.
Good morning. It's morning.
Carrie Hamblin, Senate District
38, chair of the tax Business
and Transportation Committee in
the Senate.
Again, good morning,
Representative Derek Lente
representing the sixty-fifth
district in the house, and I
also chair the House Guy Station
and Revenue Committee. And so I
begin this discussion this
morning. This is the 2nd time I
participated in this type of
forum. Uh, this is the 2nd time
that I've seen all the people
looking at us as we talk amongst
ourselves about a tax package
that um uh we'll discuss whether
or not uh we'll move forward or
not. And so if, if I may take
the prerogative of providing a
little bit of a context in terms
of setting the stage in terms of
how we got here, I think would
be beneficial for all of us on
this committee as well as those
of you that are joining us in
this room and online, and so,
uh.
Last week, last Saturday, we
passed out of the house a tax
package on, on partisan lines
that uh included uh two
provisions in the tax omnibus
bill. The first one was House
Bill 548, that that was uh
titled Gass Equalization Tax
Act.
And the second one was House
Bill 14, which was the expansion
of tax credits, and as we sent
that over, our tax omnibus bill
wasn't so quite omnibus, but we
passed that bill, uh, that
raised.
A capacity of about $130 million
to provide initiatives for us to
provide these benefits for the
Mexicans, uh, in terms of of
what we're going to do in the
tax package of that 130 million,
the
uh expansion portion of it,
House Bill 14, was going to
spend about 73 million of that
capacity, leaving the rest then
to the Senate for their own
initiatives, of which later on,
earlier this week.
this week, earlier this week,
um, I then presented our, our,
our house version of the text
omnibus bill in the Senate Tax
Committee. And in that Senate
Tax Committee, they then amended
the bill with their initiatives
as the Senate saw fit in regards
to their priorities and their
prerogatives uh related to uh
their priorities.
Of those, their initiatives
included are the amendments
included, uh, Senate Bill 15, a
volunteer EMT and firefighter
income tax credit, Senate Bill
473 volunteer search and rescue
tax credit.
Senate Bill 110, local
journalistic employment tax
credit, Senate Bill 111.
Local news printer tax credit.
Senate bill 335 foster parent,
guardian tax credit, which I
understand as well as a governor
initiative.
As well as send bill 211.
Quantum facility infrastructure
tax credit, which which uh again
I understand is a is a governor
initiative as well. They also
included health practitioner
coinsurance, uh, under House
Senate bill, excuse me, Senate
Bill 455. And if I said house
building any one of those, they
are senate bills.
Also included in their
amendments were Senate Bill 464,
the UNM School of Medicine fund
distributions.
In addition to that, 2 final our
Senate bills 378 liquor excise
tax increase, as well as Senate
Bill 393 disaster area gaming
tax exemption.
As it passed out of their
committee, as I understand it,
uh, on a bipartisan vote, we
supported, uh, went then to
their Senate floor yesterday, to
which uh a friendly amendment
was made by then Senator Sheer,
uh, to
Take out uh sections 1 through 7
in the bill, which are, which is
the oil and gas equalization tax
Act, which now I, I believe, uh,
maybe bridge number one to cross
in regards to whether or not we
move forward on this tax
package, uh,
As, as I had discussions with
Leader Worth and Chairwoman
Hamblin.
Mention was made that it's gonna
be friendly because there's
other ways to help fund this,
this initiative. Uh, one of
those initiatives that was
mentioned to me was that we will
look at the reserves to take
from.
Uh, as I understand it from
staff talking with staff that it
may not be as easy as taking it
from reserves to help fully fund
this type of initiative, uh, and
I would just stay for, for the
record that I, I asked why and,
and if I may be so bold as to
say why it's not.
That easy is because
To pay for this initiative out
of money and reserves.
Uh,
is it O simplification that
ignores how spending occurs, and
they needed appropriations or
preparations needed to ensure
that we can cash the checks that
we write.
In order to do this, as I
understand it, we would need
legislative action today to draw
from the reserves to pay for
this through an appropriation
and decreased spending.
And at this point in time, it's
hard to just have money
magically appear.
And in, in many cases, some
called it almost impossible to
try to do that. Now, I'm hopeful
that it isn't impossible that
maybe that you have some tricks
up your sleeves that we can make
something happen and hopefully
with that context, we can then
begin to talk about pathways
forward and hopefully ways to
Pay for this initiative if we
can move forward at all. So with
that being said, Chairwoman
Hamblin, I, I've taken a lot of
time, but please feel free to,
to chime in on what you feel.
No, and I certainly appreciate
the uh the opportunity, Chairman
Day, um, you know, we, we
weren't really expecting to have
a tax package, um, and then all
of a sudden we did and there was
the, the tax package scramble,
uh, happening, and thankfully in
the Senate Tax Committee, we
heard a variety of bills that
allowed us to kind of plan and
then start to shave away when
originally the amount we thought
would be roughly 200 million
apiece, then it dropped down to
150 million or 125 million
apiece.
And then roughly about 73
million apiece. So I'm really
grateful for the ranking member,
um, and the uh members of the
tax committee because we were
talking about how we can try and
hit as many points um to
complement what the house was
doing with them dedicating their
uh their amount to the earned
income tax credit, how we could
address other issues, uh, in the
state, uh, as well as, um,
acknowledge some of the, the,
the priorities of the governor.
And so we feel that we've done
that. We've talked about uh
Practitioners, how we can start
that process of helping our
medical providers, but also how
we can start trying to grow our
own, uh, if we're, uh, we're
gonna continue to see people
leave, we need to start
developing and and supporting
our own uh medical providers
here. And so with a conversation
with the minority members of the
committee. Uh, we came to the
consensus of uh the bills that
are included in the Senate side
of it, um, trying to hit those
multiple points.
Uh, on that and be able to have
uh impact for people where our
members will be able to go back
to their communities and be able
to at least say at least one of
these things is going to impact
them in some way or another. So,
um, I'm grateful for that
conversation with the ranking
member, um, and with the
minority of the group, um, and
hopefully we, we can, we can
work something out to make sure
that that these these elements
happen. Thank you. Mhm.
So can I just add something
about process, uh, number one,
we do have 26.5 hours left, and
we certainly could do a lot of
things.
With bills to find the funding,
uh, number 2, I think it's
important that we may have a
disagreement about where we are
on the funding that's here
today, but I would suggest that
we try and work through that,
even if we're not in agreement,
because the thing is and
understand we could put out a
conference committee report
until it's adopted by both
chambers. That's, that's the
final step. And so, as the
leader in the Senate,
I'm not gonna put, you know,
we'd have to do it on both
sides. There would have to be a
second agreement. In other
words,
I do think there's an option of
looking at money that is not
spent. In other words, things
that don't end up in the budget
that are budgeted for, uh, bills
that need to pass that are
contingent, they may not spend.
Also, the governor has the
option of potentially doing, you
know, vetoes to line this amount
up. So I think there's a number
of different options. I would
suggest we try and work through
and even if we don't have an
agreement on putting the oil and
gas tax back back in, we try and
come up with something.
He, um,
Take it down, it'll be a
conference committee report and
having been through this before,
where uh we've had a conference
committee report that everyone
agreed to and it did, it didn't
never got put on the floor in
the Senate years ago. I was
involved in that. So I do think
there's a second step that would
allow us to keep our options
open. I don't think we have to
make an all or nothing decision
here this morning, but obviously
that's up to the the will of
both sides and what the votes
look like.
Remember anything else to add?
remember Sandyel said.
I don't think so, Mr. Chair. I
think, uh, I think Senator Worth
probably is on the right track
that we work as hard as we can
and, and uh.
Come sit at the table as often
as we need to for the next 26
hours, so.
So I, I appreciate that the
pathway forward, I think this is
the meeting one of several that
perhaps will happen today, uh,
but as we look forward to what
potential options that we may
have, uh, when you talk about
Options that there's some house
bills still on the floor. I
think we're talking about house
bills that are still outstanding
on the Senate side and, and when
you make that mention, I'll just
be public about it. It makes me
a little bit uncomfortable only
because those are house
initiatives with substantial
amounts of money and initiatives
that were put forth by
communities and their respective
representatives that are
meaningful to those communities
and I would, I would hate to
utilize those as sacrificial
lambs in many cases to pay for
this initiative and so
Um,
I would say that that the houses
has
Done well and in good faith,
passing up.
Almost I think all of this the
really substantial big spend
initiative that the Senate has
brought over and so I, I, I
don't know if I'm so excited as
to say, well, we, we can create
capacity by way of, of, of
looking at some of the options
of bills that haven't passed yet
because I don't think that that
would be fair for me to say to
anyone of my house members, uh,
and I know that um for the
leadership of the house that
probably wouldn't be something
that they would also want to
support as well.
And just, let me add, we have
Senate bills that are in play in
the house that have potentially
hundreds of millions of dollars,
uh, which also are contingent.
And again, I, I hear what you're
saying completely and I'm not
suggesting we go, go take out
bills, but, but just in the
normal process, there are things
that might not happen. And
remember, the governor can also
Tunne this up. She's gonna do
some vetoes, I am sure. And so I
do think an initial discussions
with her, she's receptive to
what the concept of what we come
up with and really appreciates,
I think what the House did with
the
You know, with the tax changes
for working families, and this
is an important piece for
medical providers. It's an
important, you know, piece for
some economic development. So
we've done good work and I just,
let's keep, let's keep talking.
And and and folks in in the
audience in here. I, I think
that we completely agree we're
on the same page when we're
talking about the initiatives
that are part of this package. I
think they represent a lot of,
of what's important to New
Mexico and the Mexicans, uh,
here in regards to whatever you
want to talk about whether it's
uh expanded tax credits or we're
talking about and I heard this
yesterday by uh Senator Padilla
talking about the quantum stuff
and how this could be a really
burgeoning uh industry here in
New Mexico and we can capture it
here and now provide these
credits, it's only going to help
us out in the future, which is
Fantastic, right? Are we talking
about the foster families that
will receive a benefit.
Amazing, but I think in regards
to how we get there, uh, I think
we'll have to do a lot of, a lot
of work with many of our staff
that are in this room here today
in regards to how do we find
that type of funding? And I
would propose first that if we
can look at those Senate bills
to raise money. Let's go there
first.
But in all honesty, I mean, we,
we, we have to be able to be
objective in this in terms of
how we move forward, um.
Again, I mean, and I, I, I, I
let our our our ranking member
know here is that uh he voted
against our tax package,
rightfully so for his reasons,
right? And we don't hold
anything against anyone for the
votes that they take care that
they can't support the oil and
gas in uh in this bill. But that
being said as well, I, I think
that measure is, is in my, in,
in, in my estimation and those
that voted for it in our
committee and those that voted
for in our house and send it
over your way was
Uh, the best example of good tax
policy, and so when we talk
about it in that sense, I would
still like for that to be very
much a part of this conversation
as we move forward, uh, Madam
Chairwoman and, and leader worth
and ranking member and
membership here.
So at this point in time, uh, I
would ask Madam chair or or
leader Worley ranking member
Sanchez.
What do you, how do you want to
move forward?
Thank you, Chairman Day, I
appreciate that. Um, you know,
in the conversations with those
of us, uh, in the Senate and our
members and after the debate on
the floor, um,
The, uh, using of the oil and
gas equalization Tax Act, uh,
would not be something that we
would want to try to do. We,
we've, we understand, especially
we don't want to use any bills
as a sacrificial lamb, um,
because it's not fair to those
communities, it's not fair to
the bill sponsors. Um, however,
I do have the confidence in the
staff, um, who have already
started to look at multiple
pathways, uh, to do that, and I
think it's maybe more of a
conversation is to look at the
the reality of those pathways.
uh, to do that. So we would like
to uh avoid bringing the oil and
gas uh back into that. We feel
that that um would be
That would, that would prevent
the rest of this from going
through, OK.
I can appreciate that sentiment.
I, um, you know, when we put it
in here, that was one thing
that, that, that was the vehicle
to move forward. Again, that was
in our estimation good tax
policy utilizing an industry
that uh large and in part um
that
And I said the Foreign Committee
and had net profits of upwards
of $10 billion last year and,
and uh could, could sense to.
Break off $130 million to help
pay for some benefits for New
Mexicans, but in any event, if
there's not an appetite for that
in the Senate, uh, by what I
understand from you, uh, as a
whole chamber, um,
I don't know if we have a path
forward.
I don't know if we have a pet
for it only because, again, I,
I, I am not in the business, nor
would I want to be an advocate
for, uh, sacrificing bills to
see if we can hold bills hostage
or or do whatever it takes to
raise $130 million. Um, maybe we
look at different paths forward
in terms of asking staff what
bills haven't passed that had
some type of contingency on it
that we could look at, uh, maybe
that also includes paring down
what we have in this tax package
so that it's a much more
condensed version from what we
have in front of us today. There
are options, but I think our
main and first option at least.
In this case, in this committee
of of of 6.
To two of our options here
between represent Barahona and
myself was to really look at
that, at that, uh, surtax as the
main driving force and if the
Senate is saying that there is
no appetite whatsoever for, for
holding uh oil and gas uh
accountable or at least
responsible for helping us fund
and provide benefits, um, then
I, I can, I can understand that.
Yeah
Well, Mr. Chair, I, we might
want to take a vote on that.
I mean, it seems to me, I'm not
sure what this, there's a
conference committee proposal
here. I don't know what this is,
0.23 2123, maybe we discuss what
this, what this is proposing to
do or what I'm not sure what
this is.
And I just think again and, and
And, and maybe, maybe you could
explain just the process for
moving.
Forward because it's been a
while since we've done one of
these.
It's been a while since we've
done all these and it's always,
it's very dramatic when we do
these because people are here
watching us talk and we act like
they're not there, but they're
there, um, but, but in, in, in
past senses that we've done this
in past experiences. We've done
this at a point where it's been
the night before the last day of
the session and we're sitting in
a conference room talking about
this, so it's very dramatic, but
I think as we move forward on
this, there, if you wanna, if
you wanna talk about taking
votes, then, um, there are some
initiatives that, that I talked.
about and that I that I think
that
If at this point I'm in a
minority with, with my
counterpart here that it is our
intent to want to look at
utilizing House Bill 548 as the
funding mechanism for this
initiative. It is utilizing
that, that, that.
28th
100% to pay for this initiative
from oil and gas. And so, um,
that's something that, that I
worked with, um,
Pam and and the LCS folks
upstairs to help, uh, bring
light to and shed light to in
regards to how we would move
forward on, on this as a, as a
first step. And so if that's a
bridge that, that we cannot
cross, then, then I would, I
would, I would say, yeah, let's,
let's take a vote on whether or
not we want to use oil and gas
as the mechanism. And if we
don't, then at this point in
time, then we can say, OK, well
then the, the pathway is a
little bit clearer because then
we have to start saying, all
right, staff, let's see if we
can find $130 million.
I start
Scratching some of these
initiatives off and see who
makes the list and, and is lucky
enough to stay here, uh, in
terms of benefit. So, so Peter,
how, how would you want to move
forward on, on taking a vote?
So I guess yeah, no, that's
fine. I just, just I think the
process is it takes
You know
On each side, I think if two of
you on.
I do not approve moving forward.
We're done, as I understand it,
and I just want to clarify that.
I mean, it's not
You know, let's think about
that.
I just want to make sure I've
got the rule correct on how we
Move forward on a on a vote so
maybe we should just be sure
about that. So if we take a
vote.
You know, does it require a
majority of both both sides. I,
I want to let's let's double
check on that before we just
take a vote, because there could
be a majority, but it's not a
majority of
On each side. That's the key
thing.
We have
We have uh Chief Ismael Torres
from the Legislative Finance
Committee that will help guide
us in this time of darkness.
Mr. and Madam Chair, um, Senator
Worth's recollection is correct.
It's a majority of both chambers
necessary for for approval of
the committee report.
I just bring that up because I
want to be clear. I mean, if the
three of us on the Senate side
make a decision to do something
and only one of you do on your
side, it doesn't move forward.
So I just think it's important
for the public to understand
that.
I'm sure you might maybe, I
mean, again, I think in this
Proposed conference committee
you're proposing to take out the
Senate floor amendments.
That basically stripped that.
And I think the question is if
that's a motion you want to
make.
Then we would take a boat on
that piece of it, which is kind
of step number one, and see
where we are.
So, uh, committee members at
this point in time, I can share
with, with each of you, uh,
something that I had worked with
Pam, uh.
Stokes upstairs with in regards
to if, if it came to this point.
Yeah,
OK, very good.
All right, um.
Came to this point that it
would, it would be our intent.
It would be my intent, uh, let
me clarify that. It'd be my
intent as the chairman for the
House Taxation and Revenue
Committee, again, not holding
ranking member Duncan, a part of
this discussion to uh pull back
on the floor amendment that was
made in the Senate to reinsert
House Bill 548 as the funding
mechanism for this initiative.
That's, that's the first part of
this, of, of, of, of this um
Conference committee.
initiative. Second part of that
I put in here is that
Something that I, that, that,
that we had talked about uh
publicly over the past uh 48,
maybe 24, 48 hours is in regards
to
How the Senate bill.
Senate bill.
378.
Uh, Senator shares, liquor
excise tax.
And then that liquor excise tax
directs funds.
Of about
Close to $10 million simply back
to the general fund. And, and,
and, and we thought that because
we heard
Alcohol initiative proposed
legislation this past
legislative session that their
approach was much uh more
mindful in regards to let's not
just raise money for the sake of
raising money, but let's raise
money with the intent to try to
uh help those that are inflicted
the most with this uh with this
hurtful, uh, disease. And so
that being said, uh, the new
material that I would propose in
regards to, to this part of the
bill, is that we would uh direct
that fund to the tribal alcohol
harms alleviation Fund, which
was made.
mentioned to in House Bill 417.
That we heard in this committee
in the House Taxation Revenue
Committee by which, um, as I
understand it, Senate members
had the same exact bill in their
legislation as well. So that,
that, that was our intent to
divert that money, not not to
the general fund but to that
again, tribal harms or
alleviation fund.
Last is uh related to one of the
Senate bills that was amended
into this package, and that is
Senate Bill 393 disaster area
gaming tax exemption, uh, if you
read the FIR uh it's explicit
from the LFC that this is just
simply bad tax policy. I, we, we
had a mirroring bill in a
committee here in the house that
I was a part of that committee
and uh in learning more about,
about that initiative we're
talking about.
the Riodoso Downs that was
afflicted by uh the flood that
happened in 2024 and by way of,
of, of their affliction that
they are built in a flood plain,
also that they did not and do
not carry any flood insurance or
any insurance on their facility,
and they are looking to have
exempted uh or be exempted from
taxation for the next 5 years,
uh.
to, to help alleviate and help
remedy their case. And again, I,
I'm looking at the FIR and it
states that it's just simply bad
tax policy that it will create a
number of other initiatives and,
and pitfalls and opens up
floodgates so that it is
creating a really unfair,
unbalanced, um, approach in
terms of how we are going to
deal with any private entity in
this state when uh acts of fire,
flood or other damage takes
place, uh, it may in some cases
excuse them for wanting to say
that they have to.
Any type of insurance on their,
on their business, uh, and
furthermore, I think it, it
further expands it to those
other gaming operations in the
state that um would not benefit
uh the same way and when I'm
talking about those um tribal
gaming operations as well. And
so Mr. Madam Chairwoman, uh,
ranking member.
Peter.
Represent Paraju and ranking
member Duncan, uh, those are the
parts of this, of this uh um
proposal towards this committee,
ranking member Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
You know, we,
And you know I've had this
discussion, um, I think we've
passed a lot of bills out of
this committee that I didn't
think were good tax policy.
But when we're talking about um
Riodos.
I don't think you can blame it
all on just the flood. The
federal government had an
obligation to clean out silt
that was in that, that river.
And they didn't do that.
And so I'm not sure that we can
blame it all on this Riodosa.
downs or lack of maintenance, it
wasn't their maintenance to do
and so I, I understand what
you're saying, but I don't think
we can all blame it on them.
Um, so the federal government
has a large part to play in
that, uh, by Forest
mismanagement in my opinion, and
if I'm not taking care of
business, so.
Thank you, sir.
If I may, Mister Chair, and I, I
appreciate, um, I do like the,
and I think we've talked about
this, the distribution of the
liquor excise tax, um, and I'm
grateful for your suggestion of
where that money goes rather
than the general fund. I think
that is uh much more appropriate
for that and really appreciate
that. Um, I understand the
concerns about um Ro us the
Downs and, and when we, we, we
started talking about these
concerns, uh, what came to mind
for
me was a bill that we heard in
the text, uh business and
transportation committee is from
Senator Candy Azel, and it's uh
Senate Bill 383.
And this was a bill that uh was
really specific to the Roswell
area to help to allow them to
self-ex so that they could uh
rebuild.
And so what I'm thinking is, is
that this might be in this bill
right now sits on the House
calendar, and so it's ready to
go, um, that this might be the
Alternative to that to help that
community, not a private entity,
but to actually help that
community, which would uh be
able to do that. I, I recognize
also the employment that the the
owners provide for that area. So
it is, it is a a a a challenging
situation, but I do think that
there are options there to help
the village of Ruidoso, um, and
also to, uh, to possibly apply
uh to that, but uh and so I, I
understand that concern, and I,
and I hear your, your
concerns in terms of equity, um,
on that, um, so I, I wanted to
put that conversation out there.
I do really appreciate where the
liquor excise tax would go. I
think that's a uh a much more
appropriate direction.
Mr. Worth just process wise can
I suggest we divide the
question. We have 3 issues, and
I'd make a motion right out of
the bat on the liquor excise tax
proposed change, I would move to
approve that.
The motion made by little words
segmented by Representative
ranking member Duncan to approve
the language to the liquid
excise tax, uh, any opposition?
Seeing none, uh, we have that as
a resolved item.
Today.
more ways to help solve this
problem.
But
Might I ask then, uh
Chairwoman Hamblin, can, can you
expand then in regards to uh
your application of Senate Bill
383 or or the Kennedy isel bill
to help it maybe is applicable
to this bill, or are you
suggesting that they take parts
of this bill and put it into
their bill to to make it worth
it.
Um, no, and I might need, um,
Izzy's help on this because he
uh was instrumental in making
this really just a rock solid
bill, um, when Senator Rosel
brought this forward in the
committee. So easy if by me, and
it wouldn't be rolled into this.
It would be that this would be
an option for the village of
Roido. So, um, uh, should this
bill pass out of the house,
which we, we've got is Senator
Worth said 26 hours and
15 minutes, um, 14 minutes. Uh,
so if, um, if Ismaili would be
able to expand on that a little
bit, but uh to answer your
question directly, Mr. Chair,
um, it wouldn't be something
that would be rolled into this.
It's something that is an option
to address those issues in the
Roidoso area.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Madam Chair,
um, the bill referenced Senate
Bill 383, I believe, uh, had
originally only specifically
applied to Roswell, but the
Senate Tax Committee had
actually expanded that to be any
community that had suffered one
of these disastrous floods could
impose a GRT increment and also
created bonding authority to
allow the community to bond
against those revenues from that
increment. I think it could, as
the chairwoman implied, uh, work
for Ridoso as well if they so
choose.
Uh, folks, any questions or
comments for, for Ishmael, not,
I have a couple, um, uh, Chief
daughters. So we heard this bill
Wednesday in our house taxation.
We actually passed it out of
house taxation unanimously on,
on, on Wednesday. I think it's,
it's great tax policy and I
think it's a, it's a process
that moves those afflicted with
either fire flood and this is
becoming more common in Mexico
today more than ever, uh, to, to
provide them an avenue to help
raise money to help fix their
communities, unfortunately,
right? Just the way it is.
But I, I think that's
That's apples and oranges in
regards to what that bill
provides versus to what is in
this bill that we're talking
about this morning. Am I, am I
right or am I wrong?
Mr. Chair, I, I don't, uh, you
know, want to imply what either
of you are intending or meaning,
but I, I think that the
Uh, discussion is to have that
proceed in lieu of the the
gaming tax.
So I, I think maybe separate
issues, you're right. Apples and
oranges, but it's a maybe an
either or rather than a
combination.
I appreciate your sentiments and
I appreciate those that have
clarified what we're talking
about here today and so it seems
like then if that's the case and
that's the pathway forward,
utilizing that bill as the
mechanism and the vehicle to do
that, then there's no need to
have this bill as a part of this
package then it might, am I
correct in assuming that.
Yes. Um, yeah, even, even though
I know that, uh, the minority,
um, in the Senate Tax Committee
would really like that, um, to
stay, uh, and we've had those
conversations also just through
the the conversations that we
are having regarding this bill,
um, you know, if, if Senate Bill
383 didn't exist, it would be a
much more challenging
discussion, but I think this is
something that might be an
alternative to having this
the, the disaster area gaming
tax exemption in the tax package
so that we can move forward with
this is that the community would
have the option of SB 383.
Senator Sanchez. Uh, one thing
that that too is, uh, you know,
an art, uh, we would love to
keep this in here. We, we fought
hard for it and we want to keep
it in there. I know the
discussion is still going on.
Um, another thing in our, when
our committee, we had a page and
a half or so, uh, support from
Mascoleo tribe that really came
forward and said that they would
really love to see this in here.
This bill was a, you know, a
great bill. Um.
Uh, see what the Representative
Duncan had said earlier too, you
know, we can't blame all this on
the racetrack, and we do have,
we reach out and help people all
the time and the disasters, you
know, not only did they have the
fires that came, you know, swoop
through there and falling right
behind where the floods, you
know, and this, this is a
driving thing here, the
racetrack there that helps all
of Ridos so whether it's a
tribal gaming, the town of
Riidoso, on the outskirts of
Rios, so this is, you know, so
with that being said,
to say we have huge support for
Mascalero that really wanted to
see this in, and I'd like to add
that to the.
conversation. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Representative Duncan.
just a quick question, would
this then require
Um, the assurance of uh long
term uh bonds.
Chief Torres.
Mr. Chair and Madam chair and
Represented Duncan. Um, I
believe in the bill, I, I don't
believe that the increment is
required to be bonded. I'd have
to go back and check, but it
creates the opportunity if the
community chooses. OK.
Thank you.
But I, I appreciate the
conversation about this matter
this morning, and I, I
understand your sentiments. I
respect those sentiments, uh,
Senator Sanchez, uh, I, I did
also have a conversation with
the Mescalator Apache tribe, the
president and those folks came
to talk to me about this, and,
and they, they did voice their,
their support, but they also
recognize that they are uh one
of uh
Many gaming tribes in this state
and, and uh they also recognize
that they are part of a larger
conglomerate group of of gaming
tribe operators in the state
that um they, I think one of the
only tribes that are supporting
this initiative only because of
the localized geographical
condition that they're in. So,
um, recognizing that I still
hold true in regards to why I
believe that this is a bad tax
policy for all the reasons
stated, so, um, there's not any
other discussion, I think for
the matters of moving forward on
this matter, uh, would it be?
appropriate to um move to remove
Senate bill 393 from uh this tax
package.
Is, is there a, is there a
motion made?
removed 390.
Senate motion to remove Senate
Bill 393.
From the tax package.
there a second on that?
I will check with my concerns
noted. Very good. It's there's
been a motion was made. It's
obviously not.
Not one that I assume it's going
to be unanimous, so we, we can
take a role in Erin, if you
would please take a role on
On this
board.
So again,
for clarification, this is for
the removal of Senate Bill 393
from the tax package, uh, motion
made by Representative Parajon,
uh, seconded by chairwoman
Senator Hamblin.
Aaron, if you would please take
the role beginning with um
Tender leaderworth.
Good morning, Senator Wirth.
Yes.
Senator Sanchez. No.
Madame Chehablin.
Yes.
Chair, Mister Chair Linton. Yes.
Representative Pajuan, yes.
Representative Duncan.
I got a.
Thank you, Aaron. With a 2 to 4
vote, uh, removal of 3 House
Senate bill, 393 is, is
completed. We now are left with
uh one final decision on how we
move forward.
Any other expansion on, on this
matter.
None? OK. Um, at this point in
time, I'm just gonna call the
boat to see if we remove then or
actually by by.
Amendment is to uh a man back
into this tax package. House
Bill 548 as the funding
mechanism for this tax package.
Um, again, Aaron, we will have
to call for the roll call, but
my motion made is that we amend
back into this tax package House
Bill 548 and with an appropriate
second.
2nd, uh.
We will then.
Che to explain what that is.
Yeah, yeah, so, so my intention
is to amend back into this
house, uh, this text omnibus
bill, uh, Senate House Bill 548,
which is the gas equalization
tax Act, which uh
Creates a $130 million mechanism
to fully fund the benefits in
this tax package by way of uh
imposing a 28100% uh tax on
gasoline.
On, on oil on oil.
Excuse me, thank you for
correcting me on oil, meanwhile,
decreasing the taxes paid by gas
by $11.4 million and in doing so
would help equalize those two
industries and by which then
would fully fund all the
benefits that you see in this
tax package today.
for clarification, a yes is to
support bringing back this into
the text package I know is to
decline that.
Yes, ma'am sure.
Earn, please.
OK.
We're starting with the centers.
OK.
Send it to work. No.
Senator Sanchez. No.
Madam Cha Evelyn? No.
Mr. Chair, Linda. Yes, ma'am.
Representative Guadaan, yes.
Representative Duncan, no.
So we got a 42 with a vote of 4,
no, uh,
4 notes and two yeses, uh, the,
uh, that amendment fails, and so
we are now at a point where we
have amended the bill by way of
taking some of the benefits out
and clarifying some of those
benefits, but then now we're at
a point where we don't have a
way to pay for it. So now, how
do we move forward?
I'm looking at the Senate.
So I guess the question, Mr.
Chair, is whether it's
appropriate at this point.
To make, we, we've
I think where we are is we've
we've agreed to two changes.
But we've not moved forward on
that.
Oil and gas being the
substitute, I would propose that
we
move forward with that.
Understanding and I want to be
clear though, I think the two,
even though it was 4 to 2.
There's not agree that the two
on the house side means that
it's that's, that's blocked. So
there's not.
I just want to be clear on this,
and Mr. Torres can address this.
So just even though it was 2 to
4, that decision we're in limbo
on that, so it didn't pass to
not move forward. I think.
So I just want to be clear on
that. Uh, I think the question
is whether we stay, whether we
hold it here, do a little more
work, probably that's the best
thing to do at this point and
then come back a little later.
check in and see where we are,
uh, versus, versus, or you
could, we could send it out.
But I think there's enough
uncertainty at this point.
Uh, I, I'm not really
comfortable with that. I think
it's better to hold it here, uh,
understanding where 2/3 of the
way there, but the big 3 is the
one we've got to get over the
line one.
Absolutely, uh, little words
point well taken. And so we've
done a bit of work this morning
and so I think at this point in
time, we could probably adjourn
uh in recess until later on this
afternoon. Meanwhile, we will
then work with our staff both in
the legislative finance
committee and we could probably
also work with Senate Finance as
well as house appropriations
staff to see if there's any
pathway forward, uh, and, and,
and again, in the most
responsible way, and I think
that's the intent of all of us
is that we want to do this.
a very transparent, candid, uh,
and responsible manner to which
uh we're not in the business of
trying to um sacrifice bills to
create capacity for this, this
intent, although would benefit
many New Mexicans isn't one that
politically speaking, we're
trying to create winners and
losers here. We're trying to
make sure that everyone has an
ability to receive some type of
benefit. And so that being said,
I would move then that perhaps
we can reconvene.
4 p.m. this afternoon, uh, same
place, different time, same
channel, uh, so if you all are
welcome to come back, you're
more than welcome to come back
and, uh, until then, Madam
Chairwoman, yes, thank you, and
I, and I do appreciate the
thoughtfulness in this. Um, it's
not, these are not easy
decisions because
It's there going to be people
who are going to win and there
are gonna be people who are
gonna lose, and that's not a
position that any of us want to
uh to put other people in other
communities in, uh, but we're
trying to be as, as thoughtful
as we can with the resources
that we have and just to remind
you, we didn't even think we
were gonna have a tax package,
uh, in all honesty, we were
hearing bells that we were
holding and um the fact that
this this is something that came
out uh a surprise, um, and then
working together to try and make
sure that we provide.
these opportunities, um, we're
grateful for, but we, we
certainly don't do it, uh,
recklessly. We are doing it with
a much, much thought that I
appreciate the opportunity to be
able to do that because we're
not just flying off the handle
and going willy-nilly. We're
trying to be very thoughtful and
realistic and practical about
this. And so, um, I do
appreciate that opportunity in,
in the way that we're working
together on that.
Absolutely. Likewise, Madam
Chairwoman, likewise leader Wet
and Senator Sanchez and, and to
even our ranking members and
represent Parajun that this is
this is a bicameral bipartisan
process that we will do our best
to do what we can and so until 4
o'clock, we, we will recess
until then and we'll come back
with hopefully some better
