Good morning.
OK, um, Representative Chandler.
here. Representative Duncan.
Representative Gallego
Representative Henry.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Martinez here.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Baron here.
Representative Silva, here,
Representative Tarasas.
Representative Cardena.
And representative chair Puente.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Thank you so much. Uh, we're
gonna go ahead and get started
with our agenda, um, seeing that
it's 9 o'clock.
So the first bill on our um on
our agenda, which is the only
bill is House Bill 14, so, um,
Chante whenever you're ready.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and
we do have a committee
substitute.
Do I have emotion?
Um, we have a motion to move the
committee substitute for
discussion.
the first.
Um, it was Lindstrom.
And Madam chair if you
wouldn't mind the uh reference
number on the bottom left is
0.231874.4.
OK.
Yeah, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
go ahead and if you want to
discuss the substitute.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
before I do, uh, describe this
substitute. I do wanna first
recognize and give thanks to the
committee for their work over
the past close to 2 months at
this point in time, uh, really
appreciate your, your dedication
to this committee and the
discussions that we've had over
the past, again, close to 2
months. I also want to recognize
our, our host of analysts that
come in uh with the dedication
to provide us the best analysis
on these, on these bills that
include those that are in the
majority and the minority in
those areas.
In the house, uh, that just give
us their continued excellence
and, and insight on these
matters, as well as those LFC
staff that continue to just
provide us the best information
that is out there possible, and
then finally also to uh our
committee staff and that
includes Erin and Madeleine that
continue to just to provide us
the support that we need to be
able to have this committee run
as it should. I also want to
appreciate the the work again of
our committee.
This past uh legislative
session, we've heard this far 31
bills total, um, obviously we've
passed some of those, we've
rolled some of those and we've
tabled some of those of those
31, 16 of those we've
temporarily tabled to which um
We were able to create a tax
package of sorts out of, and if
you recall, uh, last week after
we had heard our host of Table
bills we handed out uh a matrix
that looks something like this
in regards to how do we organize
a tax package and uh we organize
them based on on subject matter,
right? Some of them were
dedicated to housing, some were
guns, some were family, some oil
and gas, small business, etc.
etc. and we went through the
process of, of ranking those and
In that process came out with uh
a host of, of top threes, and as
it turned out is that uh we
don't have the capacity to have
3 bills or 2 bills or even 1
bill to spend money on this,
this legislative session. The
the fact of the matter is that
um,
Uh
Based in consideration and
communication with our uh
House appropriations chair
chairman small, um, we want to
take a calculated approach in
regards to how we're going to
look forward to the future and,
and not get too crazy with
spending and not get too crazy
in regards to how we want to uh
push the limits in regards to uh
what we're doing in New Mexico.
And so that's why we've taken a
much more uh modest approach to
this tax package. That's why I
think at this point in time, we
may see something different as
maybe house Bill 2 comes back
across from the Senate because
he has
That
He wants to do something good
for New Mexico, as we all do.
And so I appreciate his
dedication to the process. I
appreciate his dedication to one
of the pieces of legislation
that we have in this package
today because you will see and
you've seen at this point in
time as the committee substitute
will be discussed, um, we've
taken it back quite a bit from
where we were when it was first
introduced. And so as we get to
talking about the tax package.
I, I wanna give a little bit of
more context again and, and
appreciation to Chairman Small
for his thoughtfulness, for
bringing House Bill 548, which
is a part of this tax package,
uh, even though he know it
wasn't going to be the most
popular bill, uh, in this
session. Uh, I appreciate his
ability to want to keep it
fluid, meaning that even though
he proposed something, he was
willing to listen to industry.
He was willing to listen to
advocates. He was willing to
listen to representatives um in,
in both the House and in
the Senate, uh, and I'll have to
say though that that even though
there were some advocates that
were quick to criticize the
piece of legislation, whether it
was on social media, whether it
was on print or TV.
The fact of the matter is that
he listens. We listen, we
listen, and that's why we're
here today.
But I have to be honest with
this committee that
New Mexico is our home. That's
why we're here today. That's why
we do the things that we do to
leave our families because we
want to make sure that it's a
better place for our children
and those yet to come.
And so that being said, we
recognize that the natural
resources of this state is our
power, is the state's power.
Permian Basin, as I made mention
too when Chairman Small
presented his bill a couple
weeks ago, the Permian bas into
oil and gas is what.
The San Juan River is to trout
fishing in New Mexico.
But when it's gone, it's gone.
We recognize that.
And representative Henry gives
the the pinata analogy quite
well, and I think I understood
that better than anything that
that in your short time here
I've understood uh in this, in
this, in this house better than
anything else, that when we
exhaust that, that natural
resource. It's gone.
So to lose our ability, our
physical responsibility to
Equalizing an industry born from
this.
Is OK.
But to also make sure that we
are not scared to equalize and
make sure that we can do good
things for New Mexico, utilizing
this industry is also a, a
courageous step to take, and one
that is a part of this package
today.
I will just say, uh, to begin
this discussion is that the
Mexico oil and gas generates.
The last data shows that in
royalty and taxes, about $14.2
billion.
per year.
Based on 2019 data which data
comes in slower based on sit
information that it was about,
there was about a $2 billion net
profit back in 2019. It is
expected that as quin tripple uh
to this point where it's
probably about 400% of that
today. So if you can do the math
and you have a calculator handy,
consider that much.
That when we talk about this
bill,
And we talk about how we're
going to raise revenue to create
the benefits that New Mexicans
will enjoy.
Currently under the oil and gas
emergency school tax oil is
taxed at 3.5%, while natural gas
is taxed at 4%.
This bill brings oil and gas
closer to the tax rate
consistency across products to
improve its horizontal text uh
equity.
Originally
Originally
In the bill that was presented
in House Bill 548.
Uh, it was expected that the
attach rate would be 4%.
Flat
Which would raise about 400 to
$450 million annually.
Today, based on responses again
as I mentioned before, uh, we,
uh, have amended the bill in
regards to it now raises about
$130 million from oil and gas.
But cuts natural gas.
By $11.4 million.
I'll repeat that.
Again,
Today, this bill is proposed
raises $130 million for the
benefits of New Mexicans, but
also then cuts, natural gas.
Uh
Liability by $11.4 million.
To do so
As I made mention, the bill
brings brings back oil and gas
taxation, and it, and it, it
brings it back to 3.4%.
And natural gas down to 3.9%.
It does so with the new Sur tax
on oil at 28.
100% on oil reducing existing
rates for natural gas.
That we get to those numbers.
Although not entirely equalized
as contemplated in the
introductory version as
represent a small made mention
of.
The oil and gas equalization Tax
Act, this bill reflects again
feedback from industry leaders.
partners and moderates the
increases while also providing
some relief to natural gas
products.
To further support the industry
partners, the additional tax
will only.
Apply when prices are higher
than.
This will only apply when prices
are higher than $55 per bale.
To automatically reduce
automatically reduce.
The burden on producers when and
if they ever lower below that
price.
Revenues raised by these
provisions are used to help
Mexicans in the middle and
working classes throughout New
Mexico.
And I'll I'll further go into
the details on this earned
income tax credit that is going
to be created by this bill
relates to the earned income tax
credit.
We heard this in, in committee,
uh, earlier in the session at
this point in time, it feels
like years ago, but
The benefit to New Mexico
workers at this point in time
has been expanded based on the
consideration of those that are
sitting on this diet today.
To help affect more of a middle
class.
Meaning that
People making up words to
$70,000 per year.
New Mexicans making upwards to
$70,000 per year.
We'll see their state tax
liability extinguished.
Think about that. That's every
single one of the people that
lives in your community today. I
know it's a lot of people that
live in my communities.
But just think about that in
terms of the far reach that it
has for New Mexicans.
At least half.
Of the family in New Mexico
today won't have a state tax
liability anymore if this is
passed as a measure.
Again, think about that and
think about those working
families in your communities. At
least half of those won't have a
state tax liability.
The bill creates the Mexico
earned Income Tax Credit.
Building off of the successes of
the working families tax credit.
The bill increases the credit
and extends the benefit to over
And an additional 100,000
working New Mexicans and New
Mexico families.
Make mention again that over the
past 5 years, this committee has
done some amazing work.
On its tax structures.
Not only do we start with having
some of the lowest property
taxes in the nation.
We've seen the expansion of low
income credits, creation of new
child tax credits and dependent
deductions.
We've also seen the rate cuts to
gross receipts tax over the past
two years by 0.25% by 0.25%,
excuse me, 18% rate cuts in 2022
and 2023, and expanded exemption
for Social Security income that
has helped those in the upper to
middle class income categories.
And then finally just last year
again, I'll remind us all that
the new tax bracket structure.
With reduced rates,
Showed to reduce taxes for every
single New Mexican in New
Mexico.
Truly making our state's tax
structure progressive.
Currently, the perky tax
families, the working families
tax credit provides a 25% match.
Of the Federal Earned Income
tax, and has been shown to
reduce poverty, improve Mexico's
labor force and participation
rate. We talked about getting
people off the bench and back to
earning wages again, without
fear of a cliff effect.
However, some problems exist
with the current credit. For
example, a person without
children working a minimum wage
job does not currently qualify
for the working families tax
credit, and are often again
further taxed into poverty, year
after year. This bill changes
that.
Similarly, a family with 3
A medium household receives a
working family's tax credit
refund of less than $50 but pays
over 900 in state income tax.
Under this expansion, New
Mexicans without children
working a full-time minimum wage
job.
And similarly, families earning
the medium household income will
receive a refund that fully
again offsets and eliminates the
state tax liability.
Again, the bill has the, the
expansion of the tax credits has
3 main parts.
First, the bill increases the
federal match from 25% to 34%
match for everyone.
Meaning that everyone who
currently receives
Working families tax credit will
receive more under this
expansion.
second the bill makes 101,000
more New Mexicans eligible for
the earned income tax credit by
significantly extending
eligibility thresholds to in
fact the middle class that many
of us talked about in this very
committee.
Lastly, the bill decouples in
Mexico from the federal Earned
Income Tax Credit, allowing us
to tailor.
This program for the benefit of
the Mexicans.
As we study the impacts of this
program over the next several
years.
House Bill 14, or at least the
committee substitute the House
Bill 14.
Works by bringing people into
the workforce.
Reducing poverty, improving
childhood outcomes.
Strengthening the Mexico's
economy.
Package further, creates a
strategy and provides a way for
the state to invest, improving
the quality of life by New
Mexicans, utilizing.
Good tax policy. With that,
Madam Chairwoman, I would stand
for any questions.
Thank you for your presentation,
Mr. Chair. Uh, let's go to the
public now for their comment,
um, if you are here in um
On Zoom in favor, let's do 5
minutes, um, of those folks if
they're here.
Kurt
Mr. Rager.
Yes, uh, good morning, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. This is Kurt Reeger,
the director of Lutheran
Advocacy Ministry of New Mexico.
Lutheran advocacy also speaks to
the position of the New Mexico
Conference of Churches, and I'm
here to express our strong
support for the committee's
substitute for HB 14.
We've been so very pleased with
the changes made in our tax code
the last several years that have
been made that have made it more
equitable, especially for
Mexicans earning the lowest
incomes, and we're especially
pleased that HB 14 would in
essence create our own state's
own earned income tax credit,
and that that credit amount
would rise from 25 to 30%.
that, that's reaching as the
chairman mentioned, 100,000 more
New Mexicans. Tax credits for
families have been proven to
earn that earning lower tax
credits for families earning
lower incomes have been proven
to improve the lives of the
Mexicans by providing additional
resources to meet their basic
needs like food, housing, health
care, and more. We urge you to
continue the, the, to follow the
path you've been on in recent
years that has made New Mexico's
tax more progressive and more
equitable. Lutheran advocacy be
straight in Mexico in the
conference of churches urged
support for HB 14. We thank you
for the opportunity to speak to
you this morning.
Thank you, Kurt.
Next on Zoom.
greater Mason.
Yes, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Dick
Mason. I'm a board member and a
registered lobbyist for the
League of Women Voters of New
Mexico. The league stands in
strong support of the
committee's substitute for HB
14. He wants to thank the
sponsors for bringing it
forward.
The league believes it's a
state's obligation to collect
revenues to fund services that
are generally the state
responsibility our, and our
adequate to finance essentials
of the government.
Le further believes that our tax
system should generate revenue
from those most able to pay. In
other words, a tax system should
be progressive.
Further by decoupling the earned
income tax credit from the
federal um EITC. It protects New
Mexicans from changes in federal
notice uh federal policies.
For all of the above reason, the
league stands in strong support
of the committee substitute for
HB 14 and urges the committee to
give it a due pass. Thank you.
Thank you, Richard.
Um, and just a reminder, you
have one minute each, but so far
everyone is sticking to that.
Next on Zoom.
Great. Thank you. Uh, let's have
all those who are in favor in
person.
And if you could um keep your
remarks to a minute.
And Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Paige
Knight, Deputy Policy director
with New Mexico Voices for
Children, and we strong stand in
strong support of House Bill 14.
It continues the transformative
work you all have done in the
past few years of enacting
targeted family-focused tax
policies that help make families
make their ends meet.
The EITC we know is incredibly
important and has many steady
benefits and as designed in this
bill, it will best serve New
Mexicans and reach more, helping
them um put food on the table,
pay their bills and achieve
greater economic security. It's
also a fiscally responsible bill
too by asking a little bit more
from an industry that is um
highly profitable at this time.
We, uh, think the chair Lindsay
for all his work on this bill
and members of the committee and
urge your support. Thank you.
Thank you. Next.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Camilla Feibelman
with the Sierra Club's Rio
Grande chapter. There's no
school today, so this is oh I
know my son, and the Sierra Club
has been following the oil and
gas equalization part of this
bill since it was introduced and
want to reiterate that the
state's natural resources belong
to the public and are in large
part extracted off public lands.
For the benefit of New Mexicans
and especially New Mexicans who
face the most need when it comes
to childcare or putting food on
the table, and so we stand in
strong support of ensuring that
those natural resources serve
our families first and foremost.
Thank you.
Thank you
Any others in favor. All right,
we're gonna move to uh those
against on Zoom.
If you're in opposition, please
raise your hand.
Santa Fe Chamber.
Hi, Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Bridget
Dixon, president and CEO of the
Santa Fe Chamber of Commerce,
and I respectfully oppose HB 14.
While supporting working
families is critical, this bill
funds earned income tax credit
through higher taxation,
increasing dependence on oil and
gas revenue and driving up
energy and production costs.
These burdens hurt businesses,
raise consumer prices, and
threaten jobs in industry like
construction and logistics. We
should focus on economic
diversification.
For long term stability. I urge
you to vote no on HB 14. Thank
you. Thank you, next.
Is that it? OK. All right, we'll
go to the members of the public.
Is there anyone here in person
who is against the bill. OK,
great. If you could choose 5
people amongst you and line up,
you'll each have a minute.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Jim Winchester. I
represent the Independent
Petroleum Association of New
Mexico. I'm speaking today on
behalf of both the Permian Basin
Petroleum Association in New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association,
although they may add on to this
on whatever I miss. Um, oil and
gas producers of all sizes run
their operations on budgets, so
it does throw a big obstacle in
their ability to both keep their
employees working and look for
new drilling investments when on
the final day.
of bill introductions with no
notice of 100 to $200 million
dollar tax increase or maybe
more is dropped on this
industry.
And all this is happening at a
time when oil prices have fallen
$10 per barrel since the
beginning of session, and
industry is already tightening
its belt to prepare for this.
These kinds of decisions
unfortunately are exactly why
New Mexico is losing small oil
and gas producers.
We don't think it's good tax
policy when higher taxes, sadly
are inevitably passed on to the
consumers, further hurting those
in poverty in the most
vulnerable communities in our
state. Thank you, sir.
Good morning. I'm Terry Cole,
president and CEO for the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce, with all due respect
to Chairman, we are standing in
opposition to HB 14. Let me say
first, the chamber is proud to
support working families.
But
With 3 billion in new revenue,
there is
Plenty of money to fund priority
programs like this and
initiatives without a tax
increase.
We suggest the oil we support
the oil and gas industry and are
opposed to taxing an industry
that contributes so much to our
economy. We urge the committee
to revisit HB 2 and see what can
be reprioritized to make room
for this tax credit.
Thank you so much. Please vote
against HB 14. Thank you. Thank
you.
Good morning chair members of
the committee. My name is Alison
Riley, Public Policy director at
the Mexico Chamber of Commerce,
standing in opposition to HB 14.
Supporting working families is
our top priority. We're
repealing the working families
tax credit to replace it with a
state earned income tax credit
funded by the oil and gas
equalization tax creates
economic instability and
undermines Mexico's progress
towards a strong and predictable
tax climate, and our tax climate
has been recognized by several
respected institutions for its
improvement, yet, HP 14 moves
the goalposts, preventing
businesses.
for making long-term
investments. This bill ties an
ongoing tax credit to volatile
oil and gas revenues, creating
fiscal uncertainty for both
businesses and the state.
HB 14 shifts tax burdens,
disrupts long-term planning and
makes New Mexico less
competitive for business growth
and for those reasons, we urge
you to vote no.
Thank you next.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza,
executive director with New
Mexico IDA, the statewide
economic development
professional Association. Uh,
we're here to express our
concerns because we do believe
the proposed oil and gas
equalization surtax will
undermine New Mexico's
competitiveness and send a
dangerous signal to businesses
considering investing here.
Economic development rights
unpredictability. This tax
introduces instability, hitting
independent oil and gas
producers the hardest, many of
whom support a vast network of
local businesses.
Um, with small producers
struggle, the ripple effects
trucking companies, equipment
suppliers and restaurants,
especially in rural New Mexico,
but the impact goes further.
Site selectors and corporate
investors look for tax
stability. If New Mexico gains a
reputation for unpredictable tax
policies, we risk losing not
just energy investment, but
manufacturing, logistics, and
technology jobs. The committee
to reject this proposal that
creates uncertainty and instead
focused on fostering a stable
competitive business question.
Thank you. Thank you.
Scan richer lobbyist for San
Juan County and the city of
Farmington and we've uh seen uh
uh some dramatic things happened
over the last few years in our
community because of the closure
of
are generating plant, our power
plants, and we're seeing a small
rebound now in oil and gas
activity in our community, and
we were very concerned about uh
issues that might impact that
rebound.
Thank you.
Thank you. And uh sorry I didn't
do this earlier, but can all of
you who are opposed raise your
hand so I can just get a tally.
Thank you.
OK, um,
Let's go to the committee.
Unless, um, unless chairman you
have any responses.
Uh, just a closing remark, Madam
Chair, before we go to the
committee, you know, I, I, I, I
appreciate everybody's interest
in this matter. I appreciate all
the public comment thus far, you
know, I, I think there's some
things that uh maybe we, we can
address in the front and in
regards to the global dynamics
in regards to the potential that
this would increase energy costs
in New Mexico. I think it's it's
well documented that the our oil
and gas industry is, is, uh,
dependent on global dynamics and
not necessary uh a small
increase in this equal.
civilization. So when we talk
about tariffs being waged when
we talk about a fellow
administration waging certain
certain wars with certain
individuals, uh, this is far
more of a reach than a modest
attempt to equalize New Mexico's
tax rates and so I think that's
really important. Also,
It's extremely important to
recognize that.
When we talk about oil and gas,
and that we're not talking about
necessarily uh a mom and pop
operation per se that uh certain
or that there are certain brakes
for oil and gas that mom and pop
shops.
Uh, the, the, the local
convenience store, they don't
enjoy it, right? They don't get
to expense in tangible drilling
offset costs to deduct labor or
materials from drilling, um,
there's no other business in
this state that enjoys that type
of luxury, so, uh, I think it's,
it's important at this point in
time that New Mexico has an
absolute right to negotiate what
is equal and fair for its
citizens and provide those
opportunities. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Chairman Lin. Let's
go to Speaker Martinez.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Appreciate the
presentation. Um, let me start
by thanking you and your team,
um, I know the good folks at LLC
I and Jennifer and everybody
involved. Thank you for your
work. Um.
This is a labor of love, and
every year it's a labor of love.
It's um, it's a bill that I
think we can all take.
pride of pride in, um, sometimes
there's more capacity than
others, right, uh, than other
years. Uh, this is a year with
with limit capacity. I want to
address a couple of points that
I heard in public comment
because yes, we have a surplus,
but we are responsible.
To ensure that that surplus
continues to generate revenue
for the state.
For a long time. So it's not as
easy as cutting a check out of
reserves to pay for tax cuts.
That's not how that works, so
for that public comment that I
heard about watching money.
Well, it's kind of disappointing
because as good business people
would know as good budgeteers
would know, you can't just write
a check.
Out of your reserves because
that creates other problems
further down the line.
Uh, so I'm glad that you and and
Chairman Small have not taken
that, uh.
that path.
That fiscally responsible path.
of dipping into our reserves to
pay for this. Now, I guess you
could make an argument and
perhaps we'll hear this later,
that we should cut elsewhere.
In state government to pay for
this, which is fair, right?
That's a, it's a fair policy
discussion, but to to to somehow
imply that we can just write a
check.
Out of our savings account to
pay for this, is to be fiscally
irresponsible thing to do, and
I'm glad that's not what you're
doing. Um,
I also want to address what we
heard about.
cost of energy going up. I, and
I couldn't agree with you more.
If this
Sur tax equalization.
Formula.
Ends up
Raising the cost of energy,
we've got a problem.
Because I think the war in
Russia or the war in Ukraine is
probably more likely to drive
energy prices. I think tariffs.
are being proposed and
implemented at the federal level
will absolutely raise the cost
of energy for us. Um, I think
mass deportations.
As we are being threatened in
our communities.
will particularly hit an
industry really hard.
An industry that is dependent on
migrant labor.
Um, but I can appreciate.
The
Um
The concern, right? Because
There's nothing worse.
than tax
Unpredictability.
Yeah
I've been involved with the tax
package in this committee for
the last
6 years.
And that's exactly what we've
tried to do, Madam Chair and Mr.
Chair.
I bring stability to the tax
code.
You look at every bill starting
in 2019 up until this one.
different iterations, different
concepts.
But all working toward building
predictability, sustainability.
Fairness and equity into the tax
code and this is another step in
that direction.
Last thing I want to say is,
And I think I heard this from
you, but I'm just gonna ask you
again, because I wrote it down,
um, as I was sort of in and out
of the room.
Can you restate
What income level?
is getting a tax cut, and I
think I heard you say a full out
tax exemption.
Can you repeat that for me and
for the members of the public,
please.
Madam Chairwoman and Mr.
Speaker, so all New Mexican
workers.
That are earning a wage up to
$70,000. We, we'll see their
state tax liability completely
extinguished.
That includes a single and and
and and married individuals. So,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, uh, this
tax bill is no longer just
targeting families with
children, which is something
we've been doing for the last
few sessions. This is actually
targeting any person who is
earning an income, so, so you've
got to be working. You can't
just get a tax cut willy nilly.
You've gotta be working and up
to $70,000 a year through the
formula you have in this bill,
it will not be paying personal
income tax.
Madam, madam chairwoman and Mr.
Speaker, you are correct.
That madam chair, Miss Chair is
the most exciting part of this
bill for me.
Because I think that um,
If, if I've learned anything in
my 10 years as a member of this
committee.
Is that people
Want to keep more of their hard
earned money and kudos to my
colleagues on the other side
because you, you guys have said
that for a long time, right? Um,
and so, um, I would hope that
this is a big win for you guys
because you've been saying this
for generations, right? I mean,
you know,
Higher taxes, they're hard on
working people, right? Uh, and
yet here we are about to if if
it's the will of this committee
about to exempt personal income
tax from people making $70,000
or less, which $70,000 is
Good, good money. I mean, is he,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, is, would
you, could you give us the
average?
What's the average salary in New
Mexico?
Mr. Chair and Mr. Speaker, uh,
median household income is, is
well below that amount, I think
to your point. Uh, depends on
the measure, depends on the size
of the household, but $55,000
for, for a household income.
It's not media. So Matt and
share $55,000 is the median
income. We're going above that
and we're capturing your law
enforcement officer, we're
targeting your firefighter,
we're targeting your, you know,
uh, level 2, level 3 teacher,
um, heck, we're targeting some
of these oil and gas.
workers that are maybe starting
off in their careers, and now
they're they're gonna be exempt
from income tax because we want
them to keep their money,
because we don't know.
How unaffordable.
Life will become over the next
few years. So New Mexico is
stepping up to ensure that you
keep more of your hard earned
money.
That you can afford.
day to day.
Um, staples from food, medicine,
healthcare.
whatever energy, whatever the
case might be. Um, the last
thing you'll say, Madam Chair,
Mr. Chair, and I apologize for
taking a little bit longer than
I thought I would take, but I
want to appreciate
Your ability, Mr. Chair, in
particular, uh, insurances malls
to listen.
Because honestly, nothing would
have stopped you all from
pushing the bill as it was
presented to us a week ago.
But you listen to us, you listen
to this side of the table, you
listen to that side of the
table. You listened to the
community, you listen to folks
in the industry, you listen to
tax experts.
And you came up with something
that I think I personally like
better. I think it's more
measured. I think it's a a a a a
more sustainable approach.
Yet high impact for those
families making 70,000 or less.
I'll, I'll stop there, Madam
Chair. Obviously I'm gonna
support this bill, uh, in case
there's any doubt, uh, but very
proud of the work you all have
done. Appreciate you.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, let's go
to represent Montoya.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair. Um,
Chairman Linte, um, real quick
just so I have the numbers
correct.
Um
So we're looking now at
Uh, reducing
Uh, natural gas, the tax down to
3.9% and
And then a separate provision.
That would be uh raising.
The crude oil price taxed to up
to 3.4, approximately a 2.0.28%
increase.
But that would not be
Staying in the same fund, that
would be a direct that 0.28
would go directly into the
general fund.
Madam, madam chair and uh
gentleman, representative, you
are correct.
And thank you, um, Madam Chair
and chair uh chairman.
That
that provision, uh, halts or
doesn't flow out that that 0.28
if if there's a if
commodity price of crude oil
drops to $55 a barrel.
Madam Chairwoman and
representative, that's correct.
We felt that in consultation
with individuals from the
industry, both Chairman Small
and I that have uh triggers in
case something like this does
happen that we are responsible
to pull back when the time
hopefully never comes, but if it
does, OK. Um, so once again,
just so I get, so I understand
that the bill completely.
Um, that would raise that 0.28
would raise about $130 million.
Madam Chair, representative,
yes, sir.
OK, and then there would be a, a
loss to the permanent.
And uh uh 11.4 million from the
reduction of the natural gas
tax.
Madam chairwoman and
representatives, you're correct.
OK. So, uh,
The bill as it stands today
doesn't spend $130 million. Um,
we're, we're, how much
Specifically as the bill leaves
the house, but
How much for the uh working or
the earned income tax credit.
How much?
is in this.
Madam Chairwoman and
representative as it leaves the
house, the cost for the
expansion of the working family,
the working tax credit is 75
million.
And so we retained the
additional capacity for our, our
colleagues in the Senate because
they also have
A tax committee. They also have
tax ideas, and so out of
fairness to that chamber, uh,
the balance has been left for
their initiatives.
So thank you, Mr. Chair or Madam
Chair, Mr. Chair. So, uh, we
have any idea on that side what
The Senate is proposing.
Madam Chairwoman and
representative, uh, we've had a
few conversations with them. We
know that we have, they have
highlighted a couple of uh
perspective ideas that they'd
like to move forward with,
obviously, we won't know until
and if this, this package makes
it through this this.
This committee and then onto the
floor to then find out how they
would amend it, but uh from,
from all accounts, I do believe
that I can say with some
authority that there was some
interest in wanting to see some
medical GRT initiatives as a
part of that as well as um the
The foster care, uh,
Support that was made mentioned
by the governor, uh, in her
state of the state at the
beginning of the session, but
then again, none confirmed just
based on conversations that I've
heard from, from individuals.
So thank you, Madam Chair and
Mr. Chairman. So I, I do have a
little bit of uh
Trepidation, let's say.
That we're, what we're doing is
we're raising $130 million.
Uh
On, on the industry.
And we're we're.
Saying that we know 75 million
approximately would go towards
the uh earned income tax credit.
But we have no idea.
What the rest of the money would
be used for. Well, not that we
don't have no idea, but we have
no guarantee. It goes over to
the Senate.
Senate can use their portion of
the
increased tax for whatever.
That's kind of a hard sell.
Mister Chair.
That's what we're saying here is
We had our priority that we
wanted to to do with this. We
have no idea what the priority
for the rest of it is, but we're
gonna send them a blank check
for about uh $65 million.
Um
Mr. Chair
I stated this before when we
heard uh House Bill 548.
Uh, when Chairman Small.
presented that to this
committee.
We have
Uh, our, our, our recurring
budget this is for this year is
10.5 billion plus.
And total dollars that came into
the state that we've shoved away
into a whole bunch of funds.
We've created a lot more funds
this year.
Of $13 billion approximately.
And we're talking just a we're
just talking, uh,
$130 million.
In my mind this is a failure on
the part of appropriations
Committee to not set aside $130
million for tax breaks if we
want to give them, if we want to
give tax breaks. I, I love.
I, I've always loved the working
families tax credit, the Ronald
Reagan.
tax credit that's just survived,
that's been one of the most
popular.
Credits it's ever existed, uh,
working families. Um.
And I, I did hear there might be
some concern that I, I think I
heard one of the advocates
mention that they were worried
that that that that might go
away. I have not heard this
president talk about taking any
away, raising taxes in any way.
So I, I don't think that's a
concern we need to have.
Um, but I do, I, I, the idea of
earned income tax credits a good
idea.
I just think the way we're doing
this is awful. This is awful tax
policy. We have determined.
That we want to do this.
And I believe we determine this
probably before the beginning of
the session.
But we did not plan it into
house Bill 2.
So Madam Chair,
Um, I'm just for the sake of
anybody who might be watching
in.
Um
We've always set aside, we've
always sent the House Bill 2
over with room.
For
Whatever we want to do with tax
policy.
But what we did this year is we
sent it over full.
And I, I, I have to disagree
with the with the uh speaker.
That this year of all years we
had limited capacity. This is a
record budget year for us.
What this points to and, and
then the suggestion that, that
our only option would be to take
money out of reserves.
That makes absolutely no sense
whatsoever.
The difference is we have a
piggy bank.
As the legislature. We think we
have a piggy bank or a pinata as
was has been mentioned.
But the idea
This is what the the average New
Mexican doesn't understand. If
I, if I, I have a budget, I
can't just go and say,
My neighbor has a lot of money.
I'm gonna go take it from him.
That's what we're doing here,
this is, this is almost like
government extortion.
We, we're, we say we know they
have money.
Because they're making money.
And we are going to rob Peter to
pay Paul, because, you know
what, Paul's gonna be really
happy with us.
This year of all years.
does not justify raising.
Taxes on the industry that pays
for approximately 50% of our
budget.
And
Beyond that, all of these other
funds that we've created over
the last several years. We have
not just this year, but previous
years have had every year we've
had increasing dollars.
We couldn't set aside $130
million for.
For
75 million for what is a good,
what I think is good tax policy.
I'm not going to disagree that
the earned income tax credit is,
that's good tax policy, that is.
But this way is not good tax
policy.
The reality is
The industry starting to feel
like a pinata.
And I, I would just ask anybody,
any other industry.
How would they feel if we if we
decided they had deep enough
pockets. I mean, at this point,
I think the people have deep
pockets are trial lawyers. I
think we need to have a pinata
tax on a trial lawyers.
Because they're the ones who are
who are making all the money in
the state.
Just to determine.
That we want to do some things
that we we've already overspent
a budget.
We've already poured money into
every fund that we want to do.
We, we, we just heard in energy
in the last week and a half, 2
more funds that we're creating.
Uh
And, and, and by the way, about
this amount, about $130 million
each one of them.
Uh, if, if we didn't, if we did
not uh pass Senate Bill 48 and
Senate Bill 83, we'd have more
than enough money to fund these
projects.
But instead we're creating a
community benefit fund.
And we are creating, Madam
Chair, a uh state
infrastructure.
Font.
So that we can fund
And in one of the bill says,
To
Create
Help create more new energy
economy jobs as we reduce oil
and gas jobs. Wow, we raise
taxes on oil and gas.
None of this makes.
Common sense.
It makes legislative sense.
I've seen that. It makes
legislative sense to do all of
this, but it does not pass the
common sense test.
Madam, Madam Chair.
And Mr. Chair,
With all due respect, I, I like
this provision. Working fam uh
working families tax credit.
has always been a good tax
credit. It is good tax policy.
have no idea if I can say
whatever else is going to be
tacked on on the Senate side is
good tax policy because we don't
know what it is.
What we do know is we've decided
to spend $130 million more.
Even as we've created all these
funds.
Even as we continue to create
funds and stick money aside 2
brand new funds that apparently
in House Bill 2, but we could
not put a tax break for working
families in House Bill 2.
Madam Chair.
I've shared this with the
Senate or with the um house
energy Committee.
As we've seen a lot of these
bills that were that were
essentially going to be new
taxes that we've heard over
there.
Or new funds.
But Madam Chair, I'm I'm gonna
share this and I'm, I'm gonna be
done.
But
When Texas decided that they
were going to become
That they wanted to become more
of a powerhouse than they were.
They did 4 things.
They set a roadmap. I heard this
from uh uh from he's now
Governor Abbott, but I heard
this from him about 10 years ago
when I went on a trip with
former Lieutenant Governor John
Sanchez to a lieutenant
governors.
event.
But the 4 things that they did
in Texas to become the economic
powerhouse that they are.
I
The first thing they did was
they decided to do whatever it
takes to double down and help
the industries that are
currently funding Texas's
budget.
to do even more.
So what they did is they doubled
down on the oil and gas industry
and other business industries
that were in state because they
were already there. They didn't
have to entice them with offers
of reducing taxes or or
anything. They were already
there and in business, so what
they decided to do was how do we
double down on the industry that
the industries that are paying
for everything.
The second thing they did.
Was they
They focused on tort reform.
Limiting the amount of money
that lawyers can get from
businesses that would
essentially, yeah, let them go
after, let them go after
damages, but don't let them put
a business out of business.
The 3rd thing they did was
regulation reform.
They reduced regulations.
And then the fourth thing that
they did was tax reform.
Unfortunately, New Mexico is
following that road map.
But we're doing it in reverse.
We have decided we are going to.
Not double down on the industry
that exists, we're going to try
and take that industry and go
out there and try and find a new
industry to replace that
industry. That is what we're
doing.
We have decided the model is
we're going to take money from
Taco Bell or McDonald's can
succeed.
The next thing that we have done
is we, so, so we're not doubling
down on the industries that
exist.
We're not doing a tort reform.
We're going the other way. As a
matter of fact, one of the
things that that you just
stated, Madam Chair and Mr.
Chairman, is that it's expected
that we're gonna have to do some
sort of GRT tax break. That's uh
or that for, for, for medical,
the medical industry, that's
likely what's gonna happen on,
on with the rest of this
capacity or portion of this
capacity on the Senate side, but
we're in that position because
we decided to
Uh, we decided to side with
trial attorneys over every other
business in New Mexico,
including the medical industry,
but they're really what the
medical industry is really
asking for is for tort reform.
Don't let them sue us out of
business. Don't let them be able
to create to, to, to get such
great big judgments that I can't
even get me medical malpractice
insurance.
The next thing that we're doing
is we're adding regulation every
single day.
We have seen a barrage of new
regulation in particular on this
industry that we're talking
about today.
And then the fourth thing is,
Um, we're not across the board
reducing taxes.
So with that
Madam Chair
I think this is probably
The worst tax bill.
Since I've been here that I've
seen.
We're going to tax one industry.
And we are gonna take that money
to to disperse it among whoever
else and whatever else we decide
to to disperse it.
Uh, and I, and I think that
we're doing this just because we
can.
Um, Obviously, this is not an
equalization that started out as
548 started out as an
equalization bill. This is not
an equalization bill anymore.
This is a this is an excise tax.
So Madam Chair and Mr. Chairman.
Once again, the items that we're
looking to spend this money on,
I don't disagree with.
The way we are doing this, I
think is awful tax policy, and I
can't support it.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Montrea. Let's go to
representative so but.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, uh, Chante for your
presentation. I just have a
couple of questions. Um, and
some of them will be directed at
um at uh Mr. Torres. So thank
you.
Um, Ismael, what is the, uh,
potential for recession, um, and
has that outlook changed on
behalf of the LFC. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and, and
Representative Silva. Thank you
for the question. I also didn't
uh take a moment to introduce
myself. My name is Ismayia
Dores. I'm the chief economist
for the Legislative Finance
Committee. I'm here at the
request of the chair and we, we
have to give our spiel about we
are not here in support or in
opposition to this bill, but
just, just to provide technical
assistance. Um, thank you for
the question. The outlook has
changed. We are seeing the odds
of a recession increase, the,
the, the likelihood of a
recession increase. It depends
on who your source is, but
We've seen it increased anywhere
to 30 to 40%, um, compared to
maybe a few months ago where we
were sitting closer to 20%. So
the odds have have grown in
recent months. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Ismael, how about for
inflation?
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
You know, one data point doesn't
make the trend, but we have seen
inflation tick up from the
previous trajectory.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, um,
and Ismay. Do you know when LFC
will adjust its position again.
Uh, Madam Chair and
representative, the
The LFC itself does not alone
publish estimates, we publish a
part of the consensus revenue
estimating group, which does
almost a quarterly forecast
August, December, and then
usually sometime in the spring
during the session. Um, so that
being said, we don't have a
quarter between now and August,
so the next uh regular update
will be in August, um, that
being said, the group does
respond in the event of, of, you
know, large shifts and in the
economy, like, for example, if
we were to see a recession,
Um, it, it would be likely be
the case that the group would
issue a new forecast at that
time.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Ismael, um, I, I heard in
testimony that oil and gas was
saying they're cutting their
first quarter outlook are other
industries across the country
also adjusting their first
quarter outlooks, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative,
absolutely, uh, another large
one that you might recognize in
the news is the airline industry
as well, uh, decreased
expectations for consumer
spending on travel.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
my. So in the 60 days,
basically, the time that we've
been here, um, what has happened
to consumer confidence, uh, in,
in the economy, Madam Chair,
Eastman.
Madam Chair, Representative
Silva, I think as you know,
consumer confidence has declined
um over the last couple of
months. Thank you, Madam Chair,
uh, in East my. So in the 60
days we've been here, uh,
there's been more instability in
markets, less confidence in
consumers.
Um, and what we're hearing is a
proposal for um tax credits for
uh so that half of New Mexicans
have their income tax, their
state income tax extinguished.
Um, so Madam Chair and Ismael do
low-income people tend to spend
more if they have more in their
pockets.
Madam Chair and Representative,
absolutely, uh, as a share of
their total income lower income
folks spend a larger share,
that's, that's correct. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and Easter. So
I also heard in testimony that
economic growth depends on
stability. Um, but the economic
policy gyrations that we're
seeing at the federal level, um,
are, make it difficult for
consumers to plan for the future
and I think in terms of state
planning, we're in the same
bucket. It
Makes the mistake. It makes it
very hard for the state to plan
for the future. And so the mood
that I've seen from the
beginning of the 60 days to now,
not because of any policies that
I've seen come before committees
that I sit on, but because of
decisions that are getting made
on economic policy at the
federal level, um, are creating
that sort of instability and,
and shifting the mood here, not
only here in the roundhouse but
across the country as, as you've
noted, you know, um, industry is
not just
oil and gas industries across
the country are cutting their
first quarter outlook, um, and
it's not because of any policies
that are getting discussed here
in Santa Fe. Um, and so, um, and
I also think, um, so thank you
for that. And um I'm also uh
wondering, uh, Madam Chair and
Chair Linte if this how many
bills, uh, a different tax bills
did have we seen in committee so
far? Will you tell me that
number again?
Madam Cha Cha.
Madam Chairwoman and
Representative, we saw a total
of 31 bills that we either uh
pass uh uh rolled or or or
tabled and then of those 16 of
those were temporarily tabled
for consideration for this
package.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, and
Chair Lente. So, um, I also
heard in um
In testimony that, you know,
this might be bad.
Um, policy and I disagree and
that it would create an unstable
or um
Uh, outlook for other industries
to consider moving to New Mexico
or doing business here. I
disagree. I think if instead, if
we had adopted every single bill
that we had seen come before
this committee, industries would
be wondering, well, who's next
or who's not next. Who's gonna
be um paying the bill or who
might be um getting the
exemption this year and I think
that might have created more
instability than what we're
discussing today. Uh, so,
I am really glad that as we're
looking at the shifting mood in
this country and
The unknowns about future
economic policy gyrations that
we're going to see the federal
government, um, choose, uh,
after we close session, I think
that this is a really prudent
way to move forward and um and
then I want to thank Cheentte
and also Chermall for um their
collaboration and uh and doing
work in public to, to make sure
that we're making good policy
decisions. Um,
I think I have one more
question, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
in a chair like this. So, um,
When
We
Let me get my thoughts together
again, sorry.
So, um, I think again to, to the
point to compare the oil and gas
industry to any other industry
in New Mexico is false. Um, can
you tell me other tax breaks,
um, or incentives that the oil
and gas industry benefit from
the other New Mexico industries
may not benefit from Chaland
Madam Chair.
Madam Chairwoman and, and
representative, I would, I would
ask Izzy if he knows to expand
on anything else.
Madam Chair and representative,
um, in New Mexico, there's a
broader discussion maybe about
those kind of benefits, um, that
are provided on the federal
level, and I'd be happy to
follow up with you on, on that
if you're curious. In New Mexico
specifically, the benefits are
more price-based, which is um
similarly reflected in this.
piece of legislation where there
are price triggers for how high
the conservation tax should be
or how high um taxes are on
stripper wells if prices go low
enough, there's also a trigger
to to reduce uh taxes on on
those specific production
facilities, but, uh, uh, other
maybe New Mexico unique or
specific benefits include the
allowance for deducting royalty
payments from your tax liability
in other states, um, you are not
allowed to deduct your, your
royalty payments. So those are a
few.
things off the top of my head
and I'm happy to follow up on.
Others
Great. Thank you, uh, Madam
Chair, and is my landing, um,
so, I mean, there are other
industries here that if a
family's per capita income falls
below a certain amount. We don't
give uh tax rebates to um
businesses where they go
shopping, right? We, we, we
don't have those those
industries don't have those
sorts of benefits. Um, and then
finally, Madam Chair and um
erente. um I also just want to
say as a member of
uh the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee, uh, we did
not send a full budget to the
Senate. Uh, we sent a budget
that uh was had 120 million left
in recurring in about 19 million
and non-recurring, um, so we
left lots of room, um, and, um,
have been very public about that
process. So, thank you, Madam
Chair and Chate please.
Thank you, Representative Silva.
Let's go to Representative
Henry.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
I just got a couple of things
that I'm a little confused on.
Uh, I do agree that dipping into
reserves.
to pay you for a tax.
Credits, probably not, not the
best and prudent way to run
budgets. It's not the way I run
budgets in small businesses.
But can you remind me, HB 2.
Did we dip into the reserves by
about $130 million to balance
that budget.
Madam Chairwoman, I would ask is
to speak to that, please?
Uh,
Madam Chair and, and
Representative Henry, um, yes,
it it depends on the fiscal
year. Actually, I, I believe
both fiscal years did did drop
from reserves, um, that is not,
I, I, I will just add, so, so
absolutely, yes, you are
correct. Um, I will just add
that that is not an uncommon
practice because there is a a
checking account in the reserves
called the operating reserve,
which is frequently used for
non-recurring spending and to
catch overflow. So, so it's not
an uncommon practice. So Madam
Chairman and
Mr. Chairman, it's not an
uncommon practice, but when we
had record surplus.
I just wanna, wanna
Remind that we did dip into
reserves by about $130 million
to balance our budget this year.
Um, I, I think that's an
interesting number. Uh, the
other thing I'm just gonna talk
about a couple of different
things. If, if there is, um,
Insecurity in in in industries
and in federal government, if,
if that's what we're we're
worried about, uh,
When they're, when, when
industries are, are struggling
or there's insecurities in it.
Is it normally good tax policy
to raise taxes on that industry.
Madam Chair and representative,
I would ask that Izzy.
can speak to that as well.
Uh,
Madam Chair and Representative,
I, I think to the point you're
making, um,
You know, what would benefit an
economy during a recession. Um,
certainly passing benefits back
to the broader economy, any sort
of stimulus is usually uh the
recommended approach to dealing
with the recession. So Madam
Chair and Mr. Chairman and, and
uh you want me to just call you
Izzy. Is that OK? I don't want
to offend you. I, I, I will
trust everyone if if.
So what you're saying is, is, is
it is OK to tax an industry as
long as those taxes are going
back to uh pay for something
else. We, we can raise taxes at
a time when there's, there's
instability, we should raise
taxes as long as those taxes are
going somewhere we think is is
good.
Madam Chair Representative
Henry, thank you for the chance
to clarify. I, I guess the
difficulty I'm having or the
point I'm, I'm hoping to get
across is that each recession is
unique.
And the
The way a recession plays out is
unique each time, and, you know,
if, if the goal is to um if if
consumer spending drops, for
example, then you would want to
apply a sim a stimulus that
supports consumer spending. If
the, if the recessionary impact
is coming from, uh, you know, a
decline in a particular
industry, taxing that industry
would certainly not benefit.
The broader economy in that
scenario. So, Madam Chairman,
I'm really glad you said it that
way. So,
I'm curious, since session
started.
January 22nd.
The price of oil.
Was at $75 almost $76. Do you
know what the price of oil today
is.
about 63 last time I checked.
Is that still pretty close?
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
New Mexico follows WTI quite
closely, and that's about $67
right now. So $67 OK, so that's
a drop of, let's call that
another 8. It was January 15th,
we were at 8. So we've seen a
decline in the price per barrel.
Have we heard, uh, Madam
Chairman, Mr. Chairman, and
expert, uh, has there been
layoffs announced in this
industry, oil and gas industry,
as of the last couple of weeks.
Madam Chair, Representative
Henry, yes.
So Madam Chairman, we said that,
that if a, if a industry becomes
unstable, the best time.
To raise taxes on him probably
isn't at that time point. Is
that still a fair statement, Mr.
Chairman or Mr. Chairman, Madam
Chairman, sorry.
Madam Chair Representative
Henry, uh, you know, I, I don't
wanna make any subjective.
Comments, but uh uh I, I
understand your point.
Madam Chairman, Mr. Chairman,
thank you because I think that's
exactly right. We're, we're
looking at an industry I talked
about it, we've heard mention of
it, the pinata. We're beaten as
pinata to death.
We're seeing the decline in the
price per barrel, and you're
absolutely right. This tax
increase might not increase
energy costs across the board.
It's a, it's a commodity. I
understand that. What it does do
is raises your breakeven price
at the, at the, the site. I know
you use, I think, a break even
of about $50.
Is that right, Madam Chairman?
Uh.
I is that kind of what you used?
Uh, Madam Chan, Representative
Henry, um, I've, I've been very
lucky to speak with
Representative Murphy at length
about this, and there's a couple
of different break evens that
that are generally discussed.
There's the lifting break even,
and that is actually
Um, estimated by uh uh folks
that we rely on for that, for
those estimates, in the upper
30s, lower 40s. Um, and then
there's maybe a much more
arguable investment break even
where you'd like to see a return
on investment, and those, those
range.
Quite substantially depending
on, on.
On the return on investment
you're seeking.
So, Madam Chairman, uh, one of
those things could be the taxes
that that are enforced on your
industry would also raise that
break-even price. Is that a fair
statement?
Absolutely, madam chair. Madam
Chairman, I think that's one of
my points is when, when we say
it's gonna hurt the industry and
energy prices overall. It's not
the overall prize. It's the
break-even price when folks shut
down. And I've made this
argument on, on uh
You know, we say we love this
industry, but at this point, I
think there's been over 23
bills.
That have negatively impacted
this industry that have come
through this body so far this
session.
So when we, when we raised that
breakeven price by all of this
legislation that's going through
here, what tends to happen is
what we see in some other
states, right? When they're
breaking price is high.
Their industry shuts down way
before.
Those other uh oil fields where
that break even price is much
lower. Is that a fair statement?
Madame Chair and Representative
Henry.
We, we would expect absolutely
in a low price environment, the
highest break even prices to get
shut in first, um, and, and
thankfully in New Mexico, as you
know, we have, we tend to have a
much lower break even price than
the rest of the country.
Some Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman,
I, I think that's what I, I've
said it a number of times, and I
wish we would start thinking
about it in those that way.
If we were to keep our break
even industry is meeting and
exceeding so many of the
regulations we've already
passed.
And yet we're adding more on
with penalties, with taxes, and
with everything else. That break
even price is going to continue
to go up. The more that
break-even price goes up, the
quicker the industry shuts down
when the industry shuts down,
what happens to our budget in
New Mexico, Madam Chairman.
I feel weird calling you Izzy.
Is there a more official term?
Is that OK? It's, it's Mr. Easy,
mister. I, I'll call mister.
Thank you. I do feel better
about that. I will say Mr. is,
if you're OK with that, sir.
Adam Che and Representative
Henry, um, we've absolutely, uh,
you're, you're economists as, as
a part of the consensus revenue
estimating group do stress
testing to see what would happen
to the state budget in the event
of a a price crash and a, a
production crash and um there
are some insulating mechanisms
that
Take the hit first in a severe
price decline in production
scenario, um, I actually might
have it here in front of me.
While Izzy is looking for that
Madam Chair and representative
to your points in regards to
the, the price of oil uh per
bale dropping since the
beginning of the session till
now, so for the past 7 weeks,
it's, it's dropped maybe what,
$55 a barrel or $5 a barrel.
Well, from January 15th it's
dropped.
What is that?
13 $14 cause it was at 80 in
January 15th, today it's 63. So,
madam and and Madam Chairwoman
and representative. I, I, I
think what what this calls for
is, in fact,
We continued, I continue to tout
the the economist at LFC and the
group of at LFC for being um
some of the best in the business
and, and this is something that
is not um sky isn't falling, I
guess as as I would say simply
because this is something they
estimated back in December in
their LFC forecast at the price
of barrel would in fact be at
around $68 a barrel. So
While, while, while you claim,
you know, this guy is falling. I
would say that they're well
aware that this was going to in
fact happen and they were
forecasting this to that point,
so.
Uh, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Henry.
The, the consensus revenue
estimating group in December
estimated that losses could be
maybe $500 to $600 million in
the first year growing to 1.4
billion in the following years.
So, you know, uh, maybe over a
three-year period, $3.5 billion
less than what we would
otherwise estimate to be
collected over that time period,
um, in a severe and prolonged
price and production crash.
So, Madam Chairman, Mr.
Chairman, I, I'm, I'm not sure.
I'm ready to claim the sky is
falling, per se.
But I do think that that we are
fixing to add another tax
increase to an industry that is
unstable at the moment with all
the prices that are going on if
we're using the criteria that
I've heard from this, from this,
uh.
Committee. I lost track of where
I was on this committee. The
other thing I, I find
interesting that I've heard a
couple of times from this
committee is there, there's tax
breaks for oil and gas. Uh, Miss
Madam Chairman, Mr. Chairman.
Is there any other industry that
has as many taxes.
placed on them as an oil and gas
industry.
Madam Chair Representative
Henry, um, I don't know that
we've attempted that analysis.
So, Madam Chairman, uh,
Madam Chairman, Mr. Chairman,
uh, and Mr. E. uh I'll, I'll
name a couple, right? Cause I
think this is interesting. I, I
would like for the public to
understand how many taxes when
we say they get tax breaks, but
let's also remember they pay a
severance tax of 3.75%. They pay
conservation tax of 0.24%. They
pay emergency school tax of
3.15% to 4% and add the lower
production tax of 3%, a net net
gas processing tax.
which is 1.22% of property tax,
a GRT tax of 5%, an income tax
of 5.9% tax plus all their
payroll, their financing, and
all the other taxes.
Am I pretty close on how many
taxes the oil and gas industry
pays.
Madam Chairwoman and
representative, I think you are
correct.
Madam Chairman, Mr. Chairman,
thank you for that because I, I,
I
I find it hard to listen when
when we hear of the tax breaks
they get, but then we don't also
include the taxes that they pay.
I think we have to show if we're
gonna talk about that, so let's
show equalization on both sides.
Here's what they're taxed, and
here could be the tax breaks.
And I think we should have a
real discussion on what does
that really mean?
Because I, I don't like playing
both sides, and that's not what
I'm trying to do here. I really
would like to have that
discussion here's what their
tact.
And I don't know that there's
another industry that's taxed in
this way.
If there is, I would like to
understand it and I would like
to see it.
Um, so that I could understand
it better. Uh, a little bit if I
could. Um, Madam Chairman, uh,
Mr. Chairman,
uh, talk about that.
Uh, you know, the other thing
that I'm gonna mention very
quickly is with the instability
that we're already seeing in the
oil and gas industry, we're
hearing of the layoffs that are
already happening. Um, I would
like to make a statement on what
that would kind of do to
Areas like where I'm from
Artesia, Carlsbad, Hobbs, Jam,
Eunice, and all those types of
areas that rely heavily on oil
and gas industry. It's not only
the 30,000 jobs get that
directly $300 to 35,000 direct
jobs at oil and gas, uh, are
responsible for. It's the
hundreds of thousands of jobs in
my area that oil and gas are
responsible for. It's those
restaurants, it's those, uh,
boutiques. It's all those little
stores and restaurants and and
wonderful.
places that we like to go in our
communities. And so what happens
when an industry is already in
distress gets taxed more the
price at the, the, the break
even might be more than shut
down faster. That affects my
town drastically.
In a drastic way, and this is
after we've already passed
legislation that's already
directly impacting those small
businesses. So we're compounding
issues in so many of our small
communities, and that terrifies
me.
I'm not trying to
Play Gex, it really does terrify
me.
Because not only do I wear this
hat, I gotta go back home and
figure out how I balance my
budget as a city. I can't
balance it this way.
It doesn't work.
So I've got to figure out with
everything that we've done and
everything that we see, what
happens to our small
communities.
And what we continue to tax it
an industry, and we say we're
going to help so many people,
but we're not helping those
folks, the thousands of people
that could be laid off because
of the instability in the
industry.
And so that's one of the things
that, that really bothers me and
then I'm
really upset about because there
are a lot of things we're gonna
have to go home and figure out.
How did we impact our
communities, and I hope some of
it was to the positive.
But I think there's a lot of
stuff that I'm still hearing
from small businesses in my
community. What have y'all done
to us?
And so there is that instability
even within those little
markets. And so the more we
impact the major industry, which
is already
You're seeing uh some shift in
it. I, I, I think that's
dangerous for us to continue to
push in that direction.
Yeah
had one more statement.
And uh Representative, I'll just
ask for everyone who's still on
the list. We are trying to get
to the floor, um, so if folks
can um be brief.
OK.
If I think of my next statement,
I will pass it to the next
speaker, cause there was one
more thing I wanted to talk
about, uh, that I was thought
was important as to how we're
impacting, uh, the folks.
And the thousands that are being
laid off already, and I'm not
gonna say that because of this,
I'm not pretending this sky is
falling, but the more we
continue to compound their
issues, the more I worry about
that. Thank you with that.
Madam Chair, if I may briefly
respond to that and and and I,
I, I'm thankful that you brought
up the, the number of taxes that
oil and gas has been responsible
for because that's, that's,
that's a great example and I see
both sides of the coin as well.
But I also think that it's also
important to shed light in
regards to the numbers in
regards to the massive profits
of this industry is taking from
New Mexico's natural resources,
right? If you consider 2019, the
net profit from this industry
was at $2 billion and now it's
400% of that today. We're
looking at upwards of
80 $0 billion in net profits
this industry is taking from New
Mexicans and from New Mexico and
so it's obviously a balancing
act, but the one thing, Madam
Chair and and committee members
I hate to have that escapes us
from this narrative is that this
is not a happy in oil and gas
bill. This is a bill in regards
to that's invest in the Mexican
workers.
Um, for entire our entire state.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, great. Let's go to uh
Representative Gallegos.
Thank you Madam Chair, and, and
thank you, Mr. Chair, for
bringing uh the spill test
today, you know, I've served on
this tax committee for over 8
years. And so, um, I guess I'm a
little surprised because I
haven't heard from one person
within the industry about this
issue or this bill today. Um,
you know, I've heard more about
plastic bags than I have about
this this bill today. So I just
wanted to put that out there.
Um, you know, as policymakers,
we have to be forward thinking
and
And, you know, I think
especially being on this tax
committee. We need to be
thinking of how issues impact um
our communities, and I know that
we have worked really hard on
this committee to make sure that
we're impacting um our families
at home, and I see this bill as
one of those, one of those
bills, you know, tax relief, um,
we talked about when you said
70, you know, this is gonna
impact families.
That earn up to 70,000 a year.
And that sounds like a lot.
Um, 2 weeks ago I went to get
buy a 24 pack of eggs, and it
was $16. So when you start
doing, you know, eggs to eggs, I
guess, you know, we, we have to
start making those connections
and this bill it makes those
connections. It provides our
constituents with safeguards,
and I'm really proud of the work
that you've done on this bill.
So I just wanted to make those
few comments. I know we're short
on time, um, but I, I appreciate
the work you've done. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, I'm sure.
Thank you, Representative Gals.
Let's go to Representative
Lundstrom.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I did
have a couple of questions, um,
I'd like to ask, and this is on
page uh that's in the FIR
regarding these phase out uh
percentages.
For the tax credit that's
currently in place. I'm curious
as to why for two qualifying
children and 3 qualifying
children is the same.
Madam Chair, would you mind
directing me to the the page
you're looking at? It's in
section 8.
Of the committee substitute.
So we can find it here. Section
8, page 15.
We're talking about the phaseout
percentage, madam chair.
Mr. Chair, since you would know
about this. Why is it the same?
Madam Chair, this is how, uh,
this actually mirrored based on
the current credit which is also
based on the federal credit. And
you're absolutely right to, to
notice that there are different
rates for no qualifying
children, one child, and then 2
or more children, um.
And actually,
There is a a different rate um
up above in section B,
subsection B.
For those with 3 or more
children. So there's, there's,
it is.
can be quite confusing that
there is a a credit percentage,
a phase out rate, and then the
phase out income. And so the
they all interact to provide
sort of that graph, that chart
that you see in in.
The fiscal impact report on page
4 and perhaps maybe even easier
to read is in the fiscal impact
report on page 7, which shows
the differences in um rates
based on qualifying children or
just number of children, and
then filing status and income.
So my question is, uh, so I
understand what this bill does.
Um, we're increasing tax on oil
and gas to equal 130 million for
decreasing on gas.
To give a savings of 11.4
million.
A 75% of the of the 75 million
of the 130 is going into this
tax credit, correct? And so if
the barrel, a barrel of oil
drops below $55 the tax credit
stops.
So I, I need to understand or
tell me how that works. Go
ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Lustrom. Thank
you. I, I totally um understand
now. The rate, the increased
rate, so the 130 million raised
in that top row would go away.
The credit would continue and so
would the reduction in natural
gas. So only the 0.28% increase
on oil would, would stop being
applied in, in the event of oil
prices below $55 per barrel. OK,
so how would that transition
work if it happens during the
time you're in this phase out
period.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Lindstrom, the
phase out only applies to the
earned income tax credit, which
exists regardless of the price
of oil, but what,
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Lindstrom, the
phase out only applies to the
earned income tax credit, which
exists regardless of the price
of oil, but I,
what I'm curious about though is
if we're changing a revenue
stream that goes in to pay for
this.
And we're also saying that if a
barrel drops.
Then that, then that changes how
much goes into this also.
And I'm just, I'm trying to get
my head around how this works on
the ground.
Madam Chan represented ones
from, they both go into the
general fund. So it does not the
uh, there's no direct tie, I
guess, between the amount raised
by the oil and gas equalization
tax and the credit. Um, so you
could have a dip in general fund
revenues and the general fund
would continue to pay for the
earned income tax credits in
that.
Thank you very much.
Uh, final thing is, um, since
we're dropping um natural grass
to 3 and 9/10 from 4.
Uh, what's, what's the
surrounding state amount? I
mean, are we actually
competitive at that level?
Madame Chair and Representative
Lunstrom. um.
You know, uh, we are already
planning on doing an updated
analysis of our effective tax
rates on oil and gas this
interim, um, and in our previous
analysis, those were actually
put together. We did not have
separate effective rates for oil
and natural gas separately, but
our analysis at that time was
that we were about in the middle
of the pack as far as effective
tax rate on the collective
industry goes. OK, well, I'm
curious about gas. I know I'd
heard this in a when the bill
was initially presented by
Representative Small, that we're
gonna do this.
equalization and we're gonna,
and there was suggestion that we
reduced natural gas.
What was the, uh, I mean, why
that level? What, what was the
purpose for that level if we're
not going to be competitive.
Um, Madam Chair and, and
Representative Lustrom, um,
that, that's a good question,
you know, I, I don't want to
speak for, for the sponsors on
how they came about choosing
that rate, um, but maybe I'll
let represent them once they
speak to that point.
Simply stated, Madam Chair and
Representative, is that the way
we came up with that rate was
actually just communication with
with all of the stakeholders. I
mean, it, it really was a matter
of a labor of love between
different individuals from, from
the committee comments that were
made here, both sides and as
well as those individuals that,
uh, Chairman Small has access to
in regards to how he came up
with his initial numbers as it
was presented in House Bill 548.
I think Mr. Chairman, it's going
to be important for us to
understand that we would be more
competitive.
Because we've reduced that, uh,
the other comment I wanted to
make would be the final comment,
Madam Chair, is that
We've heard, to my knowledge, at
least 2 bills that have been
brought forth asking for
reduction in personal income tax
to this committee, at least 21
of the bills was to completely
eliminate it, we might recall
that completely reliminate her
eliminate personal income tax.
Now we are able to at least be
able to say that those at
$70,000 a year.
We can do that.
Because when those bills were
brought forth for complete
elimination of personal income
tax. There wasn't a strategy for
that.
Uh, so I think that this helps
provide that strategy to get to
the point of reducing personal
income tax, at least for a set
population that makes $70,000
and below.
And I think that's the way we
need to start chipping at this.
I mean, if we want to reduce or
eliminate personal income tax,
you've got to have a strategy to
get there, and there were
several bills that were
presented this year. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
I think you represented
Lindstrom, let's go to the
rasas.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, Chairman. Thank you,
Mr. Izzy.
You know,
That's gonna stick. I learned
something today. You don't let
Representative Henry go before
you because it takes all your
stuff
but you know, he did a good job
in in explaining things. I think
for me, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, we're seeing
that we're seeing a time where
There's volatility. I mean, you
hear it no matter what side
you're on, it doesn't matter
what's going on, whether you see
it on the federal level and
you're thinking, oh no, this is,
this is gonna cause um
instability or or or or some of
the policies that we're hearing,
um,
We are, we are seeing at the end
of the day, a squeeze on oil and
gas.
An increase on cost.
And a reduction in the cost of a
barrel.
And so it's, it's squeezing it.
I mean, so we can say, you know,
they make this much money,
whatever.
The, the
The thing that concerns me is
that
During that time was still seen.
I, I, cause I wanted to make
sure I have this right, so I
started looking up, but
Chevron's talking about reducing
their force by 20%.
BP is 5%.
And that affects the New Mexico
service companies in hobbs,
Farmington, Carlsbad, Aztecs,
Aztec Eunice Jo.
And, and so I just
I worry, I'd love the tax
credit. You guys know that. We
don't have to really say, I
mean, we, we all want that.
I think what makes it hard,
Madam Chair, um, representative.
I
And we see this in Cali.
You get $100 million worth of
capitally request.
We got $2.5 million to to to
address that.
very difficult to pick who you
can target those dollars with.
And I think that's what's
happening here, you know, we,
we've got a, a massive surplus
in in money.
Everybody out of everybody in
the woodwork start coming out.
And they all had parties. We all
have priorities. They have
priorities.
And
And so sometimes it's difficult
to say.
Who, who you, who, who you
address as I'll support it and
who you don't support. It's
hard.
It is hard.
Every one of us, if we had an
open checkbook and then, and we
could do whatever we would fix a
lot of things in the state.
But I think that's, that's,
that's what's going on here. I
think we had a lot of money, a
lot of people asking things and
Um, there's parties. I was
looking at the priorities
whether it was, you know,
representative Diegosis um bill
on, on helping those individuals
purchasing things, I think the
day after Thanksgiving or, you
know, and we can just go on here
and how we wanna help people.
But
It worries me that we, that,
that I heard the sky is falling,
no, it's not.
But the caution signs are up,
since we use analogies here. I'm
gonna use one.
There's a curve coming out,
yields.
And caution signs.
Concussion times for me are
Reductions in workforces.
Um
That's a big one.
And, you know, at the end of the
day, um, Madam Chair,
Um
Representative, anytime you
increase any sort of cost on the
on the industry.
Um
Indirectly, it's gonna create
inflation.
And you know, we can say, well,
it's this, it's that, any time
you increase cost than anything.
All we're doing is passing it
on.
And you may not see it directly,
but I can guarantee you it's
being passed on.
And when, when you're hearing
all these, all this.
uh uncertainty talk and, and,
and caution.
I think it's just the timing of
how this is being done.
The men that we're helping the,
the middle class. I, I'd love
that.
I just, I, I think what where we
struggled is
Gave away $3 billion in all
kinds of initiatives.
And, and you know, I heard one
of the representatives said, but
we left.
It was 120, please I don't I I
can't remember on the table and
and some other other money
recurring. I'm not in the
committee, so I don't know
exactly those figures.
The question I have is, where
did that go?
If you left it on the uh, you
know, you left that open.
That that amount of money
sitting there.
sent it over to the other side.
Get paso.
Can you answer that for me?
Um just chair representative.
uh, what happened? Get us so
like what happened to that money
that went across. Thank you for
that translation,
Madam Chair and Representative,
you know, I, I think it's, it's
really just a common practice
that when the house does its due
diligence on on our side, they
do leave in fact a cushion uh
for the Senate to do their own
work. So I, I think it's a
matter of just making sure that
we can work collaboratively, but
at the same time, it's at the
Senate's uh.
Uh, prerogative to to make sure
that they are doing as prudent
of a job as we've done in the
house on the budget as well, but
I, I, I would also be remiss,
Madam Chair, and representative
to state also that when we talk
about a reduction in workforce
that we should also keep in mind
that in just this past year,
there was an increase of 1% in
oil and gas uh employment. So
perhaps it's regulating itself
at this point in time to then
look at those factors as well.
Well, um, Madam Chair, uh,
representative 1% maybe correct
that it went up because of, you
know, the price of oil or
whatever, but it's going back
down now and um,
In all fairness, I mean this is
20%, so, I mean we still have a
negative, negative direction,
you know, um, and I didn't get
the, the number. Can, can you
please tell me what that number
was. I'm sure representative for
so please. So I'm not just.
Sure that it was about 120 in
recurring in 19 million in
non-recurring.
So
And Madam Chair and
Representative, still
nonetheless, uh, as the budget
went over and as was the case
that we voted on in the
legislative Finance Committee
that the reserves still sit at
this point for our state at 32%.
And I think that I, Madam Chair
Representative, I, I, I, I hear
that and I, you know, I'm glad
we have that, you know, that's
debatable how that comes up, but
it doesn't matter. I think what,
what worries me is we sent that
over with that with this
cushion.
is gone and I just wondered
where that cushion went. Um,
other than that, I just, I just,
uh,
It's, it's, it's a tough spot.
Especially when we're trying to
help people. I wish we could, we
should, we should, in my
opinion, if I could control all
the
I had the magic wand, I would
have definitely um done this
without raising taxes, um, in,
in a, in a time that we had the
most money, and I think it was
just the biggest problem that we
had, I'm sure, um.
Committee, all of us.
I it's just hard to say no to
sometimes to people and
sometimes we find, we I think we
find ourselves today, um, where
we went through all that and
then we needed a little bit more
and so it's, it, I struggled
with that, so with that, I don't
wanna believe, you know, keep
going on this side. I think
there's probably someone else
who wants to speak and, but I
appreciate.
Ah
That there was, there was one
thing and I lost my paper.
I think, you know, I was just
looking at all the permanent
plans that we've established and
that those looking at the FIR.
60 billion
Invested permanent uh various
permanent funds.
You got 11 billion in the early
childhood.
Trust alone.
We got 6.9 billion in unspent
capital outlay. It's a lot of
money.
Bless you.
Use that. She's always wanted to
do that, that, and I'll let you
do it so I can stop talking.
Yes, ma'am.
Thank you, Representative
like that guy.
This is a little smaller, um,
Representative Duncan.
Ranking member Duncan.
Thank you, madam chair.
This, uh, this bill reminds me,
um, Madam Chair and Mr. Chairman
of uh taking a blanket and
cutting off the top 12 inches
and saw it on the bottom and,
and uh saying the blanket is no
longer. It makes absolutely no
sense to me. When we have a
surplus that we have or when if
we wanted to be fiscally
responsible and making some
changes there. I would certainly
support this.
Um, there were a couple of
things I heard, Madam Chair and
Mr. Chairman, uh, you'd
indicated this was heard during
the interim.
Madam Chairwoman and
representative, um.
No, I didn't say that. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Um
You know, if we're going to
start taxing businesses that
make healthy profits, then we
ought to start taxing the trial
lawyers.
I got nothing out of the speaker
on that one.
Um
Madam Chair and Mr. Chairman,
I'd like to do a point of order
I'd, I'd like to do a case study
if I could briefly. Um, we know
people in this room that are
first year or first generation
citizens of this country.
That are very, very successful.
That have risen to ranks that
The speaker probably never in
his life thought he would raise
to.
in this country.
I don't think I've heard the
speaker say that his family was
born with a silver spoon in
their mouth.
Just the opposite.
Um, he worked extremely hard,
very successful.
And I might even say that he
might be the 2nd, 3rd, 4th most
powerful political figure we
have in the state. I don't know
for sure.
Um, hard times create strong men
and women and women.
Um
For every case study, Mr. Madam
Chair and Mr. Chairman, that you
can show me on what this EITC
does, I can show you a case
study that rebuts that.
I don't think there's anybody in
this room that doesn't want to
help people.
We do. We want to help people.
But the waste, the abuse, and
the fraud with this and the
disan um decentizing people not
to show up for work is rampant
with this, and you look at any
study across the board.
Mr. Chairman or Madam Chair, and
uh
Mr. Chairman.
The minority doesn't ask for
much and we don't get much.
I came and asked for a rural tax
credit for our healthcare
providers to be put in this
package, about $9 million asks.
In a $73 million.
when you and I talked.
That had been raised.
Probably not quite as much as 9
million, but very close to that
9 million.
were now giving out.
Me and Mr. Chairman, Nelson
Mandela said, if you want to
make peace with your enemy.
You have to work with your
enemy.
Then he becomes your partner.
Today I feel much more like the
enemy than I do a partner, and
I'm truly disappointed in that.
Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, I can remember
Duncan.
Representative
Madam Chair.
I make a do pass motion on House
Bill 14
excuse me.
Yes, I know how to do it.
um
There you go.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I move
and do not pass on House Bill 14
and a house and I do pass on
house taxation and revenue
Committee substitute for House
Bill 14.
seconds.
OK in a second.
We're on a do not pass of house,
um.
How do not pass on house
Bill 14, um, and I do pass on
house taxation and revenue
Committee substitute for House
Bill 14.
And we will take a roll.
Or do you have closing remarks?
OK.
Representative Chandler.
Yes. Representative Duncan. No.
Representative Gallegos, yes.
Representative Henry, no.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lindstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Montoya.
No.
Represented Paju. Yes.
Representative Silva, yes.
Representatives Terasas
Representative Galano.
Representative Linhe.
Yes, ma'am.
We have a 75.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, you have a due
pass on, uh, House Bill 14 can
be substitute.
And
Just an FYI, we still have work
to do. We have the capital
outlay bill that's going to be
coming up, but we will not be.
