Representative Garrett.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Herndon here.
Representative Herrera here.
Representative Little here.
Representative Luhan present.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Saana.
Representative Sariana.
Representative Silva, here.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
small.
Excellent. Thank you, members.
Uh thank you staff. OK, members,
we're now moving into the bill
portion of HAFC. Just a quick
note, uh, particularly for new
members, uh, there will be, we
will table many bills, not every
bill, but many bills, uh,
members that can be for a few
different reasons. One reason,
and we'll see that today is
because money is already in the
budget, and it's not, it's just
a, a money amount that's part of
a bill, and so remember.
When the money is already in the
budget, we want to, um, we'll
table that, uh, in other cases,
as you might expect, that their
money is not in the budget. And
uh unfortunately, if it's only
money, then we won't be able to
pass that bill through. There
may be some cases members, um,
and we'll work through those
that are maybe a little bit more
nuanced or what have you, but I
think broadly speaking as a
ranking member, uh, has, you
know, points out,
Um
The, the first and foremost,
this is about whether or not
bills have funding in the
budget. Um, so, uh, we'll work
through that and we're gonna go
to
uh Herrera and Beta for House
Bill 252 for many bills, um,
particularly when there's policy
like we're gonna see here, we're
gonna amend out a um an
appropriation that's included in
that bill, and we'll work
through that, uh, and work.
get amendments in place. In some
cases, which we may be doing
now, we'll do it by voice, but
it's pretty straightforward,
just taking all the money out of
the bill. So, uh, with that, and
feel free to ask any questions
as we go through with that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
members of the committee. It's
my pleasure to bring, uh, before
this committee, uh, House Bill
252 and uh as you know, this is
relating to uh children and what
we're trying to do is uh set up
a um a program through the
Department of Aging to help uh
people who are raising
grandchildren, uh, both
grandparents and kids kinships,
uh, raising grandchildren,
helped them, um.
navigate through um through the,
the programs we have in place at
the Federal, state and local
level. So the the Department of
Aging would hire a staff to help
different communities navigate
through and find out what is
available to them, you know,
when you have this problem
before you, you don't know what
you don't know, and so the
department, the aging department
would help people, uh, kind of
learn about what's available to
them. They could provide legal
service for
Um, for counseling on how they
would uh gain custody if that,
if they so desire to do that,
um, and they would and they
would have monthly meetings and
to kind of give them more
training on on the issues that
they're dealing with as uh as
busy grandparents and kin
raising these children and um
and they would also do home
visits, uh, once a month to
these homes again to see what
how people are doing and how
they're out and how they're.
Uh, progressing on their goals,
and then what we have done is um
I've been working for 3 years on
this and I couldn't figure out
how to get around the anti-
donation clause, frankly, and
then I realized, well, we could
ask foundations and so I've been
working with about 5
foundations, and they would do
the um what we are thinking
about now as a monthly stipend
of $500 a month per family over
a three-year period. So that's
pretty much how it will work,
and um.
I would like to introduce my
co-sponsor, representative um
Abata to add her comments.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you committee for having us here
today. I'm very proud and
honored to be presenting this
bill alongside Representative
Herrera. I quickly want to tell
you that I've been in the court
system 3 ways. First, as a child
with my grandmother seeking
guardianship of me. Second, as a
court clerk helping families
with family cases, and third, as
a practitioner, helping families
guide through the process, and
that's why I became a legal
practitioner.
One of the things I specifically
love about this bill is that
it's gonna help parents now, or
excuse me, grandparents navigate
through the court system to gain
guardianship of their children.
You see statistically that
grandchildren do better when
they're with their family.
Children do better when they're
with kin versus in the foster
system, and that's exactly what
this bill is going to help do,
and I appreciate your support. I
look forward to having your vote
for this. Thank you. Great.
Thank you very much,
Representative Verra. Uh, thank
you very much, Representative
Beta. OK, um,
We'll go to committee for
questions, first question
though, this is this in the
budget. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and I'd like to thank this
committee for putting it in the
budget. Yes, we have 4 million
allocated for this program.
Great, OK, it's in the budget.
Uh, questions. Representative
Lujan and then represent
Vincent.
Mr. Chair, uh, I just wanted
more of a comment. I I just
really love this bill and and
what it does, it's been an issue
for as long as I can remember
and um our family here in um.
In New Mexico, but growing up in
northern New Mexico and here in
Santa Fe, um, I just wanna say
thank you for bringing this
forward and forward and for all
the work that you've done, uh,
for our grandparents who are not
just grandparents, but great
grandparents that we're seeing
now raising their great
grandchildren and um really
bringing this, this issue to the
forefront. I just want to
commend you and and your work
representative of Ata as well,
um.
Before even coming here, all
your work that you've done on
this represent always continuing
to look out for, for our
families first. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much.
Uh, next we have represent
Vincent and represent Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, reps for being here. I just
have one question, how will the
bill define and identify
eligible kinship.
Or the kiddos.
Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative Vinson.
Actually, actually there are
I mean, I mean, grandparents
said the eligibility is easy.
There's also uh kinship and that
eligibility is pretty well
defined too. There's also
something called fictive
kinship, and what that means is,
well, you know, the worst, the
worst day of the kid's life is
when you put it, take him out of
a home and put them in foster
care, OK? It really is a
horrendous thing for them, um,
they might have a close family
or friend that they really love
that that sees this.
family is in trouble and would
like to take those kids. So
that's what you call a thick
dive kinship, that's kind of how
that definition works. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. So, um, on the
The kinship versus the fictive
kin, do you get a choice?
Whatever the kiddo wants if they
want to go to fictive, could
they do that over?
Uh, kinship, Mr. Chair.
Well,
there are a lot of steps to
this, so, so let me just and
it's very confusing too. Let,
let me just explain. If you have
a baby born with fentanyl, OK?
And they're in the hospital and
a family member goes and gets
that baby from the hospital
says, I'll take care of this
baby, and a lot of people do
that. They just step forward and
they say we're gonna take this
child, and they take them home
with them.
Well, they've never really,
they're in a home where they're
being taken care of, so they're
really not abused. These are the
families that need help because
they don't qualify for for our
kinship rules and, and that's
based on a federal formula. It's
kind of a catch 22. If you have
a fentanyl baby.
And
You would leave it there and
CYFD would take ownership of
that and then as a family you
would step forward and say we're
willing to take this child and
see whyFD had custody and then
turns it over to you, then
you're eligible for foster care
payments at whatever they are
650 a month right now. But if
you go and get that baby before
and you take him home, then
you're not eligible because
they're not in an abused
situation, and our foster care
system pays the federal amount
is.
3/4 of that of that monthly
allowance. So that's why these
kinship parents are kind of
they're kind of left catch 22. I
mean, I, I think next week or or
after the session's over, I'm
gonna send a letter out to every
physician and, and pediatrician
in the state and saying, look,
if you have a child that you
know is going to, you, you need
to alert parents because if they
would let CYFD take custody and
then they would take custody,
then they would get
help right now none of these
parents get help, and, and
that's the gap that we're trying
to fill here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the answers.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Garrett and
Representative Brown. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representatives on the money
that's already in the budget. Is
that amount of 4 million.
Spread out over 3 years.
Uh, yes, it is. It's a, uh, we
typically have, we'll have 5
foundations at a million a year
over 3 years, and that will be
their kind of, uh, that will be
the foundation match.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Brown and represent Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Representative Herrera and uh
Representative Beta. Um, so,
several counties were chosen for
this pilot. Um, we're looking at
Rio or Reba, Mr. Chairman.
Santa Fe Taos, McKinley, and
Donna Anna. Is there a reason
those 5 were chosen, do they
have an outsized problem
perhaps.
in this area, Mr. Chair
representative Mr. Chair and
Representative Brown. I actually
think we have this problem all
over the state. I think every
county could use this.
I just kind of ran out of time
and um I had, I had a foundation
sponsors in those areas, and it
was time to come to the
legislature, so I just went with
what I had. I, I.
I have had Republican members of
the House come up to me and say,
well, I'd like this in such and
such county, and I said, if you
help me find a thunder, I, I
think we could do a little bit
more, but, you know, this is a
start. It, it's, we haven't done
this before, so we will have the
evaluation that goes on because
it's part of the grow money and
it, it will be a proof of
concept, uh, that we're, uh,
doing right here to see that it
works or what problems we have.
I think this is a particularly
good fit for foundation.
It's kind of what they like to
do is is do a preliminary, uh, a
preliminary um scale and see if
it really works, if it's
effective, and then they come to
the legislature and see if we
can implement it more broadly.
Mr. Chairman, I have one more
question for the
representatives. So you've
chosen the aging and long-term
services department and to be
the house for this um pilot
project.
I'm trying to remember if AOC is
in charge of guardianship
generally does uh.
represents know on that uh who
who does most of this type of
work already. I, I don't know
that for sure. We chose aging
because people don't trust CYFD.
Grandparents don't want to go to
CYFD. We all know this
situations it's in and so we
wanted a place where
grandparents felt safe, and, you
know, they go to the senior
centers, they have lunches
there, they, they have a
community there and we part of
this part of this program is
also to build a community so
that grandparents raising
Kids can help each other out,
you know, they need to know
they're not alone, that we can
build a community that can help
each other out doing respite
care or whatever, um.
As far as the other question, do
you know the answer to that
Representative Chairman
Representative Brown, um, if I
understand you correctly, did
you ask why it wasn't with AOC?
Uh, Mr. Chairman,
representative, I, I'm, it's
you've been several years since
we talked about a bill. I just
sent something told me it was an
AOC, but that probably isn't
right, but there was something
where we, we did a big
guardianship um statutory
overhaul, and I'm just trying to
remember it, it's not that
important, but just curiosity
really.
Representative, thank you. OK,
yes, and so this program would
help assist with the legal
services so that they can then
move to the courts to file their
guardianship, but that's the
extent of it. Thank you. Thank
you. And um since we had one
more little thing, um, yeah,
and, and that is Mr. Chairman.
Representatives, um, I, I visit
senior centers in my district,
actually qualify.
from a few years ago. Um, I
noticed they have a lot of
pamphlets that are very
educational, and this is the
kind of thing once this gets
started, I think it'd be
wonderful to make sure they have
these on hand.
Thank you. Uh, uh, thank you,
uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, yeah, outreach
is gonna be a huge part of this
when we begin.
Thank you, Representative Brown.
Next we'll go to Representative
Pettigrew, then some Duncan.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Representatives for
bringing this.
Um
Chairman and Representative, I
went through the math, 4.5
million over
3 years is 1.5 million.
Divide that by 50.
50, uh
Potential sciences because your
goal is to have 50 in each
county. Right. And
Um, 500 a month, that's 300, so.
You work it one way, you get.
1.5 divided by 5 counties is
300,000 per county work it with
the math 50 times 500 is
300,000, so.
We're at the same boat.
Um
I was wondering how you figured
out how how to implement this if
you're gonna chairman and
representative if you're gonna
have somebody visit all 50
people.
50 kinships.
Once a month.
And I think I heard
representative that you have um
foundation matches in 5 counties
and a million dollars apiece.
Is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, yes.
OK.
All right, um,
With that, you're debating on
how you do your hiring bands and
at what pay scale and
The total costs, I mean,
according to the FIR there's a
couple of different ways for you
guys to do this.
I assume that's going to be
determined by.
Rule making that would come and
effect from the spill. Mr. Chair
and Representative, we, we were,
I work very closely with the uh
secretary of Aging, Emily
Kulenbach and um we worked this
budget over and over and over,
and we feel confident that this
will work, and we, we left it up
to the agency uh to decide, uh,
you know, whether you're gonna
have a legal contract or a legal
professional, so that will be up
to the agency to do.
All right, Chairman, thank you,
Representative.
Thank you very much,
Representative Pettigrew,
Representative Duncan. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Just, just a
quick question and it's probably
not the right.
Commit to be asking the question
from, but is there a way to take
CYFD out of this entirely before
they even that child even gets
to them and gets put into there
before. Is there a way that we
can intercept and and have this
done, and then.
Um
Do that.
Um,
Mr. Chair and Representative
Duncan, right, right now, CYFDA
isn't involved in in this
program. So they're totally out
of the picture right now. It all
goes through the Department of
Aging.
OK, thank you. And, and I'm
probably not asking the question
right. So
Let me see if I can tell you
that.
Do you mean cliff notes version
here of what I think I
understand. So, uh, we got a
child here that parents don't
want grandparents that they'll
step in right now if they step
in and take the child, then,
then, um, they, they get
nothing. But if the child is
turned over to CYFD, then they
can get paid. So my question is,
before they get to CYFD, is
there a way that we can just
Have this.
Work out before then. That's
what I'm asking. Mr. Chair
Representative Duncan.
That's the next bill I'm working
on.
Thank you, Mr. That's the only
question I had.
Great. Thank you very much
Representative Duncan.
OK. Uh, I don't see,
oh
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Representative Duncan. I just
want to assure you too that when
families do step in, it's almost
immediate that they get to take
the children, and I know this
just because I'm also a kinship
caregiver to my two small
nephews before they could even
be.
Into the system formally
physically, I was able to take
them. Thank you.
Great. Excellent. OK, thank you,
great questions. Thank you,
Representative Herrera. Thank
you, Representative Beta. Uh, I
don't see any other questions.
We'll go to ranking member chat.
Mr. Chairman, I move on page
one, line 14, and we strike
making an appropriation on page
5.
lines 2 through 8.
And remember the succeeding
section of yeah, accordingly,
OK, it's been moved by ranking
member Chatfield, saying by uh
Representative or vice chair
Dixon to uh strike making an
appropriation on page 1 line 14,
and strike the uh line 2 through
8 on page 5 and renumber
accordingly. Is there any
opposition to that motion?
Being no that amendments
adopted.
Well now
Back to ranking member Chatfield
for a motion on the amended
bill.
Mr.
Mr. Chairman, let me, I make a
motion that for do pass.
On house Bill.
252 as amended.
OK, uh, OK it's been moved by
ranking member Chatfield, uh,
seconded by Representative
Little Du pass on House Bill 252
as amended. Any opposition to
that motion?
OK. Please show representative
Pettigrew in opposition.
Oh.
Yeah
Noted.
And let me ask, did you wish to
vote in opposition? OK, great.
OK.
Excellent. Thank you both very
much, uh thank you, appreciate
it very much. Thank you.
Invite up Representative Kates.
And Miss Russell.
And Secretary Calmas, thank you
for being.
you know
No
Uh, members, uh, for, for bills
is the vice chair reminded me,
we do uh public comment, uh,
often on the bill itself. Uh, my
apologies for missing that in,
on our first bill, but from now
on, we'll ask for a brief public
comment on legislation as it
comes up.
Instead of at the end of the
hearing like we've done for
agency budgets. OK, with that
Representative Kates.
Uh thank you, chair, and thank
you very much, members. This is
HB 41.
Is the New Mexico Finance
Authority's public project
revolving fund, we, we presented
every year as an appropriations
bill. I'm carrying this
legislation on behalf of New
Mexico Finance Authority's
legislative Oversight Committee,
which voted unanimously to
endorse this bill. The bill
appropriates a total of 13.25
million for the PPRF in 3 ident
identified funds. I like to turn
this over to my.
subject expert, Nikita Russell,
who introduced herself and be
able to answer you the technical
questions. Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, my
name is Marquita Russell. I'm uh
the CEO of the New Mexico
Finance Authority and does the
uh sponsor mentioned this bill
is an appropriation bill, but
the appropriation comes from the
public project revolving fund,
which sits at the New Mexico
Finance Authority and does not
impact your budget. The funding
13.25% would be moved over to
three identified funds, 2 of
them at the New Mexico Finance
Authority and one of the
Department of Cultural Affairs.
Uh, we primarily use them for
infrastructure, uh, to service
capitalization grant state
matches and things like that.
Happy to answer any questions.
Great thank you, Representative
Kate. Thank you, Ms. Russell.
Any questions? OK. Uh, now, uh,
ranking member moved to DuP
pass, same by Representative
Sanchez, is there any opposition
to that motion?
none, you have a do pass.
Thank you. Thank you.
OK.
Uh, members, uh, a quick note,
apologies, uh, House Bill 113 is
amendment is gonna be rolled.
Uh, we will be bringing that
back up.
And thanks to the sponsor for
flagging that earlier. Um, we
didn't get it, uh, there. OK,
um, Representative Hernandez,
can we ask you to present, um,
and then Representative Lohan as
well on House Bill 75.
Excellent. Representatives, go
ahead, please.
Whenever you're ready.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Joseph Hernandez and I'm
here with my, uh, uh,
co-sponsor, um, some Terra
Lujan, and we do have our expert
witness, uh, who's also here
and, and we'll let her introduce
herself if if we need her, um,
for, for this again in front of
you is a House Bill 75 funding
for all tribal and county health
councils.
Um, uh, Mr. Chairman, as you
know, uh, you know, this is, uh,
a, a statewide initiative. It
impacts all of our communities
and, um, uh, uh, um, before
session, I actually got reached
out by my, uh, county uh health
council, and I learned a lot
more about how connected they
are into the community. Well, I
also did understand was or
didn't know until till I learned
more about the health.
is, is just the, the, um, just
the amount of, of, of um a
service that's, that's being
provided, especially for our
rural communities who lack, um,
the, uh, the, the attention, and
so, uh, right now we are, uh,
and again, initially requested,
had requested 10 million, but we
gone through this, this process,
and I, I believe we have 3
million.
in, in the budget for this, um,
and, uh, I just wanna um remind
the body and, and also the
public sir that uh there's uh I
could, I believe it's 3
additional tribal um health
councils that wanna get that
want to participate in this, uh,
and, uh, we, we're hoping that
future funding can help allow
that to to take place for uh
Zuni, uh, Zia Pueblo, and
hockey, so I just, I just wanna
make sure that
And then I'll turn it over to my
co-sponsor. Excellent, thank
you. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. um, thank you,
representative for that, um, we
worked hard last year as well to
to bring in funding into our our
our health councils and a lot of
that work was uh weed was on
represented Allison, who is who
now representative Hernandez is
um taking taken over his
endeavors on this as well. We
find that our house, uh.
Councils are
Our statutorily attached to the
Department of Health and
We have found that through that
previous 3 million, uh, that we
funded last year, a lot of the
work that they've been able to
do and how this is really
supporting them. So moving this
year into the next phase of
another $3 million we hope to
see that return on the value as
well, as well as as other things
that we're doing with the state,
Mr. Chair, um, we have a huge
opportunity now when we're
regionalizing.
Or further regionalizing, I
always say our health priorities
through the bills that we just
passed last week with SB.
SP 3, Mr. Chair and the like, so
that we can then um look to see
how the health councils can be
further, um,
utilized and in helping the roll
out of those sorts, those um
those plants, chair, that's
something I'd like to see, um,
and with that.
Well, we would stand, I would
have our expert witness
introduce herself and then stand
for questions. Excellent, thank
you. Thank you, Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
committee, Valeria Arcon here,
executive director at the New
Mexico Alliance of Health
Councils representing all 33
counties and currently 10 tribal
health councils. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much. um,
I, I will get this here. I
apologize for missing on the
previous two bills. Is there
anybody who wishes to speak in
opposition or support in the
public now.
OK.
Please, Mr. Tina.
You know,
and I represent the public of
and uh we are very much in
support of the legislation
before you.
Um
Tribal Health councils play a
critical role in in.
healthcare.
And I'm hoping they'll play a
significant role.
SB 2 and SB3 become law.
Um
You
Use this in my prior life. Um.
I'm hoping that once SB 2 and
SB3 calling for reforms, um, and
regional planning that the
healthcare uh councils then
become actively participant
actively participate in the in
the planning, as well as the
funding that's in Senate Bill 2,
when it comes to healthcare
delivery behavioral healthcare
delivery. I'm sorry, Mr.
Chairman, but, uh, for those
reasons we stand in full
support. Thank you. Great. Thank
you very much.
OK, we have a number of folks
online, uh, we're gonna limit it
to 45 seconds and try to get
through everybody. And um
We'll start with Marlene Lida.
Marlene.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Marlena Lira and I'm a substance
use researcher. I'm here today
to express my strong support for
House Bill 75, which would fund
health councils across our
state.
These health councils are vital
in addressing public health
challenges, including the
pervasive issue of addiction.
They facilitate essential
services, enhance community
outreach, and promote, promote
health equity. By funding these
health councils, we empower
local communities to implement
effective culturally sensitive
interventions. It is said that
the opposite of addiction is
connection, and that is
precisely what the health
councils provide. In my work,
I've seen firsthand the
transformative
impact of well-supported
community health initiatives,
House Bill 75 represents a
significant step toward a
healthier New Mexico, and I urge
you all to support this critical
legislation. Thank you so much.
Thank you very much. OK, uh,
next, uh, and I'm not, uh, uh.
Seppora Nefesh.
Yes, Mr. Chair, my name is
Tippora Nefesh, and I'm the
executive of executive director
of New Mexico thrives, and we
stand in strong support of HB
75, the Health councils provide
an essential component of our
public health uh landscape.
And we ask your support. Thank
you very much.
Thank you very much.
OK, next we're gonna go to Ali
on Anderson.
Thank you. Good evening, chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Allie Anderson, and I
work at the Burnleyo Health
Council, also known as the
Health Equity Council, our 33
county and 10 health councils
are the backbone of community
health in New Mexico. We conduct
health assessments, develop
improvement plans, and implement
vital programs like mine.
My work focuses on substance
misuse prevention, specifically
addressing prescription opioid
use and Bernalillo County in
Albuquerque. Um, this is federal
funding that I'm receiving.
House Bill 75 is critical.
Health councils have been
severely underfunded since 2010,
well before I joined the
workforce. Um, so that just
shows to how long standing of an
issue this has been.
Um, many health councils,
including mine, rely on unstable
federal funding, with rising
costs and no means to adjust
salaries, we are at risk of
losing dedicated staff who are
essential to improving health
outcomes. We are passionate
about this work, but passion
alone does not sustain us
funding does conclude your
thought.
Thank you. Um, so I am urging
you all to vote in support of
House Bill 75. Thank you so
much. Great. Thank you very
much.
OK. Next, we're gonna go, uh,
if, uh, whoever's on iPhone too,
if you could please say your
name. Oh yes, um, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. I'm
Meredith Main, and I'm speaking
on behalf of the American
Association of University Women
and I'm sorry my name did not
show up, um, but we strongly
support these councils, uh, the
tribal and the local healthcare
councils, they've been proven.
My only concern is that $3
million is not really that
adequate. I know it's in the
budget and we're happy for that,
but I urge you in future budget
negotiations to add more to this
fund. So I urge you to support
HB 75 and thank you all for
making this work in New Mexico.
Great, thank you very much. OK,
now we're gonna go to Anna, uh
Horner.
Yes, thank you. I'm calling in
from Bernalillo County, and I
have a long history of working
in public and community health
at the local level. What our
health councils provide across
the state in terms of public
health infrastructure is an
entity in each of our counties
and tribes whose sole job is to
bring together other people
working toward public health to
collaboratively assess the
problems and strategize on how
to address.
together. We do not have another
public health infrastructure
like our health councils in our
state. It's incredibly unique
and something that we need to
take advantage of in order to
address the increasing needs
across the state. Additionally,
our health councils employ
community-based.
The health councils are an
opportunity to build capacity of
community based, uh, people
statewide. Thank you very much.
Please support this bill.
OK, we're gonna conclude with
Luis Vera.
Louis.
Hello.
Thank you so much. Um, my name
is Louis Vera. I represent
The
Oh, I'm calling to urge support.
Uh
It
Um, health comes are essential
for.
And for providing vital services
to our community in New Mexico.
And I am pleased, um, asking to
all health councils soon.
it's great.
OK. Uh, apologies for the tough
connection, but thank you as
Wuhan noted, uh, echoing the
support and uh want to thank you
for that. Also, I wanna give a
quick shout out to former
Representative Anthony Allison,
we see him on the Zoom. He's,
he's done as representative
Mohan also noted really
tremendous work.
OK, uh, thanks for the, we got
through the public comment, um,
and remember, as we noted this,
uh, we'll go for brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
Um, thank you for this bill, um,
as I think you all know I do
support the health councils. I
try to go to the meetings when I
can locally, but I do have a
question, Mr. Chair, about the
um use of the appropriation. I'm
looking at a pointy version of
the bill.
And it says that the original
request was for $43 million and
um
It says uh for Department of
Health for expenditure in fiscal
year 26 for the following
purposes, then it gives us an A
through J, identifying with
those purposes.
could be or the money may be
spent, but then it says on page
2 at line 23.
Uh, and this is a subpart 2 $1
million for the Department of
Health to contract with a
non-profit organization to
provide training.
Tech technical assistance and
other supports. So my question
is, Mr. Chair, and, and panel.
If you're only getting 3
million. Are you really?
Going to spend a million here on
kind of like an advisory uh.
group or organization, Mr.
Chair, that's the question. So
thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, the one
On the original $43 million ask.
It was the ideal funding for
resourcing all tribal health
councils, 50 chapter houses in
Navajo Nation, uh, our Apache
nation, um, and also the 9
remaining pueblos with $1
million included for a 501c3 to
continue to provide technical
assistance to all county and
tribal health councils as the
organization has been for 5
years now. Professional
development, networking
opportunities.
Um, we, they also carry out a
statewide resource directory for
health councils and in support
of various partners like kinship
as well, actually. Um, that is
the ideal, um, and in support of
in, you know, new tribal health
councils as Representative
Hernandez noted Pohuaque pueblo,
Zuni pueblo, Pueblo, and many
others, right? want to establish
a health council. However, at
80K, it doesn't, it's not a
feasible uh
funding level to establish that
successfully. Does that answer
your question? Yes, thank you
that, uh, Mr. Chair, that does
answer, um, and I just point out
that this isn't just meant to
help tribal held councils.
All counties. I just wanna make
sure we, we remember that, that
we
Make sure they get the support
they need to. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Excellent. Thank you very
much, Representative Brown.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you representatives and experts,
so I'm gonna segue off of what
uh Representative Brown just
said, so it's for, it's for
tribal and counties. What do you
do? How do you, how do you make
sure that the criteria is met to
make sure that that's
distributed.
To everybody. Thank you for the
question, and yes, it is in all
all 33 counties, but on that
last part of your question, I'll
have a letter answer. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, Representative, um,
much like last year when you all
made the $3 million feasible for
43 health councils for the first
time in 13 years, so thank you
so much again. Um, that
appropriation, uh, goes directly
to the Department of Health. The
Department of Health, um,
curates the school.
of work, the specific
deliverables, the health
councils are going to work in
concert with the health
promotion offices, the public
health offices and their
specific teams, right? Um, for
this current scope of work, the
two main deliverables have been
focused on behavioral health for
obvious reasons that we can all
agree on, as well as increasing
access to primary care. We have
a lot of data just from this 1st
and 2nd quarter to report back
to you. So health councils work
directly with health promotion
managers to
donate access to services, to
report to DOH on their
deliverables. And that is the
way that then they get paid for
their work once they've
delivered on their contract.
Does does that answer your
question, ma'am. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, and are there, are there
Regs that need more money than
other ones, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair, um, yes. OK. Just,
if you, do you want more detail?
No, no, that's good. And I got
one more question. I like that.
That was good. And I know you
like it, chair, um, so how will
the initiatives funded by HB 75
aligned with or complement
current public health programs
at the state and local levels.
Great question, uh, they just
coordinate so well and do so
much, so much of this work, but
I'm gonna ask our expert to
emphasize what they do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative, we could spend a
whole week here walking you
through all the great work the
health councils lead both in
public health education, uh,
prevention intervention efforts,
coordination of access to
critical services, so they work
very closely with our state
agencies like aging and
long-term Services, for example,
uh, uh, obviously the Department
of Health, um, and they drive on
based on the um community health
assessment process that DOH
leads the critic.
to that process, convening
community members, so the
community gets to inform our
state agencies. Here's what's
most pressing for us. And what
we know to be true across our
counties and tribal communities,
it is very different. So think
of health councils as the full
representation of your local
constituents saying this is most
pressing, who do we get to work
with to address our local needs.
They know where the needs are,
they know intimately what those
challenges and barriers are.
They know how to get there. If
we think about our community
members in rural.
New Mexico on an average of 150
miles, right, need to be driven
to the nearest, fill in the
blank. Health councils are the
ones that are coordinating on
food drives, on food deliveries,
on vaccination, um, you know,
coordination of those services
for children on aging and
New Mexico on an average of 150
miles, right, need to be driven
to the nearest, fill in the
blank. Health councils are the
ones that are coordinating on
food drives, on food deliveries,
on vaccination, um, you know,
coordination of those services
for children on aging, uh, and
long term services care on
prenatal care, um, on access to
mobile clinics with DOH and
Presbyterian and Blue Cross and
Blue Shield, they are the
connective tissue of public
health in
service of all of our
communities. And if we think
about 55% of our community
members comprise, excuse me, of
Medicaid and Medicare
recipients, they're gonna need
us to resource them to be of
greater service to our
population when they're going to
need us the most as we're
navigating this landscape.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that. That was, that was
very informative for sure. And I
don't mean that in a bad way. I
mean that in a very good way. I
need to know that cause I, I
just feel, Mr. Chair, sometimes,
our community does not know
about health councils. I'm not
saying that they're in the dark
completely, but we don't
cheerlead our health councils
long enough. Ma'am chair
representative, it's because the
health councils are the the ones
behind the scenes that like, I
love the analogy of connected
connective tissue.
We don't think of our connective
tissue of doing all the work and
the communication for all of our
organs and every part of our
bodies uh getting the nutrients
and everything they need.
That's, that's.
That's the analogy of what the
health health chemicals do. And
that would be your integumentary
system. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much Vincent. OK,
we're gonna go next to
Representative Petigroup.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for the presentation. Um,
chairman, as I understand it,
The county and tribal health
councils already exists
statewide.
Would that be correct?
Mr. Chair, representing, yes,
they are statewide, every county
has has them,
It's chairman and presenters.
Is there anything defined
Getting rid of the money piece
of this. Is there anything
defined in pages 12, or 3.
Is it separate from
The goal and the task given the
health count, the, the, the uh
county and tribal health
councils.
Mr. Chair, uh can you
Can you clarify your your
question. I'm not quite
understand
from
Page one.
Um
Starting line 19.
through
Page 3 ending on line 1. Is
there anything inside those
words that it's different than
what empowered.
The county and tribal Health
councils to begin with.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, the language,
if, if I remember it correctly,
it's based on the role and
function that's stipulated in HB
137, which is the state mandate
that dictate dictates the role
function and activities of
health councils in concert with
the Department of Health and
many other key partners in
service of community statewide.
Does that help answer? It does
help, chairman, and, and thank
you very much for that answer.
So, Chairman, I, I guess my
point.
With some questions?
3 million's in the budget.
What's the purpose of the bill
now?
I think so and all um
representative Pettigrew and
members, I think this is a good,
so we afford members if they
want to have the bill heard that
that opportunity, and this is an
important conversation, uh,
because this is just a straight
appropriation, we will ask for a
tabling motion, uh, but, and so
the point is, I think to uh
ensure for those members who
want to have bills heard and to
go deeper into issues,
particularly this is one where,
so that's.
life.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you
very much for your time. Thank
you very much. Thank you.
Representative Pettigrew. Next
we're gonna go to Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm trying to figure out the why
of this bill. I've been talking
to my
Um, my county and uh.
And they've asked me the same
thing, why?
My, my apologies, Mr. Chairman.
Um, so.
Mr. Cha,
Representative Duncan.
Um, one unique aspect where I, I
found out about our our San Juan
County Health Council is that
they have a
A, um
Health fair each year.
At the uh at the uh county Miggy
Park and, uh, it's through the
health councils that they're
able to bring our community
together to help advance, uh,
healthier living, uh, uh, you
know, for, for, for, for
everybody, um, that's just one
aspect, you know, they're out in
the county, you know, do an
assessments there, you know,
going to to the schools they're
they're meeting.
Meeting our, our, our
constituents where they're at,
and they're, uh, 11, other
conversation I had with our
county health council was the
initiative for a mobile unit,
which I felt, you know, we rural
communities, you know, need that
attention we're we're going to
them instead of them coming to
us. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that representative. So, how
are they funded right now?
Mr. uh, Mr. Chair representative
they funded through the
Department of Health, um, it is,
it was a s a statue that was in
what year?
Um, 1999, 19,990. So we have not
completely funded them
throughout the years, as we
mentioned before last year was a
big uh step forward and we gave
them $3 million and we saw
instantly a return, um, on that
uh that appropriation I myself
can say I can't keep up with the
amount of uh meetings and um.
Issues that they're covering
across even um.
My, my district, which is Santa
Fe, obviously, but in northern
New Mexico, in our rural
communities who I stay in touch
with, uh, every year, a year
round, they keep us informed,
they keep me informed. I
understand what I know when
they're having their meetings
and I'm always invited and I'm
always, um, just amazed at the
progress that they're making
with the funding that we finally
gave them, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you for that
answer, Representative. So,
Going back to the clinic, Sonora
County.
Is there anything that you
couldn't get from those two
clinics without funding more
money. DOH funds them.
Funds the health clinics. I'm
just trying to wrap my mind
around, um, what I'm missing
here. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, uh, Representative, so
some of the things that they do,
it's through the advocacy, um,
networking that they do. I mean,
they work on.
Uh, distributing information and
the product of of Narcan, um,
through our especially in our
rural areas, so they're doing
suicide prevention and
trainings. They're doing crisis,
uh, 988 crisis line campaigns
and information pieces so that
people in our communities know
that these services exist
because if you talk amongst your
your community members and those
that are working in in
behavioral health or other
healthcare, um, initiatives, the
communication line of, of our
public know.
where to go, what what services
are available is very
disorganized, if you, if you
will, especially in our rural
areas, so having this
information and bringing the
communities together really is
the support system and why we're
saying it's the connective
tissue. It's the information
connected um highway if you will
to all this information, all
these things that we bring to
our communities.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that. So how many other
places can I find that
information out?
You can, um, thank you, Mr.
Chair Representative, you can
find information on all county,
33 counties and currently 10
tribal health councils at the um
uh association website of NM
Health councils.org. I'm happy
to provide that information for
you. Thank you for that, Mr. I
think I asked the wrong, ask it
the wrong way. So you're saying
then that you're the only one
that distributes the information
out to the communities that you
can only find there. So that's
my question. How many of the
places can we find this
information?
That's what I'm trying to figure
out.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Of course,
the Department of Health are um
um.
Another, uh, state agencies have
information pieces and get as
much information as they
possibly can, but it's really,
as I mentioned before, it's
really hard, especially in our
in our local um or rural areas,
I'm fortunate because I live
here in Santa Fe. I represent
here. I know that I can, you
know, extend uh a call and have
information or something right
in front of me really quickly,
but it's in our rural areas and
that are really in most need and
really making those connections
and then in our tribal
community.
as well, making sure that
everybody is talking in on the
same page and that we are
distributing and getting the
right information, training and
information and safety, um,
conferences that they have as
well, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Duncan, how I found out about
our health council was through a
community event, you know, on
Main Street. They had a booth
set up and I started asking, you
know,
questions like, how come I don't
see you everywhere else, but one
thing, uh, Mr. Chairman is
funding. These help councils
need more funding for uh, thank
you.
Thank you for that,
Representative. uh, thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you, Representative
Duncan. We're gonna go to
Representative Garrett, then
ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you very much. I just,
um,
Our counties range from 700
people to 700,000 people. Our
pueblos and tribes range from
300 people to 6000 people or
chapter houses are buried in
size. So I guess what I'd like
to see for the sake of future
funding, I think we need deeper
dive into what's being done.
Um, in order to really support
further funding, uh, that's
just, I just wanna put that on
our agenda for the um
Interim because on one hand it's
a vital service, but what it
looks like in one county with
few people, but a huge space and
some place that's very
populated, it's very different,
and there's other bodies that do
some of these functions. So I
just feel like to really justify
funding, we need a more
comprehensive overview.entative,
I can't thank you enough. I
think this should be a, a, a, a
deeper dive for us during the
interim just so.
we can get to to exactly what
this means. And as I mentioned
in my opening statements, as we
have completely turned around
what we're going to be doing
with our behavioral health.
Systems in our state. We need a
functionality that understands
how things are already
regionalized in in inter
connected, and I truly believe
that our health councils can
provide that service because we
don't want to recreate a wheel
when we have services and
providers that are already in
place through the connectivity
of what this with the health
councils does, so I appreciate
that and I I say 100%, I second
that, Mr. Chair.
Excellent. Thank you. Uh,
ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, I've been familiar
with the Health Council for
many, many years, and I will say
if you live in Albuquerque, you
might not need them quite as
much as if you live in Mascaro.
Uh, some of the things that they
do is they have health fairs,
and they check people for high
blood pressure. They check
people for diabetes. They check
people.
For all the things that a person
that lives in Albuquerque gets
checked for anyway, but if you
live in a very
Rural remote area, you might not
get checked for that. And they
do that on a very minimal
budget. I don't know what your
budget, recurring budget is
from, from the
The Department of Health, you
have you, it's almost nothing.
I, I agree. One year, I was able
to give them just a little bit
of my discretionary funding to
help the local health councils
because I know they're in our
schools, they're at the health
fairs. Uh, they have health
fairs. Uh, they do a number of
services to both our young
people and our elderly, like I
say, checking for blood pressure
checks, diabetes checks, uh,
things that we don't just have
access to.
We,
we don't have a doctor in our
county, uh, we have
Uh, very little health care, so
I appreciate the job that you
do, and I think you guys do a
good job. Uh, I think it's money
well spent. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much, Ranking
Member Chatfield. OK, I don't
see any other questions, uh,
representatives, thank you very
much for bringing this. But, uh,
Ms. Alarcon, thank you, and I
think, uh, we've heard really
good sentiment in um the ranking
members were words are very well
taken. Other questions, as we
sort of, we, it's easy to
imagine that um there's
challenges sort of separating
and differentiating funding
within.
sort of the, the, the health
councils that are out there, I
think seeing with the committee
that there's a strong interest,
particularly in uh rural areas,
no matter where they are in the
state, uh, in some of the really
so we'll look at, look at that
and encourage, you know, the,
um, just also say, of course,
you know, that this committee is
proud. This is the 2nd year in a
row, step forward and dedicated
funding, um, continuing to sort
of differentiate.
show and maybe have different
levels of support for different
health councils depending upon
some of the challenges that they
may face and the needs that they
serve, um,
uh,
very good points and questions
OK, uh, we'll go to, uh, vice
chair for
Emotion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I moved to table.
OK, uh, there's a motion by Vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by uh
ranking member Chatfield. Is
there any opposition to that
motion, seeing none, it's. Thank
you all very much.
OK, uh, members, that concludes
our business for today. Thank
you for a really, uh, uh, great,
um, continue great work. We'll
see everybody back and keep
