Yeah.
Here.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay, We do have a quorum. Madam
Secretary. It's great to see you
were gonna go. Uh, to our
analysts will ask Miss Hyla,
then Mr Miller and Madam
Secretary When we get to you
please feel free to introduce
member Get off.
Good afternoon, Mr Tricking,
hear me?
No.
Hello.
Is that why, marking now?
Neither of them just outside
this one's dead? Oh, it is. It's
working.
Okay. Thank you. Um, Hi, Mr
Chair. Members of the committee.
I'm Emily Hyla, the LFC analysts
for the secretary of State's
with me is the Secretary of
State Maggie Toulouse, Oliver as
well as Simon Miller, the
executive analyst for secretary
of State.
And I just wanted to point you
to Volume two for secretary of
State that is on page 139.
And to start on page.
Um, I guess that's number three
with the overall BU, um for
overall revenue. The executive
recommendation increases the
general revenue by 7.6% and the
LFC recommendation increases
general revenue by 3.4% or
553,000 for the Beast. The LFC
recommendation increases
personal services and employee
benefits by 3% and the executive
increases this category by 9%.
Analysts have reached consensus
on all performance measures and
targets and for expansions. The
LFC recommendation exceeds the
executive by 211.6000 and
expansions. The executive does
not recommend any expansion and
the LFC supports, uh the
expansions of an it system
administrator and a trainer. And
with that I will turn over to
Simon for any comments.
Good afternoon, Mr Chairman,
Members of the committee is this
working
Ken, you hear me now? Can you
hear me?
If you can turn it off, Pull it
close to you and speak very
close to directly into Mr Chair.
There we go. Perfect.
Mr Chair members of the
committee again. My name is
Simon Miller. And I'm, an
analyst at D F A. Um, as Emily
said the executive
recommendation is an increase of
about 7.6% and the LFC
recommendation is an increase of
3.4%.
So overall, the executive
recommendation is about $500,000
higher and that can be
Basically broken down into two
items. So one the executive is
about $200,000 higher in
personnel, so that's enough to
fund
Roughly two positions.
Then the other $300,000
increases for the cost of
elections. Uh, every year,
there's one statewide election
that's funded out of the
secretary of state's budget.
Um, and even fiscal years, it is
the primary election in June. In
odd fiscal years, it's the
general election in the fall.
Then there's also a regular
local election every two years,
but that's not funded in the
budget, the base operating
budget that's funded through non
recurring
Appropriations.
Um So, um, Mr Chair members of
the committee over all the
executives about $300,000 higher
for election expenses for the
general election in the fall of
this calendar year.
So with that I will turn it back
to Emily or to our secretary of
state. I'll turn it over to our
secretary of state. Thank you.
Ah, thank you so much, Mr.
Chair, Madam Vice chair, ranking
member and members of the
committee. Maggie to lose
Oliver, New Mexico Secretary of
State I know and appreciate you
all and and really appreciate
how well you've been working
with me and my team over the
last several years to get
To get our budget, right? It's
been a struggle. As you all
know, I won't go into the long,
lengthy history and in fact,
I'll give a relatively brief
presentation. Because, um, you
know, even even though we always
want the most money we can
possibly get just like any state
officer agency. We are super
happy to be in a position where
we're coming to you and either
recommendation.
Will get us so much closer to
where we've ever been before. Um
And so we really greatly
appreciate that and the amazing
working relationship with both,
uh the executive team and lfc,
You have some slides in front of
you, Um, we we've hit on some
highlights of accomplishments
over the last year. As you all
know, even though there's not a
general election or primary
election happening, there's
always an election every
calendar year.
Uh, sometimes one and sometimes
two, depending on the fiscal
year we're coming into a, um, a
request for a single fiscal
year. Um, so the request that
we're asking for in terms of
funding the election, uh, is
worked into our operational
budget, as it has been in the
past.
And I'll talk a little bit about
the proposed change. That's
going to be coming before you
down the road. Um and let me
just say I will. Definitely When
I'm done with my comments. I'll
introduce my team because it is
an election year and I know you
will all need to access the
members of this team at some
point, But we do have Justin
O'Shea, our CFO up here.
Sitting next to Emily to answer
any technical questions that I
cannot, um so we did request
seven additional FTE s, um The
lfc recommendation includes four
additional FTS, Um, we are going
to be creating, um, cheaper
information Security officer
position. As you all know,
Election security has become
more and more of an issue,
particularly cybersecurity, and
this is to ensure the overall
Security and integrity of every
single aspect of the election
system or voter registration
system or voting machines,
etcetera, etcetera, additional
it staff and training staff.
Um, we did have I will get into
just
I'm skipping around a lot.
Sorry, and I can I can
definitely speak. I want to give
you guys time for questions, and
I know it's a long day, so I'm
being as brief as possible. Um,
these are our goals and
highlights for the upcoming
year. I'm just gonna skip
through those. And of course, if
you have any questions, let me
know.
Um
I'm loving the okay. I already
talked about our FTS. Thank you.
So we do have some specials and
supplementals, which is, of
course not what's immediately
before you in terms of the
recommendation today, But give
me just give you a sense of what
we're trying to do in the next
upcoming fiscal year. Um, and
we're pretty satisfied with with
lfc recommendations on those
Um, you know we can work around.
some of the other issues we are
in. I do want to mention we're
in a constant battle.
To get our campaign finance
information system working
right? And at some point I would
love to. Um, um you know, come
before you all maybe an interim
and kind of give you all all the
The long and lengthy story of of
this the struggle we've had to
get that system working right?
but it is an ongoing top
priority of our office. Um and
and we've been sort of just in a
challenge with vendor
situations, etcetera,
And if you have specific
questions by all means sources
they need pay for poll workers.
The cost of poll workers has
gone up just like the cost of
everything has gone up as as you
all are well aware.
Um, so our goal moving forward
is is we do have that statewide
election fund and to put those
funds for elections in the
statewide election fund, and
every year we come to you and we
say we have this election in the
next fiscal year or these two
elections, and we say this is
how much we project them to
cost. We're asking you to
authorize those funds, so we'll
always come before you for that.
And legislative accountability
in terms of understanding real
cost. These are the efforts that
we've been working toward over
the years and we're hopeful when
hopefully the bill comes over to
this side. Um, Mr Chair and
Committee that you all will be
favorable to that effort as
well. And of course, any time
we're happy to chat. Sorry about
that chat with you about that.
Um, And then the next slide is
just sort of a recap of what I
just discussed. Um, Mr Chair.
Like I said, I'm going to keep
it brief. The last I will do is
I just want to make sure you all
know names to faces. Please hold
on to this contact information.
I know you will all need
something from the office this
year at some point or the other
do not hesitate.
Most of you have my direct cell
phone number. You're always
welcome to call me. But if for
some reason you can't These are
the folks and we have our deputy
s O s turn Pinot so you can put
a name to a face, of course.
Justin O'Shea or our CFO Mandy
Be Hill is not physically here
with us today. Um, but she
That is always reachable.
Gregory Rock Stroh R C. I O
deals with all of our I T
challenges, and Cristina Chavez,
our business services director.
A lot of times I'm getting
questions from you or your
constituents about
This filing, uh, X y and Z and
Christina is our rec star and
business services, and we'll
make sure those things happen
for you. And so with that, and
in light of knowing how big of
an afternoon you have all leave
it there for my presentation, Mr
Chair and answer any questions.
Thank you so much. Madam
Secretary. Thank you to your
team will go straight to
questions first with represents
Sanchez. Thank you, Mr Chair. I
just wanted to make a brief
comment. I want to thank the
secretary and her stuff for
their responsiveness.
Specifically, um and even
Well.
I was doing a great job. I
always have issues with the
system. And, uh, they're quick
to help. So thank you.
Thank you, representative. Thank
you Represent Sanchez. Next we
have represented champions.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Uh,
I certainly want to compliment
you on your your office. Very,
very polite. Very responsive. I
appreciate you for having that
kind of folks up there.
Uh, I also have had a lot
Trouble with my financial
disclosure.
And I cannot get it filed and
I'm trying and and been up
upstairs and and really couldn't
get on the system at your
office. So, uh,
Just, uh I'm rooting for you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. If I could
just address that, and and this
any any legislator or or anyone
who asked to file the FDs that's
listening. We do have two
additional contract staff, one
of whom is carry Fresquez, Who's
our former election director?
Physically in our office for,
uh, for the duration of this
month, as we all know, January
3rd is 31st Is that f d s
deadline?
Um, so we have her available.
We're also going to have office
hours in the House and Senate
lounges on January 22nd and
January 30th. We will have staff
down there to assist you all in
trying to get the any
outstanding issues to get those
completed. Mr Chair and
representative.
Thank you very much. Next. We
have representative dela Cruz,
their rooms and care.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I
appreciate your work as well.
Secretary of state.
And this is more of a statement
than anything else, But it seems
to me that the elections are
it's a hard cause. It's whatever
it happens to be that year. It
is what it is. It seems to me
that we ought to
How to fight it somehow, so it
doesn't go up and down, so I
appreciate I think it makes all
the sense in the world and to
the extent that that I can help
them certainly there. Thank you,
Mr Chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
madam Secretary.
I just have a request. I find
this continually with websites
and government websites that I
always feel that the developer
has never been in the position
of the user agreed. And it would
just be great. If, uh
Republican Democrat people who
do these reports to help us we
ourselves if they could have
little focus group
And then if, as it's in
preparation, have one of us
people come in. I'm pretty tech
savvy, but every time I go to
campaign finance, I feel like
I'm in kindergarten. So if you
could just have some users test
it.
Because, as you know, it's like
you guys know what you need.
And we know what we're supposed
to do. But there's just often a
disconnect there. And the other
thing is, it's mandating others
on the staff. They answer the
phone actually with a voice. So
thank you, Mr Chair if I could
just briefly addressed that,
just so you know, we're in sort
of that the process of our of
our major overhaul of Cephas.
and while yes, I think we can
absolutely ask you all to come
Do that Beta testing once we
have it, ready to go.
Um, we did do some focus groups,
Mr Chair and representative with
our super users, treasurers,
lobbyists, etcetera, as we were
sort of in the in the phase of
making sure our
Extremely challenging vendor
understood the real life
challenges that you and many
others have been facing, Um so
we'll add that to our list to
let you play in the sandbox,
Madam Chair or Mr Chair and
representative before it goes
live. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much making
member Armstrong, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I'm
I'm beating the rural New Mexico
addresses drama again. Um, about
how it's very difficult. I
cannot even sign up for my
petition online.
Because of my rural New Mexico
address.
And it's not finding it. I've
called and asked for help. I
have not received a phone call
back. I would love to get one.
Rural New Mexico addresses.
Where it's nine miles west on
road, 10.
Try to find it.
And so I'm I'm very concerned
where I have constituents that
live in my district but have an
address where their mailboxes
out of my district.
And they're not linking up.
So I I just want to beat that
rule. New Mexico drum again to
try to get help.
And and
People want to do things, right?
We want to follow the rules, but
it's it's just extra difficult
for us so and thank you for what
you do. I too. Thank you. I know
it's a big, difficult job, but I
am still gonna beat the drum.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair
and representative. I know our
legislative director Lindsay
just made that note and and one
challenge. It has been great
with the new online petition
platform. I know a lot of you
are using it.
Uh and and like it and the 11 of
the main issues we've had is if
something isn't exactly exactly
right. The system is is
Not happy. So we will definitely
get that done for you as soon as
possible. And I know Lindsay
will follow up with you.
Excellent. Thank you Recommend
Marshawn represent Luhan,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
I'm just looking at Thank you,
Madam. Secretary and
And your staff again all echo
that the responsiveness and even
your responsiveness Your direct
responsiveness has been
incredible throughout these
years.
Um
Happy to know that we are
addressing your budget in a
holistic way with the revenues.
We have my question, though, Mr
Chair just going on on what you
gave us under your contractual
services is 11.1%.
Discrepancy here, Um
I know that you've had to go to
N M F a to look for funding and
that's why we have this this
bill in place. How is that how
you're contracts affected by
what this bill will do, Mr Chair
if we get it passed, right.
Excuse me. So, um, Mr Chair
representative.
Uh uh, The good news is that the
funding will be there. If we get
this legislation passed, and I
alluded to Oh,
Well, he's not here. So even
better. Representative Dela
Cruz, my former county
commissioner in Berkeley County,
uh, that we might ask for his
assistance went. Hopefully it
makes it to the floor of the
house. But, um, the funding will
be there. And so again, we would
come for that authorization as
always. Um, But even if we saw
excessive costs, we wouldn't be
having to go. Madam Chair
representative.
To the board of Finance to, you
know, use their very limited
emergency funds to pay for what
is not an emergency. But what
was already a mostly anticipated
expense. Madam, Mr Chair
representative. I appreciate
that. I think that you know the
investment that we have to make
in our elections.
Protects our constitutional
rights. And I think that this is
always money well spent, and
we're facing, uh, the new
generation of what voting is and
our constitutional rights and
protecting those rights, Mr.
Chair. I feel like
Um, I can't wait to read the
bill and see what you know those
provisions in place. I just I'm
a little conflicted a little bit
with a budget to know that you
know if we get this through, you
know contingency upon that, and
so if we could have a little
more offline conversation, and I
figure like that will help me
and looking at this because it
is such a huge thing for me.
Thank you, Mr Chester.
Then you represented 100%.
Herndon, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and Madam
Secretary. It is great to see
you here, and I just want to let
you know that once you get that
online voting, I'm sorry. Online
petition form, working greatly
for everyone. It's immediately
so you know that all of the
signatures there have been
verified. But the current
question I have for you, Madam
Secretary, Mr Chair is with
respect to the
With respect to the process for
those individuals who want to be
on the permanent absentee ballot
list. If you could bring that
up, lots of people are still
confused. And who is the one
person in your staff that we
should direct individuals tour?
Great question, Mr. Chair
representative. We got a
presentation earlier today. We
were
Meeting with our county clerks
from around the state and
letting them know that we're
getting ready to go live tonight
with a system improvement where
Starting tonight, as you know,
assuming technology works, which
were hopeful it does a voter
will be able to go on to that my
voter information platform and
check a box.
That is a permanent absentee
box. That's new legislation from
last year where any voter who
lives in New Mexico permanently,
uh in other words, they're not
out of state can all
automatically get that, um,
absentee ballot in the mail. I'm
going to be doing that myself
become a vote by mail Voter who
knew? Um and so that will start
tonight.
Um, I would say for any question
that you all have as
legislators or on behalf of your
constituents, and it's not on
our list. But Lindsay Bachmann,
who is our legislative director,
is a great single point of
contact. If not me, um than
Lindsay because she can always
figure out exactly who on the
staff. Um your information
should go to and Lindsey, I
don't want to put you on the
spot. But how? How should they
best get ahold of you?
Madam Charity, if you could.
Yeah, Explain it, please. Just
for the Webcast E. You all have
Lindsey's card, and we'll also
make sure that just, you know,
on both sides, the caucus
chairs. You know whoever else
needs that information. It will
be widely distributed. Um,
because we know sometimes it's
like, Well, we could call Maggie
Or we could call Mandy Or we
could call whoever and and
Lindsey can be that point of
contact for for you all.
Ben. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Absolutely. Thank you very much
for absent. Hernan. Okay, Madam
Secretary. Thank you very much.
I think that concludes our
questions deeply appreciate the
work. We've traveled a long way
together, Exciting to know that
there's still good ground to
cover. But there's a lot of
progress that's been made go to
the madam vice chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move. The committee adopts the
LFC recommendation has been
moved by Vice Chair Dixon,
second by representative
Narayana. Is there any
opposition to adopting that
motion?
Okay? I don't see any
opposition. Madam Secretary.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much, Mr Chair
and members of the committee,
okay?
For the next presenters. Don't
do the microphone. What I just
did.
We're gonna invite up our
secretary of taxation and
revenue.
Thank you, Secretary Chardon
Clark for coming up.
Miss Anderson.
Great to see you, Madam
Secretary again when we get to
you please feel free to
introduce your team members who
are here, Miss Anderson will
start with you for the LSC.
Great. Thank thank you, Mr Chair
and members of the committee.
Good afternoon. My name is
Ginger Anderson. I'm the LFC,
analyst for General government
And here with us today we have
Secretary Chardon Clark of the
Taxation Revenue Department.
This is agency code 333.
And we're looking at pages 73
through 78 in volume two.
Uh, we also have here with us
today. DFA counterpart, Arianna
V. Hill, who will be present
helping co present the agency's
recommendation and the
differences between the
executive and the LFC
recommendation. So go ahead and
kick us off with some of the
overview of differences. I will
keep it pretty short and sweet,
but the primary differences
between the LFC and the
executive recommendations were
in motor vehicle.
Compliance enforcement and
program support divisions. Uh,
the total recommendation for
General fund.
Oh, sweet pause and okay, Thank
you, Cecilia. Uh, the
Primary recommend difference in
general fund was 954,000
difference with the executive
recommending, Um, sorry. The LFC
recommended 81.8 million in
general fund, which was 3.3%
increase above T rds FY 24
operating budget.
While the executive recommended
a 4.5% increase.
And that would be a total of
82.7 in general fund revenues.
Alright. The LFC recommendation
included 2.6 million in General
Fund for the Gin tax system, uh,
for updates and maintenance. All
the executive recommended about
1.7 million for the updates.
And just so everyone is aware a
gin taxes. The the primary tax
system of record for the state
of New Mexico, and it supports
about 45 different texts
programs.
Right. So I think that about
summarizes the overview, so I'm
going to turn it over to Ariana
for, um, the next P code.
Good afternoon, Mr Chair.
Members of the council. Um, I
have here for program support.
It is P code 57 to the executive
recommendation is 166.8000
higher than the LFC
recommendation, which is a
recommended overall increase of
2.8 million and personnel to
reduce the unfunded vacancy
rate.
Operations and maintenance costs
for fraud, identification and
verification services.
Fast collection services and
adjustments to time and material
charges to these contracts.
Additionally, $85,000 and
recommend
It is recommended for training.
Costs, software supplies and
travel.
And with that ginger will pass
it back to you.
Alright. So the next program
we're going to look at his tax
administration.
Um, so for tax administration
Lfc did not recommend the
agency's request to decrease
General fund revenues for the
program. All the executive
recommendation supported the
requested decrease of 7.6000 to
reallocate operating costs to
the program Support division.
Um, so that was the main main
difference for tax
administration.
Mr Cherry have for motor vehicle
Division P called 574.
The executive recommendation
provided 667.7000 more in
general fund revenue to fund
reclassification and appropriate
placement.
And Gentex operating support,
which are the following
differences.
514.4000 more than the
appropriate placement and
reclassification.
And 100 and 53.3000 more for
increased rates and indirect
class for both personnel and
property.
And with that complaints and
force mint to ginger
If I could just please point out
one thing in the motor vehicle
Division P code, you'll notice
that in the language, um, the
suggested the recommended
languages for the other state
funds, uh, for to include $10
million from the weight distance
Tax Identification permit fund.
Um, there there is a request for
technical cleanup there. Should
you decide to opt for the LFC
recommendation because the
transfer should be 9.5 is
indicated on the other financing
uses line, so there was a small
discrepancy between the language
and what the amount was so it
should be.
9.5 million indicated in the
language, uh, to be changed from
10 million
Hope that makes sense.
Um so moving on again to the,
uh, Was it compliance
enforcement?
Right for in compliance
enforcement. The LSC recommended
General fund revenue remained
flat with the FY 24 operating
budget. While the executive
supports the requested increase
of 127.1000 of and that will be
to fund investigations, audits
and supply costs.
Uh huh. Is that it will Okay
Right away. Property tax
division had no differences, So
Arianna will go ahead and
present about non recurring
For the non recurring
appropriation specials of the
executive recommendation
includes 600,000 for Call Center
Contractual services.
5.1 million to develop, enhance
and maintain the systems of
record.
3 million to implement tax and
motor code changes made by
legislation.
And 600,000 for the M B D Q
system.
And with that I will hand it
over to details, okay?
Thank you, Mr Chair, Members of
the committee and thank you to
the analysts for walking us
through the differences. Um,
this is the agency's slides
before I get into those. I'd
love to take just a moment to
introduce the wonderful staff.
That's here with me. We have
Deputy Secretary Aisha Maura.
Um, from our administrative
services division. We have ASD
director Denise, Syrian and
Deputy director and net Reynolds
from I t. We have our CI Oh,
Mike Baca and we have a whole
host of leadership from MBD,
including director Ted Gonzalez.
Deputy directors Monte Lopez and
Juliet Castle Duck and MBD.
Finance Director Ali Rodriguez
camp.
I think that's everyone. I hope
I didn't miss anyone.
Okay onto our slides. Um
And slide to we start with the
agency's priorities and so very
big picture. There are pretty
significant differences in
funding between the executive
and LFC wreck. Our budget
requests this year was really
driven by an increase in
contractual service costs that
are necessary to have in place
to upkeep are two systems of
record Gentex for tax and
tapestry for M V. D.
The contractual costs. We have
been doing our best to contain
those in the past years at the
beginning of this
administration we were paying
for program changes on
undeliverable space method and
due to lack of funding for bill
implementation after the 2019
session, we made the tough
choice to switch to maintenance.
I'm sorry. Time and materials
delivery from that main
contractor, which has worked out
fairly well and has saved some
money overall, But there
Are risks involved with
Paying for contractual services
without a guarantee of
deliverable now four or five
years out from them. They have
changed their maintenance
structure for for the way that
these contracts or build and we
are facing several million
dollars of increasing our
contractual services for Jen tax
and tapestry next fiscal year,
so probably the highest priority
that we have is to fully fund
those contractual services. Um
they're fairly well funded in
the executive wreck.
The LFC wreck reduces the
funding available for that for
about $2 million that's in the
recurring setting aside the
specials.
And what if, if that record is
taken? What will happen is we'll
be in the difficult position if
we want to meet all of our
mandates and keep taxpayer data
secure, will need to increase
our vacancies and shift money
from salaries into contracts.
And, um, that's predictable, and
I just really want to make sure
I flag it out for the committee.
um, to talk just a few minutes
about specials were we thought
very closely about which
specialist to request as we know
there are more requests for non
recurring
And funding than anyone has to
be able to fund this session. We
understand that, um the
executive wreck does help us
keep moving the ball forward.
It'll allow us to
Replace kind of a problematic
queuing system in M V. D, um,
when the queuing system isn't
working and isn't stable, that
means we have to take an agent
or a supervisor off of a teller
window to go check people in at
the door and not be processing
transactions, so you can imagine
how that decreases customer
service.
Um we also preached appreciate
that the executive has funded $3
million for Bill.
implementation. Um, for those
that aren't familiar with this
funding mechanism, as you do
know, house built two is always
finalized before the tax
package. And so we don't know
until after the budget is set.
What are costs will be of Bill
implementation.
Um, it's typically over $5
million per year, but that's
what we tend to request and it's
a very limited purpose. So to
the extent there aren't bills
passed, that we need to
implement the money reverts and
we expect that so we appreciate
the 3 million in funding from
the executive, Um there are a
couple other specials, but the
analyst has has already called
out the differences there for
you.
Um, I think I can skip slide
three You've already been taking
through each of our programs and
the differences and slide four.
We just wanted to provide some
historical data. That kind of
puts the agency performance in
perspective we've tracked for
you are operating budget
excluding federal funds. There
really aren't many in their, um,
over the past several years and
showing that really our general
fund growth has been quite
limited over the year.
Here's our state. Other state
funds have gone up sometimes
gone down.
Um, and that overall, we're very
proud to be managing our
reversion Z. I would I would
say, Well, we revert about 3 to
4% per year Stable E and during
covid a lot of that had to do
with supply chain issues. For
example, big computer and
monitor orders that weren't able
to be received by fiscal year
end and the rest of it really is
simply. We constantly have
employees coming and going
coming and going, And so we've
heard Revert some portion of
that.
Due to that turn of employees.
And the next slide. We have our
updated vacancy rates were
currently at 20.8% vacant down
from about 30% of the start of
administration. So while I'm
very proud of that progress, we
could use more folks, but that
20% vacancy rate we're at is
about as much as our budget can
fund.
So we fill positions as quickly
as we can, to the extent we have
budget, but the rest of those
roughly 20% of our positions
that are in organization aren't
able to be filled because of
budget.
Um, slide six. Just kind of
gives a snapshot again. This is
for context. Um, text and rev
has about the same number of
employees now when we processed
$23 billion in distributions
last year, as we had when we
were processed in sing eight or
$9 billion per year, so our
amount of revenues has almost
tripled and our staffing has
stayed the same.
Now The reason we can handle
that at all is because of our I
T system automation most of our
tax returns and refunds don't
require human touch, but they do
require those systems of records
and tax and tapestry to be
functioning fully. And so that
we have as little um, staff
manual work on on returns and
paper as possible.
So, um, that
Um, concludes the slides I
wanted to share with you and I'm
happy to stand for questions.
Thank you very much. Madam
Secretary. Thank you to your
team who's here will go straight
to questions, starting with
ranking member Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank
you for your presentation. Um
Always
Interesting. I don't know a lot
about this process with the
taxes and
And so one of the questions that
I have is the weight distance
tax identification.
Permanent fund.
And how much is in the fund. And
what was the fund created?
To fund
Yes. Um, we're bringing up RSD
director who I think will be
able to answer this best. But
that fund resides at D. O T. So
there's a little bit of an
anomaly where it appears as a in
and out transfer through our
budget, But the money
ultimately, funds D O T handed
off to Denise. Um, Mr Chair and,
um
House Minority Chair, Armstrong
So this is definitely a
transaction between Department
of Transportation and also with
Taxation and revenue Department
We have about $9.4 million that
this is part of the language
within the weight distance that
Ginger had alluded to that we
needed to have the technical
change of the language.
And so this is a transfer that
happens each year between the
two agencies for the weight
distance.
And it's included in house Bill
two. Okay, thank you. For that
information. I'll I'll ask
probably someone else. What it
was meant to what it was created
for two fund. I just am
interested in that because I
know a lot of people.
A lot of semi truck drivers are
the ones that pay that waste
weight, distance and
Uh, oil and gas, so I was just
curious what it was created for
how much is in there and what it
was actually created for so, But
thank you for that information.
It's just a pass through and and
Mr Chair, Representative
Armstrong. We're hearing from
the audience that it it
ultimately funds Road projects
that bot
So we have secretaries turning
here. I think unless
I think it's ideal to probably
we love that for feedback. Thank
you to, um
Is, if that's alright, Feedback
is fine. Okay. Okay. Thank you
so much for that. Um, And then,
uh, you had talked a little bit
about Mr Chairman. Uh, and Madam
secretary about your re
versions, which were
I mean, it doesn't sound like a
lot compared to what you're
Uh, budget is, but it's it's
over 3 million
And then 2.4 million in
personnel and employee benefits.
And so can you tell us? What?
Why would you take it out of the
two hundreds and
Put it in, Put it somewhere else
and what you're spending that
money on Mr Chair and
Representative Armstrong. Um so
I think there's confusion about
in the past and what would
happen in 25? So you're you're
correct. In the past, we've
reverted 3 to 4% of our budget
in recent years. Um I would say
that during the pandemic period
and thereafter, there's just
been so much movement in the
labor market. And you, you know
that that applies to all
agencies and so
As we're doing our best all the
time to fill vacancies that we
know we have budget projections
to show we can fund at this. You
know, at the same time we're
filling positions. We're losing
people in a lot of the time and
this is a good thing overall,
but a lot of the time when we
fill positions. It's an internal
movement. So filling one vacancy
creates another and we're back
where we started, But that's
it's good to have a career
ladder internally. So the
vacancies if they're in personal
services, probably just has to
do with the timing.
In a vacancies and only be able
Being able to recruit so many at
a time in the future. What I
mentioned is that if if we
received the LFC wrecked the way
it is, we would be in a
difficult position to have to
fund our contractual expenses
that we know will have for
Gentex and tapestry and may be
forced to make the difficult,
um, decision to take money out
of the 200 move it to contracts
which, of course we don't want
to do.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much. Ranking member.
Armstrong. Next, we're gonna go
to represent hundreds.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
You have to go a little bit on
those lines, Mr. Chair going
into your priorities and looking
at your contractual services and
cost
Um would you say, Mr Chair
secretary that it's that you
were holding a 20% vacancy
because of the planning based
upon your budget to fulfill
contractual services budget, Mr.
Chair, Mr Chair and
representative Luhan. Not yet,
but we could be in the next
fiscal year.
Um at the moment, and I would
refer you to the bottom of
slide three in kind of the peach
color. It's have apologized.
It's very small writing, but you
can see what the funded vacancy
rate is in each of our divisions
and programs and where our
request attempted to take it.
So, for example, um in our I T
Division, which is under program
support in FY 24. We had a
funded vacancy rate of 23% are
request would have taken it
down.
Down to 20%, allowing us to fill
probably about two more. I T
positions. Um, and so that was a
request. The executive
recommendation is basically
there for us in our
There are two hundred's
category. Lfc, however, is a
little different. Um, the main
the main difference, the single
largest difference that's
important to us and our
recommendation would be, um, if
you look at the program support
program, um, under contracts,
you can see the reward Crested
8.26 million. The exact wreck
removes 2 million from US.
And the LFC wreck. Um, about 1
million
Um, the LFC doesn't put that
back in and specials, whereas
the executive does to an extent.
Thank you. Thank you for that
summer around that that's really
important.
And I just think that you know
through our discussions and and
working through the interim in
our
The committee hearings and we're
hearing how you kind of get
dinged when you move this
fundings around, But I don't
think that you have an option If
you're going to
What is it? What are the
The constant statutory ALS. Hmm.
Effects of the contracts you
have to hold and not fulfilling
those statutes. Sure, Mr
Chairman and representative
Luhan, thank you for that
question. And if if when I'm
done answering if our CEO would
like to add anything that would
be great, But we have one main
contractor Fast is the provider
of both our Gentex tax system of
record in our tapestry MBD
system of record.
Those systems require, you know,
regular service packs to keep
them updated, Um, to prevent
fraud. They require service
packs to meet legislative
mandates. For example, we're
always doing get bill
implementation. There's always
something going on. Um and if we
can't do any of those things it
puts us at risk of not being
able to press this tax returns
timely, not being able to
deliver and MBD services.
Um and and the data security. I
can't really overestimate how
important that is. Mr Chair for
gonna upset our public More than
anything. It's not get their
taxes into them. That's right. I
think that, um
We're actually there's going to
be some legislation that could
impact your, um your agency as
well in a big tax.
Creation that that's being
looked at from the executive.
Can you comment on how that will
affect you? Sure, this is just
the balance Mr Chair that are
that we're always paying
attention to with those
vacancies and us increasing the
amount of work that you need to
do. But then integrating, you
know that your budget your
budgetary needs chair Thank you,
Chairman and representative
Luhan.
Um it's very early in the
session, of course, but we're
already scoring the fiscal
impact in the implementation
costs of many bills. Um there,
you know, we don't know until
the end what will pass in a tax
package and be signed into law.
But I think it's fair to guess
right now that will have about 4
to $5 million of bill
implementation costs and it
really just depends what passes
and then what shape they're in.
I appreciate that, and just you
being on top of that. I really
do so, Mr Chair. I'm just kind
of drawing that in. It's going
to be. It could be a big issue
for all of our constituents in
our state. If we
If we're not being we're not
able to meet those those demands
and timely effects of what the
contracts provide, So I'm just
wanna draw that to the budget.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Appreciate
your time. Thank you very much
Representative Han. An extra
gonna go represented dela Cruz
and represent Alison.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I'm
curious Secretary why LFC made
no provision for any funding in
sections four and five. Mr.
Chair members of the committee.
Um so you're just referencing
like the overall review of what
was recommended in the executive
recommendation for non occurring
versus non recurring on the LFC
recommendations? Yes.
Um, thank you for that question.
Mr Chair representative. So the
main difference there is, um and
I'm happy to kind of run runs
through our recommendations.
For on the LFC side. The LFC did
include 2.9 million for the non
recurring portion of the, uh,
the system to maintain the
systems of record. Um there's
another 1.2 million in that
chunk. That will be that word
deemed as recurring costs.
So for again for the non
recurring recommendations, the
LFC prefers to keep you know as
much of that chunk, so it was a
partial recommendation. Uh, for
the systems of record compared
to the executive recommendation,
which was 5.1 million, uh, the
full amount of the agency's
request.
Um and Mr Chair. I'm happy to
review the other two as well,
Um, for content for contact for
call center. Contractual
services. Um TRD had requested a
453.9000 decrease. Uh, in the
Operating budget. Um, where the
the the LFC recommendation did
not did not recommend that that
decrease happened because the
contractual services are should
remain in the operating budget
for recurring expenses. Um and
finally for the motor vehicle
changes. Um, rather than
recommending the 3 million of
for tax code changes the LFC
recommends to
Million, but with language in
the bill that does require the
agency, um to have approval
through the board of Finance
through the appropriation
contingency fund.
And Mr Chair members. I think
that covers the main differences
for the nonrecurring spending
differences. Mr. Chairman, can
you please explain where that
revenue is proposed to come
from?
Can you please repeat the
question Mr. Chair come from
for, um and Mr Chair. Which
increases are you referencing
reference that funding be made
available for the fact. Yeah.
Thank you for presenting, Um,
Miss Anderson. I think in Calif.
You wanna come up that this is
the board of Finance language?
Yes, Mr Chair representative. It
would be through the Board of
Finance.
Thank you. Perhaps Miss Anderson
and and Kelly, if you want,
maybe describe the process by
which
The LSC. We're proposing, like
what would happen. How do you
petition the board of four tax
changes? Secretary? Madam
Secretary. We can go if you want
to explain this Mr Chair and
representative de la Cruz and
Committee, um, sometimes in the
past our bill implementation
funding has come to us through
language and house built to
that.
Makes it contingent on going to
the state Board of Finance going
to the state Board of Finance
with a financing plan and just
laying out basically all the
scoring from our F I R. S that
of bills that were enacted that
process though it takes time
isn't too burdensome. We're fine
with that. The problem is that
being that after bills are
signed, we cannot wait for a
monthly board meeting to get
there yet budgeted and begin
work That's um
That's our only problem with
going to the board they meet
once a month, and we sometimes
have bill implementation
deadlines in May and July 1st.
So, um, that's the only issue
but it's not a huge deal.
Mr Chairman. That's exactly what
I was trying to get to it that
you have these recurring ongoing
operations that are necessary
mandatory for the stadium,
Mexico and yet
We're putting this department in
that position.
Thank you, Mr
Thank you. Very much
Representative of Cruz
represented Allison, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, madam Secretary.
My question is gonna pertain to
the motor vehicle division to
your P 574 code.
My constituents are constantly
asking.
When are you going to bring us a
substation to Shiprock? They say
that their neighbors over the
hill a mile over the hill on the
Arizona side.
Has MVD officers and Kayenta
kindly and Wind rock and 40
finance. And then, um, part of
their argument is that
They have to drive between 75
and 100 Miles one way to renew
their vehicle registrations in
Farmington.
Sometimes they are not happy
with the service that they are
getting in farming town, Mr
Tear, so they have to go to s
Tech or Bluefield, adding
another.
30 to 45 miles to their to their
one way trip.
And to make things worse.
We have the highest area where
gasoline price is the highest.
We're still at a rate where it's
almost $4 a gallon so you can
understand the dilemma that they
face. That is why they're asking
for, uh, a substation near near
their home so they don't have to
drive as far and to make things
worse. They have to drive over.
Half of those 100 miles on dirt
roads, so
Just a formal request for
something for you to look into.
Madam Secretary. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you, Mr Chair and
representative Allyson. I
appreciate you bringing that up
with with me. And I know we've
talked about that before.
I think that the to be briefed
the responses that M V D could
receive an expansion to its
budget that would allow us to
add a field office. I think we
have 32 field offices statewide.
We could add one in Shiprock or
thereabouts to shorten that
commute time. The other
alternatives are that municipal
or tribal entity can offer can
open a partner office, for
example, we have some very small
municipalities that maybe have a
half times work.
Doing utility building and they
spend another. That employee
spends another half time work
processing MBD transactions, so
It would take an expansion for
us to add a 33rd field office.
Um, but we would also be open to
you putting us in touch with any
folks that you know in the
community that might want to
open a partner office.
Okay?
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much Represent Alison.
Okay, now the secretary. I have
a couple of quick questions
first.
Oh, before I go represent
pedigree, please.
Thank you, Chairman. And thank
you, Madam Secretary. My my
questions were asked. Actually,
I just wanted to put a shout out
for April V Hill. Um
The what? What Your constituent
services liaison does for us or
for me, anyway.
I can guarantee you. My
constituents don't always like
the answer that you guys give
But they get an answer, and I
wish we had more departments.
That they had people like that.
Thank you.
I appreciate that. Thank you
very much for present pedigree.
Uh, Madam Secretary, I want to
turn this is members Page 14. I
believe of our packet. It's the
final page. Uh, this is R P s
and D v. The personnel services
and employee.
Employee benefits calculation
worksheet, Madam secretary. This
is a snapshot in time, so it's
it doesn't apply right now
necessarily, Miss Anderson. This
was back in November.
Mr Chair. Yeah, I think October
timeframe was so Thank you very
much. So, October 2023 what This
does. It gives us the funded
vacancies. So sort of the
funding. That's there. That's
not being utilized because there
aren't um and Madam Secretary.
It looks like there's uh,
In two divisions.
Property tax division and
compliance enforcement. Mhm
seeing sort of a 24.8% funded
vacancy, and then a 22.8% funded
vacancy. And what that what we
take that to mean or at least
to show its signal is that there
is a lot there is significant
funding that's not being
utilized.
Can you walk us through sort of
that piece? Yes, Mr Chair. Thank
you for the question, And I'm
just kind of acclimating myself
at this table, but property tax
division and compliance
enforcement are two smallest
divisions, and so if we have one
resignation, for example in
compliance enforcement pops are
vacancy rate up immediately by
5% because they have about 20
positions. Property tax, if I
remember right has about 40
positions. So anyone vacancy
it's just very volatile.
Around so compliance
enforcement.
Um, is our tax fraud
Investigation Division They
investigate white collar crime
tax evasion, type things and
send them for prosecution for
referral. Um, we've had a hard
time keeping certified law
enforcement in their positions
because you know, will
potentially hire someone send
them through the Law enforcement
academy. And once they're
through, they may get a
different offer from more boots
on the ground law enforcement,
So we have a hard time retaining
their and I believe one of the
request.
Yes for growth are only requests
for growth in that division was
for an increase to salaries to
reflect a personnel study for
law enforcement. So it's SPO has
determined that our law
enforcement officers are under
placed But the LFC wreck does
not fund us being able to
properly place them.
Um, property text division is
kind of unique to it's. It's a
fairly small division of about
40 ft, and it is enterprise
funded through the delinquent
property collections that we do
property tax collections we had
around that time a shift in
directors, so this is probably
right before we hired a
director, and there was a wave
of I think three
Uh, people that left at once,
and it's since gone back down to
the normal rate of vacancy. I
think it's down about
17% right now. Okay. Thank you,
madam. Sir. Thank you for going
through that also on that in the
tax administration portion,
although the rate is lower
There seems to be $2.7 Million
in in funded vacancies savings
there.
But I I say, um, you It's Yeah.
Okay, Madam Secretary. I mean
the recommendations overall are
But I I say, um, you It's Yeah.
Okay, Madam Secretary. I mean
the recommendations overall,
pretty close. Um
You've highlighted a few areas
around with regard to the tax
changes piece.
Madam secretary that that month
lag time.
That it really only in very
specific circumstances. That is,
if the department has to push
money out immediately that month
that comes into effect, but
most, which has been sort of an
extraordinary circumstance that
we've faced the past couple of
years.
But if if we're to reduce taxes,
implement new tax credits
Uh, anything really short of
checks going out to new
Mexicans.
Do you see that month lag time
with the board of finance being
a particular challenge? Mr.
Chairman, I agree with you in
general, if you know, and if we
have a voice in setting
effective dates of legislation,
we should be able to work around
going to the board of Finance.
What's more important is that we
have adequate funding. Thank
you, Madam Secretary. I ever go
ahead, please. Sorry I wanted to
call attention to slide five of
the slide deck. I went through.
Our vacancy rate has fallen
precipitously since October.
1st. Um so it looks like in
October. 1st. We are about 2320
about 23% bacon. And now we're
20.8. A lot of that is in the
audit and compliance division.
The one you mentioned last in
the Tax administration program.
That's great, Madam Secretary.
Thank you for pointing that out
in great to be able to see.
Ah, there. Okay, Madam
Secretary. I think what we'll
do. I don't see that. There's
any other questions. We want to
make sure that there's
sufficient support both around
on the Gen tax side and on the
potential tax changes, we would
ask the analysts to work a
little bit more closely, perhaps
on
Increasing the length that what
you can ask for from the board
of Finance. Um, and with that,
I'd go to the vice chair for
Uh, with the vice chair brings
up an excellent point. This is
changing that the language
peace. Think, um
Let's ask for that and ketchup
cleanup, But let's let's capture
that, Ms. Anderson. This is
instead of the 10 million. The
9.5 million that you noted in
the language, and so we know we
need to make that change. That
will be part of what we'll ask
you all to bring back. Okay, man
and vice chair and thank you for
the catch.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and I would
like to congratulate the
department on the digital
driver's license. Thank you for
that exciting press release
today. Um, Mr Chair, I moved the
committee adopts the LFC
recommendation.
Okay. It's been moved in second
by, uh, move by vice chair,
Dixon said Goodbye. Robson de la
Cruz, certainly opposition to
adopting that motion.
I don't see any Madam Secretary.
Thank you very much for your
time.
Kate. Uh, we're going to
continue on
We see are some
Ah!
Excellent Miss Curry, Chief of
staff. Great to see you. Mr
Rodriguez will start with you
when we get to you, Mr Curry.
Please feel free to introduce
the members of the PRC here
today. Um, and a big things to
Kelly for navigating our sides.
Okay?
Mr Chair members of the
committee. Good afternoon. My
name is Julie PSA and I'm the
LFC analysts for the Public
Regulation Commission. Um, for
this agency, please refer to
documents under to have four and
that's agency code 430.
You can also look at your volume
two for the full lfc
recommendation on page 183.
I'm joined today by chief of
Staff of the PRC trying to curry
as well as the D F a budget
analysts Arianna V. Hill.
So starting off in page one of
your packet. Um, this is the
overall business unit for the
agency. So you'll see that both
recommendations decrease the
General fund.
Um, well, however, the LFC
includes an additional 284,000
more in general fund than the
executive so overall, the LFC
Decreases General fund by 0.6%
while the executive decreases it
by 2.9%. This decrease in the
General fund is primarily due to
a $1.2 million reduction.
For the transfer of the
transportation division from the
PRC to the Department of
Transportation.
Um and however, savings from
this transfer or offset by a
roughly 1.1 Million General fund
increase, or 9.8% for personnel
and other services.
And then both Lfc and the
executive or aligned in other
revenue for the pipeline Safety
fund.
So going down to spending both
recommendations support the
agency's request to grow the
base budget by a net increase of
1.1 million again. That's the
numbers you see. In front of you
are reflective of the decrease
from the transfer of the
transportation division. Um, so
both recommendations increased
personnel, contractual services
and other services, which will
go into more detail as we go
into the peak codes.
And then as far as the
expansions, both recommendations
increase funding for the
pipeline Safety Bureau. Um and
the LFC doesn't additional
expansion for 284,000 for it,
Compliance manager
And then pass it over to
Arianna.
Afternoon.
Um, And with that, we're gonna
go. We're going to move to the
Peacoats 611.
Um, Mr Chair members of the
Committee due to the transfer of
the trans Transportation
Division two d. O. T is Julissa
just mentioned. Both
recommendations decrease the
General fund revenue, although
the executive recommendation
reduced by 284.9000 more than
the LFC
Um, there are no differences in
the base recommendations for
this P code. Both include
583.6004 personnel.
26.5 for contractual services
and 44.8000 and other category
for staff training.
Overall, the LFC recommended an
additional 284.9000 more than
the executive and the personnel
category, which includes one
additional compliance manager
position.
In consultation with PRC, the
executive opted to recommend 2
million for a special
appropriation for it. Purchases
prioritizing current staff and
operations over expanding the
program.
For the Pipeline Safety Bureau,
which is not general fund
supported both Lfc and the
executive recommended 10
additional FT to inspect and
regulate an additional 30,000
miles of pipeline.
And with that, I will, um, give
it back to Julissa.
Okay, Madam Chair, so moving
onto the last peak code. We're
looking at Page five of your
packet. Um, the LSE and the
executive recommendations were
aligned in General fund revenue.
Both of them increased the
General fund by roughly 4.1%.
The recommendations were also
online in spending for all the
different personnel, contractual
and other services.
And those include an increase
for to fill one vacancy as well
as funding for equipment,
employee training and
telecommunications. And then
neither of the recommendations,
um included the expansion, um
for a grant, administrator.
Okay. And then I will touch on
the specials. I'd like to
highlight just a few items on
the non reoccurring
appropriation, different sheets.
As previously mentioned, the
executive recommended a total of
2 million for it purchases as an
alternative to additional staff.
The executive recommended a
total of 900.8000 for legal
costs from the Fire Protection
grab fund because the case is
related to the fire marshal's
office when they were part of
the PRC.
LFC recommended 408,000 and
General Fund.
And for the supplemental
request the executive
recommended about 100,000 less
than the LFC based on more
recent production.
And with that I can turn it over
to
Chief of staff, Madam Chair
committee members. Thank you for
having us here. Um, I wanna
introduce myself. My name Is
Choi a. Corey I'm the chief of
staff of the Public Regulation
Commission. But mostly I want to
introduce our commissioners. All
three are here. Um, if they
would stand up so we can
recognize them.
Commissioner Aguilera.
Commissioner Ellison.
And commissioner Pat O'Connell.
And I also want to recognize
that just today they graduated
with their ethics certification
of compliant with the law. So
congratulations, commissioners.
Relations.
I also want to thank all my
executive staff and the team
that is here supporting us and
all the work that they do,
because we really hit the ground
running. The commissioners did
when they came in in January of
last year, and I did, and our
staff did to meet what the
commissioners were seeking. So
we went through a strategic
planning process and we came up
with four strategic goals.
And, um they really can be
boiled down into two things. We
want to increase the capacity of
the agency both what we already
have and what we can tackle what
we can take on and we want to
ensure that we are transparent,
reliable partners in government
for other government agencies
for the Legislature and for the
public.
We? As I said, hit the ground
running and we've given it all.
we had quite literally, um we're
really proud of the progress
that we have made were down. The
updated number is 3.45% vacancy
rate. We came in with
approximately 20%, and we really
made it a priority to fill those
positions because
The agency wasn't built 20 years
ago or so to handle what we're
handling now and so it's
absolutely critical that we fill
those positions and we did. I
would also like to say that as
we hit it with everything we
had. We also got for the first
time in at least 20 years. The
first zero finding audit.
So that is a testimony a
testament to the staff and the
commission's hard work and
commitment to this.
Also, the commissioners have
been very proactive. They have
not just sat in judge cases that
have come before them, although
they have also done that,
because that is their job. They
have instituted rule makings
They have instituted inquiries
and we're trying to be very
proactive in this space that is
ever evolving and ever changing.
So we have many workshops going
on, and in fact, I want to
highlight one that's coming up
next Thursday, a regional
transmission organization
workshop to explore
New Mexico's participation in an
entry into and the creation of
regional markets that really the
wave of the future.
So it's important to understand
as we're looking at our budget,
the operating structure of the
PRC because its not intuitive we
actually have kind of three sets
of stuff. One set of staff is
for the commissioners.
To advise them. One set of staff
is for the advocacy side. So
that's the staff that appears in
front of the commissioners, like
lawyers in front of a judge, the
judges said as commissioners we
have staff that appear in front
of the commissioners.
The commissioners can't talk to
the staff that appears in front
of him. That would be a
violation of rules of statue and
ethics. And so there's a wall
there. So when you see our
requests, actually funding kind
of two different functions of
the agency, both adjudicatory
function with the commissioners
and their advisory staff that
sit as judges. In these cases,
We also have a side of the
agency that act as experts and
lawyers in front of the
commission that build the
record.
The commission can't base their
decisions on anything that's not
in the record, so having a
strong commission is one
component having a very strong
advocacy stuff to build. The
record is the other component.
And then Thirdly, you have staff
like me, who are, uh, here to
help the agency run better.
We're concerned about processes.
We have a S D there. They help
us with the finances the it all
of those. And so that's the
third category of staff. You
have.
When we built the budget request
for FY 25. We did so with a
couple of goals in mind. We
wanted to keep this a place
where people wanted to come to
work and stay to work. And we
think we've done that.
Um, so we built it with room to
provide professional education
and keep our staff training and
moving forward because this is
an industry where something you
learned today it's out of date
by six months from now, and so
this is a constantly evolving
industry, and our staff needs to
be constantly evolving as well.
Additionally, uh
We really focused on the ability
to bring this agency into the
modern age into the 21st
century. Our I T systems are
severely out of date. It means
that we're essentially operating
with an arm behind behind our
back tied behind our back
because, for example, to file
something at the PRC, you have
to email it to a person.
And that person has to download
it and then upload it each
individual file onto our e
docket system.
We have better things to do with
our time and technology will do
this for us and make us that
much more efficient. So that was
really one of our goals. And
then Lastly, there are things
happening in the world of
utilities today that weren't
happening when this agency was
organized a decade two decades
ago, things like regional
transmission organizations,
regional markets. Those are
evolving. Those are constantly
evolving, and this agency simply
wasn't designed to meet those
challenges were doing it.
But we don't have dedicated
staff to do that. And so we
designed our expansion request.
One to increase the capacity of
the staff that we currently have
so companion, uh, positions or
positions that will make other
staff members more efficient and
also meet that rising demand
that's facing the agency
nowadays these days are new
challenges.
So we built the base budget
requests and I want to express
absolute gratitude to our
analysts to the executive into
LFC for supporting our base
budget request. We're really
excited. We think we're going
to, um, really expand our
capacity with this request, and
it's like I said gear to
increase the training, the
professional development and the
ability for our current staff to
meet the challenges that there
Just a quick overview of how our
base operating budget broke
down. You can see there's some
focus on recruitment, increasing
being able to keep the stuff
that we have in the 200 category
categories. There's a small
focus on being able to increase
our ability to find expertise in
kind of the one off cases that
we get, But we don't have
somebody on stuff so we need to
be able to hire contract
experts.
And then you'll see the major
increase in our request is in
the 400 categories, and that's
where the focus on training
And professional development and
the associated travel to pay for
training and professional
development are found. Our
overall requests included 24
expansion positions 10 from the
Pipeline Safety Bureau again
gratitude to our analysts, D F A
LFC for supporting that That's
not out of the General fund. We
asked for 14 positions from our
General fund.
Um broken down into eight on the
advisory side, three on the
advocacy side and then three
other that
Everything else category staff.
Um and we also asked, as you can
see for
A big chunk in the I T
modernization because, as I
said, if we can't keep up, we
are operating with one arm
behind our back.
So I want to run into how we
focus on
Um, optimizing internal
operations and processes. We've
been putting a lot of effort and
thought as a uh, agency into how
to best use our processes, so
there's a ton of new processes
internally. A lot of
optimization there, but really,
it comes down to I t
modernization. We are
Very behind. Um as some of you
may know, I have experience in
complex litigation. There are
tools out there literally out
there. We can purchase off the
shelf that can make the complex
litigation we do at the PRC so
much more streamlined and
efficient, which opens up our
staff to do the other things
that frankly right now there are
two buried to be dedicated to
And with that, trying to be
respectful of your time, I will
stand for questions.
Thank you very much, madam.
She's staff were going to go to
first from Sen Montoya and then
represented Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
Madam chief Chief of staff. I
guess that's the right term for
you.
Um I appreciate you coming
before us today.
Um
Prior to the transition of the
PRC.
I may just full disclosure. I'm
a 32 year.
Long coal miner out of San Juan
County. So, um, I was very
involved during the
Whole transition. The E T A and
all of that.
And, uh,
I just want to ask because
previously under the elected
body, there are certain
Ah requirements and, uh and
Benchmarks that they needed to
reach and I'm wanting to find
out under this new
Since we've transitioned where
those benchmarks are and what's
the priority?
Um and Mr Chairman. Those
benchmarks were
To do to to regulate in a
fashion to make sure of two
things, one being grid
reliability.
Um, which is Paramount have not
met you before, And I think I'm
reluctant to say this because I
know people get tired of hearing
it, And that was
I worked in the previous
Governors administration.
And that first year we had a
tremendous
Icestorm.
It caused
It caused
In Texas for some of the, uh,
generation to go down.
And in New Mexico if we had not
had
Back up.
Where and inability to divert it
had been a tragedy in northern
New Mexico. Lions came down
Uh, people would have died from
exposure from the cold from it
was a big issue.
So
Grid Reliability. Is that still
the number one priority for the
PRC now that it's gone from a an
elected body to an appointed
body?
Mr. Chair, representative
Montoya grid Reliability is
absolutely a high priority for
this commission. And in fact, I
want to recognize Commissioner
Ellison, who is actually led an
effort and it's currently
leading an effort to set
reliability standards for the
state. Um, so absolutely Grid
reliability isn't is a priority
for us. Thank you for that, Mr
Chair.
Um
And one more question and it's a
kind of the For me. It's the
sister component to that.
And that is
We have a lot of poor people in
this state.
We have over 50% of our
population.
Is on some sort of government
assistance or another.
Or or receiving some sort of a
Uh, retirement or a government
paycheck and
And there's not a lot of room.
For
While costs to their utilities
bills each month.
So, um
Once again Now that we've
transitioned to an appointed
Commission.
What priority is it to maintain?
Affordability of our utilities
that are under the purview of
and oversight of the PRC.
Mr. Chair, representative
Montoya. Affordability is
absolutely one of the
commission's priorities, and
that is part of what they
consider when they look at
Justin. Reasonable rights. Um
and when they are considering
setting those rates as two of
our commissioners did just
earlier this month rate impact
is certainly a major factor in
their consideration. I want to
say to it's not just the
commissioners when they're
setting those rates. It's an
agency as a whole were
undertaking efforts.
On the consumer outreach side to
make sure that those consumers
who come to the agency seeking
help or or who can't pay their
bills or otherwise need help or
assistance with their utility
bills are connected to the
right, um, opportunities and are
able to if it's appropriate
workout payment plans and and
other mechanisms that we can
really help consumers.
Make these ends meet. Thank you
for that, Um, Mr Chair. I'd like
to have a couple of follow ups
on that and
Um
The concern that I've heard from
folks who are receiving utility
bills is that the rates have not
necessarily increased.
But a whole bunch of little fees
have been added on so that the
overall bill has gone up.
But it's not in the rate.
Um there's PRC have any
oversight over that over those
fees over those other?
Uh, additional costs that people
are seeing in their bills.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Montoya? Yes, The PRC has
oversight over utility bills,
not just the utility rates. Um,
the PRC's charged with
implementing statutes and laws
and the utilities often come in
with those requests to
implement, uh, renewable writers
or other required, um
Pieces of their service and the
PRC is is charged with
overseeing those which can show
up as a line item on a bill.
Thank you for that, Mr. Chair.
One last thing. This is more of
a statement than a question
we've seen in California who
Um, is kind of the direction
we're going with our E T. A and
here in new in New Mexico.
What we're seeing now is
Um, to try and not make it such
a burden on
The poor. What we're seeing now
is rates are being shifted.
That
Um, businesses or other folks
who maybe not qualify or not
receiving some sort of
government assistance.
You are now.
Capturing
A bigger portion of the bill.
It's being transferred to them.
It's not so so the rates are
Are becoming imbalanced. Um,
that's concern because I have
mentioned that we're not
California. We have a lot more
folks who are let's say low
income.
And
Because of that.
There's fewer folks who would be
considered not low income in
this state if we tried to
transfer that burden to them, so
I'm very concerned.
That
We don't allow that to take
place in New Mexico.
Um, we need to hold the
utilities to a reasonable
increase.
Um
It's it's going to become very,
very difficult for us to be a
place that attracts business to
the state.
If what we're doing is we're
transferring the burden.
To the larger purchasers of
electricity. So in the future,
um I've been very involved in
the past. I would like to come
and I and I plan to sit down
with you. But these are segments
concerns. I had tried to get
some legislation.
Ah tried to get the e to to
reflect these concerns I tried
to put in place.
Limits as to what increase could
take place.
In these in the rates and
utility bills and
Unfortunately, this legislature
did not have the
Ah!
Sent out intestinal fortitude to
put that into law. And so it is
up to the PRC.
To make sure that that we don't
stifle and we don't shift
increasing costs onto those who
are
Shift greater percentage of the
bill to them just because we can
So thank you, Mr Chair.
Okay, We're gonna thank you.
We're gonna go to represent
Sanchez and represent ah.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I just had
a few quick questions. Uh, is
there? Are there any
conversations? Uh,
And this is paying the opposite
spectrum of our remote Montana
was talking about
He's probably not talking about
nonprofit co ops, but
Is there any discussion about
reducing regulations on
nonprofit electric Co ops? Just
in the only reason I ask is
because, uh, a lot of these co
ops they arranged between 32,000
M. They're real small. They're
nonprofit. So there's not a
profit margin there. Um, a lack
of resources and the finances.
I just want to ask. Is that
something you guys are looking
at her potentially talking about
Mr. Chair, Representative
Sanchez. It's a not currently on
our radar, but we're happy to
chat with you and follow up like
to talk, Mr. Chair. Uh, like
great cases are real expensive.
And if you have a few people
that are intervening, and, uh,
That the costumes are being
between 500,000 or a million
dollars in these little
nonprofit co ops, or they're
asking for read, increase in, uh
Costs are negating the money
that they're
Asking to bring in and, um
A lot of these co ops serve.
Poor communities. I myself come
from real Reba. Um
Ah, there's a lot of poverty in
the area were served by a co op
and, uh, I know they do their
best, and I know they
The one that serves us recently
went through a great case, and
they got, uh, some kind of
increase, But from what I
understand, the costs were
pretty
Pretty high to go through that
rate case, and, uh,
We'll talk more offline. I don't
appreciate you offering that.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
Represent Sanchez from similar
Honda represents Narayana.
Thank you, Um
I'm chief of staff TROIA. It's
good to see you here, um and
everyone that's been working on
this.
Is this is a an interesting
budget Mr Chair as it's not
funded by the General fund and
looking at what LFC is made.
A bit more above above
additional
Um, funding requests or
recommendations over the
executive so kind of going
through this, but I'm also
looking at your performance.
Um, measures in summary, and it
just looks like you're going
above and beyond. In a lot of
ways. There's some missing
information as your new, um
New commission, so to speak.
Um And I'm really, really glad
that you, um
You focused on how
In the import importance of this
of the PRC is in in the modern
time demands energy focus, and
that's not all of the PRC does.
Yeah, but it is. It is a huge,
huge job and growing
Responsibility and I have
attended hearings. I've been,
you know, participated in some
of the trainings you had over
the interim, Mr Chair,
particularly in the Rto
spectrum and thank you for
announcing that you're you're
having another. Is it a training
Mr Chair, Or is it a
Teaching session. What is it?
Mr. Chair, representative Luhan.
It's a workshop. So there'll be
presentations, The commissioners
will be able to ask questions of
experts, um, really high
engagement is hoped. Okay, So
the one thing I saw on your
report card Mr Chair is is to
host. Um
Meetings outside of Santa Fe,
And do you have anything planned
and how and have you talked to
discuss what your plan is moving
forward and getting these
discussions going across the
state as we only have three
commissioners, as opposed to the
Was it five beforehand? Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair, Representative
Luhan. We're starting the
planning. Uh,
On the staff side. We've started
to identify some dates and
potential locations. We
Thank you for recognizing that
we set an ambitious performance
metrics for ourselves because we
really wanted to challenge
ourselves with this performance
measure. We recognize that we
went from having areas
represented by individuals to
having three represent or three
persons represent the entire
state. And so we wanted to make
sure that every new Mexican
Felt like the PRC was working
for them because we are and so
we recognize that we need to get
out of the out of the Santa Fe
area to make that feeling
different. Um
We've started just some informal
talks with the utilities for
their service areas. Um, but
nothing formalized yet.
Thank you. And with that
ambition, Mr Chair is that
reflected in your request,
especially for the trans
transportation or travel.
Mr. Chair representative. Yes,
the
The base operating budget was
planned with the idea that we
would be out of Santa Fe. I
appreciate that, Mr Chair. I
think that's really important.
One of the things that
You know voters, um
Hmm. Made the decision to change
the PRC and the constructs. And
so I think that we need to kind
of look at that, because we It's
so important that we get into
these other places and
But I just do want to focus into
that We the L C recommendations
or are greater than executive
certain and many areas as I'm
reading through our budget here,
But, um, being cognizant of your
need and growing need, as we are
moving into the modernization of
what we're doing with energy,
the the grid as mentioned many
times already today, I think
that
Grid, modernization and and a
lot of the developments around
that.
Um, the act that we created for
you for our states is to the PRC
has a lot to do with that and a
lot of the requests and how
we're going to
Just make some big decisions in
the next few could expand Mr
Chair in any of those those
things that might be coming
regarding our grid,
modernization and an rto, Mr
Chair.
Mr. Chair, Representative,
Luhan. Um, as many of you are
aware, there's a market forming
in the West. Um New Mexico is
uniquely positioned to
Be a driving factor in that
both.
Geographic, so both physically
physically and metaphorically
location between the East
Eastern grid and the Western
grid makes it really a prime
time for New Mexico to step up
and take the lead.
Right now. The commissioners are
holding that down without
dedicated support. We were able
to fill some of their advisory
roles. Our original request asks
for additional positions to help
them do that, too.
Dedicate to that. The SPP is on
the East and commissioner
O'Connell sits on that we have a
staff member who, frankly does
that in his spare time helps out
the commissioner O'Connell in
his spare time. He also has an
advisor, but again not dedicated
staff to this.
In the West. Talks are ongoing
about what that looks like
whether SPP moves over West
whether there's something to do
with California Commissioner
Aguilera is working on that with
his advisers help in her spare
time. Also, and so that request
reflects
Dedicated, uh
Staff to work specifically on
regional market analysis. Um,
that request also reflects a
staff member on the advocacy
side because as we're seeing
these cases come before us.
We're seeing this become an
issue on the record and we don't
have a dedicated staff member to
put evidence in the record as to
the impacts.
On our utilities of these
changes.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I think
this is I think this is an
oversight.
As far as how great of an impact
this modernization where we're
moving in the direction as an
energy state is and I don't see
that reflected
Very much in our budget, your
budget, Mr Chair, and I think
that this is something that
Is our responsibility. Um, as we
are
We're moving in that direction.
This is a huge lift. These are
not millions of dollars.
billions billions of dollars for
us to take on what this means
for our state and moving in the
direction of lowering those
rates and doing all the things
that are necessary.
Make these comments because you
are that you are the factor and
the regulation factor and it's
very important to me. It's very
important to the policy and the
work that I do. And I know I'm
taking a little extra time and
saying this, But I don't see
this reflected.
In our budget as as a priority
right and have some some more in
depth in serious conversation.
How in the future adapt More
important. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. We're gonna go to
next representative, Indiana,
then Vice chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Mr Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
We heard we've heard it a couple
of times and I'm most interested
in the I t. So where are you at
on the I t I believe you have a
$2 million Ask or go ahead, Mr
Chair representative staring
gonna we have about $2.5
million asked the executive
recommended 2 million. Um, lfc
recommend 500,000.
Alright. So I'm gonna ask the,
um Panelist. What's the
difference there? Can you tell
me why
Mr. Chair, representative, Um el
FCS.
Just just increase it by 500,000
just take into account like the
different just a different
PRC's current budget. Um
2.5,
I think any agency and this is a
very important agency,
especially, um, what's coming
with all the transition that,
um I like to see us give you
more because as an I t person
background, um, you have to have
it to do with your job and to be
up in the You know, we're this
is that it sounds like your kind
of course and buggy versus
freeway type place, And we need
you to be with the Spurs state
up to freeway levels so
I'm hoping we can do something
about that because it is very
important. It's what we do every
day and you guys need to have
what you need to have to do your
job and to be effective, and we
haven't had that in a while. So
it's very important that I
believe is very important that
we get you Do you already know
the application you want or
where you will put you want as
far as the two men, he said with
the 2.5 is
Mr Chair representative. We did
a request for information.
There's a couple of options off
the shelf that wouldn't meet our
needs. We didn't get what we
were trying to do with our
request was get ballparks and
what's out there and get an
idea. Um so we don't have
anything selected yet, but we
We know better, what's out there
and what it's going to cost and
that's why we asked for the 2.5
because it really was a
sharpening of the pencil based
off the responses we got to that
request.
So I just just to say it again.
I believe we need to to fund
this because we need to bring
their their agency.
Thank you very much.
Representative carignane. Next,
we're gonna advise your Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Actually
representatives, Sanjana asked,
Um
My biggest question. Um, a
smaller question. I noticed that
you have your interested in
expanding grants Administration
of funding.
Um, how many staff do you have
right now working on grant
applications.
Mr Chair, Madam Vice chair. We
don't have any full time staff
doing that. Our pipeline safety
Bureau chief Jason Montoya
manages the federal funding that
comes in that helps fund the
Pipeline Safety Bureau also our
CFO and ASD director Miranda
Mascarenas, she assists Jason
with that, And we have, um
A lot of pieces of staff working
on that.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Chief. Cory, Um
Mhm was that position that you
were looking for part of the
expansion request that you had
included Mr Chair, Madam Vice
chair. It was okay. Thank you.
Um, I have another questions.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Madam Vice
chair. Um
Okay? I don't see any other
questions. Ms Gray, I think
probably went over. This
apologized for stepping out
briefly, um with regard,
particularly on the market is
that obviously there are some
full time implications. But
right now we're you outlined
sort of a lot of questions over
the next couple of years with
regard to
How markets might form Is that
so that? I guess the question
talking it through is that could
contracting ability there?
Help you is it Is it really sort
of a full time FTE approach.
Has that been part of any
considerations.
Mr Chair. We are open to being
creative. However, I do believe
that
There is full time implications
there. Um, the activity,
especially around the Western
market right now.
Could be a full time job very
easily and we're getting
constantly getting requests. In
fact, I was working with
Commissioner Aguilera on on a
request just last week for
another.
Presence on another conversation
group. Um so we're having to
Pull staffs extra time and put
them on this part time. It could
very well be a full time job
right now, which is why we
requested those positions and
less. Um
Madam chief staff. Um
Do you know this is sort of
looking ahead? You noted New
Mexico's unique role as sort of
the connector between East and
West.
Do you see? Perhaps sort of
corporate home for a regional
market, potentially being in New
Mexico should sort of things
play out in a in a way that's
advantageous for us as a state.
We know our energy is central to
both. You know both directions.
Obviously, we have a pretty low
population even as we continue
and work to grow. Um yeah, just
interested in your thoughts
Briefly there.
Mr. Chair, Um, having had some
small conversations with others
around this point, I very much
believe that New Mexico could be
a location.
For such a head.
Quarters or hub. Um
Physically where exactly in the
right place, but also, um
We're a good place to do
business and very, very
competitive for all those other
reasons, Um
In the other.
As to the other states, who
could also be in that physical
location.
Got it. Okay. Thank you very
much. I really appreciate that
appreciate the presence of both
the commissioners and your
staff. And really, we've seen in
a with a lot of challenges. You
all have, really, I think
exceeded expectations and are
working in really strong ways
for the state.
Last time. I don't think it came
up. I just recently per
commission order there was a
rate decrease for PNM customers
recently was that
A 6%? Yeah, mr Chair.
I don't know. Off the top of my
head. I'm going to look back to
my
Commissioners.
Complement and if it's a little
too complicated, get into its
outside of the parameters of the
budget hearing, so I think what
we would ask is the analyst
We've heard from the committee
being a lot of interest, not
only in sort of the security
side of this, but I I and others
are very interested in the
regional market opportunity.
That you are leading sort of
search for ways with staff to be
supportive there so we would ask
you to sort of go back.
Uh, Mr Rodriguez to look at
opportunities to really support
The commission in that also
acknowledging the data security
side
With that war, And I think in
this case we can stick with the
LFC recommendation. Given that
it does not change any of our
budget parameters, Mr Chair, I
would move. The committee adopts
the LFC recommendation.
Okay. It's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon. Second by represent
Garrett. Is there any opposition
to adopting the L C
recommendation?
I don't see any. Okay. Thank you
very much. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Kate, We're gonna ask.
Excellent. Thank you all. It's
thanks for being up. Um
Uh, Madam Superintendent, When
we get to you please feel free
to introduce members of your
team.
We see one member of your
illustrious team there already.
Uh and Mr Rodriguez, Julius,
please. Whenever you're ready,
Mr Chair members of the
committee. Good afternoon. My
name is Julie PSA and I'm the
LFC, analyst for the Office of
Superintendent of Insurance.
Please refer to Tab four and
that's agency code for 40.
You can also look at your volume
two for the full lfc
recommendation on page 188, as
well as volume three for the
health care affordability fund
sources and uses and that's on
page 78.
And I'm joined today by D. F a
budget analyst Arianna V home as
well as as well as
Superintendent, Alice Cane and
so starting off on Page one,
This is the business unit, so
this is an overall
recommendations.
Um, so always side does not
receive any general fund.
revenue. Um, the LFC didn't
recommendation is 2.1 million
greater than the executive So
overall, the LFC is
Um, recommendation includes 7.8%
increase, while the executive
includes a 6.3% increase. The
main differences are in other
transfers and in other revenues
with the, um lfc recommending
1.2 million more and other
transfers and the executive
recommending, um
979 109 100 more in other
revenue.
Um as far as spending the LFC
recommended more across the
border for personnel and
contractual services than the
executive. Both recommendations
see the need for to fully fund
size, um, authorized FTE.
However, the executive the LFC
recommends and a additional
funding for personnel.
Um LSD also provided additional
funding and contractual
services, um for things such as
legal representation and
actuarial representation, which
we'll talk about shortly, um, as
far as the expansions the
executive, um and recommendation
included 103,000 more and that's
for a fraud insurance agent
which the LFC did not recommend,
not pass it over to Arianna.
Madam chairs moving on to page
four of your packet. This is for
the insurance policy program
again. This
Okay, Um, agency, and this
program doesn't receive any
general fund revenue, so the
LLCs recommendation was 900,000
more than the executive mainly
as a result of the LFC
recommending more for personnel
and for operational cost. Um the
LFC recommends 1.2 million more
and other transfers in the
executive while the executive
recommends 287 more in other
revenue for the health care
affordability fund.
Moving down to spending in
personnel. Both recommendations
increased funding for personnel.
The executive increased by 9%
and the LFC increased by 16%.
For contractual services. Both
increased funding for financial
analysis, which is tied to the
agency's national accreditation.
The LFC also provided additional
funding for legal consulting
actuarial representation and a
couple other items.
And then finally in other and
the other category, Um, that 87
million. You see, there's for
programs funded by the health
Care Affordability Affordability
fund.
Um And then, in terms of the
expansions, neither the LFC or
the executive
It.
And to perform investigative
work and law enforcement
services pertaining to insurance
fraud, theft, arson and other
related crimes.
The LFC recommendation does not
include
Madam Chair, and then finally,
for the last peak code. This is
on page eight of your packet.
Um, There are no differences in
the L C and the executive
recommendations. Both are flat
budget for a third party
administrator of the Patient
Compensation fund.
Mr Chair on onto the non
reoccurring appropriation,
Different sheets. I'd like to
highlight the first, uh, that
first. The executive
recommendation includes 2.15
million special appropriation
for the agency to re mediate
issues caused by the recent
cyber attack.
This item was not included in
the Ellis LFC recommendation.
Next, you'll see on the non
recurring different sheets. Two
fairly large items recommended
both by the executive and LFC to
address the actuarial deficit in
the patient's compensation fund.
And finally, the remaining items
on the sheets are all related to
oversize accreditation through
commissioners or the any I see.
I see reviewed or size
operations and determined that
they are not meeting the
baseline level of financial
oversight regulatory standards.
In order for us to keep their
accreditation they need to
greatly enhance the risk focused
financial analysis, both in
house through the contracting
technical experts.
The executive includes 2.5
million for contractual
financial analysis services,
while the LFC includes 3.6
million for this purpose.
Additionally, that LFC
recommendation also includes
nonrecurring funding for salary
increases to retain in House
financial analysis experts at O
S. I
And with that alternate over to
Thank you, Uh,
Thank you, Madam. Chair members
of the Committee. Um I really
appreciate the opportunity to
present to you today. This
presentation hopefully will be
brief because we know and I'm
trying to leave time for the
committee to ask ample
questions. I was pleased to
present to many of you, your
individuals on this committee
during the interim and look
forward to working with each one
of you during this session.
For those that have I have not
had a chance to meet. I have
worked in insurance for more
than 40 years and bring
significant industry and
regulatory experience to this
position. I have now been
superintendent for seven months.
I'd like to thank you, Madam
Chair and the members of the
Committee and Mr Sully and his
excellent team, a number of who
have tried to recruit and
successfully, but, uh, for for
the incredible support that
they've given OS I since my
arrival
Building A state budget is an
extraordinary task that you have
vote and you have all been
excellent partners to work with.
I have been very impressed with
the dedication and the
professionals that always I who
work on behalf of New Mexico
consumers every day and with me
today is Superintendent Colin
Bio. I mean, it's Deputy
Superintendent Colin Bio
promotion soon is coming, and
then two people from our finance
area, the director of
administrative services for
Subi Rodriguez and the manager
of a budget friendly Moya and I
could not have produced this,
uh, package.
Without their assistance.
Um
This is a mission driven agency.
It strives to protect consumers
foster competitive marketplace
ensure that companies are
financially sound so that they
can pay consumer claims and that
the producers who sell insurance
are honest and trustworthy.
The insurance landscape is
undergoing a number of major
changes and challenges stemming
from external factors that
require strategic and principled
oversight from all state
insurance regulators from the
rising costs of health care to
the increased risk posed by
climate change to the potential
for algorithm discrimination
tied to the adoption of
artificial intelligence
technologies.
Let's I needs to be prepared to
take on these emerging issues in
a way that reflects the voices
and priorities of the people of
New Mexico. Let me share. Some
of the OS is recent
accomplishments on slide three,
has saved consumers a
considerable amount of money by
resolving their complaints in FY
23, the agent recovered over 4
million for consumers resulting
from property and casualty
insurance complaints.
And work to increase the fair
plan coverage limit with the
Legislature from 250,000 to
350,000. This is critical as
many of you are hearing from
your constituents about
challenges and obtaining
insurance. This is a bad step.
We have a new Mexico that is
being used increasingly, uh and
it is there to ensure some
leverage of coverage is
available.
I'm also glad to share a point
recently given to me by my
Consumer Assistance bureau,
about half of the flights we
received from consumers results
in a positive resolution, and
many say the individuals
substantial sums. That is why
it's so critical that we raise
awareness about OS I and what we
can do to help your constituents
is also safe consumers millions
of dollars in health insurance
costs.
Both through a resolution
resolution of complaints as well
as programs under the Health
Care Affordability fund. We are
proud to announce that the Roman
and coverage to the health
insurance Exchange had a record
high year over year enrollment
increased by 38%. This
accomplishment is in no small
part to the affordability
improvements enabled by the
Health Care affordability fund.
We now have 6000 businesses and
41,000 of their employees
benefiting and about 57,000.
People are enrolled in B well,
New Mexico has also taken
enforcement actions that will
incentivize companies to follow
the law and take seriously the
priorities of the Legislature.
To that end, OSC has issued
penalties against health
insurers.
Where they were found to be out
of compliance with health care
provider credentialing
requirements. That's one of the
things we can do to ease the
administrative burden on our
stressed healthcare providers
system.
Now let me share some of the
challenges or I see his face.
Downside. Four.
Was, I is in the process of
rebuilding our financial
analysis capabilities, and we
thank the LFC and the executive
for their attention to this
area, ensuring robust financial
analytical capabilities is a
core function of any state
insurance regulator, and we have
made significant progress in
recent months and with your
support will continue to do so.
Oh, so I was also a victim of a
cybersecurity incident in late
September. This is a growing
threat to government agencies,
and I will need the support of
this committee.
Do not only continue our
remediation efforts but to
strengthen our cybersecurity
readiness. Fortunately, we have
made significant progress and
with your help will be a much
stronger in a much stronger
position moving forward. We also
are seeking seeing the effects
of climate change is having on
the property insurance market
the availability and
affordability of coverage is a
major concern that is not only
affecting New Mexico and other
Western states. But the entire
nation.
Our team is planning to hold
town halls throughout the state
this spring and summer to help
your constituents with coverage
issues and OS. I just issued an
emergency rule that will give us
more advanced notice on coverage
changes in visibility into the
markets so that we can best
direct consumers to the right
resources.
It is also doing everything we
can to help address the health
care provider shortage and we
have requested relief for
independent providers and
facilities as well as royal
hospitals in this year's budget.
Finally, there are always there
are always I workforce issues
that need to be addressed. We're
taking steps to develop better
recruiting strategies, including
working with local universities
to build internship
opportunities and workforce
pipeline to recruit professional
talent such as actuaries.
accountants, I t professionals
and attorneys from New Mexico.
I'm pleased to tell you that we
have had very good conversations
with LFC and executive staff.
And both recommendations from
most of our size priorities. I'm
hopeful that we will be able to
work together to address the
remaining items this legislative
session.
Slide five covers OSC revenues
OS. I is a unique agency because
our day to day operations are
funded entirely through revenue
that oversized generates through
insurance industry assessments
and fees levied on the companies
We regulate funds needed for
agency operations or
appropriated by the Legislature
during the current fiscal year,
OS I projects that we will
generate 35.7 million
Which we hope to utilize to
strengthen our core functions.
Other funding streams not
included in the slider dedicated
to specific programs such as the
Health Care Affordability fund
and the Patient's compensation
fund.
On slide. Six. You can see OS is
recurring requests for FY 25 is
173.2 million. However, since
the agency adjusted its request
down where due to a delayed
program launch date, I will
describe some of the key
differences in the next few
slides.
This is original request
included specific new positions.
Recent events have shifted our
priorities and we have a more
focused request today, OS. I
request at least two additional
staff to focus on our
cybersecurity preparedness and
response. We have also
identified two key positions
that are needed to address
Bottle next in the agency
related to HR and budget,
because we are a relatively
small agency if one person is
out in either of these
departments, it puts a
significant strain on the entire
agency.
Finally we have a requesting to
public facing positions, a
public information officer and a
new property and casualty
consumer complaints specialist
who can deal with the increased
consumer needs in this line of
coverage. The LFC budget did not
include additional positions,
but did include 1.6 million for
funding existing vacancies. What
the executive included one
position and 1.1 million for
filling existing vacancies.
We would appreciate the ability
to create these new positions as
we see them as critical to
fulfilling our mission.
Finally on site eight. You can
find overseas contracts. Request
O s. I is appreciative of Ella
Si and the executive
recommendations related to the
financial analysis, services and
technical assistance services.
The other major need that we was
included in the LFC
recommendation but was not
included in the executive is
actuarial services, which is
especially critical because OS
is longtime chief actuary
recently accepted a position and
industry.
We are working to recruit a new
actuary, but the current hiring
environment for actuaries is
extremely challenging. The LFC
and executive recommendations
are closely aligned with the
SC's requests related to the
health care, affordability fund
and automobile theft prevention
programs. LFC for the auto
theft.
Pension and and the executive
Um, side nine.
As noted earlier. There are
several issues that will require
special appropriation and we do
not anticipate the need for this
level of ongoing fun. Fun and
pardon me funding for these
priorities.
First and foremost, we need
funding to address immediate
cybersecurity needs. The request
was developed in constant
consultation with do it and
includes temporary contracting
staff for technical assistance,
skill, development and
maintenance training for
certifications. Consulting for
special purposes, such as cyber
security audits, Compliance
audits, network audits and
special infrastructure projects.
Well. The executive
recommendation supports this
request. The L. C did not
included, but noted that
additional conversations are
needed. We are working with
Julissa and the team that do it
to discuss these matters as soon
as possible the need for
financial analyst services is
also critical. And while we have
built in funding for recurring
costs, or scientist pates that
intensive contracting services
will be necessary in FY, 25 and
26 as we rebuild and fully
staffed this unit.
We have also requested a salary
increase for OSC staff in order
to improve retention and the
quality of life. Our employees,
which was supported by O. F. C.
I hope this will go a long way
towards keeping the talent we
currently have in the agency.
Finally, OSC has included
requests for the patient
compensation fund in order to
eliminate it and eliminates the
projected deficit for
independent providers and
facilities. This will not only
address the long term PCF
funding issues for these
providers. It will also provide
immediate relief by eliminating
the deficit related surcharge
that is owed.
I see this as a way for us to do
our part to address the provider
shortage.
Was. I has also requested 10
million specifically to provide
immediate relief to rural
hospitals participating in the
PCF.
In summary you can see on slide
10 that always see requests.
Adoption of the LFC
recommendation of 151.8 million
as the starting point for the
OSC budget. We also request the
ability to create these six
additional positions. And
finally, we hope that after the
additional discussions, we can
find consensus with the LFC and
executive on cyber security
enhancements.
We again are greatly
appreciative of both the LSE and
executive for helping us
navigate these challenging
issues and look forward to
continue discussions. Thank you
again, madam chair and members
of the Committee for your
Support of OS I I look forward
to today's discussion and I'm
happy to follow up on any items
that I'm not able to answer
today.
Thank you, madam Superintendent.
Um
We do have questions from the
committee and I'll start with
ranking member Armstrong. Thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you
for your presentation. Um, I was
curious to just ask a little bit
about the $31 million reversion.
is that part of fees that you've
collected or where does that
reversion come from? And then
where does it go? Where does
actually get reverted to
Madam chair and representative
Armstrong on the reversion is
tied to the, uh, the affordable.
The
Patient Affordability fund and
if I don't answer all the
details, Colin will step in. But
there was a program that didn't
go forward and that's where it
goes back into the fund.
Colin
Go ahead, Colin. Thank you And,
uh Madam Chair and
representative Armstrong, the
reversion specifically for FY 23
was because additional federal
funds became available and then
the transition of folks from
Medicaid into our insurance
exchange happened a little bit
later than we're expecting when
we had first requested our
budget.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you for
those answers. And then can you
talk to me a little bit about
the, um, patient? The
compensation fund.
The patient compensation fund is
a is a rather large fund. I
think it's about 176 million.
It's provides a layer of
coverage. It was developed. I
think, during the first medical
malpractice crisis that the
whole country had in the
seventies, um what it's required
that the providers and the
entities get one layer of
coverage, and the next layer is
covered by the PCF for medical
malpractice. And then and there
are caps in there.
What we do is there are
surcharges. The PCF has, uh, an
actual consultant that makes
recommendations about the
surcharges. Uh, last year, there
was an infusion. I think of 35
million were asking for an
infusion this time to keep the
funds sustainable. We're also we
didn't accept all the advisory
board surcharge recommendations
accepted most of them except for
the independent providers where
we lowered it from 14 almost 15%
to 10%.
And we're gonna make that up,
because, uh, we as we look at
the fund, we see a large There's
I think 40 million invested, but
we think we can invest more that
could make up the surcharges and
in very in minimal, risky
investments based on the
interest rate environment right
now.
Okay. Thank you for that.
Answer. I appreciate that. So
you asked for a 35 million last
year.
And we're asking for another 35
million this year.
Correct to pardon me 32 last
year man, Madam Chair
Representative Armstrong. Is
this going to be a continued ask
Uh,
Can you look into your magic?
Paul and tell us if it's going
to be a continued ask PCF is a
challenge, and I would like to
get back to you with a more
detailed answer on that, if
that's permissible, Madam chair
and representative Armstrong, it
is a complex issue. It depends
on whether the you know the
hospital stay in and they pay
their surcharge. So let me get
back with a much more details.
Response, which
Will not rise to the level of a
crystal ball.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for that. That response
because, you know, we just can't
have specials and supplementals
of that amount. It just I mean,
ultimately, we need to
Fix the problem. So thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, representative. Next
we'll go to representative
Garrett and then Sarah Nana.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for your presentation. My
have two questions. The first is
so you don't have any of your
own actuaries. They're all
contract ID. Can you just
clarify that?
Uh, Madam, Chair and
representative, You are
absolutely correct. We had a
chief actuary who recently left.
We had a life and health actuary
that we had for two months and
left. Uh, he was supposed to
move to New Mexico and didn't
uh, it is really a challenge,
not just in New Mexico and other
state agencies.
Hiring actuaries. Um, but we are
we that we were very successful
in getting our chief actuary
through a cheek through an
internship program and we're
really pushing hard on going to
the New Mexico universities and
trying to start a pipeline
because there are some very
exciting professional jobs in
the OS I that we'd like to keep
in New Mexico. But in the
meantime we need at yours and
financial analytical people to
stay operational.
So people tell your Children to
enter this career? Yes. My
second question is on from 190
the details on the health care
afforded.
Affordability fun.
So there's two things that I
wanted to ask you. About. One is
that the Taxation and Revenue
Department has struggled to
accurately report sir Tax
revenue.
For the fund, Further
complicating accurately
projecting the fund's ability to
support quickly growing
initiatives of which you have
some significant ones is
anything being done to address
that?
Come? Yes, I turned to Colin on
this one.
Uh, Madame Cheron,
Representative Garrett. Thank
you for that question. It's a
It's a really good one, and I
think we're in an especially
unique time right now because
there were so many people who
were enrolled in Medicaid during
the pandemic period who now are
coming off until because of that
it's become very difficult to to
know in any given month how many
people
Are ensured in aren't and so,
um, We've seen some fluctuation
there, but I think as things
normalize a bit and are
uninsured rate stays a little
more constant, that will become
easier for us to project and
we'd be happy to help with the
consensus Revenue group as they
come up with those estimates for
next year.
Thank you. And my final
question, Madam chair is, um
Let's see the third, um,
program.
Let's see, which is for
uninsured people. It was
expected to launch in 2024.
To expand coverage to uninsured
new Mexican residents in
eligible for Medicaid, Medicare
or be will New Mexico. When is
it projected to come online? It
said late 2024. Can you give any
accurate estimate?
Okay? My expert tells me Excuse
me, Madam Chair representative.
My expert tells me January 2025.
There were some problems with
the group that was going to
administer it in there. They
were having problems with their
own systems and their own t p A.
Which is what held it up.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you very much represented.
Santayana. Um, thanks for your
presentation. So can you tell me
specifically what you're looking
at for cybersecurity. Where are
you falling behind or what? What
it says, um, enhancements.
Um, I thank you.
Mr. Chair representative of
I would say we were very
fortunate that do it had such
protections around our agency
that we lost no consumer company
data. I think as we've gone into
the belly of this beast, which
has been an education for me and
my staff, uh, it's clear that
there weren't enough resources.
There weren't enough updates.
That's why we're looking for the
audits.
To make sure there are right. It
was really problematic. Uh, some
of our our systems were
antiquated and we didn't have
enough people to service them.
That's we've been working. We
were very fortunate that do it
introduced us to Arctic wolf
that did the forensic review and
also helped us going forward.
What things we should be looking
out for.
We also have been working with
New Mexico company and M who've
been extremely helpful as we've
built up these various systems.
I will say that, uh, we've we've
probably moved, uh
20 years forward if you ask me
and how we're going to operate,
and we are what we are asking
for which we didn't have is our
own in house cybersecurity
experts and then also training
so people really understand how
important it is, even though
it's annoying at times to really
take on these protections, and,
uh
It's it. We were as again I and
I've given do it. A lot of
anyone who asked, they really
protected us. And we've had the
talk, which were shut down for
two months, and it's been a
total rebuild.
Okay?
Thank you. I agree with you as
far as do what they have done an
amazing job. They even got hit.
And you wouldn't even known
because it was such a there. So,
um, up to date and strong in
their security. Um
Training should it's supposed to
fall under the new Office of
Cybersecurity, so hopefully we
can get that going so we can
train all of our everyone who
uses the system. But those
things are coming. I know, but I
I understand how important it
is. I hope the committee
understands how important it is
that we keep up with cyber
I understand how important it
is. I hope the committee
understands how important it is
that we keep up with
cyber security and all the
software updates. Those are
really important and like, like
you said, Um people getting
people to understand. And what
what is this? What? What could
happen and what to look for and
with a I. It's only gonna get
harder, so we really need to
make sure all our agencies are
up to date with cyber security.
So
I'm hoping we can do something
for you. Thank you.
Men, Madam chair and represented
valuable say that do it has
become an invaluable partner to
us, and I think we've really
opened up those communications
dramatically since this
happened.
Thank you, Representative. Next
we have representative Luhan and
then representative Herndon.
Thank you, manager.
I appreciate the time. Um
This is a fascinating agency for
me and all the things you do and
all the things you're bringing
to the table regarding, Um
Hell, things are changing, uh,
in regard to
Um, climate change insurance and
all these new things that are
coming up. I just want to say
thank you for that and bringing
those things to our attention.
How? Um, but Miss Madam chair
I think those are future
conversations are really kind of
time. Those think those
intricacies on those issues.
Down. Um, my one question
because I want to thank
representative Garrett for
asking about her actuaries. I
know we have an issue with that
and being able to afford
An actuary to on staff or even
to contract someone.
Um
It's a big, It's a big issue for
your agency.
My question is going to go to
healthcare, uh, affordable,
affordable fund. And can you
give me a little more detail on
how the fund or how you're able
to lower the cost and increasing
expert Madam Chair
representative Luhan again
turned to my expert on this fund
since he's been a managing it
since it started.
My deputy
Thank you, Superintendent, Mr
Chair and representative Luhan,
so we're able to use the
resources that are distributed,
uh from tax and revenue to the
fund every year in a few
different ways, So the first is
that we provide a direct
discount to small group
coverage. So this is for
businesses with fewer than 50
employees.
Um, we're providing that
directly through the health
insurance carriers so that the
businesses don't have to go
through a cumbersome process to
sign up for that assistance were
able to automatically provide
that discounts that now 6000
businesses and their 41,000
employees are able to get that
on a monthly basis.
Um, on the other one. We have
our health insurance
marketplace, which is also
called Be well, New Mexico and
that was created by the
Affordable Care Act. There is
federal assistance available
there. Um, And fortunately with
the resources that you all have
appropriated to the health care
affordability fund, we've been
able to
Build on those two not only
offer additional premium help
for people but also lower those
out of pocket costs that often
can be a barrier to access to
care. And so together, just I
think, largely by making that
coverage more affordable but
also through some of the
improvements in the system that
be well in M has done some
improved outreach and marketing
efforts. We've been able to get
the word out about those
programs and really spread them
more widely, So we're really
pleased with the results that
we've seen this year, Mr Chair
and representative Luhan.
And hope to continue to build on
that success that we've had.
Thank you, Mr. What are the
numbers and incomparable numbers
Since we've had the fund in
place, or, uh, Mr Chair and
Representative, um
Since the Let's see the most
recent number that I can pull
off the top of my head is that a
year ago today we had about
40,000 people enrolled in B well
in M. And today we have 57,000.
So we saw 38% increase over this
enrollment period and we're
going to continue to try to
build on that throughout the
rest of the year.
Thank you, Mr And what was your
goal?
Uh, Mr Chair and representative,
we actually had, um
Because of some of the actuarial
reports that we had had done for
this program. We have been
expecting something closer to
maybe 3 to 5000 additional
enrollments. Um and so we
actually saw quite a bit more
than that, which is is great for
us to see. Thank you Appreciate
that. So we were reflecting some
of the things and you've you've
done a
Good job. I want to say, miss
manager every sea view. I don't
know how many emails and next
month to support this part of
your budget. So I want to say
good work on that Whoever is
getting them getting the message
out there, But I just want to,
you know, make sure we're
getting those details Correct.
And now as we're moving forward
with Mr Chair, so thank you.
For the time, Madam.
Superintendent. You want to add
anything?
Not at all. Um Mr Chair
representative. I think Colin
and his team have done it an
incredible job in this
affordability. From what I
understand about 50% of the new
enrollees are being supported by
this affordability program.
Appreciate it. Thank you so much
and good work and everybody and
I just appreciate the time Mr
Chair.
Thank you. Representative Hunt
representing Herndon, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Madam Secretary for your
presentation. My question
actually goes to the LSD
analysts with respect to the the
concern that the secretary has
raised regarding insurance fraud
and the need for an insurance
agent, But the LSC did not make
it that recommendation for
increasing that.
That FTE? Can you tell me what
you're thinking how they should
take care of that issue? Mr
Chair representative. So
although the LFC did not, um,
include the expansion request,
the LFC did increase personnel
by 16% funding for personnel by
16% which could be used, um for
additional positions.
Thank you, Madam Chair and um,
Madam Superintendent Secretary.
I wanted to make sure that is
looking at the work that has to
be done by this amazing agency
that the recommendation it's
important that you have the
people in place for
For that position. Well, Mr
Chair, Representative, Thank you
for that support and that fraud
unit has been winning awards
nationally for the work they've
been doing and exposing a lot of
large, uh related crime
syndicates most recently and we
have a number of excellent
prosecutors in there and
investigators.
So, Mr Chair and Madam
secretary, if for some reason,
the recommendation is not
enough, it's important that we
have that conversation so we can
bring everyone to the table and
make sure that you're taken care
of and you can continue in the
pain that you've started. Mr.
Chair, Representative. Thank you
for that support, and we will
continue the discussions, but I
think we will be able to meet
that need
With the current allocation.
Thank you and Mr Chair one last
point of, uh
For the secretary. I wanted to
make sure that you knew that
there was a house built 33 that
had been at it that had been
dropped, and, uh, requiring you
to be engaged in, uh, Drug
Transparency Act.
Prescription drugs. Pence
Famous. Yeah, let me be clear
about that. And to make sure
that you could, uh, be able to,
uh accommodate that, along with
the funding that has been
included in the legislation.
Okay up. You know, Mr Chair
Representative. We, uh,
submitted R F I r. I think
yesterday and we included in
what we thought it would cost to
collect that data. We are very
even in full support of getting
transparency and this whole drug
pricing and so we are eager to
support to take on that.
All right. Thank you. Thank you
very much. Madam Secretary.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Representative Herndon. Vice
chair. Dixon, please. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Um
Thank you, Superintendent for
the presentation.
I am wondering, I'm looking at
this specials. Um, and a number
of agencies have requested funds
to help with cybersecurity
response and enhancement. And so
my question is, Um, if O s I is
working with do it if
You know if the budget were to
provide funds to do it to help
all of the various entities that
have asked for support if OS I
would work with do it for that,
Uh, madam Chair? Uh, I mean,
excuse me, madam Vice chair,
right? No. Sorry for the switch,
but
Yeah, we think Do it's an
incredible partner. But we do
think we need some some cyber
security on site because
You know that the day to day
they can help us. They've helped
us surrounding it. They've
helped us get the right
partners. Uh, but they haven't
been on site and I think we
really need on site
cybersecurity experts. That's
why we're asking for this.
But it will not stop our
partnership with the do it.
On these issues at all.
Thank you, madam. Super. Thank
you very much. Vice chair,
Dixon. I don't see any other
questions. Uh, it would be, I
think. Well, you know, we see
that the LFC is a stronger
record is a Yeah, a bit stronger
recommendation. Excited to go
ahead with that since Madam
Superintendent.
I really encourage you with sort
of aggressively asserting your
office's involvement across the
number of areas as we consider
other legislation this session
that invest more into our health
care industry, which we need. We
also need greater, um
The you know the results need to
follow them.
So then invites you. Thank you.
Mr Chair. I moved the committee
adopts the LFC recommendation.
It's been moved by vice Chair
Dixon second by representing
Figueroa. Is there any
opposition to adopting the LFC
recommendation?
Okay. I don't see any. Thank you
very much. Thank you. Chair and
members of the committee. Okay,
Uh, Madam Commissioner, we want
to invite you and your team up.
Yeah, As folks are sitting down,
we'll turn the mics off. They're
always very tricky.
Alright. I think we're getting
there to the presentation. Uh,
help. Please go ahead and start
us off. Madam Commissioner. When
we get to you please feel free
to introduce the members of your
team.
Good afternoon. I'm Helen Got
SWAT. I'm the LSC, analyst for
the State Land office with me.
today is the Commissioner of
public plans. Stephanie Garcia,
Richard
And my D F a counterpart Monica
Tapia.
Um
Yeah.
State land offices agency 539.
It should be behind to have five
for additional information. The
LFC budget recommendation is on
page 49 of Volume two.
And there is a table on
beneficiary distributions in
volume three on page 31. And
with that, I will turn it over
to Monica who is going to talk
about the uses and sources.
Thank you, Helen. Mr. Chair
members of the committee.
Executive recommendation
increases Total revenue by 1.7
Million or 7%. For a total of
26.3 million.
LFC recommendation provides a
total revenue increase of just
over 1 million or four port and
to present
The Saint Latin offices, a
ported solely with revenue
earned on state trust lands from
activities do that do not
deplete the resource such as
grazing and one time bonuses on
oil and gas leases.
The executive recommendation
includes a 1.1 million increase
to the base budget for all
spending categories to support
and flight inflationary costs
related to administrative costs
and in state travel.
LFC recommendation. Increase for
the total base is 127,000 less
than the executive
When the base budget increase.
Within the base budget increased
The executive recommendation
provides an increase of 1.4
million, or 7.3% to support six
new FT to increase efficiency
and capitalize on new revenue
generating opportunities.
The LSC recommendation does not
support the six FTE increase,
but does include 845,000 0.5 for
personnel.
I will now pass it over to Helen
for performance measures and
language.
Uh, the
Uh, executive and, um lfc
reached a consensus on
performance manager targets
that, um, slightly gently raise
three targets for three
performance measures that the
agency has been exceeding fairly
regularly. We don't think that
this place is an additional
substantial subject additional
burden on the agency.
Um and we, uh, carry forward
language That's been in the, um,
bill for for a very long time
that has to do with a certain
type of coal, methane.
Is that right? Coalbed methane,
and with that I will turn it
over to the land Commission.
Thank you. And before I begin,
Mr Chairman, I do want to thank
Mr Happy and Misko swap for, um
all of their great work on our
budget recommendations and
really digging into what this
agency does, As you know, it's
quite unique amongst agencies,
So I want to start there and
then joining me here at the
diocese is one of our
Deputy commissioners. Um,
similarly, Stewart, he's deputy
of operations. We also have
turned Knicks, who is deputy of
public affairs, Then we have a
various assortment. Mr Chairman.
I'm going to just have them
stand.
Well.
So we've got folks from ASD oil
and gas surface Division. Um,
are legal division or commercial
division. So all of the
appointees folks from renewable
energy? Any question that you
may have today, Mr Chairman or
your committee? Hopefully, I
think one of these folks will
answer. This is my Google.
Right here behind me, Mr
Chairman To quote you back to
you since we are not touching
general fund, um
And in this budget because we do
fund the agency from the money
that is made office State Trust
land. I just wanted to reinforce
that.
I wanted to start by thanking
you for the opportunity to be
here today. Um, I know that you
don't have a lot of time You
have to get back onto the floor,
And so I want to really get to
the heart of our request. Which
is our our personnel.
Um, we're gonna ask today that
the committee considered moving
the executive recommendation and
if not, at least providing are
requested funding for personnel.
and I will get into why that
matters. State land offices
funded from revenue it generates
each year and this last year. I
think it goes without saying
once more if you haven't seen
the banner in front of the
office, we almost reached $3
billion this year. 2.75 billion
For school kids, hospitals and
universities for the first time
ever.
At the land office. Uh, slide
five provides a historical
overview. We're just gonna We're
gonna go through these quickly.
You can reference them and ask
questions about them at at your
own pace. Um, and then slide six
hits on some of our fy 23
accomplishments. So we broke
another revenue record. As I
just mentioned we expanded,
affordable housing on state
land.
We quadrupled our renewable
energy resource on state land.
We got industry to clean up
their messes on their own dime.
We strengthen health protections
around schools and, uh up
through FY 23 we plugged over
300.
Abandoned wells on state land.
As our deputy says.
With a taxpayer cost of 00.
Since FY 23 ended. We are now
well on our way.
Uh, two. We have plugged over
400 wells. And just to give you
an idea there are around 1000
such wells that need to be
plugged on state land that are
no longer active.
So we're we're well on our way
to 50% of those plugged at no
cost to the taxpayer, um and no
cost to the state Land office or
its beneficiaries.
Our FY 25 budget request is
detailed in slide eight.
It's focused on continuing this
good momentum. We're requesting
an overall increase of 7%, or
1.7 million.
This is a modest increase,
considering our historic
workload, and we will talk about
that workload today.
Um, and our agency at once again
is completely funded from its
own earnings, so there is no
general fund that comes to this
agency.
For some perspective.
On Tuesday. So just two short
days ago.
Our oil and gas lease sale just
for this month alone. Remember,
we have monthly lease sales are
at least oil and gas lease sale
for this month alone actually
earned us almost the entire
budget request in one day.
That we are here to ask for.
The majority of our operational
budget over 75% is focused on
investing in our employees, and
I just want to recall the words
of a former LFC chairman. Lucky
Varela, who used to talk about
investing in our state
employees. If we want these low
turnover rates these higher
retention rates if we want folks
to make a career in state
government
And bring to bear their
expertise and their passion and
their commitment. Like these
folks behind me, do we have to
invest in them?
Contractors aren't going to do
it.
Overworking our employees
because they're doing two jobs
when they should be doing their
own isn't going to do it, paying
them below mid level.
In their salary category isn't
going to do it so the land
office has really made an effort
in the five years that I've been
here to invest in our employees
and this budget request in front
of you today is continuing with
that commitment that I have made
to the quality folks, um, at the
State Land office.
As you can see from slide nine.
So this is for representative
Garcia. This is specifically a
slide for him because he asked
me about vacancy rates, and I
sat in your very chairs and got
drummed into me the importance
of coming to this committee.
Showing that you have committed
to filling the slots in your
agency. It's an important thing
to do. We don't have these
Vacancies that have been
lingering for for months and
even years in some cases.
Because we see the importance of
filling them with high quality
individuals that we want to
compensate fairly.
This budget request continues
that same commitment
Um, we're at 6% as of two days
ago when this slide was put
together, as which is you can
see is is
Highly unusual for US midsize
state average.
We need more capacity to be able
to keep up with the work coming
in the door, as well as position
the agency to take advantage of
opportunities in the future.
To this end, we are requesting
six new F T.
So I'm gonna go through these in
detail.
Each of these positions is tied
to revenue generation in some
manner.
So the first two are to help our
own gas and minerals division
with processing, managing leases
and approving units and calm
agreements.
For those of you who have Olin
gas background. You already know
what that is, But for those of
you who don't it is quite
complex and very technical. Um,
agreement that essentially says
One operator is going to drill
through multiple
Land managers, and so there has
to be an agreement between those
multiple land managers about how
royalty will be distributed.
As you know, the laterals that
folks are drilling are longer
and longer, so it it
Defacto. At some point, it's
gonna go through state land,
even if it goes through a 40
acre parcel of state land. We
are impacted.
So that workload of the comms
agreements um
Approving comms agreements has
actually increased five fold
Just in the time I've been in
office.
The units, agreements have
increased sixfold.
These positions are crucial. And
you know, I've been having
sidebars with various members of
the Legislature and I get
questions like why can't we
just, you know, put in some some
contract folks just to cover the
workload. That's not the way we
do business at the State Land
office.
Okay, This workload is is here.
It is here.
For the foreseeable future. We
want to invest in our employees
so that they stick around and we
don't have to keep coming to you
all to ask for more and more ft.
We have employees right now.
Who? Um I have been told are
staying until 78 o'clock at
night to get these agreements
approved.
Because, believe me, you hear
from the folks when they don't
have their agreements approved
in a timely manner, and I was
asked by one of the
representatives to provide
performance measures and that
the thing is our performance
measures are so damn good, so
right now we have a turnaround
time of between 3045 days to
approve these agreements. If we
do not get this FTE we are
asking for today.
That will probably end likely
double
So if you've got specific
questions around those two
positions, we've got our oil and
gas sky here right behind me.
Greg Bloom can add.
Um
We are also asking for a tribal
consultation position.
So I'm not sure if
Those of you who are familiar
with tribal governments. You
know that there is a lot of
notification request for
consultation that comes through
tribes. We get the same kind of
requests and so we need an FTE,
a single individual that is
going to go through and work on
all of the consultation requests
that our office gets. And if
you'll remember what happened to
Cinzia in Arizona.
They didn't consult with the
tribes.
That
Project is effectively dead in
the water at this point because
they didn't do the consultation
on the front end. We are asking
for this tribal consultation. Um
Uh, position so that we can, um
ensure that we are covering all
of those consultation requests.
Uh, we're asking for a position
to give the agency capacity for,
um
To apply for federal grants
after the fires hit, Um, the
north two years ago in April
Our land was severely impacted
and we found that the billions
of federal dollars available on
the table for land restoration
and, uh, post fire remediation
actually not available to us
because we don't draw down
federal funds in our agency. We
would like to request a position
that will
Only do federal grant money.
Um
Lt. Yeah. So we do. We are
requesting as well. Two
positions in our royalty
division. And, um as if you'll
remember the royalty folks are
the ones who, um, work with
companies to
Receive royalties but also to
audit the royalties and I have a
Where is that figure shucks?
Had a figure of the positions
that we had, um, so in the in
the land office just from the
beginning of the fiscal year
alone, So we're what
I don't know. Six months into
the fiscal year.
We have actually already raised
with our, uh, royalty Division.
$6 million just in this half of
the fiscal year, so as you can
see, those royalty positions are
revenue generating as well.
I think that that is all of
them. So
The executive recommendation.
We're very grateful funds all of
these positions. Unfortunately,
Lfc recommendation falls
basically $600,000 short of
funding these positions.
Um
Basically with the way that we
work, and I'll explain it to you
in more detail. The LFC wreck
right now would only pay for our
existing staff and one
Of these six positions that I've
mentioned.
So we today respectfully asked
the committee either to move the
executive funding level for
personnel or to add an
additional amount to allow us to
pay for the new FTE that we're
requesting.
We're not talking about a lot of
money in the big picture.
We're only asking the agency be
able to use an additional
$600,000 of our non general fund
money that we generate.
For the fiscal impact of failing
to do so would be much, much
greater.
Um, we can save a couple of
bucks today.
But in the long run, Like we
said, with our auditors, we
would be missing out on the the
audited money that the land
Office, uh, you know, receives
from from those audit
collections.
If we don't have people to work
on oil and gas applications like
I mentioned before we will see
delays and you will hear from
industry on those delays.
Up to this point, we've been
able to maintain good turnaround
times, but are
Current staff is likely to burn
out.
Um, LFC did an interesting, um,
analysis on retaining personnel
and in they quote a figure in
their analysis that says, if you
lose an employee, you actually
end up paying it's costing the
agency 30% of that employee's
position.
To rehire retrain
So if you'd like to save us that
extra 30%. We're asking that you
fund these brand new just
because we're forecasting more
conservative earnings over the
next few years, based on the
lower price of oil. That does
not mean that this workload that
we're talking about today is
going to go down.
Auditing looks back.
On, you know Remittances that
have been paid.
Two previous production levels,
so that is always going to Maine
remain high and industries
requests aren't going to aren't
going down.
Um, As I said, we're trying to
build our capacity to apply for
federal grants so we can bring
additional resources to our
land.
Um, and our inability to fill
that position is going to cost
us millions in lost
opportunities down the road.
I did want to mention one
additional thing, and that is
that you see a lot of agencies.
I sat in your chair. Like I
said, I remember. You see a lot
of agencies pulling money out of
P s and B, we actually have to
put money into it. So this last
year, we had to transfer
115,000 into personnel.
This fiscal year. It's going to
be probably as much as $500,000.
We're doing what the LFC has
recommended investing in
personnel so we can address hard
to fill positions and reduce
costly staff turnover.
Uh, part of the reason there's a
difference between what Lfc
thinks that we need and what we
think we need as far as
personnel costs is because the
salaries at the state Land
office, actually, but it
budgeted at either mid level or
higher in their salary ranges.
Ah, we generally higher folks
higher than midpoint, and we are
actually running a lower vacancy
rate than the LFC projected
vacancy rates, So we're bumping
right up against that vacancy
rate. We're basically
You know, fully staffed to our
vacancy rate.
Um, I understand our budget has
grown, but so has our workload.
So, uh,
We only use the money that we're
given.
In FY 23. We, uh reverted only
1% of our entire budget.
And only 0.2% in PS and be after
putting the additional money
into it.
It's important to recognize that
much of this growth is related
to new functions at the land
office that haven't historically
been part of the work. We've
been focused on.
We have a new renewable energy
office, a new cultural resources
office, a new environmental
compliance office, and we've
allocated staff to work on
oversight and accountability
like we've never done before.
Um
Gonna skip that, and that and
end on a positive note, the LFC
did fully fund our I T request.
So that's on slides, 13 and 14.
Both of our I T requests are
aimed at making our systems more
efficient, more productive for
our users are old and gas
leaseholders and for responsible
and our responsibility for
auditing leases. We're very
grateful for the support we
received for Archie projects.
And with that, Mr Chairman, I
would be happy to answer any
questions that you were. The
committee might have. Thank you,
Madam Commissioner. Great to see
your team here will go straight
to questions. We're actually
gonna go to representative
Luhan. First she has to. She
will step out here shortly
resembling home. Please. Thank
you so much. I have to go pick
up my daughter. Um so I'm just
gonna follow up with what you
said on the, um
Investing in our state employees
as I now serve in house district
48.
But the claimed former acclaimed
um Lucky Varela. See, um
I can't. I can't agree with you.
more of that and myself being a
former state employee.
Um, and understanding what that
investment means and everything
that in especially as an HR
director, I think you hit all
the points for me as you always
do, in increased amount of
information for us to know.
And quite quickly, Mr Chair. I
just want to support that.
On page 11 of the commissioners
presentation in those six
I have to use this reflected in
the 619,000. I think we see a
small discrepancy in the in the
in the book, The budget amount
we have
But nonetheless, it's six as FTS
and quite understandably and
reasonably for me, Um,
underlined here in the personnel
requests.
And I really want to say thank
you for paying attention to what
is happening in the immediate
time.
Now the past time of the forest
fires and that investing in
getting a federal, um
Grants partnership We want f T
e. I can't I can't tell you what
that would mean because we don't
know what other
Devastation.
Um, events. Devastation of
inventory might have or see in
in the future, Mr Chair, and I
know that this is all really
hard, but Mr Chair, um, I just
want to say even before as a
state employee. When I was a
state employee, it was this
office that really put me on a
course of understanding.
And helping me along as a state
employee, Um
And that's our member you
promoted and and she's She's
with you here today and I want
to say thank you directly for
what this office has done and
how you're growing this out, and
I know as, um
As a resident here in our
capitals, Um city.
That
You and particularly our
highlight in our state for our
state and in your
professionalism and the
treatment of your employees, and
I believe even gotten you've
received an award for that.
Yes, Mr Chairman. We received an
award. But we were going so
fast. We didn't actually talk
about it. Some Page seven, The
Albuquerque Journal recognized
us as a top workplace for 2023.
I believe the first state agency
ever to receive the award. Yes.
So it was when I highlight that
and and just for my the length
in the depth of my knowledge and
Um with our state employees as
I've mentioned in many other
tops. I want to say thank you
for that. I think that that
cannot be highlighted enough.
Um, get it.
Your staff gets it. We want to.
I want to invest in what that
means so that it reflects in all
of our other agencies and how we
are and how you've been able to
recruit and retain and, um
promote within and and what that
means in the career driven way
because this office does have
that potential. And as you're
reflecting the innovation that
you've demonstrated, and I know
I'm going a little over for you,
but
It's not that I like you so
much, and I've known you and all
those sorts of things. It's
because it's It's your proven
the test and and I don't just go
upon. You know, those sorts of
things actually talked to the
employees and they live in in my
some live in my district and
live in the city and live
elsewhere. But I just want to
say I support you in that and
what you're asking them, Mr
Chair and that's all I have,
Because I have to leave and get
my girl. Thank you so much.
Thank you. We're going to go now
to represent Sanchez and
representatives.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I just want
to speak to the personal
requests. Uh,
It sounds like, uh,
Some of these positions. Uh,
we're gonna get more
applications approved.
Which means more revenue for our
state, so
The other issue is with the
fires.
The majority of the
The places affected where in my
district border and adult skirts
of Las Vegas
And, uh, I think the whole state
needs to be made whole. Not just
those, uh, the federal areas and
also the
Those belonging to the people in
that area, but also the state
lands so
I would ask for your
consideration that we maybe I
know we're probably gonna take
the lfc, but we revisit and, uh,
take a look at adding these
personnel requests is I think
those were very important. Uh,
it's not very often that we see
adding, uh
Personnel bringing in more
revenue. So I guess I would just
ask that Mr Chair. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Representative Sanchez. We're
going to go next to our
percentage. Chatfield.
Good afternoon, commissioner.
I'll do it on election. Ah!
Welcome.
I have my first question.
It is.
Is community ization.
The same thing.
That's what I was Cowboys.
Cold Unit ization.
Do you? Can you answer that?
Oh, please, Please, come on up
If you want to grab a seat will
ask you to say your name and, um
Go ahead. We do have a number of
additional members for
questions.
Please go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Alison
marks, director of the oil, gas
and Minerals Division of
Pleasure working for the
commissioner. It's a great
agency to work for. Um, Mr
Representative, Um, Community
ization agreement is separate
and distinct from a unit ization
agreement, which the good folks
in Texas get very confused by,
um, I have this conversation.
Time and time again. Um I wish I
could hit just record and just
play it, But I can't. Um, it
makes my job a lot easier
because I'm up to about 810
o'clock at night a lot. Having
this conversations, I think, um,
but a unit ization agreement.
Is when you consolidate leases
of state land and federal land
or state landfill, land or state
land.
Be a land land and free land and
make a unit. You combine it to
Look for a way to appropriately
developed the land to generate
Revenue for the state in a way
that would hopefully minimize
the environmental footprint on
the land. Um, last year, we had
I want to say about 800 unit
Wells that we had to process
plus a number of, um
Participating areas in different
unit related
Um, issues that we had to
examine it. In addition to unit
requests for new units and
expansions of units that we have
to work with our counterparts at
the BLM, a
A unit a community ization
agreement, on the other hand, is
very different, um, community
ization agreement and I'm a
visual person. But if you have a
piece of
State land and a piece of BLM
land. And you just want to drill
your horizontal well across
that, um, across those two
leases you needed community
ization agreement or a piece of
federal land and feel land and
state land. And the longer those
laterals are going, the more and
more, um
We are seeing state trust land
involved in these, uh,
horizontal wells Wells are going
now up to they drilled a four
mile long lateral down in Texas.
We're seeing a lot of through
mail along laterals. So, as the
commissioner said of little
piece of 40 acres of state trust
land, we're seeing more and more
communities ation agreements.
That's why, the commissioner
said. We had a five fold
increase in the number of
communities ation agreements.
That are one community z com
Well focus working on
That's why we're seeing a huge
increase in the number of
communities ation agreements.
Hmm. Mr Chairman. I don't like
to be confused, and I don't like
to be enough confused people so
I think I understand a little
better now. Yeah, but I'm
probably I might ask you this.
Not today. Another time. Just go
over it again so that I get real
clear to them very familiar
familiar with pools, you know,
Unit ization agreement that
thing But community ization
little bit new to me. Thank you
for that answer.
Commissioner.
Having sat in this chair. You're
familiar with this little volume
right here. So I really
disappointed that you confess to
the 2%. Because this volume
three has it less. Is it less?
Three says you have no
reversion. It's literally just
whenever. Yeah, whenever they
take the snapshot, So what
Mr Chairman, representative. The
book has General fund reversion.
And since we are
I have no general fund were
other state funds. We don't show
up in there as showing that Ah
So, Mr Chair. This is the agency
that makes all that money. We've
been spending
And I think they need the tools
to do a good job.
So I don't know what the amount
is.
I asked that we talked about it.
Sounds good. Thank you. Thank
you very much. Representative
Chatfield. We're gonna go
through, uh, going to go now to
represent Garcia.
Thank you represented Garcia
Following you represent Montoya,
ranking member Armstrong and
then continue from there.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Commissioner for the
presentation.
You know, I'm sitting here
looking. Listen to all these
people talk about what's going
on, you know?
The first thing that came up
there was oil and gas. You know,
we all know in this comedian to
German, the oil and gas.
Is our schools.
Our education for our kids.
You know that goes away. Schools
go away with it, and we really
need to look at that, you know,
And I know you know what I'm
saying here year after year, and
we always recommend the lowest
of the two.
You know, in this case, I would
you know, like to recommend the
higher the two for one
particular reason.
This is this agency gets more
money for this state than
anything else.
You know, they don't have a
vacancy rate
Sindel.
To get the job done a little bit
quicker than what they're doing
it and you know, you guys are
doing a good job, you know, and
If it was up to me, I would go
executive.
Because you know your position
is so important to our state
that it's unreal. Like I just
said a little bit of government.
German
Our education for our kids. Oil
and gas goes away. That's gonna
go away with it. So with that
I don't need no address for
anything. But you're doing a
good job, and I appreciate you
and this committee really needs
to look at to see what we're
doing.
At the end of this day.
It's gonna be if we go the wrong
way. It's going to take us
forever and you know, in
$600,000 is not a whole bunch of
money.
You know when you have a budget
of billions, Nexus 600,000 is
no. No money and Mr Chairman.
Everybody wants to hire the two
That's natural.
But in this case, I think it was
well warranted. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Thank you Represent Garcia.
We're gonna go next to our seven
Montoya, then. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Commissioner Garcia Richard and
former representative Welcome to
appropriations.
Um, I want to reiterate as well
on behalf of our schools.
Thank you for
Doing what you can to make sure
that that our kids and our
Our education system is funded.
Um, I do have a question, though
about one area of
Of leases that are on state
lands that I'm questioning.
Whether or not it's appropriate
for some of the charges that are
that are going out there.
And Mr Chair That would be for
some of the radio towers that
are out there.
Um, some of the private like
radio stations that have towers
out there. Uh, some of our
state. Uh,
Some of our counties and
emergency services towers as
well.
Um
I I understand Mr Chair when
we're talking about cell towers,
where cell companies are have
customers are generating money.
But for some of our radio
stations and are
And in particular back home and
in San Juan County are our
emergence are 911 cell towers on
state land.
And that one. I have the numbers
for back in 1998, which is quite
a ways back.
Yeah, the South the
The state land lease that they
were paying was $250.
Um, that was very, very low. I
can understand the adjustment
that took place. But in 2012, it
was $1500.
Um, in, uh, 2017. It went up
tenfold to $15,000. Currently
we're at 19,900, some $20,000
essentially and it's set to
increase in 2027.
2 $22,500.
Um, that is the emergence that
is a 911 system.
For the whole area. That is
state police, uh, are on that
are all of our emergency
services are on that for our
local and county.
This is money that really is
coming out of the county
coffers, So it's not really a
Producing for profit business,
not a for profit business.
Um, I've been contacted by
In the past by some of our radio
stations for the profit margins,
not big. It's not like
I can understand. Like I said
cell towers that are
That are there for for rate for
for telephone cell service,
where that's a for profit
business.
Is there any discretion? Do you
have discretion? So, Mr
Chairman, the short answer is
yes. And the long answer is
actually we have a few different
pricing models dependent even on
you know whether it's rural or
urban, um and and different
things of that nature, So I
think probably what's best is
for me to invite your folks to
come and chat with us about
seeing what we could do in
terms, Okay, I'll talk to you
about that offline. I was just
wondering. I didn't know if you
had discretion or not. I didn't
know if
A cell tower is a cell tower.
Mr. Chairman, There is one place
I do not have discretion and
that is setting any of the terms
with oil and gas company leases,
including royalty rates, and
that's fine. That's where I once
again. That is where our schools
are being funded and
Personally Right now, I'd like
to thank oil and gas for all of
our education across the state
of New Mexico.
And thank your office as well
for for providing what you can.
I just I just want to make sure
that we're not taking tax
dollars out of a community.
And then having to spend that
elsewhere, so I will get in
touch with your office and all
set all that up. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you very much for
so, Montoya. We're going to go
now to ranking member Armstrong,
please. Thank you, Mr Chairman
and thank you for your
presentation. I really just want
to say miss
Gaussian
swap always screwed it up. Oh,
Yeah, just such a cool name, but
I wanted to ask you about in
volume to the recommended
language on page 251.
I just want some additional
information. What is that? What
does that mean?
Um, I actually am going to defer
to stimulate because it is, um
Some leftover laying. There is
some leases. They go back many
years. They're very complicated,
more complicated than I can
explain.
Mr Mr Chairman, Um,
Representative, So this is old
language related. Some just some
deals back in the nineties. Um,
where we were trying to State
Land office was trying to take
advantage of, um Corbyn methane
areas and looking for a way to
be able to take the tax credits.
Um and monetize those and they
actually went out and, um, for
sale in a different series of
auctions on these, and this is
basically processing through
suspense kind of the result of
those deals that are long gone
and you know, we don't really
deal with anymore other than
At the tail end. So that's um
it's not an active program or
anything that we're doing today.
Thank you so much for that
answer. I appreciate that, and I
always love to be educated on
that. So thank you.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Remember Armstrong, we're going
to go next door upstairs. Sarah.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you, Um, sure,
Commissioner for your
presentation. Always good to
hear from you. Um, So when we
when I was looking at your graph
earnings that you made in the
last five years since you've
been there is amazing. And your
accomplishments um is is just
beyond what most agencies show
us. This proves that when you
get the best people and pay them
what they're worth.
You see? Great you get you know
you get makes. It makes a huge
difference. Um, I think you
should do a training with all
our agencies. Um
But okay, so as far as FTE s, um
every area that you asked for
FTE s. You've justified why you
need them. I believe you have,
um, especially the tribal
consultations. Stopping son Vz
and Arizona is huge. So we need
to make sure we have someone
there who can speak and work
with the tribes grants.
I mean, let's use as much
federal money as we can. So
everything here seems reasonable
to me. I think we should again
Talk about it like
representative, um
Capital said, And I'm hoping we
do that. We really need to look
at this agency and fund, um, to
keep our money flowing because
they have a great leader. Great
staff. We appreciate everything
you guys do and your hard work
and you're still hearing. It's
almost five. That's amazing. So
thank you for what you do. Let's
get you funded. Thanks.
Thank you, representative. We're
going to go next steps of
pedigree then represented
Alison.
Thank you. Chairman and
Hmm.
Thank you, Commissioner for
being here, Uh, appreciate our
conversation that we had earlier
today.
Chairman. I okay. I think I
misunderstood our conversation.
I understood that you were
potentially looking at three.
FTE s on the leasing side. Mr.
Chairman. Yeah. So I we're
looking at six altogether. And
so for our there's there's three
oil and gas and one royalty.
So the three I was talking to
you about today are the three
oil and gas
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Commissioner. The
presentation we have on page 10
just two and two. So that's the
reason why I was.
Yeah. At the end of the day,
Chairman, Commissioner Um
We need to keep this thing
continuing to move forward.
This isn't costing our general
fund they're generating the
funds to pay for this.
I think this is kind of a no
brainer. Um
Commissioner and I have a agreed
on everything. But at this point
in time
This is what is continuing to
generate.
Not only
Our General fund.
But also the trust that were set
across last year.
With respect to Senate Bill 26
and 378 and some of the work
that we did and inside the house
built to last year, correct.
So, um
I think we need to give them
German the latitude to be able
to do that, And I really, really
hope you put one of them in Lee
County.
Thank you. Thank you very much
represented pedigree. We're
gonna go to represent Alison
episode dela Cruz.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Madam, Mr.
I'm always looking forward to
these success stories from
agencies.
I look at your list of
Fiscal year accomplishments and
they're very, very impressive.
I just want to compliment you on
your accomplishments and, uh,
end with one question.
What are you willing to offer
for tribal consult? That's
That's such a great question.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Allyson. We're gonna go to
represent a day like Cruz and
Vice chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. You
know, it's pretty evident
Secretary that, uh,
That your operations is an
enterprise.
It really is. Of course, you're
a steward of land that is owned
by the state of New Mexico.
But you know, people often
forget that the
Vastness and complexity of what
all happens there, so I echo the
sentiments of my colleagues at
that are supporting what you're
doing. And the request that
you're making Mr German and
think about 1996.
I was the director of Berlin
County parks and Recreation and
I was asked to attend the
meeting.
To talk about Mason. All soul
Now all I knew about Mason also
was that
The burly account. Berlin County
had a
A waste disposal location. The
city of Albuquerque had a waste
disposal location, and so I was
asked to go up to the roadie law
firm to visit with the state
land director, Your predecessor
and some other folks. And
remember that, uh, they asked
me, they said, art do you think
brilliant County parks and
recreation could
Use maybe five or 10 acres for a
park because what we want to do
and they had a master plan for
the entire area. Then it's now
called Mesa del sold. It is an
economic, It's become a major
economic
Engine for Albuquerque.
And
I looked at them, I said.
Well, white. Why do you want
park here? And they said, Well,
we would like people to come up
here See, makes it all soul and
see the vistas and how beautiful
it is. You can see Mt. Tainer,
The Sandia's The Manzano's is
just gorgeous here. We think
people would love coming up
here. It was spur interest.
So I looked at them and I said,
Well,
If you can talk about 100, plus
acres, Maybe we have something
to talk about.
Ultimately it ended up being
about 600 plus acres.
To give you a perspective, it is
twice the size of balloon
fiesta.
And it's going to do to this
day.
And so I only share that little
bit of a story. Mr Chairman,
because that's the kind of
things that this office does.
It's much much more than just
capping oil wells. It's just
much, much more. It's it's
really important to state on an
economic
Level and I just hope we
continue to support. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. Thank you very much
represented Cruise Vice chair,
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Commissioner for the
presentation and kudos for the
excellent work that your office
is doing.
Um, I was wondering, um
Given the sort of
Uh, global projections.
For the use of oil and gas
between now and 2050. I think
we're looking at a reduction in
oil and gas for energy, but an
increase in oil and gas for
other materials like
petrochemicals. What, Um
What are you in your office
Projecting? What are you guys
thinking? The future of New
Mexico Oil and gas looks like
Between now and 2050, Mr
Chairman and Madam Vice chair. I
thank you so much for that
question. And when we presented
to the LFC, we actually talked
about the Goldman Sachs carbon
nomics study that was came out
in march of 2023 that basically,
you know, had the predictions
that you are referring to and
talked about how the green
revolution was actually going to
Take the place of that resource
for energy. Um, they project
projected like something like
$11 Trillion in spending by 2050
in in green energy, but for New
Mexico
You know?
Because Lisa's take a while to
develop.
And then they are in production.
You know, like we've got some
leases that were developed in
the thirties and are still
chugging along may have been re
drilled.
But certainly the the area is
still developed. Um, we project
that even after what we see is a
downturn that will come sometime
in the mid twenties thirties.
Um, you know that that there
will be
The saying is, there's always
going to be someone scratching
at the ground.
Thank you, Madam. Commissioner.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I don't
have any other questions.
Thank you very much. Vice Chair,
Dixon. Thank you, Commissioner
Briefly, Can you first just a
couple of points of follow up
one can you share with us? The
committee the locations and
lease rates for the 911 towers,
please.
That you all have least on
statement. Certainly. Certainly.
Thank thank you for that.
Absolutely. Secondly, Um, uh,
Madam Commissioner, the in terms
of continuing to work on land
restoration and land health
restoration.
Um it's the goal seems pretty
similar to last year.
Do you anticipate if there's a
new federal grants person that
we could look at increasing the
number of acres treated, Mr
Chairman? Absolutely. The
federal grants person would help
getting money in the door for
that, but you know are so I
don't know if you all remember
but about a year and a half ago,
so I think it was October 20.
Any start.
Um, we began a program first
ever at the land office. Uh,
accountability enforcement, and
the wells plugged wells that I
talked about and restored
acreage.
We're a product of that of that
program.
Because those first few wells
were sort of, like a little bit
to get going. We feel like the
rest of those wells to clean up
on state land. We were building
momentum. And so we will, uh,
the remainder of the Wells will
probably take less time than the
initial 400 did. That's one
thing we opened, and, uh,
environmental compliance office.
They are single mindedly focused
on clean up.
And ensuring that we have proper
standards. Uh, for for
compliance from operators and
lessees who are cleaning up
state land. So those I think the
enforcement accountability
Um and eco. We call it eco
environmental compliance will go
a long way, You know, with this
federal grant, uh, position to
ensure that we are like, you
know.
I don't want to make any
promises, Mr Chairman, but
You know, doubling the amount of
land that we could possibly
impact. Thank you, Madam
Commissioner. I very much
appreciate that answer. Um, for
the sake of time. I wanna first
I wanna so really listening to
the committee. I think we've
heard really from
All parts of our committee
representing different parts of
our state, really a commitment
and an interest in funding, So I
think we're go ahead. We can ask
for funding at the executive
level in return. I think we want
to add and sort of. This is a
good exciting day in house
appropriations and finance. Not
all the time.
Um
Certainly, but we do, I think
acknowledge that the progress
and and the voices of the
committee in return Madam
Krishna, I'd like to ask you and
your team and our analysts to
look at some of the performance
measures and adjust
Appropriate performance measures
upward, then you we've seen a
commitment from you and follow
through on that commitment from
you and your team. Good for us
to move the executive also good
for us to come out of this
session with increased
performance measures that record
that recognized that Mr
Chairman, That's fair. Sounds
good. Okay, madam vice chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, seeing
as how this is not General fund
money. I moved the committee
adopt the executive
recommendation.
Then move by Vice Chair Dixon
saying by represent Chatfield
and a whole represent been
saying to me, it was said first
by many members of the committee
in fairness
and what we'll represent their
like Bruiser Chatfield. It's
been moved and seconded. Is
there any opposition to adopting
the executive recommendation?
Okay. I don't see any mental
commissioner. Thank you very
much. Thanks to your team, Kate.
Uh, Mr
Okay, Mr. Auditor. Great to see
you. Thank you for being here
today. When we get to you,
please, let's go. Please feel
free to introduce members of
your team. Uh, Mister David will
go ahead and start with you.
Thank you, Chairman. Um my name
is Isaiah Taurus. I'm the LFC,
fiscal analyst for the state
auditor's office. Um, with me
today is the state auditor,
Joseph, my Estes and my D F a
counterpart Simon Miller.
Um, I know with time I'm going
to try to keep this as um as
quick as can and concise as
possible. So if you could please
turn to tap three agency code
308.
I'll begin the
The differences between our
recommendations on the LFC
recommendation. Um, includes
$121,000, or 3% increase in
general fund revenue compared to
the executive recommendation for
$610,000 increase, which is a
13% increase.
The LSC recommendation is
$502,000 less than the executive
recommendation and my D F a
counterpart will will be able to
elaborate for why
There's a difference there. The
LSE recommendation for
contractual services is, um
$45.8000 more than the executive
recommendation. And this
derives, um, to find the local
public bodies initiative.
And also the higher ups during
peak audit season.
And lastly, that the LSE
recommendation is 30 or
$31.9000, less than the
executive recommendation. And
with that chairman, I'll turn it
over to my DFA counterpart.
Thank you, Mr Cortez. Mr.
Miller, please. Thanks. Good
afternoon, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee again. My name is
Simon Miller. And I'm an analyst
with D. F A
Uh huh.
So if you look in the far right
column of the different sheet,
you can see the executive
recommendation is about $500,000
higher than the LFC.
That's mostly for personnel.
This is an agency with a pretty
high unfunded vacancy rate.
You can see they have 42
authorized FTE.
Of those 42 positions about 35
of them are funded in the
current year.
So the executive recommendation
put some more money into
personnel to, uh
Fund more of their existing FTE.
so the executive recommendation
would fund about 39 of their 42
FTE. Where's the LFC
recommendation leaves it at
about 35.
So that's the major difference
between the two recommendations
there and, um
Uh, in terms of non recurring,
it's been a priority of this
auditor to help. Uh, small local
public entities, uh, achieve
financial compliance and then be
able to receive capital outlay,
funding. And so, um, the auditor
received a $500,000 special
appropriation last session.
The executive recommendation
includes another $500,000 non
recurring appropriation. The LFC
has doubled that amount A
million dollars to assist local
public entities with financial
compliance.
And so with that I will turn it
over to our state auditor. My
Estes. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Auditor. Please
go ahead.
Thank you, Mr Chair members of
the committee. It's honor to be
here with you. Thank you for
staying late and accommodating
My changed to be last on the
rotation this afternoon. I want
to introduce some members of my
team, My deputy state auditor,
Ricky Baha Rano.
There he is.
Ah, we have our latest
acquisition. My new Government
Accountability Office director
David Craig.
David, Where are you? There he
is.
We also have our budget and
finance director Laura Montoya,
our Laura Montoya.
And then we're joined by one of
the best and brightest from
Highlands University. Our intern
Shane Claiborne. So with that,
Mr Chair if we can go to the
presentation before we advance
the slide, I come to you today
to present our fiscal year 25
operating budget request.
After a full year in office, we
face significant challenges in
the areas of recruiting and
retaining qualified personnel.
And we are not dissimilar to the
rest of the public accounting
industry.
Both of which we wish to address
today.
Similarly, we're reaching
consensus regarding
The need to do more for local
public bodies to ensure they
have the resources they need to
be financially successful.
Today. I'll highlight specific
areas that I changed from our
original request is reflected in
the differences between the LFC
and the executive.
Next slide. Please give up,
Okay?
Alright. So this Wow, um
This slide, really, I think
reflects the state of the public
accounting industry.
Uh, in New Mexico, You know, we
understand the vital role of my
office and overseeing
The state's financial resources
and ensuring we're we protect
them against fraud, waste and
abuse.
However.
Our ability to fulfill this
mission and vision hinges on our
ability to remain competitive.
With current salaries for public
accountants.
The pool of available labor.
talent is increasingly shrinking
in our state as shown here in
this bar graph.
In our pool of approved
independent public accountant
accounting firms.
That we approve every year.
To give them the green light to
contract with public entities is
steadily declining. And on top
of that the number of licensed
CPS in New Mexico in New Mexico
Has gone down 30% over the last
five years.
And I think I know that there's
been efforts by you all to
address nursing shortages and
allow wastewater level three
operators to come back and have
law enforcement come back, But I
just want to give you a heads
up. This is this is a crisis.
It's nothing short of a crisis.
Because of the sheer volume of
work that we do. We're one of
the only states in the country
that requires every single
public entity be audited every
year.
Uh, there's some states like
Nevada that don't even conduct
annual financial audits. They
conduct performance audits on a
select basis.
Next slide, please.
So in addition to competing
statewide for qualified staff,
my office must compete
regionally for qualified
government accountants, the
salaries we offer at the office
of the State auditor are the
lowest among our regional peers.
Placing us at a disadvantage.
Our ability to deliver on
safeguarding the state's assets
depends on our ability to
recruit.
And retain qualified
individuals.
Similarly to provide timely
information necessary to provide
data that our state depends on
Like timely audit reviews,
performing audits for entities
that we are that are unable to
secure.
An auditing firm.
Auditing, um allegations of
fraud, waste and abuse hinges on
the same ability to acquire
qualified financial staff.
And this is just basically is a
comparison of my office relative
to regional state auditors
offices and you can see where
lagging seriously behind
In the last gathering that I had
nationally with my colleagues
they're having to hire audit
auditors from out of the state.
Uh, so this is not just a
statewide crisis. It's a
national crisis.
Next slide, please.
So when we originally submitted
our request, we had proposed
significant increase in
personnel services and benefits
based upon benchmarking against
in state public sector salaries
and regional state auditor
offices. It comes as an
additional challenge to see that
the LFC recommendation does not
support this request.
There is an indication that the
L F C and D F A will address
salary needs as a part of a
larger compensation package. But
I'm I'm here to say, like every
other agency were unique and
special. Uh and we truly are
because, uh, our industry is
very, very unique. And you
you've already seen a snapshot
of the contraction of the
industry.
And, um
So it's only gonna get worse. We
have fewer accounting firms with
the same workload.
And we're already seen signs of
tension.
With auditing firms that are
carrying multiple clients. If
one client does not get timely
information to that accounting
firm, they'll go onto the next
client and
So we're constantly intervening
and mediating over these
disputes because
There's
You know, not enough accounting
firms and too much work.
So the need to address adequate
personnel compensation and
staffing in our office is
urgent.
When we have flat budgets for
personnel service, we must
correspondingly increased
contractual support.
So we had originally proposed
increasing support to local
public bodies as a recurring
request. In addition to our
special appropriations request.
Now the intent of this recurring
Uh, um, proposal.
Is once we bring the small local
pub, public bodies up to
financial compliance. We want to
make sure that they stay there.
And that's what this recurring
request is for executive budget
proposals are supporting our
ongoing program of direct
accelerated assistance.
To these small local public
bodies through supplemental
funding, as we said before a
million dollars and 500,000
respectively, Um
From from the LFC and the
executive and I just want to
give you a brief report. You all
were, Um Grace is gracious
enough. I think you formed a
subcommittee when I made the
initial request for the
appropriation to help the small
local public bodies and
To date, we have freed up two
point almost $2.5 million in
This is capital outlay. That's
that was withheld from the local
public bodies.
And we have provided almost 400.
Annual financial certification.
So the program is working as you
know, executive order 2013 006.
Requires that any public entity
cannot access their awarded
capital outlay and unless
they're financially compliant.
So this program is working. And
I'd like your consideration to
continue funding that.
We also need support for our
financial audit division. The
financial audit division is
really the workhorse.
Of my office. Um, it really
reviews almost 1000 annual audit
report reviews
Um and
We're busting at the seams. Um
and this situation is really
untenable.
We're also doing some in house
audits right now, so
We primarily
Conduct audit report reviews
And we also do in house audits.
As a stopgap measure. We're
having to hire a contract
auditor to assist our financial
audit division to handle that
peak.
Uh, workload of of annual audit
reviews And, quite frankly,
that's triage. Um
It's It's not gonna It's not
going to solve the problem
permanently. We've taken
positions from our financial
audit division to meet the
requirements of hospital to 34,
which was passed in 2021 that
mandated that my office review
annual financial reports of
conservatorships
Well, that division is five. FTE
s, and, uh
We're gonna We're gonna come
back. We're trying to make a
case that we need stopgap
measures to kind of help with a
peak workload.
But based on the trends, uh,
we're going to need to make hold
that financial audit division
that was cannibalized to meet
that mandate, and I call it a
partially unfunded mandate of HB
234 back in 221.
2020 next slide.
So we had some other
miscellaneous requests, and I
really don't want to, you know,
go through them in detail, but
we did propose other items to
upgrade our systems.
We have an online portal that
all the UM public entities and
the independent public
accounting firms that are that
represent my office. They upload
contracts, audit reports. It's
in dire need of, um, upgrading
its not user friendly. It's
clunky.
You can't run reports. Um
So I think you know, my office
really would like to provide all
of you with better data
Analytics on the state of audits
across the state.
Any any inquiry that you have? I
mean, we can still do that. But
our information systems, which
is called Odessa Connect doesn't
really provide for that.
And we want to also build and
improve our case management
system for special audits.
And improve our website. Since
these needs were not included in
the LFC recommendation would
like to discuss in the future.
How such needs may be
accommodated.
We've begun work in these areas.
It will be difficult not to
continue that path.
As all of our requests from
stakeholders expect nimble, user
friendly information systems.
In this session. We're proposing
a bill to codify Executive order
2013 006 into law.
To best meet the need for
additional accountability in the
form of timely audits to find
this effective executive policy
into law insurers. New Mexico
has a firm legal foundation to
have a couple of capital outlay
distributions tied to timely
financial audits.
We are available to speak on
this issue and the operating
budget proposal at any time.
In the next interim will revisit
our personnel expansion request
if it's not to be met this
session will begin the
conversation around other policy
changes changes, perhaps to the
audit act.
Um
More flexibility and using our
audit fund.
And efforts to make whole our
financial audit division.
And when I allude to the fact of
resorting to changes in the
audit act, we may have to resort
to reducing the frequency of of
audits of public entities.
Um, So with that, Mr Chair, me
and my team we
We stand for questions.
And we we prefer the executive
recommendation. I think it's
more favorable for us.
Thank you very much. Mr Auditor
will go straight to questions.
First Representative Sanchez
chat.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Uh, just
like to thank the state auditor.
That program where you're
helping the seculars and the
mutual domestics with their
audits. I know they're They're
real great for for that.
Last year was huge.
Proponent for forgetting that
funding and this year I'm glad
to see the LFC recommended
renewing that.
So regardless with whatever
recommendation we go with, uh, I
hope we can continue to fund
that program because it's It's
very important to these
entities. Thank you, Mr Chair
real quick. I'm sorry. Comment,
um, on the topic of, uh um,
salaries.
And that's a really reoccurring
theme Cherokee period from
agencies where they're not
Making what other states are
making, and, uh
And every year we get request to
expand agencies or to create new
agencies. I hope one of these
years we really focus on our
state's most important asset,
which are the employees and
We can somehow give raises
across the board. So maybe one
of these years are
Will be able to focus on that.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you Represent Sanchez.
Next, we're gonna go to
represent chat.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I also want
to talk about the small
Local public bodies and and
I want to echo what
representative Sanchez said.
Thank you so much for
We're helping fund those guys.
Uh,
Myself and representatives.
Sanchez. We represent the very
similar
Sort of folks and we were some
of the ones that pushed really
hard to get that going, and, uh
Has been very helpful. Some of
them don't know how to reach
you.
And, uh,
some of the some of those are
right here. Uh,
So I really want to see this
program move forward, and it's
like we doubled their money that
we recommended in there.
This year. Very helpful. These
folks are trying to the ones
that can't get there on it out,
kept doing anything. I mean,
there they they don't have the
ability to spend the money that
the governor has put forward
and, uh
So
In a
When we get through here, I
would like to pass this on to
you.
And hopefully you can tell me
So that I can take it home. How
they could, um
Find out how to access your
services without having their
state representative, Uh, you
know, bring a note or whatever,
I'm sure you have a website
online or something there, and,
uh,
It is it is essential.
To our communities. I mean,
By here in Santa Fe, it's hard
to even think about how
How important that is to small
communities. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr Chair, Representative
Chatfield. I just also want to
expand on how the program is
unfolding. Our initial focus was
looking at local public bodies
that had capital outlay pending
and so we issued request for
bids on a county by county basis
that had the highest
concentration of local public
bodies.
With capital we withheld. So now
we're getting all those
priorities and then now we just
issued a statewide RFP to
obligate the remainder of the
initial appropriation. So things
are going very well. And also if
you're curious about those local
public bodies in your respective
districts, we have a list on our
website.
That list every single local
public body.
Whether or not they're compliant
or not, and whether or not they
have capital outlay pending, so
it's a good comprehensive list
If you have any questions, I
encourage you to visit our
website.
So, so, Mr Chairman. It just
means it meets a very important
need in our
Communities. I thank you for
doing it, and, uh
When we get through here, I'll
Bring you some contact, right?
Thank you, sir. Thank you
represented Chatfield represent
Garcia.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Mr Auditor. I'm going
to kick the can down the road a
little bit more, you know.
I have, like 10 communities that
are out of compliance for the
riders.
And you know, I'm glad you're
doing what you're doing, because
you know you give them capital
loudly and they can use it in
that the end of the year. Two
years he wind up losing these
monies. And you know these
smaller communities are really
struggling.
To get a want to get in line,
But you can't
You know, it's always something
they don't know how to
They're they're a board of
directors that are
Volunteers. There's no pay.
And always more community there
that are out of compliance. What
about it? And you know, I really
appreciate what you're doing,
because at the end of the day,
there's more not only in my
district, I think every district
Like representative Chatfield
Representative Sanchez have the
same problem.
You know, I really appreciate
what you're doing, and if we
could help you move along that
really be nice because at the
end of the day, the small
communities will benefit from
it. Thank you, Mr Chairman, Mr
Chairman, Representative Garcia,
Will you give me a note? Two on
that list of 10 communities? I
got two notes so far.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Representative Garcia. Thank
you, Mr Order. Uh, other, um
Thank you for for effectively
working with the special from
last year.
With the proposed LFC special,
which is doubled the executive
investment in that sort of local
public body piece do you have?
How do you feel about being able
this upcoming year? Well, I can
tell you now we basically have
all the contractual instruments.
Um
Contracts are executed. I think
the last one that we need is the
RFP to cover the rest of the
state.
And this would logically include
all of the local pub, public
bodies that are not compliant.
But may not necessarily have
capital pending right and keep
it. Keep in mind. It's not just
about capital outlay.
At least you know, accessing it.
I mean, these are local public
bodies that need assistance. In
fact, the way we structured
these initial batch of contracts
we asked afterwards, what can
you offer at no cost? And they
said, we will provide training.
So one of the first things
they're doing is they're
providing training to help the
small local public bodies with
their books. But you all are
right. They really don't have
the capacity to do that. And
that's why this recurring
request to help these local
public bodies.
Once they achieve financial
compliance to maintain
Financial compliance. Okay,
Thank thank you very much,
auditor. And so, um, we may ask
for some more, um, feedback from
the analysts. It sounds like
this. Doubling the investment we
started last year started with
that field. Another's makes a
lot of sense. So I think, um
And if there are as we go
through this if there are local
public bodies that are sort of
not in compliance now and need
to be and can be brought back
into compliance. And this is
maybe one of the years to really
not should keep an eye on that.
We're going to ask for the LFC
recommendation right now. I do.
There will be opportunities to
review this and more closely
with you, Mr Auditor. And we're
gonna, uh, circle back on when
the Deloitte study the targeted
compensation because that is a
very much a statewide issue and
one that's best done on Mr
Charge. Just want to make one
final remark regarding another
special that we did receive last
year.
We're the only state in the
country that does not have a
singular audit. What is the
singular audit? It's a
consolidated audit of state
agencies we have about 133
agencies and share. We all have
separate audits for those were
the only state that does not do
that. We feel that if the state
can go to a singular audit, we
would realize the benefits of
more favorable.
State bonding rates, and I have
no doubt that every single
federal agency would be tickled
to see.
Their their programs and the
result of audits of their
programs in one document, so
we'll be coming back to you.
with results on on that.
On that study. In terms of the
you know the benefits of going
to a singular audit.
Outstanding. Thank you very
much. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move. The committee adopts the
LFC recommendation.
Okay. It's been moved by Vice
chair Dixon, second by represent
Chatfield to adopt the, uh
Lfc recommendation. Is there any
opposition to that?
Okay? I don't see any. Thank
you.
Committee. Okay, uh, we're gonna
go now Committee a couple of
quick announcements. We do want
to open up public comment on the
agency's we've heard today.
Folks need not feel obligated
to. But that is a part of what
we do committee is we're sort of
waiting there. Um, we first the
well we're not going to have
committee on Saturday. I think
we're that does mean Of course
we have a very full day
tomorrow, starting at 8:30 A.m..
Yeah. And then Yeah, and we
won't have committee on
Saturday.
With that. I don't see anybody
lining up for public comment in
person. Is there anyone online
going once going twice. Okay.
Committee. Oh, sorry. Please go
ahead.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, I know
I am between you and all getting
home, so I will be very brief.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Lansana,
policy director for the Center
Pacific Policy. I wanted to
thank the committee and
supporting O s. I s budget
specifically on the health care
Affordability fund. I'm here to
talk about specifically about
the importance on funding
programs that address the
uninsured that are ineligible
for coverage.
My grandfather was locked out of
accessing healthcare, and my
family knows what thousands of
those that wish to access
coverage but cannot and have to
face the tough choices When my
grandpa was diagnosed with
cancer, he chose to forgo
chemotherapy to prevent
household of 16 from being
homeless and because he couldn't
get coverage, so my family knows
exactly what that feels like,
and we hope that thousands of
new Mexicans don't have to face
the similar choices. So thank
you.
Thank you very much.
Good evening, Mr Chair members
of the committee. My name is
Erica Sanchez and I'm with New
Mexico center and lamb poverty.
We believe that everyone
deserves healthcare, and our
community is only healthy when
everyone has access to the care
they need.
We thank you for supporting the
health care affordability fund
and funding its programs as we
heard in the short time the fan
has been in place. It has
already had a significant impact
on house care affordability in
this state, it is lowering costs
for tens of thousands of
families and workers.
And for 6000 small businesses,
and we hope to see this
progress. Continue. Thank you
for your hard work on the budget
and ensuring every new Mexican
has access to authority
Affordable, high quality health
care. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Uh, thank you Both. Thank you
That you committee members. Uh,
we we do have there's one person
online. Okay, Cecilia opinion.
Please go ahead.
Okay?
Can you hear me?
We sure can. Okay when I started
this share small members of the
community, My name is Cecilia
Pignon and I live in Anthony,
New Mexico very close to the
border and Texas and Juarez. I
am a community organizer with
strong families. New Mexico
I am currently leading an
immigrant health coverage
advisory board composed of 10
individuals from Gallup, Dona
Ana Espanola, Santa Fe, so
different parts of our state We
all come from immigrant
backgrounds and our families
have very in very in
documentation status. Our
families are hardworking. We pay
our taxes.
We contribute greatly to the
economy were you raised our
families and our part of what
makes our beautiful state.
We ask that you fully fund OS
size budget request so New
Mexico can continue its path
toward health health Plan for
New Mexico immigrants residents
who can enrolled and on the
exchange plan or Medicaid.
Thanks for your concert
consideration.
Thank you very much, Mr Pignon.
Okay. Uh, I don't see any other
hands online. Uh, that rapids up
for public comment today. Thanks
for those who made public
comment. Members. Thank you very
much. We'll see you at 830
