Hey when you think about the
massive amount of work the
massive amount of technical
review dealing with all the
issues working back and forth
it's almost and it's almost an
impossible task so all that work
is down before we get up here
and then we bring in all the
work of the DFA staff.
I also want to thank them also
because you know we're one of
the few states in the country
for the legislature build the
budget as well as the executive.
So it's our job with HSD then to
pull the two budget
recommendations together so I
want to thank the committee for
your work I want to thank the
LFC HSC and DFA staff we're
making it possible for us to
come together on this home
stretch and with that being said
I hope everyone has received the
packet.
You should have an agenda and
that's what we're going to work
from under each of the items
we're gonna take action on each
of the items.
we'll start with the Legislative
maintenance budget and then
number two is all the HSD
adjustments that we've been
involved with.
I will be reading them and I'll
be calling on the staff to talk
about it and then we'll go to go
to the motion and if there's any
question certainly will allow
for that.
With that being said I have one
question before we start I'd
like to call on Representative
Hochman Vigil thank you very
much madam chair it appears that
I do not have the packet at my
office should I come grab it
from your office or shoulders is
it anyway so I can run it up to
me here and for thirteen after
yeah we can have our and we can
have our attendance take it out
to you I'm I do know that they
were email this morning okay
I'll check my email to thanks
chair okay.
Parties on the way okay already
great Mario be bring in that
packet so if we could staff are
ready to hear about the
Legislative maintenance budget
which is item number one.
Charles go ahead I think.
Okay.
Sure was Representative.
Small.
Mr solely to go ahead.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair you've got
a packet of HFC adjustments and
it's got a series of
spreadsheets behind the high
level showing additional action
that you'll want to take this
morning.
These are basically just for the
committee's understanding.
These are drafting instructions
what we'll do is we'll get
direction from the committee to
make these changes from things
you've already adopted or
possibly not adopted yet for
agency budgets we'll go and
draft the budget for you and
then bring that back for final
review next Tuesday.
So the first item that you have
not taken action on is
Legislative building services
madam chair the staff would
recommend taking the LFC
recommendations for legislative
building services.
Do you know that is page in your
packet that would be page two.
Everybody and it's.
The staff recommendation that
circle there.
So go ahead Charles and then
madam chair do you want me to go
through all of these and then
we're going to thank you just
one edit we're gonna take me H.
one at a time I just a Martian
okay on the legislative building
services do you want to say
anything about this Mr Burciaga
before we take action.
Madam chair and a good morning
members of the committee but
nothing at this point a it may
be a little tight for us because
we've having had to expand our
security to include
the
Metal detectors as well as
staffing for that so that's
that's about it madam chair.
Right we have any questions from
the committee on this.
All the dust does not.
Okay we have a motion from
Representative Anderson for
and option for adoption we have
a second the second Madam okay
we have a second from
Representative small proper
motion proper second is there
any opposition.
It's been approved I need
everybody to mute unless you're
called on because we're getting
feedback here from somebody
else's computer so I'm gonna ask
you to please mute and then when
you're called on.
And all then I'm here.
So let's go ahead and go back to
the agency adjustments Mr
solely.
Your manager also.
I'm.
Are gonna finance administration
on page three initial Committee
action was to take the LFC but
to go back and take a look at a
couple of items that were
important to committee members
and so the recommendation is to
add two hundred to civil legal
services three hundred to the
grants administration program
and seven hundred thousand for
the hunger initiative.
Okay thank you Charles and and
debate Romero secretary Romero
if you want to type up on any of
these just raise your hand okay
I don't want to just keep
calling on if you don't have any
comments.
All right.
Any questions from the
committee.
Senator small thank you madam
chair I move approval of the HSC
adjustments to the department of
finance and administration
second.
Okay Representative Anderson as
a second is there any
opposition.
Saying that approach.
Next the next madam chair is on
page four department of
information technology that
committee took the LFC
recommendation with direction to
go back and look at compliance
of project management
the recommendation is to
increase that by a hundred
eighty two point six thousand.
Okay do we have any questions
from the committee.
Are ready.
Representative Hochman Vigil
thank you very much madam chair
just I'll quickly knew that we
had a discussion about the civil
legal services and the DFA
budget is that included in the
compliance and project
management P. top.
That was the civil legal
services was in the previous
motion for DFA to increase that
by two hundred thousand thank
you.
Representative small thank you
madam chair I move the HSC
adjustments to the Department of
information technology.
Second okay we have a proper
motion proper second is there
any opposition to this motion.
Saying that it's been approved.
Madam chair page I.
This is the regulation and
licensing department the initial
recommendation was to LFC and
they go back and take a look at
some of the department needs for
how they were reorganizing to
create a new manufacturing
housing program that would
increase that amount by two
hundred thousand from the
general fund that eight hundred
thousand from the mortgage
regulatory funds as well as
increases to the their cannabis
Division.
And then thank decreases in
boards and commissions for the
substitute advisory commission
that
Can use federal funds and.
The final thing would be.
On page five madam chair there
was also a crest request by the
department late to
include an additional five
percent for a total of ten
percent of our authority for the
boards and commissions program
so that's included in the
recognition for you madam chair.
Questions from the committee.
Representative small madam chair
I move approval of the
regulation and like I said is
you have a question
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Madam chair thank you I know
that there was some discussion
about allowing is the the
transfer from some of the fees
are collected by the regulation
and licensing develop into out
allow transfer those fees for
additional personnel costs that
that included in this ten
percent with Charles just said.
Thanks for translating that for
me thank all right
Representative small thank you
madam chair I move approval of
the HSC adjustments to the
regulation and licensing
department.
I understand.
Okay we have a motion and a
second is there any opposition
to this.
Saying that it's been approved.
Page seven gaming control board.
Our recommendation is to
increase three hundred from the
LFC for
At the request to TV requests
FTE such as compliance officers
in the special agent that were
discussed in the HSD initial
action.
And we have any questions from
the committee.
I don't see any Representative
small madam chair I move that we
adopt the HSC adjustments to the
gaming control board.
Check we have a motion proper
motion proper second is there
any opposition saying that it's
Representative.
Madam chair on page eight the
Economic Development Department.
The initial HSC recommendation
was to take the LFC and go back
and look at some adjustments and
those are highlighted for you
the biggest adjustment would be
to add recurring change up to
the budget to meet the executive
request that's online eight.
And then there are some other
minor adjustments to get closer
to the executive including
interstitial F. T. and fell.
That total general fund increase
for economic development would
be about one point four million.
And you are taking action to
reduce the J. tip special
recurring for special
nonrecurring appropriation in
the section five the HSD would
prefer that to be in our base
budget that's what you think
here madam chair in the right in
that scenario.
Okay.
Questions from the committee.
Representative small madam chair
I move that we adopt the HSC
adjustments to the Economic
Development Department.
I understand second.
Our promotion proper second is
there any opposition to that
motion saying that just passed
next Madam chair on page nine
cultural affairs department the
committee action took the LFC
recommendation with direction to
try to get closer to the
executive and a couple of items
those include the southern
facilities manager and executive
assistant and museums and
historic places and then a
couple of.
Arts and the military was
brought up as well online forty
three
those are part of the the
increased general fund
recommendations for cultural
affairs chair.
Questions.
Representative small.
I move we adopt the HSC
adjustments to the cultural
affairs department.
Second.
Have any opposition to this
motion.
Saying that it's been approved.
Yes madam chair at page ten
energy and minerals the initial
recommendation was for the LFC
and direction to go back and
take a look at a couple of items
so there increases on lines
three and four
in the energy conservation.
Aligns fifteen and then also.
Thirteen fifty nine at thirty
seven.
And then they also had an
increase for let page eleven.
Line fifty three for that office
of regulatory affairs important
to the Department.
The and energy and minerals
general fund increase up to ten
percent on this particular
scenario madam chair.
All right you have any questions
from the committee.
Representative small madam chair
I move we adopt the energy and
minerals and natural resource
farming at house preparation
finance increase at.
Okay we have a proper motion
proper second is there any
opposition to that motion.
Is that opposition
Representative Ezzell.
Okay we do have one in
opposition if we could know
about Representative Ezzell
thank you.
Our next page twelve madam chair
of the Indian Affairs Department
the committee action was to take
the LFC recommendation and go
back and take a look at one item
in particular for tribal suicide
prevention specialist and tribal
consultation.
the recommendation is to
increase from LA from the LFC by
two hundred fifty thousand for
those items that are listed
there at the text madam chair.
We have any questions regarding
the Indian Affairs Department.
All right Representative small
thank you madam chair I move
that we adopt the HSD
adjustments to the Indian
Affairs Department.
Second.
Okay we have a second for
representative Allison is there
any opposition to that motion
saying that it's approved next.
On page thirteen madam chair
this one's a little bit complex
I'm gonna walk you all through
that the initial committee
action took the executive
recommendation you can see that
on the far left.
And that was three point four
million.
That was lower than the LFC.
As the executive did not replace
pre K. fund balances and
increased funding for program
support.
The committee asked and a group
to go back and take a look at
this particular agency budget
because of the importance of
early childhood to the committee
and the recommendation is to
replace some of the fund balance
rather than using a program
support online twenty one thirty
three yes the four hundred forty
eight thousand.
Madam chair LESC has endorsed
legislation increase the use of
the.
Fast growing early childhood
trust fund by an additional ten
million dollars and so on line
seventy and the line right below
what the recommendation is to
use some of that capacity to
back fill that pre K. reductions
that were in the executive
director.
And also in your public schools
recommendation you have a pretty
sizeable increase for licensed
teachers license teachers are
also operate in the pre K.
program as well as the private
providers so to give those
teachers raises as well the
recommendation is to include
that three point five million
dollar from the trust fund all
of these items on the very
bottom box are contingent on
that legislation being enacted
so if for some reason that
legislation is not an act in the
pre K. teachers will not get the
range and pre K. would need to
be reduced
in the in the budget along with
this other line items that are
in other agency budgets the
recommendation is also to
include.
Pre K. language that was in the
LFC recommendation that
prioritizes expansion awards two
areas that are also doing
extended learning programs.
and to include new language
specifying
the three point five million is
for increases in pre K. teacher
salaries.
With that we have to answer any
questions about this let's ask
the committee are there any
questions from any of the
committee members on this.
Early childhood education and
care department.
All right Representative small
Madam chair I move that we had.
Digest mints and endorsements
for the early childhood
education and care department.
Second.
Shekau's.
Second was is there no no okay
we have a motion proper motion
proper second any opposition.
Saying what we want.
So page fourteen madam chair.
This is the Human Services
Department.
And if you recall there pretty
large differences in the
recommendations.
Can a recommendation funded a
lot of the Medicaid increases
with nonrecurring
we did get word a couple of
weeks ago that the Medicaid
program will receive another
quarter of enhanced F. map that
relieve the burden if you're
calling your supplemental
scenario to relieve the burden
to to make a supplemental
request.
and there is room in the budget
four some reallocation there's a
possibility madam chair that
there could be another quarter
and FY twenty three of enhanced
F. map if this pandemic doesn't
wind down.
So the recommendation is to make
about eighty million dollars of
the general fund increase
contingent on the department not
receiving an enhanced F. map if
they get the enhanced F. map
they're going to get the federal
funds are not due to general
fund so the recommendation is to
make that contingent.
As well as use some of that
funding for increased hospital
rates you've probably heard and
seen in your own local hospitals
the tremendous labor costs
changes that are going on and
the tremendous stress that
hospitals are under with this
pandemic as well as other
delayed chair in the issue any
levels of patients has spiked
and maintained a really high so
the recommendation is to
increase those hospital rates
there's also a.
chair as increase their premiums
and Medicaid pays for Medicare
premiums so there's a
recommendation for an increase
of.
Five million dollars for the
Medicare rate increases on page
fifteen madam chair you heard
from the department there a need
for additional income support
workers so line forty eight
would reduce their vacancy rate
and find some more of those
positions that are currently not
funded there is a two to one
match from the federal
government that's kind of their
blended matching rate in income
supports that I bring in a
considerable sum of a federal
funds.
And there was the executive had
recommended some vacancy savings
in behavioral health and that's
built into this as well so
that's a net increase on page.
Sixteen.
Six million dollars.
Between Medicaid and and other
behavioral health madam chair.
Okay we have a couple questions
Representative Trujillo and then
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair I was
still on page thirteen and we
are with all due respect Mr so
he went to page.
Fourteen and fifteen and I have
questions on the bottom of
thirteen is it okay to go back
there and and yes my questions.
Well we've already taken action
on that you can ask no question.
Well.
We didn't get a chance to to I
thought he was going to talk
about the bottom it was in line
sixty nine the CYFD sexual
assault prevention and
intervention it was my
understanding that we were going
to include extra funding for
that we had already dealt with
the crime victims reparation
commission concerns but the
sexual assault prevention and
intervention had not been that
within I think David if with all
due respect David do you recall
the conversation.
So madam chair that particular
line item is not part of the
early childhood budget that's
part of the CYFD budget this is
just outlining how the trust
fund would be spent across
agencies.
So this so what you're saying
this block of of information
we'll deal with later.
Well we're it says ECECD you
just dealt with that in adopted
that for the pre K. compensation
and ECECD pre K..
Okay I'm confused on why is
sixty seven sixty eight and
sixty nine.
I mean sixty seven sixty eight
yes sixty nine in that page I
don't understand
because we're trying will come
up on page nineteen of a couple
agencies right on that one.
And this is just for a tracking
mechanism for the additional ten
million from that particular
fund madam chair and
representative.
Okay we're gonna talk about this
is because we've already taken
action on it and I'm gonna
remind the committee to go
through the chair not direct to
the staff.
I appreciate it and the other
thing is is that we have to
raise our hand this little zoom
hands so I can catch it.
There's going to be questions
thank you Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair.
Charles worst contracts the in
this three pages of documents on
fourteen fifteen and sixteen I
can't find contracts we were
told when we look at workforce
solution that there was a.
Hundred employees transferred
from Human Services over to
workforce solutions.
And I was looking for contracts
I would assume that if we
transfer that many of the work
force that would be a decrease
in contracts and I can't find it
can you help me please.
Yes madam chair Representative.
This is a I sheet that's only
showing general fund and that
would be a in a federal funds
scenario and the
Or a transfers.
Okay thank you for help me
understand that I what I would
do it looked at the different
shapes when they told us that we
had a hundred employees transfer
I went back to looking to see if
there's a decrease in contracts
in actually in contracts it had
gone up in I'm having a hard
time understanding that so again
I thank you madam chair so madam
chair the recommendation is to
take the LFC recommendation.
With these adjustments to it and
the Human Services Department
pays for ten F. welfare to work
programs and the the workforce
solutions department has to
assume some of that
responsibility that used to be
assumed by a private sector
company and so that's why
workforce solutions is is
increasing their their FTE
because they're actually hiring
people on staff to do different
work and paying in that
particular way.
So.
Thank you madam chair I
understand that but Charles I
just thought if you were
transferred responsibility
somewhere else I would see a
decrease really transferred from
and I didn't see that so we
offline sure thank you madam
chair.
As a representative Armstrong
and then Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair I was
curious trials if you could in
of expanding on the Medicaid
increase for hospitals is that
just for hospitals or for all
health care.
Madam chair the recommendation
is just for hospitals.
And you'll see in a nonrecurring
scenario
a nonrecurring bump in payments
for hospitals and nursing homes
when we get to the nonrecurring
section.
Thank you Sir.
Representative Brown.
Thank you very much madam chair
I'm just making a couple
assumptions and I want to see if
these are correct we're moving
through these spreadsheets have
been rather rather quickly
the changes are either
highlighted in hand writing in
the margins.
Or it looks like the original
sheets were highlighted perhaps
in yellow and they show up in
our black and white copies as
sort of.
Modeled.
What I say shading and we also
see the changes highlighted in
terms of any kind of notes that
are typed in but usually at the
bottom of the worksheets am I
correct in that I because I'm
I'm trying to get my bearings
here he would be held every
time.
We've dealt with one of the
changes that we either have the
line item for the staff would
point us to and exactly where
we're looking if there's no I
went have you look at the HSA
scenario you look at that call
Much of this comes back through
the subcommittees and and full
hearings and comments as we've
gone through the process.
Then they call us eight to the
far right which I was what was
the actual difference.
I would agree if we could
identify I line exactly what
you're referring to that be
great Charles so.
Questions and Representative
brown on the Human Services
Department.
That no questions just was
trying to get a little bit of
guidance here thank you already
okay.
Else on the Human Services
Department.
Representative small madam chair
and we adopt the HSC adjustments
to the Human Services
Department.
Check it okay have a motion and
a second Representative Crowder
you just put your hand up is
that for the Human Services
Department.
Yes I just wanted to vote no on
Human Services okay so we have a
motion proper motion proper
second is there any opposition
to the Human Services department
budget.
We have one and that the
Representative Crowder I don't
see any other hands the call out
if you are in opposition.
Okay let's move on to the
Department of Health.
Page seventeen madam chair.
Let's start with.
You took the LFC recommendation.
And let's look at line chan.
This would increase the violence
intervention.
Program that's new.
I seven hundred thousand.
Excuse me Charles I have a
member that so they've lost.
Audio in the checkout.
Mrs Representative these at all
I just lost audio.
Representative Ezzell she still
on.
I don't see her on.
Okay I don't see descent.
Yeah she my log in and try to
get back on madam chair she
still on she has herself muted.
But I can.
okay I can hear now are at your
Representative Ezzell.
Okay we're gonna go to questions
on this one this is the
department of health.
And we're gonna start with
Representative Dixon and then
Representative Hochman Vigil.
After Charles does through it
okay.
And then line fourteen there
wasn't the same level of.
Need for the tobacco cessation
programs when there is a desire
to do some of these others and
it was not in the executive
recommendation.
line twenty two the this was not
the executive recommendation but
there is a need and staffs here
for an office of gun violence
prevention this was presented
before us can safety that cost a
lot of confusion this would be
this is a CDC recommendations
for states to have their
epidemiology department study
how to better prevent gun
violence in communities and
three hundred thousand is a good
start we believe.
Line twenty four
the executive had a suicide
prevention programming this
would increase that from LFC by
seven hundred thousand.
Lab services increased the LFC
recommendation to get closer to
the executive by three hundred
thousand.
Line thirty nine this was a top
priority for secretary Scrase on
the automated medication
dispensing systems so that would
be one point one million.
As well as just a swap
for making sure that they've got
that person funding that they
would need for.
Being on electricians plumbers
and others rather than putting
that out a contract.
On page eighteen madam chair
this would also reduce the
vacancy rate make it closer to
the executive and health
certification and licensing I
think they've got a pretty big
effort needed for regulating
forty homes in particular.
The overall increases of eight
hundred thousand online seventy
five madam chair.
Be happy to answer any
questions.
Three so far and what I'm gonna
do is I'm going to ask if
Representative Ezzell has
questions to type them in the
chat all Reedham.
We're gonna start with
Representative Dixon Hochman
Vigil and then Anderson so if
you would please.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to ask about line twenty
five the family success lab I
know that that's something that
had been brought up to see if we
could get closer to the
executive on that recommendation
I just.
You know it's an opportunity for
us to use data to help drive
some of our policies of which I
think is cost effective in the
long run and so I just wanted to
see if there was any movement on
that.
Madam chair
I am not seen.
some of the request yet but bill
do you want to comment on the
supplemental GA and whether the
funding is going to come to his
apartment.
Your.
I have seen a request for that
Representative to supplement J.
we're currently working the
spreadsheets are we act get a
better handle on everything
descender we have a mentored but
now we're we're working on but I
have seen requests.
Thank you madam chair thank you
bill.
And madam chair another thing
for the committee to consider is
on some of these you'll see
movie either
halfway or maybe full way to try
to meet the executive there is
another chamber that gets a bite
at this apple so the committee
may not be doing the full
executive a request in some
areas and there still is an
opportunity for
the Senate to work on some of
these things to.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much madam chair
my question goes back to the
office of gun violence
prevention and the violence
intervention makes up so Charles
that both of the both the seven
hundred thousand dollars in hand
the one million seven hundred
are going to be going to DO age
and they're both to study
violence as a public health
crisis is that correct.
Madam chair the office of gun
violence is where the
epidemiologists will be doing
that the studying and and coming
up with evidence based
interventions the violence
intervention online Chandler
actually requests out to
communities for law enforcement
and others to implement actual
community based interventions to
reduce violence thank you madam
chair trial so that you will be
working hand in hand the I I
assume yes and you'll see a big
increase and the nonrecurring
section for the violence
intervention as well as other
evidence based
Criminal justice interventions
to reduce crime.
In a nonrecurring section when
we get there madam chair.
Okay madam chair and Charles
there also some federal grants
that that the department of
health and had received for that
as well are those going to be
I'm reflected somewhere in this
budget we're not gonna worry
about them because it's federal
funding.
Madam chair if they get the
federal grant award they can
bring that into a budget
adjustment request
and.
Check with the analyst to see if
we've anticipated RD budget but
either way they'll be able to
bring it it's just I thank you
very much chair thank.
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chair up madam
chair real quick on line twenty
five I thought when not the LFC
was going through of the just
being I thought I heard that the
three hundred thousand dollars
that that I and others might
recommend on getting that funded
I did twenty five family success
lab of and I'm aware of the HB
two junior funding and I feel
like if we're going to do it we
we should fully funded I believe
that three hundred thousand our
addition with that question.
Madam chair I don't know how
much is in the supplemental
request right now but if if it
is three hundred thousand that
would be a good start to get
going on this particular
initiative to be able to hire a
couple people to start doing the
data matching.
Representative Anderson madam
chair I think the until the
industry to signing up shorts
out that I'm going to leave that
we're it lies with with of hope
that we can fully fund of that
of by the time this process is
over thank you.
Thank you very much anybody else
on the department of health.
I I have a question I want are
going to have Representative
Garcia.
Thank you madam chair on a line
waiting on sexual violence
regions was asked for the from
the department of the LFC and
exec the same the task for.
Yes ma'am.
Thank you thank you thank you
madam chair.
Talk I want you to briefly visit
with us Charles on the whole
issue around how we're providing
and can providing capacity for
nurses in both the hospitals and
nursing homes.
Madam chair when we get to the
nonrecurring
Sheets that use the
our money that's in the
appropriation contingency fund
that some of those big items
from the general fund.
You'll see about a hundred and
seventy one million dollars and
cleaning federal matching funds
for an initiative to provide
supplemental payments to
hospitals and nursing homes to
help with their
The current labor costs for
nurses and to be able to help
them.
Retain the nurses that they have
as well as hopefully not have to
rely so heavily on contractors
and that HSD budget that you
just adopted
there will be an ongoing rate
increase for hospitals and when
that money runs out General Fund
is about eleven million that
bring in close to seventy
million in federal funds for
recurring hospital rate increase
madam chair that could be used
for the same purpose.
All right okay your hand is back
up representative Garcia is that
a question on this on this
agency you madam chair grief on
this okay thank you madam chair
I would want that of.
The hospital with the veterans
hospital we covered under
additional.
Yes if they have Medicaid
patients.
Still there funding is going to
come from the VA though manager.
Thank you madam chair Joseph
Representative small.
Chair hi I move that we adopt
the it students stated
assessments to the department of
health your your freeze framing
of.
Gardens.
Representative manager are
committed now go let me madam
chair I move that we adopt the
HSC adjustments to the
Department of Health.
Second.
And we have a motion and a
second is there any opposition
to that motion.
Representative Crowder is in
opposition okay.
All right let's move on to
children youth and families.
Share.
Page nineteen.
Show up is highlighted but there
are two changes you adopted the
LFC recommendation
and there was a desire to
revisit a couple of priority
areas for filling positions
within the department department
does have a considerable funded
vacancy rate and the behavioral
health services but the
recommendation is to help them
with some additional funding
online three seven hundred fifty
thousand in the far right
column.
These are clinical positions
that work directly with you.
And line thirty seven.
And program support on the far
right two hundred and fifty
thousand.
And this is to help with our
support for overseeing the cabin
just settlement to improve child
protective services in
behavioral health for for you.
With that madam chair and stand
for any questions.
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you madam chair line eight
that I just need a clear
explanation I think this is what
I guess I was referring to and
David.
The stated that madam chair that
domestic violence based
increased LFC additional one
million from early childhood
good
David can you explain that madam
chair yeah please explain out.
Madam chair I can help.
This is Eric Shinya.
So what that item their online
eight there's.
There's three million in general
fund revenue.
You can see there and then
there's the other million that
came from the other page that
you're talking about earlier
from the early childhood Fund so
there's a total increase of four
million dollars.
Madam chair thank you very much.
Okay do we have anybody else on
this agency that has a question.
Representative small.
Sure I move that we adopt the
HSC adjustments to the children
youth and families department.
Second.
Representative Anderson were
motion proper staff and is there
any opposition.
Okay it has been approved we
could move on then to the next
stage in state.
Page twenty madam chair
Environment Department.
We can follow along in the far
right column.
There was.
Recommendation from HFC was for
the LFC and direction to go back
to look at some adjustments.
That would be line eleven.
For the watershed and what Liz
wetland restoration and
protection.
One twenty four for the solid
waste bureau FTEs.
One thirty three for salaries
for the climate change bureau.
I'm thirty for the cannabis and
hemp you're a person.
Would be the other increases
madam chair.
Environment.
Department would go up about a
million dollars in general fund.
There's also a note on the
bottom.
At a take a look at the
differences in other revenues.
Representative Sarinana.
Thank you madam chair do we have
anything for uranium waste clean
up this.
Essential specials that you
adopted correct chair.
Thank you okay this is the base
general fund budget.
Section four of the budget
anybody else on this.
Representative small thank you
madam chair I move we adopt HSD
adjustments to the New Mexico
environment department.
Second.
Session and the second is there
any opposition to the
environmental of department yes
from brown okay and Ryan lane is
that now okay yeah we have
Browde and laying in opposition
let's go ahead it's better for
you so let's go ahead and move
on that Charles.
The final piece for
this set of adjustments madam
chair is in that.
compensation so you've not taken
action on on the compensation a
recommendation
there are differences the LCS is
higher it hasn't
A seven percent average built in
that's which starred in FY
twenty two this year in the
final quarter with an across the
board three percent and then
agencies would have flexibility
in the next fiscal year with an
average of four percent
increase.
The executive has
An increase bills and it focuses
on the fifteen dollar minimum
wage.
for state employees.
And then that builds up
for.
That people that are not in the
general plan at at at average of
a four percent increase higher
education and executive is a
four percent increase the
legislative and judicial
branches are four percent
increase executive
recommendation.
We do recommend that adjustment
for you to consider in the LFC.
Recommendation and that includes
the ERP increase.
There is already built in so the
recommendation the current law
requires another one percent
increase for the employer
concert contribution.
The LFC recommendation includes
an additional one percent
contingent on legislation which
has been filed to increase that
year the employer contribution
by another one percent.
Our estimates have been revised
so you can do that the two
percent and still save six point
one million and you'll see that
on the far right column under
that your B. H. U. D. and
crease.
The other recommendation
yeah just meant.
Is.
To make to make sure you
understand that the public
education ERP increases are
built in to the public and
budget that you've adopted and
so these are that HEDT
DRB increases we're this
scenario also includes funding
for a fifteen dollar minimum
wage bills and section for for
PED and section eight for all
others.
Up from the thirteen fifty and
the original out LFC
recommendation.
And we would recommend rather
than a mandate that you include
language that says there's
appropriations are sufficient to
cover that level of a salary.
The final note
Item three in the bottom as some
superintendents have expressed
concern of their ability to give
their employees a raise in FY
twenty two so we're recommending
providing some flexibility that
if they need to do that July
first through in August that
they do that in the form of a
retention state that.
There are administrative
differences between a state
agency being able to do this and
the schools which get paid
differently than the way the
state works you know we've got
a.
They got to get a transfer and
be able to do a budget
adjustments.
So.
With that madam chair and be
happy to answer any questions
about the AGFC scenario on the
far right and differences in
their the cost.
Okay we have to let's go
Representative Trujillo and then
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair I.
I'm.
I think it was section.
I'm sorry it is minimum wage on
the top.
So we are we're actually
increasing three million three
hundred and sixty six thousand.
That's correct the LFC
recommendation was for the
assume the minimum wage of
thirteen fifty and this scenario
assumes that they can find a
fifteen dollar.
Then the starting wage.
Madam chair thank you.
Okay we're gonna go to
Representative Crowder Anderson
and then we'll have the cabinet
secretary make a comment go
ahead.
Thank you madam chair my
questions just answered thank
you.
Representative Anderson.
Madam chair real quick is it my
understanding on the scenario
that we are about to take action
on that up there will be three
percent in the fourth quarter of
FY twenty two and then starting
FY twenty three seven percent is
that correct yes Representative
so that would include madam
chair the three percent would
continue into FY twenty three
and then there would be a four
percent increase on top of that
in FY twenty three.
I see thank you for that
clarification madam chair that
answers my question.
Secretary Romero.
Madam chair just a couple of
comments thank you for allowing
me the opportunity and good
morning everyone
Certain about not being able to
address compaction issues that
that are facing the state and
state employees when you do
these these increases we just
don't first of all doing the
minimum is going to cost the
compaction issues and and then
just doing a straight across the
board increase doesn't address
doesn't help us address those
compaction issue so just wanted
to mention that thank you madam
chair just wondering of what we
see the public safety increases
someplace else because I don't
see them included here.
They're included in and then
overall is that correct Charles.
Public safety.
Increases are included in these
items at the LFC a
recommendation and then there
are additional targeted
increases for the state police
as well as other person and an
agency budgets that are built in
to the agency based budgets so I
think state police are in for an
increase of about fifteen
percent if I'm not mistaken Mr
Abbey.
Okay David you wanted.
Madam chair sixteen sixty
percent okay.
Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair I'm just a
follow up on that question is
there.
Where else should I look for
additional funds for the hiring
of law enforcement for sort of
other
Entities is there another place
thank you that was adopted Madam
chair in the specials contingent
on your ability that you're
carrying being an act.
Yeah it is thank you madam chair
so for retention as opposed to
recruitment correct.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Okay do we have any other
questions on the compensation
sources and uses.
Okay Representative small thank
you madam chair I move we adopt
the HSC adjustments to the.
The use of madam chair.
We have a motion and a second
proper motion proper second for
compensation sources and uses is
there any opposition to that.
Seeing none is better for a once
noble on.
The next page twenty two madam
chair these are additional catch
up cleanup items that are in
addition to the packet that
you've just gone through so
these are adjustments
that have been.
review and presented here for
your consideration.
I can go through them line by
line if you'd like madam chair.
When we.
Many time to look at the list
the committee just review it
quick and then yes questions.
Okay let's go to Representative
Trujillo.
Thank you madam chair Charles
two quick questions where is the
crime victims line item I know
is I something like six eighty
a cold six eighty number one and
then the second question madam
chair is in the middle of the
page of line twelve twenty two
there's still you know we talked
about the about nine six forty
seven DD PC it's still in my
opinion not enough because
they're still going to have to
they have to hire staff or
they're gonna lose support
system with support systems
within it I know that that was
raised in the subcommittee.
two fifty is two hundred fifty
dollars not enough madam chair
that's a really strong concern.
So those are my two questions
how do we address this.
So madam chair.
For DD PC this is I think
basically halfway.
And I think the thinking here is
that the Senate can help out
possibly with the remaining
funding amounts that they might
need.
I don't have anything for crime
victims and their maybe I know
that there may be things and the
supplemental GA that we need to
follow up on madam chair.
Representative what was that
first question Representative
Trujillo on at funding code you
asked about.
It was funding code six eighty.
For crime victims reparation.
That's America madam chair madam
chair that's agency seven eighty
is crime victims.
Seven thank you madam chair.
Thank you that correct.
Seven eighty.
Well it again that one and then
the and then the six forty seven
DPC both in my opinion do not
address the need for money and I
really have a strong concern
about that thank you madam
chair.
Representative Armstrong acts
please.
Thank you madam chair I was
curious about the office of the
state engineer
on the water data and it has
contingent on legislation the
the legislation was passed a
couple years ago and there is
another bill coming forward but
I would appreciate if that
language was taken out
contingent on legislation.
Charles.
Well of the committee madam
chair.
Okay so let me just ask a
question and.
Are we is there existing is
there any existing frontier code
that can receive these dollars
based on a previous piece of
legislation that was passed.
Thank you madam chair go ahead
David.
Madam chair this was included by
error and I was kind of like it
before your question so it yes
there is existing legislation
the staff should be dropped it
was included buyer contingent on
legislation should okay on the
street.
So madam chair struck and that
from this scenario.
Okay thank you madam chair.
Representative Brown and then
Garcia.
Thank you very much madam chair
this question is for either
David or Charles I see here
Agency CO two hundred district
courts and nursing comments
there my question has to do with
where we stand in the HSC
proposed budget for the two new
judgeships in the fifth and
thirteenth judicial district
house bill one twenty four which
I'm sponsoring cleared the house
Judiciary Committee yesterday
we need to have for each of
those judicial districts three
hundred six thousand eight
hundred dollars.
the LFC had recommended I
believe a lower amount one point
that I'm just so I'm clear where
do we stand now on that funding
for those two new judgeships.
It may not be here in any of our
spreadsheets but
We have testimony from the two
chief justices that they need
the full three oh six eight
hundred because they they must
fund the judgeship per se
and administrator and they need
to have a court monitor and I
believe the LFC originally did
not allow for the court monitor
and they cannot actually hold a
trial without a court monitored
because that's the person who
keeps the official record.
And because multiple trials may
be going on at one time in a
division we can't share a
monitor.
Madam chair.
Miss madam chair could miss Dick
Peddie answer that I think our.
Madam chair members of the
committee Amanda Dick Peddie
the LFC recommendation does
still include the two hundred
and fifty thousand dollars per
get chip in the base of both the
fifth and the thirteenth
judicial district
that was why does it change but
the motion that I remember
taking get adjusted so that that
word is.
Madam chair yes so this became
very clear to us in the hearing
in Judiciary yesterday that we
do need to of the to three oh
six eight hundred or it it just
it's kind of meaningless if we
don't they're smaller district
courts they don't have a pool of
employees they can draw on to
you know supply court monitor
impromptu it has to be paired
with the judge in the
administrator so either this
change I guess to be made here
in our committee or I guess we
can ask the Senate to do it
would be nice if we could just
get it done the house bill one
twenty four will go to
appropriations so at some point
we need to address it thank you
madam chair.
Representative Garcia thank you
madam chair just on what
Representative up you mentioned
on that thank victims of
commission they're asking for
another million dollars to if
you don't have enough funding
and it just a concern if you can
visit that somehow and I
understand madam chair of the
so there should be into thanks
for.
Thank you.
Representative Lane.
Thank you madam chair just to
brief items that I I thought I
recall seeing in the the higher
end sub group and so many to
look somewhere else but one was
for us monies for center of
excellence for someone college
and the other was for health
professional loan repayment.
Health loan repayment was
increased US Micaela line about
the other one.
Madam chair San Juan college for
New Mexicans was increased by a
hundred thousand dollars in
addition to the two hundred for
the health of professional
recruitment program.
Thank you madam chair so those
are added another on the sheet
here they were in the higher
education subcommittee adopted
report madam chair thank you
madam thank you madam chair.
Let me let me just take a minute
here to explain this.
Mr chair state catch up cleanup
piece is based on anything that
didn't get caught during the
time when we were doing the base
budget issues.
So sometimes
The questions that you're
raising have already been
addressed and they were inside
the budgets that we've already
approved as a committee.
So it I think what I'm gonna do
after when we get a little time
I want to go back through this
with the committee and how the
bill is structured where you
find components of these
different things and how it's
actually in it how it's actually
listed because I I feel like
that maybe maybe we weren't
clear enough on that I haven't
spent enough time with the
committee on this but I just
think that's gonna be something
will pick up on right after we
get the the budget over to the
Senate also like to remind the
committee that there is another
chamber and I do have funding
and they do have reoccurring and
non reoccurring funding.
They're going to have a
responsibility to help fill the
gaps also.
And I and my intention is on non
technical review I'm gonna put
myself and then probably
Representative Crowder on this
when we go through the technical
review as the bill is being
finalized because there may be
some things that have slipped
through and may not have been
but I just want to assure
everybody that is not over until
it gets in the Senate finance.
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair my only
question was on
PED is for the panic buttons
with no cost there I just
wondered what it's rare to see
something on here without a
dollar amount Charles thank you
madam chair madam chair that
would be other state funds for
the public school capital outlay
council.
General fund totals.
I see so it's on the list but it
will come out of this total
gotcha thank you madam chair.
Representative Castellano and
Representative these out.
And madam chair I I think you
answered my question of I was
going to check on Senate five
thousand dollars for drug court
for a.
The four judicial district I
think you answered my question
thank you madam chair.
Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair thank you very much
I'm in agreement with
Representative brown of the
fifth and.
Additional district unless we
have a full funding it's kind of
been under wheels because those
judges will not be able to
operate your court rooms without
additional help thank you madam
chair.
All right we have anybody else
any of the committee members any
comment from secretary Romero.
Okay I don't see any other hands
that Representative small thank
you madam chair I move we adopt
HSC catch up and clean up
language with the.
Removal of the.
I see the fix.
Recognizing that some of these
things are in a different
they're not general fund I want
to work with that out there to
so.
We have a motion to have a
second to.
Second.
Our motion proper second is
there any opposition to the
catch up Plano.
Okay we have one in opposition
Representative Trujillo is there
anybody else.
Okay let's move on then to the
school address.
Yes madam chair so these are
things that we found going
through what you've already
adopted that are technical in
nature this is page twenty three
the first DVR usually has a
going back for years no
reverting language
Because they bring in some
federal matching funds
so we're recommending
reinstating that that was not in
the LFC recommendation.
HSD and the LESC recommendation
there was contingency language
for their Medicaid program to be
approved by the federal
government they have received
approval so that came in after
the LFC recommendations that
contingency language is no
longer needed
the corrections department had
asked for re out there is ation
language that was an air of the
already have the funds available
in FY twenty three so that needs
to be stricken from the
committee substitute.
Let me go to clients can you had
a our request from use
conservation corps the
recommendation is instead of
doing the bar is just a budget
the money include that language
and then there are some
discussion on removing in the
specials thank the contingency
for I came in finish to have
this federal act amended that
was stricken and there was the
desire when you're talking about
it to come up with more
inclusive language and that's
what this language would you
madam chair.
Okay Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair thank you very much
I was concerned about the
department of game and fish.
Is there any way that we know
where this.
Supposedly acquired land is
going to be.
Madam chair this is the
property I believe that we've
been discussing since the
special session and this is in
the specialist for about.
Eight or nine million dollars
Representative small I don't
know if you had anything to do
you want to add on that.
Now that sufficient madam chair.
It's still didn't answer my
question madam chair I'm opposed
to any sort of government agency
acquiring private land because
that land does come off our tax
rolls no net gain is the way I'm
planning on going on this thank
you madam chair.
Okay anybody else on technical
adjustments.
Representative small.
Thank you madam chair I move we
adopt the HSE technical
adjustments.
So.
Okay we have a proper motion
proper second is there any
opposition to the technical
adjustments we have three we
have Representative Ezzell
Crowder and Armstrong.
During body else.
Okay and brown all right so we
do have a four in opposition to
the technical adjustments want
to talk now about the public
school workgroup where we
brought this back to full
committee.
Everybody should have received
that document.
Now we're not going to go
through every agent here what
we're gonna do is just talk
about that first page that
everybody was to chomping at the
bit over.
About the very first ball it if
we could Charles or sunny
whoever's going to do this
public art.
Madam chair I'll I'll provide
the overview so if you recall
the LFC originally had a
requirement for all districts to
participate with flexibility and
extended learning program your
workgroup removes that
requirement and asked that PED
to ensure everybody participates
there was still concern about
that language and that was
removed and the workgroup there
was also concerned about
providing flexibility through
the budget so what the
recommendation is now is to
reduce the E. L. T. P. funding.
Eliminate the flexibility
language there's there was no
mandate and the subcommittee
report are ready and you already
removed the other language but
reduce but eliminate the other
flexibility language so that
districts that they're going to
do it they got to do it the way
that the statute says and I
would like to point out to the
the members the statute doesn't
require an additional ten days
that's a PED requirement
so the flexibility language
really wasn't usurping statute
be that as it may that's all
stricken from the scenario.
Then the.
This scenario rather than
Providing flexibility and strong
encouragement provides
encouragement through
Enhanced funding so the the base
recommendation for extended
learning is reduced there's a
new pot of money for districts
that are implementing or would
like to implement the LTTE they
would get enhanced funding for a
race is a ten percent rather
than seven percent.
There was concern about language
increasing the at risk funding
that has been removed from the
scenario along with the money.
The committee heard pretty good
testimony this summer madam
chair for your call from Dr vero
about the the need for the state
to do a better job of targeting
at risk funding and not just
letting districts sort of
haven't swimming around in the
SCG so the recommendation is to
move funding into
a specific pot below the line
for PED to administer using the
family income index which we
validated targets of funding to
the neediest schools and then
allows for spending on evidence
based educational interventions.
The scenario also missed funding
a little bit for the insurance
cost.
As well as for instructional
materials and with that manager
I'd be happy to answer any
questions you have all these
details are in your packet.
I noticed that we have secretary
Steinhaus on the.
On the meeting here if you want
to make a comment Sir.
Madam chair thank you for the
opportunity we stand ready to
implement the changes that you
are considering thank you.
Already and I have one question
for you Sir this whole issue
around extended learning time my
understanding and I went back at
are color coded chart is part of
the response to the Martinez
Yazzie lawsuit is that not
correct.
Madam chair yes thank you for
bringing that up the E. L. T. P.
extended learning programs that
you have put into statute in our
funding are in the crown jewel
and the primary implementation
to address the Martinez Yazzie.
Thank you very much and you know
it's unfortunate that the state
provides funding that is not
taken advantage of by the school
districts.
Yes it's the state then it is
food because we're not meeting
the Martinez Yazzie mandate so I
just want everybody to remember
that
When you're school district more
may not apply for these funds so
with that is there any questions
of Charles on this.
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair I move
that we adopt the HSD
recommendations for the public
at budget a second.
Proper motion and a proper
second is there any opposition
to this.
Saying that it's been approved.
All right what it what also if
you got for us today staff.
Well over a billion dollars in
spending.
For other non recurring items
that we're not in your normal
special supplementals and
efficiencies madam chair and so
that's the other extra color
coded spreadsheet.
I'll go over just a couple of
the the bigger changes madam
chair and I would like to orient
you there are some in the the
language and agency name.
There's some color coding there
if you stay up at.
A light red.
Those are criminal justice
package related appropriations.
And then a light blue our major
health care related
appropriations that you wanted
to to highlight madam chair.
So I need you guys to run that
she didn't to me please.
So.
Well we're waiting for our madam
chair just as a setting some of
the context back this summer
when LESC was developing its
budget guidelines the committee
directed staff to work with the
committee to spend the our state
really funds and to to make a
recommendation for how there
should be allocated.
eventually the Supreme Court
decided that the legislature
needed to appropriated not just
recommend and.
So the LESC have been developing
a plan for how to spend that
billion dollars that was left
after the transfer to the U. Y.
and some of the other pandemic
related spending that the
executive attack.
So sometimes around the
roundhouse you're hearing people
saying what we do with this
unspent art of science well it's
been accounted for in its
accounted for here along with
about a billion dollars to
spending from the general fund.
To get out into the communities
across the state I'm not have
the state have unreasonably high
reserves and bring those
reserves to about thirty
percent.
So they were being
recommendations and LESC some of
which were advanced in the
special session and spent some
day mass you see here are the
amounts needed in order to I am
the LFC column the amounts
needed to reach the original LFC
recommendation and then you'll
see the staff scenario for HFC
are adjustments from LFC if you
look at the yellow column.
That is the executive
recommendation and the executive
did not have a recommendation
for how to spend the our point
of order it with their
recommendations for general fund
are already covered in the
specials that you adopted
already.
So transportation being
appropriations across the
spectrum for transportation
including major infrastructure
projects I'm Planning requests
for local governments to move to
autonomous vehicles
There's airport upgrades you did
some of that during the special
session equipment upgrades
branch infrastructure
investments as well madam chairs
as made a point about that
that's included in this package.
Members of the interested in
line fourteen.
This would be for evidence based
criminal justice reform efforts
at twenty five million dollars
there is a suite of locally
delivered evidence based that's
got strong research behind it
that works to fight crime those
would be requests for five more
violence intervention.
Program statewide there be
requests for a pre trial
services that could go out to
judicial districts in addition
to what you've got built into
the based budgets.
As well as training for local
police departments on how to
effectively implement community
oriented policing or evidence
based forms of police training
Hydrogen have amount was
reduced.
To match the bill that you're
still considering.
Line eighteen in the original
LFC recommendation they were too
big appropriations combined into
one doesn't been split out in
this scenario the first one
would focus on others at LFC
bill to create an economic
diversification Fund and that
would be funded with some
leftover money from
last year session for business
relief that's not going to be
spent in addition to arpa and
general fund and then there's
another LFC bill for financial
venture capital program fund a
fifty million for that.
Some other minor adjustments on
this page it points you to line
twenty five this this would be
Madam chair for house bill seven
we didn't have a bill number
with this language but will look
adjusted in the budget to
reflect house bill seven which
does this business space
development.
Turning to the next page page
three.
The executive had a fifty
million dollar actually forty
million dollar drought
mitigation package lines there
it that also included some damn
repairs so lines thirty four and
thirty five one that
that would be dynamic following
in the middle Rio Grande to make
sure the state communities water
delivery needs to the state of
Texas there's some water system
projects that have been
identified by the executive
including
Navajo Gallup water supply
system until that pipeline is up
and running they need back up
wells to be operating properly
and in ten million for a damn
repair statewide there's a huge
S. S. S. need for repairing
damaged this will also include
three point four million at the
executive requests for the
gardener Dan.
Thank you.
This this can fall into criminal
justice or healthcare online
thirty seven this is the
bridging strategy for expanding
behavioral health and child
welfare community based services
that have a strong research
basically and then they would
bill federal Medicaid or
families first the hospital
online thirty eight this is for
hospital and nursing home labor
costs this would be about a
hundred seventy one million all
funds.
To help with that issue.
Turn the page for madam chair.
As some of the water of funding
in the original LFC was
reallocated and one of them is
line forty two for the eastern
New Mexico Rhode Water System.
The
LFC recommendation had forty
three million for the
opportunity scholarship to be
spread out over a a number of
years that was increased to ten
by ten million.
By reducing work study and
reducing the nursing indictments
the nursing endowments we expect
to get potentially some federal
Medicaid funds from up enhanced
F. map plan that the department
just as submitted.
The water project funds online
forty nine was reallocated as
well as the colonias.
And the lottery tuition Fund was
reduced by ten million to pay
for some of those other things.
Do.
The other thing that's on
initiate as a fund transfer
thank you you seen before is
that teacher preparation
affordability scholarship fund
putting money into that fund as
well as teacher loan repayment.
Those are from the public and
reform Fund.
And then the last page has the
totals madam chair so little
over one point seven billion
dollars.
Between the general fund and the
money that's in the
appropriation contingency fund
from our the state police.
With that I'll be happy to
answer any questions chair okay
we're gonna start with
Representative Dixon and then
we'll go to Hochman Vigil and
then we'll go to Crowder and I
will go to Garcia.
Thank you madam chair I just
want to
looking at line fourteen
which is the twenty five million
for the evidence based criminal
justice reform efforts and madam
chair I'd like to make sure that
this language allows for the
hiring of new officers and so I
don't know if we need
clarification on that here with
Mr Abbey or silly or if that's
something that the technical
committee will be reviewing.
Madam chair
that I would flag on that is.
These are a nonrecurring sources
of revenue so if you're to
provide.
State funding for local
governments to hire additional
police at some point they would
need to figure out how to find
them we.
There was a cost program that
the federal government had in
the nineties where the the
federal government put up a
large share of the matching
funds that then decreased over
time
That might be an something to
look at if the committee so
desires but I would just like
that.
These are nonrecurring in the
for the local governments we
need to pick up that that cost
eventually.
Thank you madam chair and Mister
slate that's a.
That's a good point and
We did I think we need to spend
a little bit more time on that
particular issue
Another question that I have
though is that with regard to
lines seventeen and eighteen.
R. Mr solely.
And madam chair would you be
able to just walk me through
the difference between those two
lines
and the shifting of money just
trying to I'm not sure I'm
following.
What's actually happening there.
So nine eighteen is being
eliminated.
And the amount.
Being reduced and moved into
line sixteen and seventeen.
Okay.
I had to two different purposes
in line eighteen and those are
being broken out for simplicity
sake.
And the line sixteen line
seventeen so there be fifty
million for the venture capital.
And then the.
Hundred twenty five for the.
Economic diversification.
Okay thank you madam chair and
Charles I will
Keep looking at those and that
the corresponding legislation
That's all I have at the moment
thank you madam chair.
All right
I think it's Hochman Vigil would
you like to go ahead please.
Thank you madam chair real
quickly the additional twenty
six million to other program
information technology for
broadband projects first
question is that in addition to
the monies that were
appropriated during the second
special session and and then my
second question is does that
money go directly to do it or
will be a newly formed a connect
council have access to those
thank you madam chair.
So in this scenario madam chair
that at twenty six million which
was in addition to what you did
during the special session and
last year I would not be in the
bill.
So they've got two hundred plus
million plus another potential
upwards of sixty to eighty
million coming in the federal
infrastructure bill and so the
thinking here west to because
there's gonna be some much
federal funds in there so much
money out there that that hasn't
been spent yet that there are
other needs and the scenario to
fund that.
Thank you madam chair.
All right Representative Crowder
and leave your next.
Thank you madam chair the madam
chair Charles online forty two
with the language.
It says including four hundred
thousand dollars in great sees
it has two hundred thousand
dollars I'm I'm hopeful that you
can change the word for.
The word to.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair and
Charles on the final page.
Under the orange column where it
says the general fund staff
scenario for HFC at the bottom
six hundred sixty four million.
I was.
I'm not sure my memories right
we have seven hundred twenty
three million it has not been
spent are those are both funds.
In in if they are worse the
other sixty million.
I'm just getting.
They are our funds and we do
have to reconcile.
The general fund mix and the
arpa mix.
To make sure that as miss Romero
has pointed out before that
we're not allocating some of the
artists different things that it
should not be allocated for so
you're not spending all of this
scenario from LFC.
That's why you're seeing a
difference between what you
are recalling and and what this
total is okay in in in the
special scenario you spent it's
a pretty complex this is
probably the most complex budget
the state is ever put together
with all the I would agree with
that but if you're and and so
from LFC is recommendation you
spent more money and specials
and supplementals and in this
particular scenario you spent
less so you've left money for
the Senate.
And.
For the for the Senate to be
able to spend and then there's
extra money over in the specials
and supplementals for things
like Lita that came out of this
part of money.
All right hello madam chair
Charles I get with you later
Charles and get a little deeper
explanation it's hard for me to
understand what I appreciate
thank you thank you madam chair.
Okay I'll start to believe it
was Representative Ezzell that
was next.
Madam chair thank you very much.
My question follows the same
lines as Representative
Crowder's Mr slowly I know that
the guidelines were just
received by various counties
yesterday and I did know that
was going to affect these
numbers that we're seeing here
on the last page as far as the
state goes is there any changes
that will be that we will should
be experiencing later on.
Madam chair representative I
don't know if any guidelines
that were sent to local counties
if they are it will.
Would not be for the ark of
funds because those are already
being allocated.
Okay Mister well okay Mr chair
Madam chairman and chair of Mr
Slee online twenty nine again
it's the department of game and
fish and
My curiosity is really peaked on
this I'm not real happy about it
can you tell me the number of
acres that they're trying to
purchase.
Madam chair line twenty nine is
being removed from the scenario
so you'll see on the far right
HSC over and then in parentheses
under so that's cutting the five
million.
Not in this scenario.
Madam chair thank you very much
my glasses are dirty.
Representative Armstrong and
then representative Garcia.
And then Anderson.
Thank you madam chair Charles
can you explain line thirty
eight a little more is that
where that money's going to go
for the and the nurses yes
that's for
sure
both hospitals and nursing homes
and the total is a hundred
seventy one million when you
match with federal funds.
Okay and so is this is this what
we talked about earlier madam
chair where
it are we gonna make sure
there's language in there so
that it's not so that nurses
that are live work and play in
the area arts.
Not being kept on on staff and
contract nurses are coming and
is this the same spot madam
chair.
Yes it is madam chair and there
still work to be done with the
department as well as industry
I'm.
How this would be allocated
amongst different size hospitals
and nursing homes as well as to
ensure how the money would be
used
okay I'd say that consider this
a place holder that we need to
work in the Senate and we hear
your concerns
for those types of things but
right now the the funding is
available and there's a lot of
details to be worked out that
frankly I don't know would be
worked out in the budget anyways
but they need to be worked out
administratively.
Thank you so much and thank you
for hearing my concerns on that
it it's getting worse and worse
and also madam chair on page I
mean online forty one
Is is this a special.
Or can you explain forty one to
me madam chair thank you to
Charles.
Madam chair this is for a waste
water treatment facility in
Santa Fe.
Thank you madam chair is this
the normal place for that to be.
It can be madam chair there is a
lack of water projects that
we're going to the water
projects fund that were broken
up for individual projects like
Easter as well as
This one.
And.
Rather than putting it in that
other funds which we heard yes
we heard.
Discussions with the director
that they could really use it
and that funds and that's why
there are direct appropriations
to specific water projects.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Charles.
Representative Garcia
Representative Anderson and
Representative small and then
representative Allison so go
ahead Representative Garcia
thank you madam chair this
questions on the line number
thirty five of state engineers
office.
Money for restoration of dams.
Are well let's check yes in the
land grants qualified for this
morning.
If they have dams under their
jurisdiction I don't see why it
would there's nothing in the
language that would preclude
that we can't really just
problem sometimes with privately
owned dams.
But if it's a political
subdivisions should be
available thank you madam chair
of the general fund available
for this because the madam
chair.
I would just say online thirty
three there's funding for a
steak use their.
Thank you Charles madam chair
your money available for these
dams did you know there's been a
waiting list of years years
and years of trying to get
repairs they are so expensive
nowadays your funding around the
we get up later this week you
get these projects.
In this scenario you need to
rearrange things if you're still
the money for the Senate
we funded this through capital
outlay in the past I don't
recall David if there's anything
in the framework.
from staff for dams this year.
But we there is a there is a
major need Madam chair
representative I agree.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Charles I think we did that at
one point fossel thank you.
And we're gonna go to
Representative Anderson small
and then Alex and.
Madam chair I just have one
quick points on items fifteen.
Up.
One first question is how we
should try to make that
adjustment down.
Representative.
As you know I brought this for
and
LFC when we look at the bill
course this is all contingent on
the passage of a bill that it
was felt like we could move
twenty five million dollars for
other purposes throughout this
scenario at least
recognizing that this is a good
this is a good start point at a
hundred twenty five million.
Thank you madam chair second
question of it in the language
of items fifteen on that second
sentence I have some concerns
about of similar legislation
of who's who will make that
determination if this goes
forward as presented question.
Go ahead.
Madam chair representative
that's standard language it's
not unique to this particular
appropriation and it probably be
a combination of the executive
and with input from your staff
here and LFC and council
service.
Make that determination if if it
met the contingency or not we go
through that each year to see if
they are feel contingencies or
not and if we think they're
failed will score them that way
sometimes we differ with DFA on
it.
Thank you very much for that
response in the the fact that
this is not of we're not
planning new ground with the
term like similar legislation is
good to know and I'm satisfied
thank you madam chair.
All right Representative small
and then Allison.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair or very much appreciate
your the fact that on the
technical review committee for
line fourteen because madam
chair
the ability to provide one time
hiring bonuses.
For recruitment is seems like a
an important piece to consider
their fault of observing the
The LFC guidelines to not use
recurring funding for for
nonrecurring funding for
recurring expenses but there's a
way to increase hiring while
also madam chair supporting the
very innovative evidence based
programs like the violence
intervention program.
Thank you madam chair.
All right is better
representative Allison.
Thank you madam chair I'm gonna
refer to line thirty eight the
Indian Affairs it looks like
there was a very good amount
that was recommended to
I will infrastructure project
fund and then more than half of
that was taken back out.
What was the reason for that
Madam chair representative
Allison because the some of it
was used to provide line thirty
four that a Navajo Gallup water
supply project.
Regional LFC.
Okay
Madam chair I was on the state
that the Gallup.
Senator water line was fully
federally funded.
That particular project madam
chair is but they because of the
delays and and finishing that
project there is a need for back
up well
rehabilitation to ensure a
steady stream of clean water
until that pipeline project is
completed.
Okay thank you for that Charles
thank you madam chair.
Do we have anybody else I don't
have anybody else on my list.
any comments from the cabinet
secretary.
Thank you madam chair not
necessarily I think thank god.
Somewhat of an understanding on
some of the things that we've
been and you know governor's
initiatives I think
I still have there are some
questions and some concerns but
will have to work them out of
the Senate thank you chair.
Okay Representative small.
Thank you madam chair I would
move that we adopt the HSC and
just months
to this section nine ten a lot
of New.
Are the contingency fund
procreation thank you madam
chair.
We have a motion and a second.
To accept of the recommendation
for section nine ten and eleven
of the American rescue plan is
there any opposition to this
motion.
All right a state line it has
passed what else have you got
for staff.
We now we have can't believe
that so Senator you have
everything for the LFC to put
the bill together at this point
they would be working on that we
will review it for your
consideration on Tuesday.
What time are we coming in on
Tuesday.
Thirty AM madam chair okay I
just reminded committee.
You'll need to get excused if
you have a competing committee
at that time we need you here in
HSC.
So with that being said thank
you everybody good work today
again I want to thank the
committee I want to thank all
the staff and
Look forward to being able to
move this along thank you
everybody.
Thank you.
