Excellent. Thank you very much
members.
We're tracking. Okay. Uh, really
Quick. First members. I'm gonna
ask for a motion to table house
Bill 135.
And also to table house built to
90 as amended in consultation
with the sponsors,
please. Thank you, Mr Chair. Uh,
move the House Appropriations
and Finance Committee tables.
House Bill 135 and House built
to 90 as amended.
Okay, It's been moved and
seconded. Is there any
opposition to those motions
thing, man? We've got that.
We're gonna briefly here House
Bill 131 great to see Europe
some little and represent
Matterhorn. Please go ahead.
Thank you so much, Mr Chair,
Madam chair and members of the
committee We wish to take. We
know that this is a bit unusual,
but we wanted to take just a few
moments to talk with you about
this bill and a tee it up,
actually, for the interim, and,
um
Future.
Session, 2025. So we are here
regarding the appropriation to a
four of $25 million to the for
the to fund the state food
banks.
Um
Um
I'm going to turn this over for
just a very brief
Um, summary from Jason Riggs,
who is the with the New Mexico
road winner.
Food Bank. Thank you.
Yes. Thank you, Chairman Small.
Ladies and gentlemen, Thank you
for taking the time. I know it's
been a very busy busy day and I
appreciate you hearing us out.
My name is Jason Riggs. I am the
director of advocacy and public
policy at Roadrunner Food Bank.
And I'm here, representing the
New Mexico Association of Food
Banks.
Um It's been an interesting five
years. I've been in food banking
for 15 years. Uh and I've I've
taken calls. I think it's safe
to say from every district
represented here on our food
assistance line. The needed New
Mexico, As you know is is great.
Uh,
Unfortunately, food insecurity
isn't limited to urban areas.
It's not limited to rural areas.
There's plenty of it to go
around the entire state.
We've seen in the last five
years is a decline in donated
product and that's really what
we've been distributing products
from large food manufacturers
grocery stores with the pandemic
and supply chain issues. Those
manufacturers have gotten much
more efficient and there's less
food coming through our
warehouse and just give you an
idea. Roadrunner Food Bank is
part of a
Part of an association food. It
comes to our warehouse, Beit
donated product or government
commodities or private donations
goes to all corners of the state
through our four sister food
banks.
However, with donated product
starting to dwindle, it's become
more of a challenge on top of
that. We're seeing T FAP
commodities. These are federal
commodities going down, steadily
declining since the pandemic
since the height of the
pandemic.
Um
This is happening at a time when
snap benefits dramatically
dropped in March. Keep in mind
23% of New Mexico. 23% of New
Mexicans rely on snap for their
groceries. So that huge drop we
saw in March. It was
catastrophic, catastrophic for a
lot of families. Uh and we all
know food. Inflation is
continuing to rise, or at least
hold steady. So it's been a
perfect storm of suffering in
New Mexico.
Um, are purchase product. This
product at the food banks have
to purchase it's it's increasing
and being 501 C three charities
were not really designed for
that. We're adapting. We're
getting as many grants as we
can. We're soliciting donations
as much as we can, but it is
still a continuing challenge. So
I'm here to basically say that
$5 million, like what we got
last year is going to help a lot
of new Mexicans.
But every dollar counts every
dollar above That is more
households. We can reach more
food. We can get out there at a
really, really trying time for
food banks all around the
country. That's all I have to
say again. I thank you all for
your time. And I hope that the
rest of the day goes smoothly
for you. Thank you. Thank you
very much to have to add. Okay,
great.
We know this is a straight
appropriations bill. We are
going to go out. We'll ask for
public comment. I'll make a
couple of comments about what's
happened on the Senate side and
then because it's a straight
appropriations bill, we will
have to table. Uh, after we go
to questions from committee.
Ah, okay. Is there anybody who
wishes to make public comment on
house Bill 131.
Anybody online?
Okay. No public comment online
briefly members. I just want to
share the Senate passed by a
vote of 31 to 10. Senate Finance
Committee Substitute for House
Bill two and three that does
include I believe $5 million for
statewide similar to last year
for this purpose, Um, members
any questions?
On house Bill 131.
I don't see any I want to thank
represented little represent
Powderhorn, your expert we've
seen in this committee where
bringing awareness is very
helpful in his in firefighter
recruitment, retention, E. M s
Some other work been sort of
translated that next year, So
thank you. Any closing comments?
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Yes, we
look forward to working with
collaborating collaboration over
the interim.
And working with the legislative
finance committees and your
committee as well through the
interim and in preparation for
the 2025 sessions. So thank you.
Thank you for your time. Thank
you very much. Okay. Can I have
a motion to table house Bill
131 0.
And move. I represent Chatfield,
Same by Vice chair. Dixon. Is
there any opposition to that
motion? Don't see any. Thank you
very much. Okay, um
Do it is representative remain
close by
Duncan.
Let's uh okay. Um
Do we? Let's go, then to Senate
Bill 14.
Well, actually, I see Madam
Chair guy goes, is here. Let's
go to Senate Bill 17, please.
Madam chair, Please go ahead
and, uh
Yeah. Please introduce your
experts when it's time and we'll
go from there. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr Chairman, Committee
members, Um
I think I'd like to start with
the bill, and then I'm gonna
refer them to my my witnesses,
and they can introduce
themselves so good afternoon
committee members, SP 17 is
simply another vehicle to help
address the health care crisis
in New Mexico.
I'm very honored to be a co
sponsor of this bill, because I
believe this bill will address
many issues facing the most
vulnerable members in our
communities.
Um Some of the most notable
aspects of the bill. Our
hospitals have created a self
assessment that will be used to
match federal Medicaid dollars
dollars.
It is estimated that this self
assessment used as a match will
bring in 1.6 billion in federal
Medicaid dollars.
Small and rural hospital will be
at a much reduced rate compared
to the larger hospitals.
Uh, no additional general fund
dollars will be necessary to
implement the provisions of this
bill.
This bill has specific language
the does not allow hospitals to
pass on the assessment cost to
patients.
There would not be an increase
for cost for care. And I wanted
to stress that
Um the intent of this bill is to
improve patients access to
healthcare and provide
transparency.
Out about cost assessment and
increase in federal dollars will
allow hospitals to bring in more
medical staff, expand healthcare
services or retain services that
are slated to be on reduced or
eliminated, And finally, the
state may enact a law that
allows for the assessment to
access these federal funds.
The center of Medical Services
has approved similar plans by
eight other states and this film
mirrors that already proven New
Mexico Healthcare Quality
Surcharge Act for skilled
nursing facilities. Um, and with
that, Mr Chairman today, my
witnesses are Troy Clarke with
the New Mexico Hospital
Association. Hmm. Okay and carry
on the host secretary of HST,
And with that we stand for
questions. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair. Great to see you.
Thank you, Secretary. Thank you,
Mr Clark. Let's go out to
Anything to add.
First experts
Secretary. No, Mr Chair happy to
take questions. Fantastic. Let's
go out to the audience for is
anybody here to speak in
opposition to Senate Bill 17? Is
there anybody online in
opposition?
Kate. Anybody here to speak in
support of Senate Bill 17.
Excellent. Please sign on up.
Ah, if you could limit your
comments to about a minute or so
or less, if you so choose,
please.
Uh, tell us your name and please
go ahead. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Members of the committee. My
name is Frank Corcoran. I'm the
CEO of Sierra Vista Hospital
were strong supporters. Bill is
going to help fund hospitals for
long term period. So we really
appreciate it. Thank you. Thank
you. If you could maybe come
just a little bit closer. Yeah,
right in there.
Hi. My name is my name is Tammy
Chavez. I am the CEO of Union
County General Hospital in
Clayton, New Mexico. Our
hospital is one of the smallest
hospitals in the state and very
fragile are almost on the
doorstep of closing, and this
bill will provide long term
access to the patients in our
hospitals our community to
maintain. Thank you. Thank you
very much.
Good afternoon, members of the
committee, Mr Chair. I'm
Stephanie Chardon Clark,
Secretary of the Taxation and
Revenue Department. I'll be very
brief. We stand prepared to
implement this legislation in
partnership with H S D and
appreciate the collaboration
we've had with them to this
point, we implemented the
healthcare quality surcharge
successfully in 2019. So we've
done this once before, and we're
ready to go. Thank you, madam
Secretary.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is Chelsea,
Canada, and I'm the director of
public policy at the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce. The state
chamber supports this bill and
thinks the sponsors for bringing
it forward. We believe in
supporting health care providers
and entities, which in turn will
improve access to care and
health outcomes in the state. We
support the leadership from all
involved on this.
Proven strategy and other
states. We believe this
assessment on themselves with
help with significant
investments into important
elements that will help bolster
and our entire system like the
hospital workforce, enhancing
safety and wellness environments
for patients and other important
efforts that we believe will
improve access to care. Thank
you. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee Larry Harun
registered lobbyists for
Presbyterian Healthcare
services. You think this is an
important piece of improving
healthcare in New Mexico was
such a huge portion of our
population on Medicaid and
infusion like this into the
Medicaid program will help us.
not only provide better care for
patients but also increase and
attract more health care
workers.
And the health care system is
pretty fragile right now, So we
think this is really good piece
Urge you to pass the
legislation. Thank you for your
support.
Thank you. Members of the
committee. My name is Nathan
Busch and government relations
director at the University of
New Mexico.
Do stand in strong support of
the legislation. We appreciate
the sponsors bringing it forward
While this bill does not
directly impact financially, um,
hospital
Why this is important to us is
this provides for more robust,
rural healthy ecosystem in the
state when MH is currently at
120 130% of census, So we're
dealing with some real stressors
on our own hospital right now.
This legislation could be
passed. We believe that will be
best for the world communities
and also for our hospital here
at home. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Mr Bush.
Okay, We have a couple of folks
online. Let's go.
Go ahead. Kay Green, please.
Thank you. I lead a small rural
hospital in Port Alice, New
Mexico, Uh, Roosevelt General
Hospital were county and
community owned, and I just want
to express my strong support of
this. I think this bill is vital
to the future sustainability of
of healthcare and rural
healthcare in particular in New
Mexico.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much. Uh, can Guadalupe
County Hospital please go.
Good afternoon, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee. I am
Christina composed, administer
the County Hospital, the
smallest hospital estate and the
only rule Emergency hospital in
New Mexico. I regret that I
cannot be there in person as I
am at a national rule, Health
leadership conference and
learning more about
sustainability programs for
rural hospitals. This is one
that was spoken about here that
Oklahoma has passed already in
other states around us and would
be incredibly beneficial to us
to help sustain a rural
hospitals.
Thank you to the sponsors and
thank you for your time. Thank
you very much.
Ah, okay. Now can we have David
shop, please?
Mr Chairman and Committee
members.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak. My name is David Shaw and
I serve as the seed.
Hmm.
Okay, let's uh are we gonna be
able to get Mr Shaw back?
Okay?
Mr Xi. Okay, you're going.
Please Go ahead, Mr Shaw.
Mr Chairman, This is David Shaw.
I'm the administrator at
normally Hospital district and I
stand in support of Senate Bill
17 and one of the things that
the funds from this program will
allow us to do is to further
expand behavioral health
services in Lee County.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Dr Salgado.
Yes. My name is
Mexico, Mr Chair and Committee.
I appreciate the opportunity to
speak. I'm also a family
physician Born and raised in
Artemisia.
Educated at the University of
Mexico and came back to this
great state. We stand in support
of
That's B 17 because we feel will
be able to sustain rural
healthcare here in the region in
southeast New Mexico. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Okay. We
have two more. Stephen Stoddard.
Yes. Hi. My name's Stephen
Stoddard. And I'm, the executive
director with the New Mexico
over a hospital network, which
consists of 11, Rural,
independent, nonprofit hospitals
across the state. Are members
are in favor of Senate Bill 17.
We do feel that this is a long
term solution.
To help our hospitals to survive
in the long run, and we feel
like it's a vital piece of
strengthening the health care
system in the state. Thank you.
Thank you Conclude with Thomas
Whalen. Hello. I am the CEO of
Symbology General Hospital in
grants New Mexico and are fine
representative Harry Garcia.
We're grateful for what he does,
Mr Chair and members.
Symbology Emerald Hospital. Ask
you to, um
Make a do pass.
Recommendation to move this bill
forward and it will help us when
it comes at a increased
Reimbursement of about $8
million, so small rural
hospitals need some help right
now, but at least in a year year
and a half will be able to get
that to help strengthen our
hospital. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much, Mr Wheelan.
Okay, that concludes public
comment will go to the committee
for questions. Any questions
represented Chatfield first.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Mr Chair in our rural areas.
It's oftentimes several hours
between hospitals right now, and
they don't just serve the people
that live there. They serve you
They served anybody that might
be passing through and have an
automobile accident. Maybe have
a heart attack some type of
emergency. They are vital to the
existence of our small
communities.
Um
Yeah, right now they're hurting.
Um, maybe the secretary can tell
me how many of them are making a
good strong profit right now. Mr
Chair, Representative Chatfield.
I know that all of the rural
hospitals are struggling. There
are 28 rural hospitals in New
Mexico.
Eight of them, I think are at
risk of closure to at risk of
imminent closure. I can't say
I'd have to look at the cost
reports on the profit, but we do
know that the financial
situation is dire for these
facilities, Mr. Chair, Long
story short.
Many of them are looking at
closing their doors, not
Next year or two years, but
right now
And many of those that are
looking at that are from where I
live in my district and I would
urge the committee to vote in
favor of this bill. I think, uh,
I haven't heard anybody that was
against it, and I appreciate
y'all bringing it
Thank you representing Chatfield
represent Garcia. Thank you. Mr
Chairman. Thanks for bringing
this bill up, you know?
Rural hospitals to Mexico or is
important this Presbyterian this
to Albuquerque. We're seeing
Joseph. You know, in our
communities if you have to
travel 100 Miles to
Do any kind of visits for
doctors. You know, it's
devastating. You know if these
hospitals closed and I'm just
going to use an example
somebody's going to have a baby.
And all of a sudden they have to
drive 100 Miles to get to his
opposed to be that that is
devastation because you can
stand to lose the mom and the
baby. But, you know, rural
hospital are very, very
important to still in New
Mexico.
You know, there's a bunch of
rural areas in her state.
But like I said, you know, rural
hospital is just as important as
Presbyterians to thank you, Mr
Chair.
Thank you very much for some
Garcia. Any other questions?
I don't see briefly, Madam
Chair in, uh, experts. You've
structured this legislation in
order to ensure that the
I think it's three quarters of
the funds raised go directly to
support patient care and go in
here. Can you briefly explain
that partial portion? Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, so
hospitals are going to be
required to spend 75% of the
dollars distributed to them in
New Mexico. They can spend 25%
of the dollars for out of state
medical items that cannot be
purchased in states such as
medical equipment, medical staff
and pharmaceuticals.
Thank. Thank you very much.
Madam Chair. I want to thank you
and I want to thank everybody
who worked on the bill for that.
And so that means even when
there are hospitals that are
owned by corporations or what
have you that have headquarters
outside of New Mexico.
At minimum three quarters of
that 1.6 billion projected will
come back into Mr Chair that
that's correct. Okay, Great.
Thank you for that.
Uh um.
Okay. I don't see any other
questions will go to represent
Chatfield for a motion to pass
second.
Okay, There are a lot of
seconds. That was the first most
seconds we've had. Okay. It's
been moved by representing
Chatfield Seconded by Sam Garcia
represent Armstrong. Is there
any opposition to do pass on
Centerville 17.
Seeing none. Thank you very
much.
Okay? Uh, Representative
Thompson Thompson is here to
present
Ah, the Senate Bill 14, the
committee substitute for Senate
Bill 14.
You're sitting in the chair
Well,
Ask you to
Okay, chair. It's great to see
you.
And let's go ahead. If you could
tell us about the committee
substitute for Senate Bill 14,
and then we see your experts
there and we'll go from there.
Thank you, Mr Chair. So Senate
Bill 14 operationalize is laws
2023 chapter 205.
By incorporating statutory
changes in merging functions of
the Human Services Department
General Services Department
office of the superintendent of
Insurance Department of Health
and other agencies involved in
the purchasing delivery and
payment for health care services
into the healthcare authority.
This bill which takes effect
July, 1st 2024 does not include
an appropriation, Mr Chair, we
will stand for questions.
Great. Thank you very much, Uh,
Secretary, Mr Blasi, anything
that you'd like to add?
Mr Chair members of the
committee, Gina de Blasi Health
Policy and the governor's
office I wanted I do want to
stress is as representative
Thompson stated that this bill
is mainly a clean up bill.
For the health care authority.
I've also asked that you will
have an index to help you with
this very large bill that
references the page number the
bill section. The statute.
What's just being renamed in any
other items that any other
amendments to to statute will be
identified in the further right
column.
Great. Thank you very much. Uh,
let's go out now for public
comment. Is there anybody here
who wishes to speak in
opposition to Senate Bill 14?
Her Senate Health and Public
Affairs Committee. Substitute
for Senate Bill 14. Excuse me.
Anybody online?
Kate. Anybody here who wishes to
speak in support of
The There's please line up.
Thank you, Mr Chair Members
Committee. Patrick Allen,
secretary of the Department of
Health in full support of the
bill, as in its current form,
and as amended, um as a
department health recommended
Thank you, Mr. Chair Larry Harun
registered lobbyists,
Presbyterian health plan and
health care services again like
we talked a little bit on the
last bill. This is a
consolidation where we are. It's
like a one stop shop with the
state of New Mexico to break
down some of those silos as
we're dealing with health care.
And dealing with those
challenges, so we support the
legislation. We appreciate the
work the governor's office
secretary sponsors have done. We
urge your support.
Thank you.
Mhm, Mr Chairman, members of the
committee, Marla Schultz
registered lobbyists for Blue
Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico.
We stand in support for many of
the reasons just stated by Mr
Haram and look forward to
working with this new department
as we move into that transition
phase. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Kate, Is there anybody online?
Nobody online. Let's go to
committee for questions.
Representing Chatfield.
Mhm. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Well, what I large number of
things that bring you know.
Oh,
Low income water. Sure.
Solid waste service is that
Am I looking at the wrong paper?
Um, yeah, I think we're well,
Mr. You've got the same
healthcare organization. That's
what it says on my paper.
Mr Chair, Representative.
Chatfield. What you're looking
at is the existing statute that
includes a number of existing
programs that are not being
shifted. But they are in the
statute today, so we do have a
lot of low income water
assistance program at the
agency. So what you're seeing is
that existing authorizing
statute that's not being
changed.
That seems kind of
Okay. Next question. Just move
on from that one. Move on. The
next question is, how will this
affect
The New Mexico
Health.
Uh,
Care.
What's the name of the fund
that's in the top side down the
healthcare authority,
SD right now.
Uh,
The fund that program the state
uses to purchase employee
benefits. Yes.
How old it will. Does this
consolidated? Does it affect it?
Does it pay it off? Um, Mr Chair
representatives have healed the
action to move that fund and the
employee benefits division from
the General Services Department
to the healthcare authority was
taken last year.
So that is underway. Um, and our
budget request includes, you
know absorption of that fund
within the agency, so that has
already occurred and is already
sort of authorized in in the
Health Care Authority Act that
was passed last last session.
Okay. Thank you. That's all I
have. Thank you Represent
Chatfield. Next we're going to
represent Bohannan represent
Garcia.
Thank you, Mr Mr Chair. Thank
you. Thank you.
I'm just looking at the
technical, um, last week
technical issue, Um
So, it just says as noted in the
F I R. The H C A, makes the
following recommendations on
page 43, subsection and
Line 11 after half facilities
add or home community based
Medicaid waivers, service
providers in order to maintain
the confidentiality.
Reports related to allegations
of abuse, neglect and
exploitation. Have you have you
memory? Did that Mr Chair Mr Mr
Chair and representative Luhan
that was taken care of in the
amendment. Thank you.
Thank you for looking at them.
And I'm sorry, Mr Chair. Okay,
um
Let me look at this really fast.
So all those significant issues,
Mr Chair. We're taking care of
Madam Mr. Chair, Representative
Luhan. That's correct. We
substitute address. Thank you.
Thank you Represent Wuhan. Next,
we're gonna go to represent
Garcia. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Representative. Maybe
I'm on the wrong page. I don't
see anything about veterans on
this thing.
What are we getting their
benefits for veterans of the
whole going to do?
Mr Chair and and Representative
Garcia. Um, while well, the
secretary is looking. Basically,
this is to kind of streamlined
health care for all new Mexicans
to try and put things together
so that we can do things like
have bigger purchasing power for
prescriptions. So I mean, if
you're getting your care at the
V, A, it won't make any
difference. But if you're
getting your care
Um
Through some, you know, through
Medicaid or Medicare. This will
this will
Kind of makings more under one
roof, as opposed to silos here
and there and everywhere, so I'm
not. I'm not sure there's
anything specific related to
veterans, but the attempt is to
improve healthcare in New
Mexico.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garcia. I think that's correct.
And what you're seeing is I'm
just mostly cleanup of existing
statute to change the name of
the Human Services Department to
the healthcare authority and to
finalize the work that was
passed in Healthcare Authority
Act last year around moving the
developmental disability
supports division.
The division of Health
improvement and then the
employee benefits unit from
Department of Health and General
Services Department over to the
new health care Authority. Um,
we made a list of transition
items we we presented a
transition plan to the
Legislature in November, an
initial plan in a final plan in
January.
We're not really shifting
anything around. In terms of
veteran services. Things are
staying where they where they
are existing today, But that
doesn't mean that we won't be
working together as agencies to
improve services to new
Mexicans. This just doesn't
shift anything around answering
that.
Thank you, Mr Chairman,
Representative just might my
concerns on veterans. You know a
lot of time We get left behind a
little bit, and I just want to
make sure
They were not dropping behind
And legislation is not helping
everybody. Thank you.
Thank you Represent Garcia,
ranking member Armstrong,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And and
thank you for this. Uh, this
bill. I know it's um
One of one of the questions is
ah.
How will this
How will these changes impact
the private sector and
independent providers?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Armstrong. Um, so I do want to
be clear that we maintain the
private market through the
strategy. We're really not
trying to do any dismantling of
that. Um, what we are trying to
do is team up.
The different entities that
have, um, funds attached to
health care so that we can team
up to get a better deal, But we
would maintain sort of the
private market. That doesn't
mean we're moving anything in to
Medicaid, really envisioning
separate lines of business and
kind of maintaining that, but
just trying to use the power of,
um negotiating, uh, and those
joint funding sources to
negotiate a better deal. So I do
want to be clear that we're not
Not moving anything into
Medicaid.
Through this transition.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you, Right.
Remember, Armstrong. Next, we're
gonna go to represent Garrett.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Quick
question. It is now Healthcare
Authority.
Without any department added to
it.
Um, Mr Chair, Representative
Garrett. Um, this is a great
question. We are in somewhat of
a liminal state right now. And
the reason I've been really
cautious about this is because
of our 1 million customers, um,
and wanting to make sure that
they know where they go to get
benefits and services. So
Um as of July 1st, which will be
when our inaugural budget goes
live, we will be the healthcare
authority. Um, At that point,
the agency will have fully
transitioned its brand identity,
meaning that our website will
say all the right things. The
signage on our offices will say
all the right things are notices
to customers will say all the
right things they will identify
as the health care authority
Until that point, you may hear a
little bit of talking about H s
D. And that
That that really is because I am
very cautious about confusing
our customers.
About where they get their
benefits and services. Thank
you.
Thank you Represent Garrett.
Next, we're gonna go to
represent Herndon and 1% figure
out. Thank you, Mr Chair, and,
uh, Mr Chair and presenters.
I've been approached by the
old the 33,000 employees who
provide hospice care to to, uh,
People around this state. Does
this building way affect them
and help them in terms of the
services that they provide?
Um, Mr Chair, Representative
Herndon. This does not directly
address hospice services, so
maybe we can talk offline about
how we can help them in the
future. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you Represent Herndon,
representing Figueroa, then
represent Montoya.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you. Sponsor. I've just a couple
of questions. One is on page 27
this bill.
Adds another person to the
retiree Healthcare Authority
Board. Can you talk a little bit
about the wise of that?
Mr. Chair Representative Figaro
at the purpose of that is so
that we can do exactly that.
teaming up making sure that we
are learning from each other. We
want to maximize the power of
the investments that are being
made in healthcare in New
Mexico. Um, I We want to have a
seat at the table. We want to
give them a seat at our table.
We want to make sure that we're
really cross collaborating.
Um, And so part of what has been
joined together is the
purchasing for the Interagency
Benefits Advisory Committee and
the contracting. So trying to
really make sure that we are
moving together as a health care
system and being more
transparent about what we're
purchasing together.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, secretary. The second
question pertains directly to
that contracting and page 29.
Um
Section a
Adds the power of contracting by
publicly funded insurance
agencies.
But then Section B defines
publicly funded healthcare
agencies. Can you explain the
difference between the publicly
funded insurance agency?
Versus the four named publicly
funded healthcare agencies.
Sorry, Um, Mr Chair,
Representative. I'm just looking
at the page that you're talking
about the, uh I'm gonna attempt
if I Mr Chair and
representative, I didn't
understand your question. Please
just feel free to clarify.
Mr. Mr Chairman, Secretary. I'm
just confused a little bit.
On page 29.
Between sections A and B because
section a about consolidated
purchasing ads contracting
power.
Hmm. And refers to publicly
funded insurance agencies but
then Section B defines
Publicly funded healthcare
agencies, and I wondered if
those were different agencies or
they were supposed to be the
same thing.
Mr. Chair representative. I
think they're meant to mean the
same thing in this.
Mr Chair in secretary. I think
maybe we should fix that. But
I'll leave that to you. Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much for percent
Figure out present. Montoya,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair
representative and Madam
Secretary.
Um
In December. The 2023 lfc
hearing.
There were several deficiencies
that were listed on HST.
Report card.
I'm just wondering what this
transfer. How are you going to
be able to track, not loot or
not lose track?
Of the areas of deficiency and
how
Will you be able to address
those areas of deficiency?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Montoya. Thank you for that
question. It's a very fair
question. There are some areas
in which the agency's
performance and I think I've
been very transparent about this
during the Medicaid unwinding,
period, the Medicaid and snap
unwinding over the past 12
months we have seen a dip in our
timeliness. Um and we know that
that's going on. But it is not
an anticipated ongoing
situation. Um
We were at about 95% application
timeliness prior to the
unwinding and we will be again.
This is sort of we're seeing a
dip in some performance. I
think, Mr Chair representative,
You're also referring to
probably some performance on the
Mexico side in terms of, um,
access to care which we are
working really hard to address.
You all have made some very
important investments in the
provider network.
We anticipate seeing that
provider that access to care
returning. We've seen already,
um some really important gains
and prenatal care and, well
child visits, Behavioral health
care, So we're starting to see
that return, but what you're
seeing is a little bit of a dip
in performance, primarily
attributed to the pandemic and
access to care problems.
Thank you, Mr Chair. And Madam
Secretary. I guess my concern is
and now we're combining more
duties under one roof.
So, uh, I'm just worried that
Attention might be a little
divided with more
responsibility.
So I guess I'm trying to
I'm trying to ask in a nice way.
How are you going to manage the
new duties and then also take
care of the deficiencies.
Mr. Chair representative. I
think we are currently
addressing the deficiencies. We
are very tuned into performance.
We meet on our performance
Quarterly. We go through those
metrics to see where we may need
to improve. And then as the
agency sort of absorbs new
duties, we will contain that
focus. So we're already working
with the leadership that's
coming over. So the D d s d and
the D h I leadership. They're
part of our performance, too.
Discussions were already doing
that. Um I don't anticipate
slippage. We've added another
deputy secretary, making sure
that we're really paying
attention, so it's really just
making sure
Um, that the agency has the
strong foundation, which is part
of our budget request and making
sure that we're adequately
resourced so that we can pay
attention to those important
metrics. So thank you, Mr Chair
and Madam Secretary. You brought
up DDS they concerns
As well there that have we've
heard throughout the session.
Um
The departments that are that
are going to come under one roof
that also are facing maybe a bit
of a critical eye. How are we
going to make sure that those
Don't get lost in the shuffle as
well.
Mr. Chair representative. I'm
paying close attention to what's
coming over to the agency
myself. Meeting with those
leaders trying to understand
what's keeping them up at night.
I think the D D waiver is
actually a really good
illustration of where I expect
to see better synergy and better
performance because that is a
Medicaid funded program.
Um and today the housing of that
into agencies has resulted in
some problems. I think some very
big problems with
accountability, which I think
will be addressed through the
transition, So I think that's a
really good example of where I
interested Pate better
performance primarily because of
the accountability being in one
agency.
Mr 11 last question.
Um, on page 68 lines, 2 to 7. It
defines rural counties of
counties with less than 100,000.
People in in, uh, population.
Um, the concern I have with this
definition is this definition
will include
Los Alamos County, which only
has 8% poverty, late rate.
But
This excludes Sandoval County in
San Juan counties, which both
have a poverty rate of about
37%.
So I'm concerned.
With this definition, and I'm
not sure if if that cannot be
Fixed before we get to the floor
because I I don't think that's
what we're meaning to do here.
But I think a lot of times the
easy
Definition.
Is my population and I don't
think that's so deep. Mr. Chair,
Madam secretary. Any thoughts on
that?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Montoya. This was a law that was
passed last year for the rural
healthcare delivery fund. We
have received that feedback. Um,
this was specific to those
smaller counties for either new
or startup.
Services from those $80 million
to secretary and her team have
fully awarded. Uh, those those
grantees and, um you know, we
made sure and they made sure
that these these new services
were, um and every world County
in in New Mexico, so more than
50% of those went directly
towards behavioral, behavioral
health. We saw primary care as
well.
We have heard that concern more
specifically related to some of
the larger counties and the
certain areas where there might
be a rural areas that might that
may have wanted to participate
in that in that grant fund.
Well, thank you, Mr Chair and
and, uh, representative Madam
secretary. The
The real issue here is
Incentive, All county and in San
Juan County is just a huge
Number of Native American
population.
That
Are potentially
Could be left out.
And that that's my concern. I
can talk to you offline.
And and
I just like
To make sure that we're not
harming
The populations that are
currently the most underserved.
So I'll let us go forward Mr
Chair, but I would like to thank
you very much for prison.
Montoya.
I don't see any other questions
in, uh, Madam Secretary just to
confirm the employee benefits
program is being handed to you
with the deficit spending.
Erased there, maybe challenges
moving forward, but to confirm
for the record, you are
receiving it with sort of a zero
balance. Is that right? Mr
Chair? That is my understanding,
and I appreciate the legislative
support for that, And I think
going forward that
accountability has shifted over
to my agency. So we will be
accountable for any spending
through that fund.
Okay. Excellent.
Ah, thank you. Let's go. Don't
see another questions. We'll go
for a motion on Senate Health
and Public Affairs Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill 14.
Move it to pass.
Okay. It's been moved by Vice
Chair. Dixon, second by
represent Garrett. Is there any
opposition to that Do pass
motion, please show representing
Montoya in opposition.
Thank you very much.
Kate. Um
Okay. Thank you very much. You
have a do pass. Uh so we've got
Robson Ream, Can you go up?
We? We've got our Senate that I
guess there's a Senate tax
package on the floor.
If I understand that correctly.
Um from San Dream if you could
go really quickly because we
need to get our senators back on
the floor.
Mr Chairman Optus. Very quick
with it. And, um, House Bill 301
is creative, Future water fund
The vision of this is that
someday we're going to be
approached with bringing water
from out of state or in state,
and we need to have a fund with
a lot of money in it to go ahead
and, um
And be a player at the table. If
you look at the FBI are just
going to read a couple sentences
Quick interstate transfers of
water are extremely rare,
pensive, technically challenging
and controversial. Currently,
New Mexico is a party to two
significant interstate water
transfer projects.
The same one real charm, a
project and the animus La Plata
Pipe Project.
So what I envision is, is this
fund once it's several million
dollars could be used for future
projects. I really see this
legislation is being amended
later on to fit. Whatever that
project is, Uh, from the F I R.
There were several concerns I
address all of them. But the
request from the state engineer
for two FTE s
There's no money in this fun.
Since it was late. I didn't add
any appropriation. It's
something that we can develop if
we have money in the future, we
could put money in it.
The amendment that I propose is
228180.2 K. Can we move that
amendment? Please moved.
Okay, It's been moved and
seconded is, uh, can you explain
the amendment briefly?
Yes. Um, so on page three wine,
10.
Uh, after fund will put in there
from the previous physical year.
And then on Page three.
At line 21 after fund will put a
period and strike
Uh, the remaining of that line
and then next line up to
Just before the word to and we
will insert in their money in
the fund is subject to
appropriation by the
Legislature. Great. Thank you
very much. Are there any
questions on the amendment?
Okay. Any opposition to adopting
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee Amendment number one
to House Bill 301.
Seen none. We've adapted the
amendment.
Is there any public comment?
Anybody who wishes to speak in
support or opposition? The House
Bill 301.
Come on up.
Pretty afternoon. Mr Chair
Committee members, Chevron of
Christianized Lee registered
lobbyists for Chevron and the
lead for the outstanding water
rights issue at the former
question, Mind, Um we can all
recognize the challenges of
today and in the future going
forward in terms of what rotter
resources may be available in
the state. Chevron's strongly
supports this bill and we ask
for your support as well.
Thank you. Thank you. Anybody
online?
Kate.
Go ahead. J D, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, JD
Bullington, representing the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. It supports this bill,
Creating a water trust fund is
long overdue, and the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
urges this committee to make it
reality this session.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Burlington.
Okay, that concludes public
comment. Any questions from
Committee, please? Thank you, Mr
Chair. Sorry. Leave a bit, but,
um
With this water. Thank you
represented for being here.
Um
I guess my
My question is with this. This,
uh
One technical issue I was
reading early was allows the
Legislature to appropriate funds
to both the trust fund and the
project fund.
In the future water just fund
may lack constitutional
Protections enjoyed by the Water
Trust fund without a specific,
specified timeline, timeframe.
The State Investment Council
elects direction as to invest
the future Water trust fund. So
has that been remedied, Mr
Chair?
Um, Mr Chair in representing
flu, hon, I don't think I
understand your question, so
some technical issues that have
been found with with your bill,
Mr. Mr Speaker. I mean, Mr
Chair.
Representative, is it?
This bill will allow the
Legislature to appropriate funds
to to trust to to what the trust
fund and the project fund and
the Future Water Trust Fund.
Two.
So what they say is it may lack
constitutional protections.
There's a water trust fund has
So without a timeframe.
This state investment counsel.
Lacks direction as to investing
with a future water trust fund.
Was that something you
We're able to
Change or address with this
State Council investment.
Mr Chairman and representative,
flu. Hana. I don't see the
conflict. This is only creating
of future water Trust fund right
now. It doesn't have any money.
There's not a date on this. This
is something that's going to
grow through time.
And then eventually we'll have
enough money to actually be a
player in some future water
project.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Representative. Does it create a
conflict with the other trust
fund, the other water trust
funds we mentioned Mr Chair.
Mr Chairman and representative
Luhan. I do not see a conflict.
We're going to have to separate
funds, and this is the water
Trust fund for future water
growth.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. I mean,
Mr Chair. I still think we're on
the floor. Sorry. Um, is this
for like with this trust, like
really focused on different
broader projects like produced
water and things like that.
Mr Chairman, Representative
Luhan. What I envision is
someday we'll have another
projects that out of state
moving water to New Mexico or
through New Mexico and I want us
to be able to come to the table
and say We have enough product
money here to be a you know a
player and get some of that
water in in New Mexico.
I do see this fund as or this
legislation being amended later
to fit. Whatever the project is.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um,
appreciate those answers.
And yes, we can have some other
talks offline because
See where this is going. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you. Thank
you Represent Luhan represent
Garrett.
Thank you, Mr Chair
representative. I think it's a
great idea, but I see little to
no support from the state
engineer's office and that
concerns me.
Can you speak to that?
Uh, madam, Mr Chairman and
Representative Garrett. Um, I
tried to reach out to him. Have
him talk to me about it. But,
you know, I can't see that they
want to turn down money for the
future. So
Yeah, I don't know. You know
what the issue is other than
they want to FTS.
Mr Chairman and representative
actually having someone to do,
it can be a big issue to disco
through any interim committee.
Mr Chairman and representative
Garrett. No, it did not. Thank
you.
Thank you representing Garrett.
Vice chair. Dixon, please.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative. Ream, Uh, did
this this bill had a previous
committee hearing, though? Is
that correct?
Uh, Mr Chairman and Vice chair.
Yes, it went to the water
committee.
Um, thank you very much. I just
wanted to check
Right. Thank you. Vice Chair.
Dixon. Thanks.
Um
Okay. Um so get. I think we're
all clear Committee. There are
there is not money in the
budget. This does not have an
appropriation. Um and appreciate
where able to sort of bring it
forward. Okay, let's go for a
motion on house. Bill 301 as
amended, Mr. Chair, I move a do
pass on house Bill 301, as
amended has been moved by vice
chair Dixon seconded by
representative de La Cruz.
Is there any opposition to that
motion?
Please show represent Garrett in
opposition, okay?
Thank you. Representative ring.
Okay, we're gonna
So noted message will be
entered. Um okay, We're on
Senate Bill 116, Senator Hickey.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
Bill, um, very simply takes the
tobacco settlement fund. Ah,
which was created in 19.
98 and has a times been a very,
98 and has a times been a
breeze. Uh, being a reserve fund
has at times been needed by the
state to plug holes back in the
Two thousands. Um
But since then is continuing to
increase its close to $400
million today. Essentially what
this bill does is it takes it
out of reserve status and puts
it into essentially General fund
says in other words, so that
the, uh, investments in from the
bill are able to significantly
increased from about two
4 to 5%. And that's simply what
this bill doesn't it becomes
operational July 1st of 24.
Great. Thank you very much.
Senator Hickey. Anybody here who
wishes to speak and supporter
opposition to Senate Bill 116.
Commander. It's just Mr Chair
members of the committee. My
name is
The American Heart Association.
And we strongly support this
bill.
I think we need a study stream
of funding for tobacco
prevention and education.
And we don't do that friendly.
And the C D. C recommends that
we at least spend $22 million a
year to tobacco prevention and
education, especially among the
youth.
And this year this current year
we're spending 3.4 million.
The tobacco industry spends $34
million each year promoting
their products to our kids. I
think this is an important bill.
I think we urge you to support
the spell so we can have a study
funding and future. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Okay? Is there anybody online?
Okay?
Joanna, please go ahead.
Yes, Mr Chair and members. My
name is Joanna Strother. And
I'm, the senior director of
Advocacy for the American Lung
Association. The American Lung
Association supports Senate Bill
116. We think the sponsors for
bringing this forward Eventually
this fund will be able to
produce revenue for tobacco
prevention and control program
funds, which New Mexico so
severely needs as many programs
and services for new Mexicans
have been cut.
We appreciate you hearing this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr Others.
Okay? I don't know more public
comment. Let's go to the
committee for any questions,
Okay? I don't see any questions
for percent of Chatfield for the
motion. Okay. It's been moved by
representing Chatfield second by
represent Garcia Do pass. Is
there any opposition to that
motion?
Seeing none. Thank you, Senator
Hickey. Thank you, Mr Chairman
and Committee.
Okay?
Ah, excellent. We're gonna
senator Souls is on his way back
up.
And I believe represented Garcia
can do. Senate Bill
Okay. Members of the committee,
this, uh
Senate Bill 106 relating to
cultural affairs, creating a
semi cool, semi colon 10 year
old
I can't even pronounce the word
commission plan, promote and
implement operations.
Commemorating the 25th and 50th
anniversary University of the
United States.
And the declaration of
Independence without L San for
any questions.
Thank you. Garcia. Is there
anybody who wishes to comment on
Senate Bill 106.
Online.
Okay. Um, any questions from
committee?
I believe we do. There is
funding that the Senate has put
in for this is my understanding.
Mr Chairman, if I may, uh, it
does have an appropriation to
it. And it is in house Bill two
on page 192. Item number 91.
Okay, actually, we do.
Yeah, um
Was the was the appropriation.
Amanda just stepped out. We need
to confirm that the
appropriation was stripped out.
Ah!
And I've got the amendment here.
Page six line 14. Okay, we do.
Yeah, Go ahead. Please Determine
small is, um, I would just want
to reiterate that the Senate
finance actually amended, Um
Senate Bill 106 to remove the
$250,000 appropriation. Thank
you very much for that. We see
that amendment here from the
Senate Finance Committee.
So we're going to go. Is there a
motion represents Sanchez for
the motion passed?
Okay, It's been moved. I reserve
Sanchez. Second I represent
figure out do pass on Senate
Bill 106 as amended. Is there
any opposition? Thank you very
much represents. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Members of the
committee Senator Sherrod owes
you
Okay, Senator. Souls. Thank you
for coming back up. We're gonna
go to
Senate Bill 126. Thank you, Mr
Chair. This actually came about
when I got a note from the LSC
that I had to pay back about
$1500 of a reimbursement.
Because there are several
different things that get
reimbursed depending on how you
what motor travel that
legislators had. And so this is
a very much a cleanup that
essentially moves that all
reimbursements for per diem for
travel, regardless of whether
it's by motorcycle by car by
airplane that it all follows.
The G s a federal level of those
Which makes it easier for
agencies and easier for us to
understand.
Thank you for that concise
explanation. Is there anybody
here who wishes to speak in
support or opposition to Senate
Bill 126?
Scene and go to the committee.
Any questions?
Represented Chatfield. Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Um
I'm selling. My notes here says
it makes it a little more fair
to those that are flying. How
about us? It's driving. Is it
higher? Is it lower? Is it in
between? Is it the same?
Mr Chair and representative. My
understanding is moving to the G
s A as opposed to the I. R. S on
the current rates increases the
driving rate by a penny a mile
at this point it updates when
the federal rates update. We all
get updated with that.
And he's a penny.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Episode Chatfield same Garrett.
Thank you, Mr Chair. My
question, Senator. Is there a
difference in re in basement
reimbursement rate if you fly
your own plane versus taking a
commercial flight.
Mr Chair and and representative.
The commercial flight is still
exactly the same thing that it
pays for the actual cost of the
commercial flight. Where, when
flying your own plane. It is
based on a per mile and it
actually is a as the crow flies
mile of the personal airplane,
so it doesn't change the
commercial flight when we're
going off to conferences, Thank
you.
Group, please.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Senator.
Um
This is a big deal.
We've only been doing this for I
don't know 100 and 10 years why
Well, why hadn't somebody else
brought it up?
Mr Chair and representative.
There are very few of us that
apply a personal airplane and
the law had based on 2004 is the
last time and it was put in
specifically only in the New
Mexico And that's why the L. E s
C missed it is they didn't know
they were supposed to look at
the 2004 rate for personal
airplanes.
They did not been updated since
then, and so it was
substantially less than what it
would be, and this just moves it
up. Based on inflation and other
things. Thank you represent
pedigree.
I don't see any other questions.
Senator. Thank you for this. Um,
let's go to emotion.
Um, Mr Chair, I would move a do
pass on Senate Bill 126. Okay,
It's been moved by represent
Vice Chair Dixon, second by
ranking member Armstrong. Is
there any opposition to this
flying through our committee?
069
Good. Thank you very much,
Senator. Okay.
They on that high note. Oh,
we're gonna conclude and see
everybody on the floor this
evening.
