Chairs small.
We have a quorum.
Thank you, Jackie. Um, OK,
members, uh, we've got a lot of
people in and out, um, but if,
uh, folks don't mind staying in
committee until uh right before
you're up in another committee,
that would be great. Um, we're
gonna go ahead and get started
this morning with House Bill 73,
uh, we've got Representative
Anaya here to present, and then,
uh, we are.
Getting a copy of a committee
substitute. Is that correct?
Madam Chair.
Uh, representative, would you
like to read the uh 231 number
of your substitute?
Yes, um, on the bottom, you
should have 0.231485.2.
Wonderful. Thank you. Um,
Could I have a motion to.
moves it.
Substitute, Adam check.
Oh, to discuss, OK, perfect,
perfect. So we had a motion uh
by Representative Duncan and a
second by Representative
Herrera, uh, to just to move for
discussion purposes, the
committee substitute any um
Do you wanna explain the
committee substitute, and then
we can see if we've got
questions. Great. I sure will.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you committee members for
hearing, uh, House Bill 73 this
morning. Um, this is expanding
the civil statute of limitations
for childhood sexual assault.
Um, and Madam Chair, committee
members, um, it is a very long
title, but it's very important
because this is a very specific
section of law, and we have
other bodies of law that we're
not touching, and so I want to
make.
that crystal clear as we go into
this, um, we have a general
statute of limitations, uh, here
in New Mexico, we are not
touching the general statute.
Um, we have the Tort Claims Act,
which covers governmental
entities. Um, we are not
touching the Tort Claims Act. We
also have the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act, um, which also
covers governmental entities. We
are not touching the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act. Here in New
Mexico, it is a very specific
statute. It's on the civil side.
And it is specifically for
childhood sexual assault.
Um, so, uh, Madam Chair
committee members, what this
bill does, um, is it expands the
statute of limitations, um, so a
survivor of childhood sexual
assaults can come forward until
their 50th birthday, um, and we
also have a look back window and
with a look back window is,
Madam Chair and committee
members, is a period of time
that we open up.
Um, in which, uh, survivors can
come forward within that time,
but not after. So in this bill,
Madam Chair, the look back
window is 3 years, so after this
bill goes into effect, survival
survivals, uh, survivors will
have 3 years in which they can
bring a claim forward, but after
that, the look back window
closes. Um, Madam Chair
committee members, I have with
me incredible, incredible folks
by my side, um, to my left, I
have, uh, Alexandria Taylor, the
director of the New Mexico.
Coalition of sexual assault
programs to my right, I have
Doctor Lex Garcia, um, who is
one of our survivor experts on
the bill, and to my right,
right, I have uh Mike Hart, who
litigates in this area often.
Um, and with that, Madam Chair,
committee members, um, I will
stand for questions.
Great. Madam Chair, committee
members, I, I apologize. I, I
need to pass it to my expert Lex
Garcia, um, just very quickly.
OK, and we could, um, what I'm
thinking maybe we do is uh adopt
the committee substitute and
then get into some more of the
nitty gritty after public
comments.
Great. OK, so,
On the substitute before we, OK.
All right.
OK, sorry. OK, so we do have a
question from the committee on
uh the substitute. Did you want
Miss Garcia to speak before or
Or weight,
she said she's OK going after.
Great. OK. Representative
Duncan.
Thank you Madam Chair. Um, on
your uh Mediture and, and
representative on section D.
Let's talk about that look back
window a little bit more and
explain that a little bit more
if you would. Sure, um, Madam
Chair and committee members, um,
this look back window is 3
years, and so after this bill
goes into effect, um, survivors
from any year.
And come forward to bring their
case under this particular
section of law for uh civil
statute of limitations for child
sexual assault.
After those after that period of
3 years is over, um, the window
closes, unfortunately, and folks
will no longer be able to uh
bring a case forward. And so,
Madam Chair, Representative, we
hope that we can get the word
out as much as possible during
that time, um, but that is, um,
where we, we are at in this law
today. Um, just to compare it to
how we came up with this
nationally, Madam Chair and
representatives, um, there are
other states that have
completely repealed, um.
A statute of limitation windows,
we are simply asking for a grade
of a C.
Madam Chair and, and, uh,
representatives. We know that,
um.
Uh, there are other states that
have uh expanded this a lot
more, but Madam representatives,
um, in order to compromise here
in the body, um, we are simply
asking for a grade of a C.
Thank you, man. Thank you. So
I'm gonna put it in, in English
that I can understand, Madam
Chair. So, uh, let's say um
somebody abused a child in back
in 2010.
And, and this law goes into
effect.
They have 3 years from the date
this law goes into effects and
that will be July 1.
If this bill is passed?
Madam Representatives, I do
believe it is, uh, there's not a
special date, so yes, Madam Cha
representatives, um, it would
be, uh, the effective date of
all legislation, yes. So then
they have 3 years from till July
1st of 2028, bring any claim
that happened in 2010. Is that
correct? No, Madam Chair
representative, um, it would be
any claim ever across the board.
So not just 2010, if it happened
in 2000 if it happened in 1993,
um.
Those folks would also be able
to come forward.
Thank you, Chair, but what I'm
saying is they'll have 3 years
from 2025 when this bill goes
into effect to 2028 to go back
and look at anything that may,
any abuse that occurred.
Is that correct? Yes, correct,
Madam. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. OK, um, can I have a
motion to adopt the committee
substitute, so move him to Great
Representative Luhan uh made the
motion. Representative Silva and
Garrett have seconded it. Um,
any objection to adopting the
committee substitute.
No, OK, wonderful. Uh, we'll go
back uh to you, Representative
Anaya, if there are additional
comments that uh you or your
experts would like to make, and
then we'll go to public comment
uh before committee questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
representatives, um, you all may
have known me before I came to
this body, but I never quite
bring a bill unless I'm bringing
community and affected
communities in particular with
me. Um, and with that, Madam
Chair and Representatives, um,
I'm going to pass it to my
expert, Doctor Lex Garcia, um,
to just explain a little bit
about how statute of limitations
windows hurt, uh, survivors.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Lex Garcia and I come to
you today as a survivor of
sexual child abuse.
For 2 years at almost a daily
cadence, my teacher raped me.
To be clear, I did report this
abuse to the school district to
PED to New Mexico, um, to the
school district in New Mexico
PhD in the police departments.
I made every effort to seek
justice and accountability that
was available to me.
And to ensure that this man
would no longer be in schools.
But I was too late.
My time to report had ran out. I
didn't process this trauma fast
enough for it to matter in the
eyes of the law.
I reported when I was 32 years
old, which is far past our
current statute of limitations,
but far before the average age
of disclosure, which is 52 years
old.
Since my reporting, my abuser
has founded and operates charter
schools right here in our state.
And despite my reporting, this
man is still entrusted with
young vulnerable children.
This man convinced me that my
ticket out of generational
poverty would be an education
and that the price of that
education would be access to my
body.
Through the course of my
advocacy for this bill, I have
heard a lot about price tags and
what the cost of this bill's
passage might be. So I wanted to
share a little bit with you
about what the cost of sexual
abuse as a child has cost me.
First of all, it cost me my
childhood. Well, I should have
been out making friends and
discovering who I was. I was
being isolated in the supply
closet, while every aspect of my
innocence and my virginity was
being taken from me.
It cost me my sanity.
For the past 20 years, I've
second guessed my thoughts, my
self-worth, my ability to
determine right and wrong.
I've struggled with alcohol
abuse and suicidal ideation in
an attempt to escape the hell
that this man's actions put me
through.
The current law does allow for
justice to be sought, but only
if you report before your time
runs out.
The current law does not
discriminate on the cost of this
justice, so long as you're able
to process what happened to you
fast enough.
What makes the report of a 23
year old intrinsically more
valuable than a 25 year old.
You've likely heard that the
cost of this accountability is
too high.
The cost of attempting to make
survivors whole again is too
much. So I do have to ask you,
what cost would be too high to
protect your own child from
sexual abuse.
If I could go back in time and
if I could stand between Little
Lex and what she went through.
There's no amount of money that
I would not pay to shield her
from this pain.
And I know that if it were
someone that you love, you would
do the same.
Investing in accountability and
justice is not just the right
thing to do, but it does create
real change by enforcing laws
that hold abusers accountable.
We don't just seek justice for
survivors, but we also prevent
future abuse.
Predators thrive where there are
no consequences.
But when New Mexico law stands
firm.
When abusers fear real
punishment, they think twice.
And in that hesitation, another
child is saved and the cost of
their harm is eliminated.
By allowing child survivors who
are now adults to seek justice,
we do protect the next
generation, and that is an
investment that's worth making.
Before you stand as an adult,
but I'm asking you to please see
the little girl that needed
protecting and who deserves to
seek justice for the harm done
to her. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members who stand for
questions.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Miss Garcia. Um, we will go
to public comment, uh, typically
what we do is in this committee,
we asked for public comment in
person, support or opposition at
the same time, we don't
necessarily differentiate um how
can I just see with hands how
many people would like to speak
in comment, OK, right, go ahead,
um, and, uh, for public comment,
go ahead to the middle of the of
the area and then.
Let's do that and then we will
go online. So if you are online,
uh, go ahead and raise your
hand, uh, and that way it'll
help me know.
OK. All right, go ahead. Uh,
Uh, right now we've got, we're,
we're good. 2 people, yeah.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Larry Sontag, a member of the
Better Together New Mexico
Advocacy Network, but I'm here
today as a retired uh law
enforcement officer. I did 20
years with the Albuquerque
Police Department. Part of that
assignment was um as a
supervisor in the sex crimes
unit. I'm speaking in support of
this bill, uh, there's nothing I
can say that's more impactful
than what uh Miss Garcia just
shared, but I can tell you from
a law enforcement perspective,
officers that are
assigned to the sex crimes unit
and in particular the crimes
against children unit, they're
not able to stay in that unit
long because they also suffer
trauma from the repeated
investigation and
On a good day, you're able to go
to court and get criminal
charges against a sex crime
offender of a juvenile, but that
is very difficult, very, very
difficult. So I understand this
is a civil proceeding matter,
but with everything that I've
seen and the difficulty which
was relayed uh here about not
feeling that any justice can be
served, sometimes civil court is
the only recourse and expanding
the opportunities for victims of
child sexual abuse.
um, that this law would put into
effect, I support. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Marty
Escovel. I'm general counsel for
the New Mexico Public School
Insurance Authority. I'm here to
stand in support of the bill
with this committee substitute,
we commend Representative Anaya
for working with us.
If you may have read the FIR
that was prepared in this
matter, there were several
concerns regarding the ambiguity
of language in the prior bill,
we believe that that has been
addressed through cooperation
and uh I, I would like to
finally add that, um, you know,
the public school insurance
authority has taken this issue
seriously. Representative
Soreana a few years ago
sponsored House Bill 128, which
heightened the duty of reporting
and training is a very good
bill, and we've been able to
implement that. We have, um,
stop it solutions and
in various anonymous reporting,
uh, instruments that have
assisted us and we continue to
take this issue very, very
seriously. I wanted to convey
that, but we do with this
committee substitutes and
support. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Escobel. So I
just wanted to, so, uh, standing
on behalf of uh neipsia in
support.
Thank you. Um, OK, online we
have Nat Dean.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, sponsors and
advocates. My name is Nat Dean.
I am a survivor of
Sexual trauma that occurred at
the age 14 at the age of 14, not
having the mechanism to bring
that forward until approximately
4 years later, the first
question asked is, what were you
wearing? This was in the 70s.
The guilt that I carry is that I
could not report, and I did not
have a mechanism, the guilt I
carry is that the perpetrator
was very skilled at what they
did, and they were able to
continue to perpetrate that
crime, it is the guilt I carry
of how many more people suffered
in the way that I did, and the
way that I still at times
continue to suffer because I
could not stop them.
And that is the guilt that I
carry. I think that this bill
would bring forward
opportunities to no longer need
to carry that guilt to process
the trauma and remove the
perpetrator from continuing to
perpetrate. Thank you very much.
Thank you. OK, we have one more
person, uh, Leah, please.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
my name is Leah Hosfield and I
stand in support of House Bill
73, um, not just standing next
to Lex Garcia but also standing
next to multiple victims close
to me. Um, predators who go
after children will never go
away. They learn how to hide in
plain sight, and they learn
exactly what to say to keep
their child victims quiet. Um,
they opened schools and they
coach kids' sports teams. Um, I
am
currently following a teacher
that has harmed somebody close
to me and somebody who all of
you know, um, teaching at his
same charter school in a
different state because our
state allowed that to happen. He
is currently being protected by
the same school, by the same
system that allowed him to harm
children in the first place and
I, I, I just don't know how this
can keep happening, money or
not, um, money is, was used.
To protect him, so why can't
money be used to protect Lex
Garcia and those all around her.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. Um, OK, we're
gonna go to questions from the
committee starting with
Representative Herrera.
Uh, thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
and, and thank you presenters.
Thank you representative for
bringing this bill forward. This
is very curious to me. I, I too
was a victim of childhood sex
abuse. Um, and it's cur to me so
I'm curious, why did you pick
the age 58.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, Representative for that
question. Um, it's actually
based on data that we have. Um,
we know that the average age of
uh disclosure for childhood
sexual abuse is the age of 52
is the age of 52. That is the
average age, Madam Chair and
representative. So what we
decided to do was, um, take that
into consideration and add.
Um, excuse me, 40 years to the
legal age of 18.
That is how we came to 58, um,
recognizing that 52 years old is
the average age of disclosure
for childhood sexual assault.
That's, that's interesting.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. I, you know, I, I
confronted my victim at the age
of, I, it happened when I was 5,
but I confronted my my
I guess, what do you call that I
have
um
perpetrator at the age of 12. It
was a distant relative, and, and
my parents had put a stop to it,
but they
They never told me. We, we
didn't discuss it because people
didn't talk about those things,
right? They just and I think
they still don't. I think those
are hard conversations to have.
So at 12, I confronted him, but
And at about 21, I kind of went
to um
A therapist, you know, but they
kind of dismissed it, you know,
it was, this was years ago,
years ago, obviously, I'm 77
now, so that gives you a clue,
but it wasn't until
I was 40, then I really dealt
with the issues and the way I
dealt with it was I, by that
time there was literature, you
know, and that was what, 30
years ago, and I remember going
to the library and checking out
8 books, and these were had all
been published in like the last
23 years, and I checked them all
out and I read 8 books.
In, in like 2 weeks.
And, and it was really coming to
terms with with why I did
certain things in certain ways
that I didn't understand.
And I and I realized at the time
that I, I would not, um,
I would not ask people for help
for problems.
Because
Because, um, nobody ever talked
about problems, and I realized,
you can imagine all the
consequences of that.
So, so I really get it. I, I
really understand this, I'm,
I'm, um, I'm supporting this
bill, obviously.
Uh, but I, I hope all the young
women listening and I hope
Other people don't let these
jerks defy you.
Do not let them do that.
And you know, use all the
strength you have and you have
it, and you have it. It takes
courage to come up here.
So, um, use all the strength
that you have not to let that
person define you and just move
on, is what I'm saying. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
next, we're going to go to
Representative Vincent and then
Bacca. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, Representative
Anaya.
Doctor, tell me your name again.
Lex Garcia.
And
Madam Chair and Doctor Garcia, I
just wanted to thank you for
your testimony.
And
I've got a few questions that I
need to ask because this is
something that nobody likes to
talk about, me especially.
And I do have a beautiful
daughter, and I'm really
protective and if somebody does
that to my daughter, they're
never going to feel safe again,
I can tell you that.
Um
And I'm just wondering, you
know, on this bill, well, on the
bill, when you talk about the
price tag, would you walk me
through the price tag?
Yes, um, uh, Madam Chair and
Representatives, um, you know,
uh, some of you may be asking
why we're in house
appropriations in particular,
um, and with that, Madam Chair
and representatives, um, the
language that we have reflected
in the committee's said today,
um, was actually a result of
many, many, many negotiations,
specifically with APS and NIMSA.
Which I will say, Madam Chair
and representatives, I am here
to come back, uh, because we do
have a problem with sexual
assault in our schools, both
public and private. Um, but
Madam Chair Representative, this
particular bill does not address
governmental entities. Um, the
very first version of this bill
and their very first FIR that
came out, um, uh, of, of this
bill, um, had a price tag
attached in that governmental
entities believed that they were
a part of.
Um, those who would be held
accountable. And so, um, we had
uh departments, uh, governmental
departments who wrote it and
said we could be sued for
millions upon millions of
dollars. Uh, Madam Chair
Representative, we knew that
this statute never touched
governmental entities, which are
covered in the Tort Claims Act
and in the Civil Rights Act.
However, we, because we knew
that we felt very comfortable
changing language here to uh
make it explicit that that was
not the case. Um, but Madam
Chair.
And that is why we are here in
House Appropriations, um.
I hope that answers your
question.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative.
How does this money plug in? How
does it work?
It, I, I'm reading 71 million,
is that correct?
Or am I wrong, Madam Chair,
representative, you might have
the old fiscal impact report,
the current fiscal impact
report, um, and I will say this
is actually the FIR was done on
the committee sub just previous
to this one, but it zeroes out
the amount of money um on the
agency and programs list on top.
Um, I hope folks, I just wanna
see if folks have that correct
FIR representative, um, yes, our
staff is gonna go grab that for
everyone, um, but just to be
clear for members of the
committee, the revised FIR
contains no physical impact with
these changes and the committee
substitute.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. I
appreciate that and Doctor
Garcia, I remember you talking
about a price tag and so there's
no appropriation to this.
That
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for the question. No,
I spoke a lot about the price
tag because in my case, um, I
was abused by a public employee
and so the rep the FIRs that
came out earlier, we're
concerned that this language
would affect public employees.
I'm here, um, giving testimony
and advocacy for the bill for
survivors who can't speak for
themselves, but it would not
affect someone like me who was
um abused in a public setting by
a public employee. So Madam
Chair, and Doctor Garcia,
representative.
If a school employee.
Sexually abuses somebody.
Who gets sued. Does the school
get sued? Does the individual
get sued? Does everybody get
sued? How does that work? Yeah,
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I will point you to page 2.
Um, so, Madam Chan
representative, if, if the
employees acting within their
scope of duty, um, that would be
under the Tort Claims Act or the
New Mexico Civil Rights Act. If
they are acting outside of their
scope of duty, then they could
be held accountable.
OK, thank you. And, and, uh,
for, again, I don't even like to
talk about this.
But I got to get it into my
mind.
Because I'm thinking how, how
can I vote against something
like this. There's no way I can
vote against it because nobody
should be treated like that.
So
I'm trying to think of what my
next question was.
You didn't, so I asked who gets
sued the is it the school or is
it the individual? And how does
the due process work for an
individual, say, 20 years ago.
How do we bring that up? How do
we try that? I mean, how do you
prove that, Madam Chair
Representative, I'll give a
short answer and then I'll pass
to my expert who will also
explain briefly, but Madam Chair
Representative, I do want to let
you all know that the burden of
proof does not change, um, and
so these folks would still, you
know, even if their case is 20
years old, they would still have
to have to uh bring it to court
and still have the same burden
of proof as if it were, as if it
happened yesterday. Um, so I do
want to assure the body of that
when it comes to due process.
Um, and Madam Chair
Representative, I will pass it
to uh my experts, um, for, for a
short, um, description of your
question.
Thank you Madam Chair and
represent him.
That's, that's essentially the
law now, what you just framed.
If a school teacher
does something on her his own
time, crashes a car in an
intersection.
Um
Does something horrible to a
neighbor's child.
If, if, if he is.
In his private capacity, that's
the law now.
That there that there is no
claim against the school
district. There's no claim
against the government entity.
It's against the wrongdoer.
Um, if in the law right now is,
is if under the New Mexico Tort
Claims Act, it's very, very
restricted, only
If the
public employee is acting.
Within the scope of her or his
employment.
Can the entity be sued under the
New Mexico Tort Claims Act. That
law goes back to the 1980s, and
hasn't been changed.
That is, that is, that protects
the public treasuries, it
protects all the um public
entities from exactly that kind
of catastrophe, big huge verdict
that can't be paid.
So this is, as has been pointed
out by the rep by uh
A representative has been
pointed out um by the committee
substitute is only for private
landers.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative Baca.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative for bringing
this to the committee. First,
I'm gonna start off by saying,
and I for all of those who are
victims out there, God bless
you. I'm very sorry that's
happened.
You know, that's
That's something that's very,
very difficult, so.
You know, for all of those who
are out there.
You know, um,
Should never happen.
should never happen to kids.
Madam Chair, I, I do have some
questions about this, and uh
it's just, and I understand that
we're not talking about the
school, but Madam Chair and
Representative.
When we're talking about the age
of 58 for reporting.
In many cases,
The perpetrator may no longer be
with us. They may have.
Have, have passed on, they may
have died.
How then does that work as far
as relief.
For the victim.
Um, I will pass that uh to my
expert.
Madam Chair and Representative.
Um, you frame a
situation that actually is, is
not a, not far-fetched.
But the plaintiff still has to
prove her case.
They still have to prove.
By a preponderance of evidence
that everything that is being
claimed is true.
And indeed for the plaintiff,
it's harder when the victim is,
is, has passed.
The fact of the time being, the
time passage is a challenge for
both sides, and there's, there's
no doubt about that.
But it is the law as it is in
every other kind of case.
And if the wrongdoer is no
longer there, that's the state
has passed the plaintiff still
has a cause of action. They just
have to prove it.
Madam Chair and representative
but who pays for that? We're
talking about private entities
and private individuals now.
This doesn't apply to public,
right? That's what we've
so then.
This person has been passed on.
Is it the surviving spouse? Is
it the children of the
perpetrator, and, and again, I
also in my earlier statement.
This happens when it does women,
it happens to boys too.
So let's recognize that that
this is a systemic problem, but
I, I do want to know as far as
the cha the, the transfer of
liability. The spouse of the
perpetrator who may not have
been involved in it. The kids
who are then with the estate or
have settled the, the, I just
need to know is.
How that
Will be impacted by this and who
within responsible for the
damages.
Mearian representative as
another as in any other kind of
civil case cause of actual would
be against the wrongdoer.
So unless you have a separate
claim against the spouse or
against the child, or against
the neighbor or someone else,
it's against the wrongdoer and
if it, if that wrongdoer is
passed and has no
Assets, there are no claims.
There is no way to recover that
claim.
Oh thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, and I just need to
understand the wrongdoer has
passed. I am the spouse. We have
our property, our assets that
are now community property,
correct?
So then this law.
You know, this, this person is
now gone who's done this
heinous.
Awful thing to a kid, but we now
have a spouse, and we have
assets, we may have a business.
Are those now impacted.
And the transfer of liability
and responsibility for these
damages. Are they, are they, are
they passed on with that because
acid still exists, although the
perpetrator may not be here.
Representative and uh I'm sorry,
um, Madam Chairing
representative.
I'm not an expert in in family
law, but I am, I am aware that
community property law.
If there are separate debts,
just like they're separate
assets.
Then it it it's very difficult
to show to attack this the
community assets.
For uh intentional tort
committed by
One of the
Uh, members of the, of the one
of the people in the marriage.
It's extremely difficult. I'm
not an expert in that. I can
certainly get you, uh, uh, a
brief on that. Um, uh, I'm chair
and representative also, Madam
Chair and Representative, um,
one of our other experts just
brought to my attention as well.
Um, and I think it's always
really hard when we're
presenting bills, um, that
that's already how the law is at
the moment.
And this bill wouldn't change
any aspects of the law. Um, when
in regards to your question, um,
Madam Chair and Representative.
Thank you, madam Chair, and
thank you, but with the age now
of reporting almost doubling it
from taking it from 25 to 58,
and then the look back of 3
years.
I, I, I will recognize and
should, people should be
reporting, but going back to the
is the the lady um on the that
happened in the 1980s or.
There there is the potential
that for, for some of these
cases, like we've seen with
other entities that the
individual may have been passed
on.
And I'll give you another
example of this, and I'm not
going to be talking circular
because I just really need to
understand this, Madam Chair
Representative.
Um, I have a family member with
no dependents, I am the executor
of your will.
I did have, you know, as far as
to do this, as far as
distribution of the assets.
Am I then now on the hook as the
designated executor of this will
of this person who may have done
this actor. I mean, this is, and
again, I'm not a lawyer.
But I understand that.
And I could see how a person's
assets.
My wife and I have a joint check
account, checking account. We
may have
Homes, or we may have other
assets here. So I, I just need
to understand is it like
Representative Vincent said,
this is hard to ask. This is
hard to talk about, because as a
32 year educator, I have looked
into the eyes of kids that this
has happened to, it's sick.
But I need to understand what
the implications are going to
be.
And how this is going to impact.
And you know, we, we pass laws,
Madam Chair, and Representative,
we passos here and then we, we
don't realize the, the impact
that this may have. So I just
need to understand, I'm gonna
tell you right now, I'm going to
support this, OK? But we need to
clarify.
These types of details.
So that we don't have a person
or family member or children of
somebody who did something that
are now being held responsible
for the actions of
Someone else, Adam Cher, did you
respond to that? Yeah, yeah, no,
thank you, Madam Chair and thank
yous representative for
clarifying that. Um, I feel like
I was getting a little bit lost
in the weeds. Um, but Madam
Chair Representative, um, what I
can tell you is we will have the
answer to that in a more uh
clarified way, we'll reach out
to our family lawyer experts to
get that answer for you, um, by
the time we get to the floor,
Madam Chan representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative. Next,
we're gonna go to Representative
Garrett and then Representative
Duncan. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, for
bringing this up and thank you,
Lex, for speaking out because
Your public
No, and it's not invisible. Um,
my only question is, so it
doesn't affect public entities,
but frankly, does this affect
the church because as we know,
we've had sexual abuse.
And um
would the church be liable if it
involved a church official, uh,
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
absolutely, yes, um.
Part of the reason this is
brought forward is because we
know we have so many high
profile, um, childhood sexual
abuse cases as well. And so yes,
churches would be held
accountable, um.
They are not public entities as
defined in Tort Claims Act and
the Civil Rights Act, Madam
Genter.
Thank you and, and Madam Chair,
I just note that this has
affected both men and women.
Thank you. Absolutely.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I'd like to talk a little bit
and you may not know this, uh,
Madam Chair Representative.
Let's, let's talk about
insurance for just a second, um,
so insurance for schools will
not be impacted one bit.
Correct.
Um,
if they are a private school, it
would. It would, OK. Um,
One of my concerns is that Madam
Chair and Representative is that
insurance companies, we, I mean,
we can't get enough of them in
the state as it is.
When we have such a long look
back.
And all the way up to 58 and I
agree 100%.
Absolutely.
Um, crimes are committed in my
In my opinion,
And they need to pay.
But I'm just trying to figure
out what our insurance companies
are going to do because they're
gonna be on the hook now if, if,
uh.
Um
X Y Z employee worked for ABC
Company.
And this occurred on um
While he worked for that
company.
And then he leaves that company
and goes to another state.
That insurance company is going
to be on the hook until that
victim is 58 years old.
Is that correct?
Mr. uh, Madam Chair
Representative, my understanding
is that it would depend on the
type of insurance they had at
the time, whether it was claims
or occurrence based, so that
could vary, um, Madam Chair and
representative, but, um, do you,
I, I.
We have a short answer from our
expert here as well. I can add
to that, Madam Chair
Representative Duncan, thank
you. Um, we have pretty
conclusive data that other
states have done this. They are
currently 14 states that have no
statute of limitations for
childhood sexual abuse cases.
There are another 21 who have um
no age cap for some or all
claims, and then 5 jurisdictions
have a cap for age 50 or older,
and so there are a lot of
that have already addressed the
civil statute of limitations,
um, and their floors haven't
fall, fallen out.
Thank you Madam Chair and
expert. Can you tell me about
the insurance in those states
then.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
I can't speak directly to the
insurance. Um, there's not been,
um, there has not been, uh, a
lot of research that they're
that they're not able to get
insured or that that schools or
other entities are not able to
get insured. There are also many
other states who have done the
look back windows, the 3, the 3
years that we chose was based as
Representative Naya said on a
middle ground from what other
states have done.
Others have done longer look
back periods, um, and so we're
really finding the middle ground
with that. But again, a question
that we could um research more
about the insurance.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, uh, expert.
We have a hard enough time in
New Mexico getting insurance.
And so my question is,
If we're going to talk about
other states, let's talk about
other states.
Challenges with insurance as
well.
And that's what I want. I want,
I want to know those answers on
that insurance. We have a hard
enough time right now getting
insurance as we've seen company
after company after company
vacate New Mexico because of
challenges that we as
legislators have placed on them.
So my question is, if we're
going to talk apples to apples,
let's do that.
Let's don't talk apples and
oranges, so.
Can anybody at this table tell
me what that has done to the
insurance companies in those
states represented,
we might have a better.
Mancha representative, yeah, so
that's a um very.
Important question. Insurance
and, and this bill was dropped,
I think on the 3rd day of the
session, and there aren't any
insurance companies here. And
that's because insurance
companies exclude criminal acts.
Every policy any one of us has
excludes criminal acts, includes
molestation, excludes these
kinds of behaviors.
And, and so that is, and, and so
I think it's a very important
question, but that's, that's how
insurance companies protect
themselves from these types. Now
following up um with the, with
the comment a minute ago, those
states have not seen. We have
seen a national Institute of uh
Professionals for for prevention
of child abuse has has looked at
those issues, and this tracked
those issues and it was not
seen.
Uh, insurance companies pull out
of homeowner, general liability,
commercial general liability,
um, umbrella policies they have
not. Um, they have put in,
they've made sure they have
exclusions.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for that. That's what
I wanted to know. Um.
I mean, we have a hard enough
time right now. No offense to
your profession, but I can't
stand tort lawyers.
So, that being said, I'm a, I'm
a father of daughters.
I want every one of them, if
anything like this ever happened
to them, I want them to get
justice as well.
And so, but I just, I was
curious about the insurance part
if, if they were going to carry
for 50 years, and that
individual like representative
Bacca said had died by then.
Don't have much love for
insurance companies either for
that matter, so, but I think
you've answered my question. I
think we're, I'm, I'm OK with
that, so thank you, thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Chatfield,
please.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning.
Uh
I'm a little unclear. I'm sorry
I missed the first uh part of
the presentation or I missed the
presentation. I was waiting to
speak out, uh, I myself and, uh,
and I didn't get here. Is this
cover?
Criminal liability.
And civic liability, that,
that's what I don't understand.
I mean, uh.
Is there, is there a
Yeah, tell me that. Sure, Madam
Chair, uh, Representative, this
is only on the civil side.
Uh
Can go free.
But just be the institution gets
sued civilly, that uh, Madam
chair and Representative, um, I
do know that there is a.
Uh, statute of limitations,
expansion that is making its way
through the Senate on the
criminal side.
So I, I would tend to support
prosecuting the criminal that
perpetrated the crime.
Uh, more so.
And just
Making a uh
Making it where you can sue the
institution.
You know, we, we, we know we
have some problems with CYFD.
There's a many of us here that
are working day and night to try
to fix those following question.
Thank you. Sure.
Thank you. Um, any other
questions from the committee
before, yep.
Go ahead. Thank you. Thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair, for the
Opportunity to to really say
thank you for bringing this
legislation forward, you know
you've been um working.
Um, so hard for it, um.
And just say many of us are are
appreciative of that and I think
all of us are actually.
I think that um it's time for
some of these changes and for us
to really investigate how we
really work towards um doing
these things, but um.
And also looking, you know some
of the questions and making sure
that we're filtering through
everything so that that this
bill.
Answers that you guys answer
everything we're, we're, you
know, getting it all through, so
I think that um.
We're not, I'm not a lawyer,
we're not lawyers, many of us
here, and so that's why we're
asking all these questions,
Madam Chair, and um,
So some of the one question I
have is
To the
And it's kind of disappointing
and I don't know if it should be
as disappointing. It's why I
have a question regarding to the
the schools and the public side
of things.
Um
But under the tort law right
now, if we pass and uh have this
piece of legislation in place.
This, uh, does the
retrospective, the retroactive,
um.
Application here, um.
Uh, affected to.
Well, madam, Madam Chair
Representative.
So, OK, so it's just under our
criminal civil.
Like, no, please explain that.
Oops, only, only civil, thank
you.
OK, so,
We have to
really look at that at another
time, Madam Chair, also, um,
was I looking at here, I think
that's it. I was looking at that
the tears from.
crime, everything that exists
now is in place. I think one of
the clarifications I'd ask, I
think is one of the questions
that I heard, so just for
further um clarification is.
If um the victim's perpetrator,
um, or this comes up and and
that.
Wrongdoer, I think is the the
term that was used as passed on
his deceased now, but they have
assets and property, and those
assets and property were can
then be um.
They, they can be the the the
victim can.
Go after those assets. Is that
correct, Madam Chair
Representative, that is what we
will seek clarification on and
to get you the answer by the
time we get to the.
OK. Um, well, I will ask, I
think that that's just some
clarification. I think we're
trying to discuss. I understand
a little bit of the family law
because I have a couple of bills
related, um, I would be
interested in seeing where that
comes, what comes out of that,
because as I understand it that
that um any asset or money as
that that you take over if
you're the executor of an
estate, for instance, then that
that separate amount of money,
not, not.
the executive's personal and
private ownership of things and
assets, but the, the assets of
of what they take over can be
um.
The victims can't, they can go
after those uh those assets and.
And that's, I think how the law
is now, I'm, I'm not questioning
that. I just want clarification
cause that's what I'm hearing,
um, and it's interesting for me
too as I'm carrying some other
legislation, Madam Chair, but I
just want to say thank you for
bringing this forward on this
bill, um.
I think that you have worked
with many, many, many entities
to get to where we are right
now, and I just want to commend
you for all that work. I know
this isn't easy. I know we
wanted more, but I feel like
you, you we are where we are and
um I support your, your bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Doo,
please.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you guys for being here.
Um, I, I, I have a question. I
mean, I think it's all been in
the public news that, that I've
been named twice in suits or
something I was not responsible
for and had no direct oversight
for one, the incident absolutely
occurred. There was a arrest
made within 2 hours.
The person, uh, who had no
priors confessed.
And was prosecuted and and
served 6 years. They, well, they
were sentenced to 12 years but
served 6 years. Well, I think
they got out in 4, but
Mm
They were never held, they,
they, they, they serve time, the
organization uh had one lawsuit
and then was no longer
insurable, so the organization
was gone. I was on the board.
Um,
That
We have to have justice.
I think that worked well.
The second incident, and I voted
to remove the statute of
limitations was probably fell
into that category, and it was a
Jane Doe.
And the incident occurred
outside the hours of the
childcare center that I
operated.
I was operating it at the time,
and it, it occurred outside the
hours with a separate
organization.
But
And, and they were never
enrolled in the organization
that I worked for, but the
insurance company settled.
Um, there was, there was no way
it was minor on minor outside
the hours, they were not
enrolled in the program, but the
program who leased shared space.
was who paid the insurance
claim.
So, and I, I don't know if it
was civil and criminal because I
was no longer an employee there.
This was back before, um, but
now if let's say that was, I
don't think it wasn't criminal
because the, the minor was not
sued. We were sued. The minor
wasn't enrolled.
And the miner who was abused was
not enrolled at the program and
it happened outside of our
hours, but the organization paid
the settlement fee because the
insurance company had a right to
do that.
We, I, I would have preferred to
go to court cause we didn't know
who it was, didn't have anybody
enrolled in the in the infant
toddler program at the time of
that age.
And we, we couldn't really
defend ourselves. It was up to
the insurance company to settle.
So Madam Chair and
Representative, would that same
Jane Doe.
be allowed to go back now and
ask again for
Because we, there was a
settlement from the
organization, the insurance
company had sole authority to
make that decision.
Even though we didn't know who
this person was, they were,
there was no one enrolled at
that age. The incident that they
described happened outside the
hours. Now what right would they
have to go back to that
organization and sue again. Uh,
Madam Chair Representative, if
they reached a settlement, then
they wouldn't be able to come,
Madam Chair Representative, if
they reached a settlement uh for
the case and they wouldn't be
able to come back. But if that
was criminal, now this is civil.
Madam Chair.
OK
Also, um, Madam Chair and
Representative, it was a little
bit hard to track all of the
things that happened, um, and I
would imagine that it would just
be based on the circumstance,
Madam Chair Representative.
I couldn't track all of that.
Representative.
In it there was a civil claim
that was settled by the
insurance company. Well, the
insurance company was involved,
so that makes it, that to me so
civil. And when they settle,
they, they demand a release.
They don't know, they don't pay
any money unless there's a
release and that release would
have required.
The Jane Doe to release all
claims of any kind. Thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representatives. So
in this case, the insurance
company chose to settle. It was
the cheapest and quickest thing
to do. That's what was said. I'm
not, and, and let me tell you, I
think that every victim should
see their day in court, and they
should get, they should have
justice. Absolutely.
I know for 100% fact they were
not enrolled in the program
because we didn't serve that
age. I know for 100% fact that
it was outside the hours of the
childcare centers operating
hours, because that's the
testimony of the Jane Doe. I
don't, I don't know when or how
or where the incident occurred,
but we are such a litigious
state that the suit fell on the
organization and it's a
nonprofit.
So Madam Chair and
Representative, I, I am, this is
hard because I just think
there'll be.
Everyone needs justice, but the,
but the, but the organization is
who's liable, not the person.
The person was a minor. The
person was, I don't even know
what they were named. They,
they, it, it, it just seems like
we're so litigious. I want
justice for victims, and it's
extremely easy to sue in New
Mexico, and a settlement is
almost always the result.
How often is it, Madam Chair
Representative?
In the first case, absolutely,
we knew the incident occurred,
we reported it and the family
needed that that.
I hope that person gets the help
they need for the rest of their
life, for what happened to them.
Um, and I wish that the
perpetrator would have spent a
lot more time in jail.
Um
But
In this other case,
There was a settlement for a
Jane Doe. I, I don't, how often
does that happen?
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, also because we
don't currently have this uh law
in place. I think it's a little
difficult to say.
You know, how many cases are or
are not going to come forward,
but as my expert did mention um
statutes of limitations in other
states have been completely
repealed, and there haven't, you
know, folks haven't, uh, the
bottom hasn't fallen out for any
um insurance companies in
particular, um, or as far as I
understand for any of the
nonprofits or anything like that
as well, Madam Chair and
Representative, I mean, you're,
you're talking about the statute
of limitations being removed,
which I don't think a single
person would ever disagree with.
But we have different stand
proof burdens of proof, and we
have a very different situation
on the other side of it as is
proved by medical malpractice
every day. Um,
It's just a lot easier in New
Mexico.
The burden
Am I, am I explain, no, you're,
you're shaking your head no.
Yeah, Madam Chair
Representative, the burden of
proof um doesn't change.
Madam Chair Representative,
there was no proof in the case
that I just described to you, it
was impossible for the child to
have been enrolled.
Could we go ahead and just try
to stick to the parameters of
the bill so that we can, cause
we need to vote on the committee
substitute.
Thank you. And, and Madam Chair
and Representative, and maybe
I'll ask your expert witness.
in the case of the example of
the person who was in support of
the bill in the charter schools
and the employee who's still
that hurt you and is still um
going, is still working in these
locations. Does this bill
resolve your concern,
Madam Chairfortunately it does
not, it does not.
Madam Chair and Representative,
so why has this amendment been
made?
Why are we not including
You know, when I had Grant
County, there there was a a
teacher who was discovered who
had for several years harmed
over, it was over a dozen 2nd
and 3rd graders. Why, why are we
excluding them, Madam Chair
Representative, I also find it
really unfortunate. And in order
to do that, we would need to
open up the Tort Claims Act,
which, as you know, covers all
governmental entities, um, which
also could involve cases of
malpractice, and we would need
to open that up and that is
something that I'm not sure we
are ready to do at the.
common.
Madam Chair and representative,
so your expert witness who's a
victim of abuse.
Uh, the whole purpose of her
bringing the bill is to stop
Teachers from preying on
children, the bill doesn't do
this, Madam Chen representative,
um,
She came to me as a friend
before this, and I was already
going to carry this bill. OK.
I am here to support Lex Garcia
in her effort to seek justice,
and please know, Madam Chair
Representative, I will be back
another year to make sure that
we are holding perpetrators in
public institutions accountable.
Unfortunately, this bill does
not do that.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I'm, I am also the mother of
boys, and I have 3 grandsons,
and I, uh,
Also we, we have this yes means
yes bill now that only an
affirmative, yes.
Uh, to consent did not exist,
um, for some young folks who
are, who are now 57. Will they
be tried based on what was
practiced at the time or on an
affirmative yes.
Madam Chan represented from what
I understand, the affirmative
consent bill only applies to
what um folks are learning in
higher education, it's not
necessarily a burden of proof,
um, once again, Madam Chair
Representative, burden of proof
doesn't change, and I'm, and,
and Mr. Chair and
Representative, I am so sorry if
my questioning is upsetting to
you, I think a lot of women,
including myself, have stories.
That are definitely defined as
abuse.
Um
And I want justice for those.
For all
Um, I also know that it is
extremely easy to sue in New
Mexico. I have lived experience
of no proof.
But uh insurance company
choosing to settle.
And I'm, I, I guess my, you're
saying to me that
This
Jane Doe, who
Heaven forbid, I, I, I do not
doubt her story.
I believe that she experienced
what she testified she
experienced, which was minor on
minor abuse.
During a program in a shared
space that I had no authority
over and was outside the
operation hours outside of the
licensing, uh, permitting and
outside of the age group have
served.
But this organization was the
organization with the insurance
and the organization that
existed, and that's the
organization that settled
because the insurance company
had full authority to settle.
Is that uh
You're saying that
With that, so with that
settlement.
It couldn't be criminal because
there was no evidence. Is that?
Mr. Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, I think it's, um, maybe
inappropriate to keep talking
about litigation, um, that is
not
Pertinent to what we are adding
to this bill right now.
Um,
it is it's a settled, Madam
Chair and thank you thank you.
Thank you Representative down.
I, I apologize. I was presenting
a different bill getting back
in, appreciate everybody I
understand represent down you're
last on the list, go back to
you, um, and we'll, we'll, uh,
obviously be focusing on our
HAFC substitute so would it
include civil and criminal,
where they just do some criminal
at the same time or Madam Chair
Representative, this is only
civil.
So
I can't ask Mr. Chair
Representative if someone would
then do a civil and a criminal
suit.
Uh, representative, I think, uh,
I would ask you to stick to the
substitute, which I guess uh as
we understand it, the
representative just testified is
focused on a civil suit.
go back to you, but please, uh,
we'll, we're focusing in on the
substitute.
OK.
Mr. Chair and Representative.
Can you,
I can't ask if suits can be
stacked.
His criminal already exists.
Thank you,
um, this doesn't prevent anyone
from coming forward with a
criminal case. OK. Thank you.
Um, and thank you, Mr. Chair,
and it doesn't prevent someone
with a civil case from a
criminal case for adding a civil
a crim if they had a criminal
case from adding a civil case.
Madam Chair presented, that's my
understanding. OK.
That answers my question. OK, so
thank you, Mr. Chair. So,
It doesn't include public
entities.
It
Doesn't change the burden of
proof.
We do not know if yes means yes.
I mean, you can sue for
anything, so now it would be yes
means yes. No, Madam Chair
Representative, I would also
like to point out this is very
clearly for childhood sexual
abuse.
And so what yes means yes, it's
being taught in higher
education, and it doesn't change
the burden of proof.
Especially for small children.
OK. All right. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you,
Representative. I completely
understand the intent.
And I want justice for all
victims.
It's very difficult, knowing the
litigious nature of our state.
And how narrow for my own
personal experiences, how easy
it is and the burden of proof
and, and that's the, the
insurance company can can
settle.
With
I, I've lived these experiences
in justified and what I believe
was inappropriate blame. So
it's, it's extremely difficult
to vote for something when one
insurance claim can result in a
program being uninsurable.
It's extremely difficult,
especially when it's many, many
years later.
Um, and that's not the same
people are running the
organization, the same people.
Those folks are not present, and
it's not focused on the
perpetrator. It's difficult.
It's very difficult. I
understand that there needs to
be.
Services provided in and folks,
but I would hope that a
perpetrator who is now in their
50s or 60s could be named as the
person responsible.
And rather than focusing on the
organization we're likely very
few of those people still exist.
It's, it's a hard vote.
Because we want justice for
victims.
Um, the justice comes from a
victim when the perpetrator is
the person who is convicted and
the and the perpetrator is the
person who pays the
consequences. I'm just not sure
if this gets there. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Dell. Um, OK, I
think, uh, thank you members
again, apologies I present
another bill. I don't see any
other folks on the list, uh,
we'll go to, thank you, uh, is
there anything sponsor experts
that you guys uh would like to
add before we go to our vote.
No, Mr. Te, thank you so much.
OK, thank you. We'll go to the
vice chair. Thank you, uh, Mr.
Chair. I'm of a Do not pass on
House Bill 73 and a do pass on,
oh, actually.
Was it a committee substitute
before
OK, so a do not pass on the
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill 3, and
a due pass on house
appropriations and Finance
Committee substitute.
OK, there's a motion saying, I
understand there's a uh we'll
ask the staff to go ahead and
call the roll and.
Representative Baca.
Yes.
Representative Brown.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Dow.
Yes.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Garrett.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Herndon. Yes.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Little, yes.
Representative Lujan. Yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew,
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sariana.
Represented
Representative Silva. Yes.
Representative Vincent.
Not with an explanation.
Dixon.
Yes.
Cheers mom.
Yes, uh, we'll go to
Representative Vincent for an
explanation and.
Have the staff people.
Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
I still don't feel like I know
enough about this, and I look
forward to getting with you
offline so that maybe you can
change my mind before we get to
the floor, but insurance right
now, I'm very protective of it.
Businesses, small business, any
kind of business. I'm very
protective about it right now.
And I just need to make sure
that I'm not implicating people
that don't deserve.
Implication.
That's, that's Ian. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Vincent.
OK, um, uh, do you have the
final
15 in the affirmative, 1 in the
negative.
OK, we have a due pass on the
house appropriation Finance
Committee substitute, 15
affirmative, uh, and thank you
all very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, members, I know there's
another, there's more competing
time demands. We're just gonna,
we'll roll the rest of the bills
until um
Uh, until Monday, including my
bill. Um.
And uh
We'll be back here on Monday.
Uh, we're gonna work more
closely with sponsors to make
sure that when there's bills
that need to be tabled, um,
That will, will do that and
thank you all very much.
Thanks members.
