That you can transfer these and
that is part of the H. B. to
process yes Mr chairman and
members of the committee this
this is transferring the the
money that goes with this it's
done in house bill two as well
great thank you very much for
any member Armstrong okay is
there any question are there any
questions on the amendment.
On the amendment okay is there
any opposition to adopting house
appropriations and finance
committee amendment one.
Saying none back to the bill
let's go see.
I apologize is there anybody who
would like to speak on
Senate bill ninety four now is
twice amended.
Yes ma'am please come up will
have our excellent attendance
here.
Okay yeah will.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name Phyllis around
like I'm the deputy director of
the New Mexico outdoor
recreation division on behalf of
our division in the economic
development department I do want
to voice our support for this
transfer of the Rio Grande trail
commission in this work I do
want to note that that support
is
Comes with the understanding
that we will have funding
whether that's through H. B. two
or this appropriation and be
able to use that for an FTP
we're hoping and Center Stein
born is aware of the request
from our leadership for that FTE
at a Senate finance in order for
us to manage this work but we
are in support and feel like
our division is more natural
home and swear it likely would
have been had our division been
in existence when the work
started so thank you thank you
very much.
Okay yes please oh sorry we have
one more.
Thank you good afternoon up
chairman thank you for this
opportunity to be Velasquez on
the director The New Mexico
state parks division we stand in
support of this bill as well for
everything that our counterpart
just said with with or do would
have been in place at the time
that the commission had been
established it likely would have
fallen there it in exist at the
time and now it does we think
it's a it's a good fit something
that we support I'm definitely
Mexico state parks and energy
minerals and that's resources
department thank you right thank
you very much Mr Velasquez.
Okay I don't see anybody else
here in the committee will look
online please raise your hand
online if you wish to speak on
Senate bill ninety four.
I don't see any hands there so
we're gonna go to the committee
where to start with
Representative Chatfield than
Representative Pettigrew than
Representative Lujan the subject
field please.
Thank you Mr chair of just
something about the the the
could assist.
The last comment that said
hoping that there would be an
appropriation the the stripping
of the warning that says making
appropriation is just a
technical thing it's still the
appropriation on excess and my
question is about that
appropriation
it is a.
Recurring appropriation so does
the wording deal with the fact
that it will next year in the
next year and next year continue
to go into this other fund or
does it not deal with it
thank you Mr chairman and
representative for that question
it looks like
It does deal with that that it
makes it recurring and that it
will go to.
The correct department instead
of EMNRD.
Thank you Mr chair that was my
only right thank you very much
for that field next
representative please thank you
chairman thank you
Representative for carrying the
weight feel Senators it seems
like the house always has to do
that.
The.
Mr chair and representative the
The appropriation that was part
of this bill was a two hundred
twenty five thousand dollars
appropriation.
This is I understand what's
inside house bill two there's a
transfer if house bill two
passes of seventy five thousand
how does that affect the game
plan with respect to the
implementation of this process
and will that seventy five
happen year after year
thank you Mr chairman and and
representative as far as I
understand the it what is
recurring.
And it will go into
Outdoor recreation are into Edie
the economic development and it
was in the outdoor recreation
fund they'll be money to be able
to to help supplement that if
there's not enough of the
seventy five thousand if they
need more they can supplement
and then next year we'll ask for
more to help if they need an
additional FTE.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative thank you very
much Representative Pettigrew
Mexico Representative Lujan I
questions of finance researcher
thank you okay great let's go to
Representative how to me for the
do passed motion and
Representative Madam ranking
member west for you for the
second just because you're at
the witness.
I look forward to pass Senate
bill ninety four as amended.
A second okay there's a motion
from Representative how to meal
second from ranking member
Armstrong was the US state or
sorry Mr GS can you please call
the roll.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Read into that yes.
Yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
If it is.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Okay.
And.
Maybe.
Yes all right.
Okay.
Okay.
Thank you thank you madam
ranking member and I know our
senators thank you as well and
of course this goes through your
district as well as many of ours
correct thank you Mr okay we're
gonna go thank you members
we're gonna ask now we see
thank you very much Terry
lengthy for being here members
are going to go to house bill
two eighty.
And it's great to see.
Are secretary of Public
Education Department others here
chairman please when you're
ready on house bill two eighty I
know our.
For Mr about this can you please
pass out the men and make sure
that
Share Lynsey has a copy.
Yes Sir we're ready yes Sir
right thank you Mr thank you Mr
chairman and committee members
good afternoon thank you for the
time this afternoon with me I
have the secretary for higher
education as well as Mr book you
know he with me as expert
witnesses and let me begin by
introducing house bill two
eighty house bill two eighty
will help schools and tribal
education programs obtain
guidance and technical
assistance to better meet the
needs of native American
students of under the tribal
remedy framework we have long
recommended the creation of two
technical assistance centers led
by indigenous educational
experts want to assist entities
serving students from the Navajo
Nation Zuni and they create
pagination and the other to
assist students serving for
serving on public lands and the
Mescalero Apache students this
year the higher education
department has come on board and
has worked with us to do a
number of things the Yazzie in
Martinez court ruling found that
public the public education
department of the state of New
Mexico has not been able to
provide technical assistance on
Indian Education the court
attributed this continue to pay
their to the to implement any
Indian Education of performance
to the Indian Education Act
partly a lack of this assistance
well the legislature has created
regional education cooperatives
to help school districts across
the state there is no
specialized.
supportive infrastructure that
exists particularly for native
American students house bill two
eighty will create and support a
system for Indian education by
establishing to technical
education system centers the
centers will once again work
with tribes school districts
schools and educators to provide
expertise guidance and hands on
support for better serving
native American students it'll
do a number of things one at
this point we're gonna direct
AGD to establish these two
technicals is centers require
AGD to issue a request for
proposal would tribal input for
two centers operating in
geographically distinct regions
of our state require the AGD
Department AGD to prioritize
application for tribal colleges
and universities from native
that programs at New Mexico's
public higher education
institutions and from tribal the
controlled entities and finally
task the centers with assisting
tribal education departments
within the respective tribal
nations part of the state
agencies and collaborating with
native American students serving
school districts to improve
native American school us
students education.
finally house bill two eighty
student is supported by the
governor of New Mexico and as a
result of the collaboration
between the tribal educational
and and the higher education
department with that Mr chairman
we stand for any questions great
thank you very much chairman
Lente what would like to do I
think let's we have we passed
out the amendment.
I'd like to will move the
amendment and then we'll if if
the if it's accessible chairman
then we would amend the bill and
then we would go for public
comment is that does that work
great okay so members all move
house appropriations and finance
committee amendment number one.
On the first page it strikes on
line fourteen and fifteen and
strides making an appropriation.
And then fear.
For it strikes in its entirety
section two.
Actually can I have a second for
that a second okay it's been
signed by vice chair Dixon.
Any questions.
Pretty straightforward is there
any opposition to adopting this
amendment.
Saying none.
We've adopted the amendment so
now we're gonna go for public
comment first is there anybody
who wishes to speak in
opposition to house bill two
eighty as now amended please
raise your hand.
Casey and nobody
we will now ask for those whom
they wish to speak in support if
you could line up and we'll have
our
The R. ten that get ready to go.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for having
me here today my name is our
senior meadow I am the secretary
of education for the public
education department designate
it's great to see all this
morning I stand in strong
support of this bill this is a
great opportunity to be able to
set up a community of practice
for some of our indigenous
students it will benefit our
students across the state and
this is also wonderful wonderful
opportunity to be able to
collaborate between pad and
higher ed might I plan to take
full advantage of that thank you
very much thank you very much Mr
Secretary the the.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Lawrence Mereb all I'm vice
president of operations at the
institute of American Indian
arts and the college stands in
support of HB two eighty it will
benefit the TCU's in our state
the indigenous communities that
they serve and educational
institutions throughout New
Mexico thank you thank you very
much.
That's a at good afternoon chair
I am only Shawna so the deputy
secretary of Indian affairs
departments and the Indian
Affairs Department is in full
support of this bill there is an
urgent need to get are so many
different technical support
centers in many of our rural
communities and this is a great
start to support our students as
well as our educators to happen
thank you very much W.
secretary.
Thank you chairman small vice
chair Dixon members of the
committee my name is Jenny parks
I'm the president and CEO of the
legal foundation and we're here
today to support house bill two
eighty it is something very
necessary for our students are
native students around the state
and it's a wonderful
collaboration between tribal
leaders education experts in our
various departments as you can
see here today higher at early
childhood as well as the PED and
importantly it will help with a
culturally relevant pedagogy but
also language and also training
more native teachers and
counselors which is very needed
for students many of our
students don't see one native
teacher student and their tire
school career here so we urge
you to do a to pass thank you
thank you very much.
good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Loretta Trujillo and I'm
speaking on behalf of transform
education Mexico but more
importantly I stand in front of
you as a career educator having
experience working with native
students living off their
homelands and one of the most
exciting prospects of these
technical assistance centers is
that many teachers many
administrators lack the the
knowledge or the access to
research or the access to
curriculum materials and this
would solve an important problem
in RG in our education system in
the state so for all of the
reasons stated on Ms we're in
support of house bill two eighty
thank you thank you very much.
I thank you Mr chairman
committee members my name is
Austin we aqui I'm here on
behalf of the ACLU of New Mexico
and we stand today in strong
support of house bill two eighty
for all the reasons already
stated and because it provides
important infrastructural
support for lots of the other
good legislation which already
been passed by this committee to
allow for the cultural
preservation and cultural
relevancy to be held within
tribal communities and for
tribes to be able to build that
necessary infrastructure for
themselves to support their own
tribal education thank you thank
you very much so we have.
Chair members of the committee
attention on.
This is the secretary could tell
you instantly with early
childhood.
Early childhood education and
care and we're here in support
of house bill two eighty with
all of the reasons given but
also that it serves as a
collaboration effort between
School districts charter schools
early childhood centers colleges
and universities.
As well as TCU's and also would
be a schools so this would
provide technical assistance for
those that need it and the role
native American Community so we
strongly support house bill two
eighty thank you very much this
assistance.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Khan right you know and I am
the reserves lobbyist for the
proposal back and tiles and we
stand in full support of house
bill two eighty
Lows because we we hope that
this piece legislation would
take advantage of the wealth of
indigenous academic expertise
that's a U. N. M. at and a
college on the Navajo
reservation but in addition we
are hoping that it will also
assist tribal education
departments in various
subcommittee on state as well as
a line learning outcomes with
the core values as well as the
world view that tribes and
pueblos happier New Mexico so
for those reasons Mr chairman we
stand in full support thank you
very much.
Hi there I'm Stephanie Rodriguez
and I am the cabinet secretary
of the New Mexico higher
education department I'm not
going to repeat all of the
points that were spoken here by
our partners but I do want to
say that this is a multi agency
collaborative effort and also
education secretary effort from
early childhood pre K. K. twelve
all the way to higher education
and beyond I'm gonna dress
something on the front end and
that is the funding we are still
in conversations with the Senate
finance committee for two point
two five million dollars we have
had very productive and positive
conversations however we do have
an alternative resolution in the
event that is not provided to
the higher education department
there's twenty five million
dollars of funding going over to
the Indian Affairs Department
the use is generally very broad
in the Indian Affairs Department
has agreed to provide that two
point two five million dollars
through an MO you to the higher
education department this is
supported by our tribal
communities our tribal leaders
because we understand how
important this initiative is and
this came out of tribal summit
government to government cut
conversations that we have had
for several years now in this
administration and it's finally
coming to fruition so because of
that reason we really hope that
you can support house bill two
eighty I think the sponsor I
think the governor and I think
the secretaries assistant
secretaries and deputy
secretaries and their staff that
is in this room thank you.
Thank you very much madam
secretary.
with that we will go online I
almost forgot creating we're
going to first go to Amarillo
Emily will DO and only for one
minute whenever you're ready
please.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I am only one
thousand New Mexico invoices for
Children when we support each
between eighty and thank
Representative Lente for sharing
with all of the resources
legislation because these
education technical assistance
centers will contribute to the
state it is responsible Martinez
Yazzie providing spaces are
homegrown in New Mexico led
initiatives to develop a
culturally and linguistically
relevant materials Andrew
opportunities to strengthen
careerpathways or indigenous
educators loan was
administrative errors as well as
providing opportunities for
native communities to continue
leading in the development of
education policy it will best
serve the American students and
actuals we asked the committee
to join us in supporting each B.
two eighty thank you thank you
for thank you very much miss
without next we're going to go
to Christine sams Christine for
one minute whenever you're
ready.
Yes can you hear me yes thank
you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Christine send someone
associate professor in the
college of education at the
university of New Mexico and I
also directed American Indian
language policy researcher
teacher training center we stand
in support of HB two eighty we
believe that it is one of the
critical pieces that has been
missing for years since the US
and working just fine pieces of
and come out so this is a
critically because the Santo
assistance needs not being met
by PED
primarily because there the
resources that they have in
terms of expertise on the latest
solar city to
educators who are from these
communities in New Mexico who
are familiar with the cultures
of the communities and who are
speakers of these languages
these resources of not being of
access in terms of helping I
with unity still their capacity
and and also for technical
services to local districts.
This is an important piece of
legislation that needs to go
forward thank you Mr chair
extending Community members for
supporting it HB two eighty
thank you very much we're going
to go now to Colleen Bowman
calling for one minute whenever
you're ready.
Good afternoon on chairman
committee members representative
Lente and all the other schools
in the room thank you so much
for allowing us to speak in
support house bill two eighty
this is something that is long
overdue and I work at apple
technical university at DC you
prepare to respond to the
challenges that face our
students in K. through twelve
and and hopefully my vision for
having success in this
initiative it is that some of
the students who go through the
pipeline of New Mexico public
education will become the
researchers who can improve upon
the techniques and strategies of
cultural knowledge that can help
you improve learning in our
nation's so thank you very much
for this and I we stand on
support thank you very much
respond.
Okay next we're going to go to
and we're going to conclude with
Melissa Candelaria Melissa for
one minute whenever you're ready
please.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Melissa
Candelaria I'm an attorney with
the New Mexico Center on party
and a member of the legal team
for the past planets.
The house Martinez case we are
in full support of this bill
because it houses the
implementation of the New Mexico
Indian Education Act This bill
has long been a key proposal
contained in the tribe remedy
framework to completing
terminology for Kerry the direct
bills.
Lefty noted in the house
Martinez he saw that the state
has a duty to provide sufficient
technical assistance guidance
monitoring and oversight of the
implementation of the act and so
for these reasons we fully
support the bill and urged the
community to pass it thank you.
You very thank you very much
miss kind of the U. K. that
concludes public comment thanks
for everybody who's participated
we're going to go to our
committee first to
Representative Chatfield than
Representative Pettigrew
Representative Chatfield.
So thank you Mr chairman I think
the secretary of higher it kind
of got to to my normal question
which is that if everything else
all falls apart there's an
agreement to fund this by the
tribal education for is that
true Mr chairman Mr Mr speaker
Mr chairman and and
Representative the through the
Department Indian Affairs.
So I'm good there we go thank
you very much Representative
Chatfield next Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for the bill
Mr Chairman
Representative the.
And.
Struggling with a figure this
out so I guess my first question
would be did that.
Through the through the summer
process did we trying get money
into this for into
Into the budget.
Mr Chairman representative it
was in fact in PED's recommended
budget however currently was
adopted the the LFC budget was
adopted and it was taken out.
Thank you chairman thank you
Representative for that the
And so I my original
understanding was that there was
twenty twenty million dollars
inside the PED budget
for the Indian education fund.
To tribal education departments
that was going to.
the.
So that would be transferred
over to higher education.
Mr Chairman and that's the notes
that I have on about three
different documents for
Now it's my understanding Mr
chairman and representative that
this money would come directly
from the department of Indian
affairs.
Mr Chairman representative to
clarify and it looks like the
lead up up around me that they
want to clarify for me but at.
But but but if I may that there
was two point two five two four
four this program that was once
in PED's recommended budget.
That was then again because we
adopted the LFC framework for
for the for the for the pro of
HB to that now with that being
taken out of working on the
Senate side through the
secretary now that is she's not
successful there is already
twenty five million dollars in
the Indian Affairs Department
budget for a kind of a
generalized framework if you
will for expenditures that there
is an agreement that have been
struck between AGD and I a do
that they will be willing to
fund this this program.
Thank you Mr chairman thank
Representative the.
Okay the so that there's
something that I have when
document the sitting on my desk
from.
I'm guessing LFC that says of
the.
That it would be coming from PED
is a transfer to hire at and so
that's how that that's
completely out of it this is
strictly with the department of
Indian affairs right.
Mr Chairman representative yes
Sir that.
Thirty any thank you chairman.
Very much Representative
Pettigrew we're gonna go next to
resent Garcia Representative
Lujan than represent their
percent Garcia thank you Mr
chairman Representative for
bringing this up as you well
know but sixty five percent of
my district as native Americans.
You know this is a good deal for
a for native just have one
question Senator one of the
going to be located at.
So Mr Chairman representative
that is not defined yet in this
bill we planned to other the
department plans to then go to
R. F. P. to find out where they
will be house that in as
mentioned in in the discussion
in the bill that we want to make
sure that they are
geographically put in places
where we can access them the the
various tribes so for instance
Navajo Nation Zuni on the
western side of the state right.
Perfect place.
Hypothetically speaking could be
at the Navajo technical
university into you right for
those pueblos there along the
Rio Grande corridor and
Mescalero it could be the
University of New Mexico at this
point in time we're trying to
effect change my way of
utilizing those native American
faculties that are within these
two public universities to that
B. R. experts versus going out
with the lack of capacity
unfortunately that that PED has
at this point in time as experts
in native American culturally
and linguistically relevant
education curriculum.
To then allow them to help us as
a state and help try to develop
those and those are I think at
this point in time
geographically
Centralized locations to be able
to provide that support.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative you know that I
was thinking along the same
lines.
Maybe one and.
No we will rock of.
Trump went.
And that's your right over the
Gallup there that would be good
because.
One is of a native American
addition the district thank you
thank you thank you very much
Representative Garcia nexa
Representative Lujan the nursing
care and then Representative
else thank you Mr.
Chairman.
Four Representative
I'm just looking at this is a
lot of come under the
constitution and companionship
relationship built.
On top of what we just heard
from the secretary of higher
education about the twenty five
million dollars of just for
clarification I guess for me so
today if we if we pass this bill
out then it's just a language to
to conduct and and do and to
with this bill says and then the
funding the twenty you're gonna
take the twenty five million
dollars to fund the programming
and operations and everything is
that correct Mr chair.
Mr chairman and and
Representative it is two point
two five not twenty five million
votes to well I thought it okay
there's a clarification right
there thank you very much that's
important
so do I is going to give you two
point two five Mr chair is that
correct Mr Chairman
representative yes ma'am thank
you that's good because I have
twenty five.
Right so.
Which could help you as well now
that is now is you clarify that
for me with the other bills H.
B. forty age before one forty
one forty seven and one forty
eight one forty nine however
those bills or any of those
bills could be moving forward or
in the budget and and will help
out in any anyway with what
you're doing with this piece of
legislation chair.
Mr chairman and and
Representative at this point in
time house bill one forty in
house bill one forty seven had
been put on hold in anticipation
to work during the inner and
come back next year house bill
one forty Mr Chairman
representative is in fact at
this point
In the Senate and I think it's
on the floor of the Senate at
this point in time
At house bill one forty nine and
has not garnered enough traction
we feel comfortable about it yet
and then here we are and then
the house bill one forty eight
critical education is also Mr
Chairman representative in the
Senate as well as last committee
one research Mr one ninety nine
ninety eight on one ninety third
okay great and so these all all
work together is that correct Mr
chair to put together just like
a really great program Mr
Chairman representative of these
all reflect the tribal remedy
framework which creates of
educational opportunities for
native American students from
the cradle to higher education
and beyond in some cases thank
you so I'm I'm just happy to see
that all this work is being done
in New you know this.
It's like a Colossus is a big
collaboration effort of of what
we've been discussing for so
long but situational question on
one has to one forty eight the
ECG ECG Fund is that correct.
Is that what what you have in
your and what you're asking in
this bill.
Is that Mr Chairman
representative no ma'am what
what what house bill one forty
to eighty does is simply
codified in statute language
that the ECECD must collaborate
with tribes and create that
collaboration between tribes and
and ECECD so that knowing that
administrations change that the
commitment towards tribes and
tribal education make changes
wells we wanna make sure that
the statute I appreciate that
thank you Mr chair those are the
questions and get in and this is
this is a good piece of
legislation thank thank you
Representative Lujan to go to
Representative Garrett and then
representative Allison thank you
Mr chair thank you
Representative because I see the
to help circulating and bringing
together all the funding all the
bills for the last four years
and you've just said that it
does that thank you.
Great thank you Representative
Garrett we're gonna go to
represent us.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
let the.
My colleague for bringing this
bill forward.
Ever since I met you a little
over five years ago I have seen
you with.
To help our native American
students and improve our
communities this is just another
bill to help us get there in
promoting our.
Of our cultures and our
indigenous values so I applaud
you for bringing this forward.
There is a one we call another
brother and to the state we're
still brothers.
Supporting and promoting one
another so thank you for
bringing this bill forward thank
you Mr chair the representative
Allison and Chairman T. into
your experts just want to say
thank you particularly I want to
thank the collaboration among C.
executive agencies that are here
today
members you know sometimes it
can be the case we're they're
very good ideas that agencies
don't see as good ideas and so
even when there is funding there
can be challenges in
implementing that I think we see
the opposite here today I think
we see a creative innovative
collaborative approach that is
sort of with the safeguard that
secretary Rodriguez came in
within chairman and thanks so
much to as a credit to you and
so many others as Representative
Allison said building what is
now shared by all as the the
right approach with that I'm
gonna go to Representative
Allison for the motion and then
we're gonna go representative
Garcia for the second
Representative Barreras thank
you Mr chair.
I move a do pass Hey there's a
do pass on house bill two eighty
as amended.
Okay this.
Rodriguez would you please take
the role.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative up yes.
Representative Ted yes.
Representative.
Garcia.
Representative Garrett yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you just for the
community.
Okay great to see our madam
Chief Justice through coven and
accurate to see chair chairwoman
Hochman Vigil.
All return visitors always
smiles on their faces so.
If.
Well ask everybody to clear the
room
We were and we'll we'll just
briefly ask everybody to clear
the room.
So we can continue on.
And.
Just so that we can be efficient
with our time.
We know our Supreme Court likes
to run on time we try to
maintain the.
Okay with that we will go to
Madam chairwoman thank you for
presenting Senate bill two as
amended.
Whenever you're ready.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee
House Bill to relates to
judicial salaries and provides
the justices States print court
will receive an annual salary
equal to the annual salary
received by New Mexico federal
magistrate judges and it removes
salary formulas for the
magistrates with that I'm going
to introduce a woman who needs
no introduction Senate Chief
Justice Shannon Bacon and with
her art have been from AOC and
we are here to answer any
questions you may have on the
bill thank you very much chair
and chief justice Mr chair
members of the committee I will
be brief because I'd rather hear
your questions Senate bill two
is identical to the bill that
was passed last year by
overwhelming majority in both
houses it was pocket vetoed by
the governor we are hopeful that
that will not occur this year
and we are back in front of you
requesting it that judicial the
judicial salary for the Supreme
Court the highest court in the
state of New Mexico be tethered
to the lowest court in the
federal judiciary
we believe this is a really
important tool for recruitment
and retention of judges from
private practice
we we don't we're not challenge
to recruit individuals that have
a criminal practice background
dust public defenders but we are
very challenged to recruit
people with private practice
background in oil and gas water
real estate complex commercial
cases and the like and we
believe this is one significant
step toward solving that
problem.
With that I will stop because
again I'd rather your questions
if there are any thank you thank
you very much.
Is there anybody who wishes to
speak on Senate bill two.
it please feel free I will ask
an yes.
We can have a state right there
yeah that's perfect.
Chair small vice chair Dixon
members of the committee on the
lane Lujan I'm a District Court
judge of the second judicial
District Court I am here in
support of a Senate bill two
thank you thank you very much
to.
Hi good afternoon chair small
vice chair Dixon I'm judge
Elliot from metro court and also
here in support of SB two thank
you.
Okay I was I don't see anybody
else in I don't see anybody here
on the line we'll go to the
committee are there any
questions for the committee
ranking member Armstrong fix.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
good to see you Representative
is this in house bill two.
Mr chairman
Caucus chair I yes it is
impossible to.
Thank you Mr chairman.
The room rang member Armstrong I
think that's most what we need
to know let's go to.
we will we'll go to by Sarah
Dixon for the motion and we'll
go to Representative byrd  and
for the.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
it to pass on Senate bill two.
And as amended thank you for No
sorry.
To Senate bill two I'm so sorry
okay okay it's been moved by
vice chair Dixon ignoring for
advice from the chair.
The executive Representative
Herndon please call the roll
roll miss Rodriguez.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you chairman I think
you're for the for the.
Well as I understand the way I
read the house bill two right
now we have of the funding in
there for five percent increase
with the total increase within
the bill is about eighteen
percent I just look forward to
the debate on the floor.
Thank you very much okay thank
you chair Hochman Vigil thank
you madam Chief Justice Mr pep
and.
The committee thank you for
really efficient quick work
today that concludes our agenda.
The.
