Prison.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Little.
Representative Li.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Pettigrew.
Represented Pettigrew,
Representative Sanchez
Representative Sariana.
Representative Silva.
Here. Representative Vincent.
Vice chair Dixon, here.
Chair small
I'm here. OK, great. We have a
quorum of members. We're gonna
uh go quickly try to get through
as much as we can. Uh, we have
Senate, we're gonna move Senate
Bill 170 after Senate Bill 92,
um, and with that, we'll go
ahead and start with Cenel 92.
There we go.
Thank you very much, uh, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee. I'm Senator Michael
Pavia, vice chair, ranking
member, and members of the.
appropriations and Finance
Committee. I also have here with
me my co-sponsor, uh, Senator
Candy Eel and uh we're here with
you on Senate Bill 92, which is
a catch-up cleanup fix to a bill
that I was able to pass through
the, the legislature with the
help of most, a lot of the folks
on this committee, uh, to ensure
that our horse racing integrity
and safety authority and jockey
and exercise rider insurance
fund actually is, is created and
has a place to land, um, or a
place for all of the money
coming out of the track.
Um,
The, uh, and, and there's a
place for it to be administered
and, and where it'll, um, where
it'll sit instead of it just,
you know, we, we need to be able
to access it essentially, Mr.
Chairman. And so essentially
what the legislation does is it
utilizes the funding sources,
money is collected by the New
Mexico Racing Commission.
Excellent. Thank you for, uh,
great, thank you very much. Is
there anybody who would like to
speak on Centreville 92.
Go ahead, please come on up. Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
my name is Brent Moore. I'm a
registered lobbyist for Penn
Entertainment. We operate the
Raino and Hobbs, uh Zia Park, we
stand in support of this bill,
it's a needed cleanup from a
bill that was done a few years
ago. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Jason, we
registered lobbyist for the
Albuquerque Downs race tracking
because you don't want to bring,
uh, thank the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward, as
explained, um, this bill was
passed a couple of years ago.
The issue is that the money was
being dumped into the purse
fund, the purse fund reverts and
the jockey insurance, um, is
paid out on a monthly basis, we
need to create this fix in order
for the jockey insurance to be
paid out year round and also
bank a little money as jockey
insurance goes up, so would urge
the committee to move it
forward, thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Catherine Crociatta. I'm
a registered lobbyist for
Sunland Park Racetrack and
Casino and, um, everything's
already been said, we'd like to
thank the sponsor for all of his
hard work, um, to move this
forward and get this much needed
cleanup, and we urge your
support. Thank you. Excellent.
Thank you very much.
OK, we have one person on
online, we'll go to Marla
Schultz, Marla, go ahead.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Marla Schultz
registered lobbyist for
all-American Riodoso Downs
racetrack. We want to also thank
the sponsors and for the reasons
previously stated, we stand in
strong support of this
legislation.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
OK, uh, I don't see any other
comment. Are there any questions
from the committee? So any
questions, uh, we'll go to the
ranking member for motion.
There's a motion and a 2nd
motion from ranking member
Chatfield, same from
Representative Vincent. Is there
uh for Du pass on Senate Bill
92, any opposition to that,
none.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members just a quick note, we're
gonna go to Senate Bill 170.
Uh, and then go back to the, um,
The way the schedule was set up.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll
just go ahead and keep rolling.
Um, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, I have the deputy
Economic Development secretary
and the chief of staff for the
Public Regulation commission,
just in case, as expert
witnesses, 170 is a follow up to
169, and I'm sorry, we have our
co-sponsor, Madam Vice Chair
here as well. And um it's a
follow up uh in a companion bill
with Senate Bill 169, which is
site readiness, essentially what
the 170 does is it's the utility
portion of this, making sure the
sites are ready, um, and it, it
provides an expedited, if you
could call
6 months expedited uh approval
process through the PRC. They've
agreed to this, uh, today,
there's anywhere from 9 to 15 to
18, in some cases, 30, 36 months
for, for, um, um, approval
through the PRC this requires
them to do it in 6 months or
it's assumed that they were
approved. Um, if we have
companies and, and organizations
looking at New Mexico hanging
out there too long, they're just
kind of gonna fly away and we're
going to lose those
opportunities. So this is a
great handshake with Senate Bill
169, and we're happy to stand
for questions at this point.
Great. Thank you very much. Is
there anybody here who'd like to
speak on Senate Bill 170.
Come on up.
Oh, you hold it, OK.
Hi, Mr. Chairman, uh, members of
the committee, good evening. I'm
Rico Gonzalez with El Paso
Electric. Uh, we are very much
in support of this bill. We live
in a territory where El Paso
Electric serves both New Mexico
and Texas, and we see every
single day where there is
competitiveness between the two
portions of our of our
multi-jurisdictional territory.
And in New Mexico, we need these
things that we can have to, we
need these types of, of, of
policies so they can help us to
attract and keep the, the these
kinds of opportunities that we
have coming to our territory,
both in New Mexico we have a lot
of tools in Texas. You see it by
the growth. We have a ton of
growth in Texas, in New Mexico,
not as much, and I can go
through those numbers if anyone
ever cared to, but this is the
kind of
that helps us to to to change
that dynamic. Thank you.
Uh, chairman and members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza,
executive director with New
Mexico IDEA, the statewide
economic development
professional association, uh,
site readiness initiative,
Senate Bill 170, and Senate Bill
169 are top priorities for
economic development
professionals across the states.
Uh, you guys passed out 169
yesterday. Uh, and this is
really truly an important part.
It's all about shortening
timelines and adding
predictability for businesses
when we, when our economic
developers look to recruits or
even expanded existing.
businesses, shortening the
timeline so that sites are ready
in the pre-development in 169
and then looking at the utility
deployment is a critical part of
that. This will speed up the
timelines and, and make it more
predictable. Thank you. Thank
you.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, Bernard Treat
representing Southwestern Public
Service, um, OO of Xcel Energy.
For the reasons Rico said, we're
a, a multi-state serving New
Mexico and Texas, um, serving a
very heavy load, a very demanded
load in southeastern New Mexico
and so for the reasons you've
already heard, um, we stand in
full support of the bill. Thank
you. Thank you.
Good evening, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee,
Sherroor of P&M. One of the main
issues with economic development
projects at the timelines, and
then taking too long and unable
to build fast enough under our
current process under SB 170,
the New Mexican public
Regulation Commission would
allow public utilities to
pre-build and recover costs for
ongoing development and
construction of old or
contracted resources for
economic development projects.
SB 170 will help expedite the
remaking process
us to attract and retain
commercial and industrial
businesses capable of enhancing
the local and state economy. For
these reasons, we stand in
strong support of SB 170. It's
needed to keep more of our own
here at home in New Mexico.
Thanks. Thank you. OK, we're
gonna go online to Erica Edgerly
and then Eric Martinez.
And conclude with Adrian Gomez,
Erica, go ahead, please. Mm. Oh,
hi, this is actually Alison
Riley with the Mexico Chamber of
Commerce. I'm on a um shared
computer, so that's why it says
Erica, but um this is Alison
Riley, a public policy director
at the Mexico Chamber of
Commerce and strong support of
Senate Bill 170, which ensures
projects across the state can
receive the necessary support to
thrive, and also makes New
Mexico more competitive for new
businesses, encourages companies
to expand or settle in New
Mexico.
which means more jobs and
economic growth for our
communities. The bill
streamlines the approval process
for infrastructure development,
which is much needed in this
state.
Senate Bill 170 positions New
Mexico as a leader and fostering
business investment and
innovation, and we urge your
support. Thank you.
Now we're gonna go to Eric
Martinez.
Good evening, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. This
is uh Eric Martinez on behalf of
uh Mesa del Sol standing in
support of this legislation.
This is innovative legislation
that helps keep up uh uh uh
utility infrastructure that
helps uh further develop
economic development throughout
New Mexico. We support this
legislation. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much.
Finally, let's conclude with
Adrian Gomez.
Uh, good evening, Mr. Chair and
Committee, Adrian Gomez on
behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce,
uh, SB 170 is another pragmatic
bill that allows New Mexico to
do the literal literal
groundwork necessary to be truly
ready when economic development
opportunities arise,
allowing public utilities to
recover prudent and reasonable
costs for certain economic
development projects will
encourage investment in future
projects today.
We respect, respectfully ask for
your yes vote on SB 170. Thank
you. Great. Thank you very much.
OK, uh, I will go to the
committee for questions. We're
gonna start with Duncan.
Thank you Mr. um
just 11, maybe one or two quick
questions. Um,
Senator and Representative, can
you tell me about the future
rate adjustments.
Um, how fast can they escalate
up and is it just for the new
construction.
Or is it for all existing chair
and Representative Duncan, um,
I'll take this one and then I
might have the PRC jump in that
the chief of staff is with us
this evening. I'm not sure if
you heard that earlier, but
essentially the approval process
is a 6 months for the site Reis
component, they would have one
extension of up to 3 months or 6
to 9 months, somewhere in that
window of time. But then future
rate changes, right, whatever
that would have to go through
their regular process. I don't
know, did I say that right or?
All right, that's right. We're
good.
Thank you. That's all I needed
to know. I, I just wanted to
make sure that they weren't
going to get a 20%, 6 months and
then 20 more 6 months later.
Well, they'll be set at that
point and then they'd have to go
through the whole process again
if there's going to be something
different.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Next we'll go to Rose Pettigrew.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
uh.
The chair, Senator and experts.
Of two such questions. The first
one, can you
Kind of lay out the changes that
this bill makes.
Uh, with respect to the NMFA.
If we can go there first and
then I have a couple of
questions on the PRC.
Uh, thank you, Chair and
Representatives, you know, I
chaired the NMFA Oversight
Committee this last year. I do
it every other year or I'm vice
chair and the uh uh executive,
uh, the chief executive officer
for the NMFA is here right now.
Maybe she addresses this, but I
will tell you that it's nothing
out of their normal processes
for a new program that then and
we have, we've crammed a couple
of programs into their laps over
the last couple of years they've
done a phenomenal job of making
that happen. Um,
If you want to
with your permission, we do have
the executive Mr. Chairman,
thank you, Marquita Russell with
the NMFA. It makes a modest
expansion to qualified projects,
so currently rural electric co
ops are not eligible under the
PPRF Senate Bill 170 allows them
access to do the PPRF and we
have financed them in other
programs, but they have limited
capital. So this provides them
with a greater access to capital
and makes a modest adjustment
for timelines allowing um them
to come forward for an
application relatively soon.
OK
Thank you for that chair. Thank
you for that.
Um, my next question with
respect to
The PRC.
The changes that I understand
take the, take a 6 month with a
potential 3-month expansion.
And tries to hold it to a 6
month. Is that correct?
Uh, chair and representative,
that's, that's right, or it is,
it is deemed uh approved.
And that way there's no horsing
around and and the uh projects
can move a heck of a lot faster
than they are today, makes New
Mexico much more attractive and
competitive.
So chair and senator, um.
Will these changes affect
Everything with respect to grid
modernization, will this change,
like right now, um, we have some
entities, uh, electric entities
that are either have or are
going to have.
Uh, some metals to the PRC with
respect to um upgrading their
grid.
And with power supply and so.
And the Chairman Representative,
uh, you know, all due respect,
respect, this is not related to
grid modernization at all. Those
are on separate tracks. They
have separate requirements. It
is simply on the approval
process.
Thank you
Chairman and senator with for
that. Let me ask my question a
little bit differently.
With these changes, will it be a
across the board change for PRC
for all approvals for for new
project expansions.
Thank you, Chairman. I asked the
chief of staff of the PRC to
respond.
Mr. Cher, representative, no,
uh, this bill only affects
projects that are certified by
the Economic development
department as being uh certified
Economic Development potential
projects and uh it doesn't even
affect other generation builds
by the same utilities, so only
the projects that first go to
EDD EDD does their homework.
They send them to us, only that
small subset or.
Subset of projects would be
affected by this shortened
timeline. The rest of everything
else that's happening at the PRC
continues to happen as it is
right now.
Thank you, chair, and thank you
for that answer. I'd like to get
together with you later. We're
members of the PRC to um
understand why.
We crimped it down. I understand
the purpose of this bill.
But I'd like to see that change.
And um
In all processes.
To where we can um.
Move some things along.
Right now, we know that
This is a little off topic, so.
At some point in time, I'd like
to sit down and talk with the
PRC.
So with that, um, I didn't see.
A activation date chair, so I'm
assuming there's no emerg there
well, there is no emergency
clause on this, so it would go
into effect sometime in June, is
that correct? Uh, chair and
representative be the standard
process of 90 days after being
signed. Thank you.
Great. Uh, I don't see any other
questions. We'll ask for a
motion to uh do pass on Senate
Bill 170 as amended. OK, it's
been moved by Representative
Sanchez saying by Representative
Duncan. Is there any opposition
to that?
See that
We'll turn the senator.
Over to House Judiciary.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, you've been
very kind to me this year and I
really appreciate your time.
OK, uh, now we're gonna go to
Senate Bill 290 as amended.
Great. OK, Representative Han,
go ahead, uh, and Senate Bill
290 as amended. Thank you, um,
Mr. Chair, committee, um,
very simple bill in front of us
today, uh, since, uh, Senate
Finance Committee amended, uh,
to say the bill 290 increases
the marriage license fee to $55
with $35 of each fee collected
going to the county clerk
recording and filing fund and
$20 to the Children's Trust
Fund.
Um, Mr. Chair, with me, I have,
uh, my expert witness. This is
Catherine Clark. She's in Santa
Fe County clerk, and if she
wanted to um have any comments.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um, we
actually did some research to
see when the last time, uh, the,
the marriage license fee had
been increased, uh, and we could
not find a date, so it was well
before I or uh Madam Wuhan was
born. Um, the marriage license
fee has not gone up for quite
some time. This is an agreement
between ourselves, the clerk's
affiliate.
who have agreed to this, this is
a priority bill for them, as
well as advocates for the
Children's Fund. This is sort of
the agreed upon split of monies
that would go both to the uh the
children's fund and the clerk's
um filing fund. You may know
that we are charged with um
preserving many of the records
that are in our office, and the
thought was to increase our
ability to preserve those um
records, what we're seeing is
that currently, uh, what is
considered a permanent record is
microfiche, uh, and if you've
been in real estate as my mom
was an Fraser for a very long
time, uh, those microfis are
actually becoming very gummy
over time. So we are seeing an
increased need um to make sure
that we are uh historically
preserving a lot of the
permanent records in our office,
and this, the idea behind this
bill was to increase our fees so
that way we could enable us to
um preserve the historical
records that were charged with
preserving. Thank you, um.
Thank, thank you very much. OK.
Uh, we're gonna go ahead and
see, is there anybody here who
would like to speak on Senate
Bill 290 as amended.
Uh, is there anybody online? We
have 2. We'll first go to Joey
Dominguez. Joey, go ahead,
please.
Uh, good evening, Mr. Chair and
members, uh, thank you to
sponsor, uh, Senator Trujillo
and uh uh Representative Luhan
for presenting this and, um, uh,
you know, this effort is a
culmination of work, uh, by
county clerks for, for several
legislative sessions. This has
been brought before, um, the
legislature and, and this is the
last committee and I, I hope
that the, the body will support
this and, and move it forward to
the full house for a vote, but
um again, the $15.
will be allocated to the county
general fund, 20 goes to the
Children's Trust 1, 20, the
clerk fund, I think it's super
important to advocate for some
of the smaller and rural
counties, um, because of, uh,
the need for historical
preservation of documents and
the costs associated with
incorporating technology um into
the recording and filing
process. Um, so I, I, you know,
as chief deputy clerk of Sanwall
County, I, um, respectfully ask
for the committee's support uh
in this uh.
built before you tonight. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members.
OK, and now we're gonna conclude
with uh Rose Angela.
Did.
Good evening, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Rose Angel Ortiz, Chief Deputy
clerk in fantasy and also chair
of the clerk affiliate. Uh,
rarely do you have unanimous
support on anything, all 33
county clerks support this
legislation as well as the
Mexico counties.
Um, and yes, we urge you to
support a reasonable increase in
marriage license fees, and we
urge you to do a due pass on
290. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much.
OK, um, we're gonna go, I don't
see any other uh folks speaking,
uh, we're gonna go to Ereta
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
presenters. I have no problem
with you raising the fund. I, I
raising the fees, I just think
it all ought to go to the county
general fund.
And to the clerk's office. I
I just.
I just think we're, especially
our real poor counties really
need money, so I just don't know
why we're giving it to the
children's trust fund, I would
rather just go to the county and
the clerk's office to do all the
things you need to do. Thank
you, Miss, um, Mr. Chair, thank
you for that, that we're, we'll
respond to that, but um, um,
it's a good question, so I'm
gonna let my expert answer.
Um, this was a carefully
negotiated, uh, division uh
because the money has always
gone to the Children Fund
historically, and, uh, we, uh,
in order to make sure that all
of the stakeholders had a
portion of the increased fee.
This was sort of the agreed upon
division of uh between the
children's fund advocate, the
filing fees that the clerk uses
that is dedicated to uh
preserving historical records
and uh historically, some of the
money has also gone to the
general fund.
Mr. Speaker and um um
County clerk.
How, how much is in the
children's.
Madam, this isn't, this isn't
the, the big fun. This is the
little fun, right?
So
Right.
It's not that, I'm sure.
So right now,
Um, the total increase 120,
162.5 would be deposited into
the clerk's recording and filing
fund and
30, 32.5 1000 into the
Children's Trust Fund. So
there's, that's, that's what we
have in the FIR right now.
Sure.
Oh, well, Mr. Speaker, I mean,
I, I really think the counties
and especially poor rural
counties need this money more
than the children's trust fund.
I, I, I get that's maybe the way
you always did it, uh, but I
know my counties are really
struggling.
Yeah, Mr. Mr. Chair, um,
Representative, I, I, I hear you
concern and in raising the fees,
that's why we, we, uh, we had
the, the amendment in in this uh
Senate, but
That's why we need to raise the
fees and we feel like that was a
compromise and that will get us
to a lot of places, but if, if
Catherine like to add to that.
Um, we are late in the session,
so I believe that we are looking
for
uh just a reminder to go through
the chair Mr. Chair, madam, uh,
Um, Madam, we are looking for
concurrence, um, so we are late
in the session and this was sort
of the agreed upon, um, division
of the increased fees, um, Mr.
Chair, um, Madam Representative,
I'm sorry, I'm so used to
commission and um we, we feel
that because the stakeholders
were very interested in ensuring
that they had some increase.
This was, you know, we knew that
there would be some, how we
should
say jockeying for ensuring that
everyone has seen an increase as
part of this increase, um, this
was the um agreement between the
stakeholders for this particular
bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Did anybody else uh in the
Senate bring this, this is the
first time this has ever come
up.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, I'm not sure. I
just know that it was amended in
the Senate and so again, you
know, with regards to what the
affiliate, um.
Recommended or was part of the
conversation agreed upon, I
think this is where we're at.
And, and this is true, he uh
Senator Trujillo's bill, you're
just presenting it here, so you
wouldn't know the history well.
Um,
Mr. Chair, Madam, we did not see
this concern come up um in the
other committees that, that I
happen to sit in. Um, I don't
know if this question came
across.
But uh in Senate Finance, for
instance, this was not brought
up as a concern, Mr. Chair. Um,
Madam Representative.
Um
Well, Mr. Chair, I'm just gonna
make an amendment on the fly
here and, and you may not want
that, but I, I really think poor
counties are struggling for
money and and uh.
And if that's OK, I, I don't
have one already, but I would
just say that all of this money
should uh go to the uh county
clerk's office. thank you that
we're gonna go through the, the
rest of the questions we'll sort
of sort things out and make sure
uh that we, we get things
squared away, but thank you for
the good questions. Uh, next,
we're gonna go to vice chair
Dickson. Well, we have
representative Brown and then
represent Duncan Brown, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and,
um, good evening.
Uh, representative, I have a
note here in my book, uh, Mr.
Chairman, that the um
General appro appropriation Act,
in other words, House Bill 2,
however, it's modified, includes
a fund transfer of $6 million to
the Children's Trust Fund.
So it sounds to me like that's a
lot of money and um has been
spoken uh by another member this
evening, uh, this money would be
better spent probably at the
county level, um, and I'll just
comment, Mr. Chair, I believe
it.
This is not really the bill, but
as a matter of public policy,
maybe we shouldn't be charging
anything for a marriage license
and um let's encourage marriage
and families and uh find other
ways to fund the things here,
the technology needs, uh, it's
not that much money, um, I don't
think we could find ways to do
it, but for right now, I just
wanted to point out that the
Children's Trust Fund does have.
I don't know the actual balance
before this fund transfer, but
it sounds like they're doing
pretty well. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Brown. Next we
have Representative Duncan.
Mr Representative Brown, that's
my, that's my question. Got it.
OK. Uh, Representative down, go
ahead, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, and I, I
mean, I, there's a long history
to the children's Trust Fund,
and it certainly precedes our
billion dollar early childhood
fund, does it not?
And Mr. Chair, um, uh,
representative, I, I, I go by
what you know, your knowledge, I
don't know when it was started.
Well, this year representative,
I know when I, I mean, in '99
when I opened early childhood
center, the fund existed. It
gave little, little grants, but
what, what did you say the fund
balance is 66 million, 6 million
so hold on, let's, yeah, sorry,
um, we, no, no, not at all. So,
uh, there's a $6 million fund
transfer that's been included
this year.
Can we ask LFC to see if
there's, uh, if we have uh an
updated fund balance.
But
OK. So, uh, sort of preceding
this year's action, 4.2 million
with some of that encumbered.
What we're being told by the
budget director.
And Mr. Chair, I, I would, I
would say, uh, having more
detailed information on what,
you know, that that transfer
what it goes to it would be
helpful too in processing this
request, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
but they have.
Uh, yeah, so, um,
Yeah, we'll, we'll get an
updated out. I'm, I'm inclined
to go through additional
questions. I, I think without
Senator Trujillo here, I think
we probably just roll the bill,
we'll be able to prepare an
amendment if we need it. Um, are
there any other questions that
folks have? Yeah, please go
ahead and representative we're
going to roll this till tomorrow
morning. I'd like to know what
they're funding, like maybe the
last couple of years what
they've funded.
That
we can ask that offline that
will not be part of that
shouldn't be part of the, yeah,
but fair point, fair question.
We'll, we'll get as much detail
as we can,
um you want to continue with the
question so that when we come
back, we just see if there are
there any other questions from
members?
I don't see any, so we've
captured that. We'll be able, if
we could go ahead, thank you,
um, and we'll check in with
Senator Trujillo and then circle
back. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate the time.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Clerk.
Great. OK, now we're gonna go
ahead, uh, and go to um
committee substitute Senate
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 33, um, I think
that'll be representincent.
Great. OK. Uh, we're on.
Sent a bill 33 or Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 33, Represent Vincent,
please go ahead. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you committee.
If you would indulge me, Mister,
Mister Chair, my co-sponsor,
Senator Stephanics, lost her
brother and I just like for you
guys to keep her in your
prayers, and she's a good
co-sponsor.
Mister, Mister Chair, and uh
Members of the committee, this
is Senate Bill 33.
And uh what it does is it
creates a task force.
And we developed standards for
invincible space.
We do, we, uh, the development
of fire prepared standards for
certification certification
consists with national standards
set by the insurance Institute
for Business and Home Safety,
develop guidelines and
requirements for eligibility.
It also gives two types of
grants to political subdivisions
as well as property owners with
making the necessary changes to
structure and property, to make
them wildfire prepared.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I'll
stand for questions. Excellent,
thank you very much for my
awesome, awesome lady here that
I've been bragging on the state
forester, Laura McCarthy.
Excellent. Good to see you, uh,
Forrester, and thank you. I, we
know that a number of the crews
around the state are fighting
fires for the last week,
particularly after yesterday. So
thank you and thanks to them and
see the Homeland Security here
as well. Uh, is there anybody
who would like to speak on
Senate bill 33.
OK, please come on down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee to the sponsors in
the state forester, I'm Camilla
Feibelman with the Sierra Club's
Rio Grande chapter. And I just
want to name how incredibly
important this bill is. I had
never really understood the
connection between doing what
you need to prevent your house
from catching on fire and being
able to get insurance and
hearing about this bill and
learning about it has been.
Totally eye opening to me
because in addition to being
urgent for people, it is one of
the ways that we as a state are
absorbing the cost of climate
change to our state.
People set fires, nature sets
fires, but it's climate change
that puts all the power into it
and burns things too.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, Bernard Treat
with SPS OPO of XL Energy, um,
some of you in this room that
represent our service area the
last couple weeks have reserved
have received numerous emails
regarding public safety power
shutoffs proactive shutoff of
energy to lines that have a
potential of going.
down and creating more fires,
um, the utilities are doing a
lot of work in advance of these
situations and so all this work
goes hand in hand with those
efforts. Thank you very much for
your support. Great, thank you.
Good evening, uh, Mr. Chair and
committee members, some Oa
Chavez Ed for Native vote. We
believe this is a really good
bill in particular to help us
with climate change, and we urge
your support. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Sherroor of PNM.
SB 33 introduces a new
definition of incidental benefit
that prioritizes wildfire risk
reduction over benefit to
private landowners.
Additionally, it establishes a
value stream for tree clearing
byproducts, which could
potentially reduce overall
vegetation management and aligns
with the work already being done
within the P&M service
territory. We stand in support.
Thank you. Great. Thank you very
much. OK, we're gonna go online
to Kerry Robin Brinder. Go
ahead, Carrie.
Good evening, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, Carrie
Rain Bruder representing Lincoln
County. Again, this is one of
those bills that has been born
out of our lessons learned from
our catastrophic wildfires over
the last couple of years. We
think the sponsor, we thank you
for making considerations for
this bill in the budget as the
appropriators and we hope that
um it passes and we can do this
great work in all of our
communities across the state.
Thank you very much. We're gonna
go ahead and conclude with
Melissa Robertson.
Good evening, Mr. Chair and
representatives. My name is
Melissa Robertson. I'm the
property and casualty bureau
chief with OSI. We strongly
support SB 33 as it adds
additional expertise to the
existing task force and it
creates a healthy uh pathway to
assist New Mexicans with home
hardening within high wildfire
areas. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
OK, uh, I don't see any other
public comment. Are there any
questions from the committee?
Seean will go for a motion for a
do pass on Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 33, but moved by ranking
member Chatfield sang by
Representative Sanchez, any
opposition to that motion,
seeing none.
We've adopted that and then
represent Vincent, I think
you're gonna be there for
another one.
Um
This, this will be Saniel 31.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, another, another
really good bill. Uh, this is,
uh, Senator Campos's bill as
well as um representative
Sanchez and myself.
And I've got Ali right here from
Department of Homeland Security
and Emergency Management, and
what this bill is, if you
remember HB1 during the special.
This one was this one's way
better, cleaned up a lot of the
language in HB one, and what it
does is the spill creates two
new funds, the natural disaster
revolving fund, uh, it's a zero
interest loan, essentially
bridge the loan uh electric
cooperatives with political
subdivision for projects.
approved for funding by FEMA and
the Federal reimbursement
revolving fund, which oversees
reimbursement for disaster cause
claims.
And with that, Mr. Chair.
Stanford question. Great. Thank
you very much, uh, Sanchez,
anything to add? No, he, he
pretty much did a great job.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
and thank you both for bringing,
I know both communities, you
guys have seen very up close and
personal. Uh, is there anybody
here who would like to speak on
um
Senate bill 31.
Uh, OK. Uh, is there anybody
online?
Bill 31 is amended.
will go to Kerry Robin Bruder.
Good evening, Mr. Chair. Good
evening, Mr. Chairman again,
Carrie Robin Brunner with
Lincoln County. This bill is
really, really important. I
think that everybody knows why,
so we look forward to its
passage tonight. Thank you so
much.
Great, thank you very much.
OK, uh, we'll go back to the
committee noting that there was
$50 million or is it your
understanding that the Senate
Finance Committee substitute has
$50 million for this purpose.
150.
Uh
But yeah, let's have an
amendment, Mr. Chair.
OK. Uh, can we, thanks for
noting that, can we note the 232
number for that amendment,
Mister Chair, 0.2 32062.1. OK,
we've got that. Can we have a
motion in a second for
discussion? OK, it's been moved
by Chatfield, same by Duncan and
represent Dow, um.
can we go, a quick explanation
for the amendment.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, it was, uh,
discussed to move it down to 50
million, um, due to the budget
constraints is what I was
informed, um, and then there was
gonna be conversation next year
that we would come back to you
guys after showing um the
reasonableness and, and how well
we spent the money to ask for
more funding to be put into it.
Great
OK. Um,
Any questions on the amendment
itself.
OK, can I have a motion a second
to adopt the amendment, we'll go
back, OK.
OK and moved by Representative
Duncan.
Say by Representative Brown. I
do like auctions, but well that
um,
and of doubt and also Vedetta,
uh, in any opposition to
adopting the amendment. See
then.
Adopted the amendment. OK, uh,
Back to the bill we've already
had public comment. Any
questions on the bill? I've got
Representative Dixon, additional
questions?
OK, we're gonna go to the vice
chair for questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, Representatives for, uh,
bringing this bill. Um,
Am I correct that the loans can
go to political subdivisions and
uh electric cooperatives.
Mr. Chair, um vice vice chair
Dixon, yes, ma'am, that is
correct. So the reason behind
that is, um, co op specifically
so private nonprofit co-ops are
eligible underneath FEMA public
assistance to be able to receive
that funding. We are currently
seeing right now, uh, for
example, Maura San Miguel
Electric is extremely um tight
with cash, and they're not able
to get out there and be able to
perform their normal services,
so allowing them to be able to
tap into this not only keeps,
um, you know.
critical infrastructure online,
but it also allows them to be
able to mitigate any impacts
from power lines going down,
causing fires very similar to
what we had going on yesterday.
Thank you. Uh thank you, Mr.
Chair, um, and thank you. Um,
the, what are the um allowed
uses for the funds.
So, Mr. Chair, um, vice chair,
the, the only way that these
entities can be able to tap into
the funding is if they have a
FEMA project already written and
obligated. So it has to already
be pre-outlined, pre-described
what it's going for and know
fully well that it's a
reimbursable um aspect. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you. I
really appreciate that. So I
just want to clarify that um
these funds cannot be used uh by
a cooperative, um, if they are
sued.
For, uh, wildfires, um, this
money cannot go to that, Mister
Chair and Vice Chair, you are
100% correct. It has to go back
to their FEMA project. OK.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair.
That was it.
Great, thank you very much, uh,
representative Peter Group for
questions.
Uh
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representatives. Just to clarify
for me, um,
The floods are flood related
issues that are identified by
FEMA that has a project designed
and ready to go, who qualify for
this, so the routes will floods
and stuff like that would all.
Be part of this, correct? Mr.
Chair, Representative, yes sir,
you are correct, so any, um any
eligible entity that has a FEMA
project is able to apply for
these. So this will also mean
for future events, if we were to
get another FEMA declaration,
those communities can apply
towards that, that as well. So
we have about tenish counties
throughout the entire state who
have an open FEMA, um, projects
that have been written.
Mr. Chair with that answer, I
just for clarification.
So an open current FEMA project.
would be eligible for this. So
this is in effect, Mr. Chair and
Representatives.
Um
This is a retroactive bill.
Mr. Chair Representative, no, so
we are still currently writing
projects, so even on Hermit's
Peak Caf Canyon, those, those
communities are still having
projects being written to date.
Um, so they can apply, so as
that project has been written
and obligated, they can apply
into this loan and receive
funding in order to execute
those projects.
I didn't think we were gonna,
this was gonna be a multiple
question deal, Mr. Chair, but.
I just want to clarify and
understand the this doesn't have
a date on it that I saw.
I just want so I would say that
90 days after being cha
chaptered, it would go into
effect.
It's a project is approved.
Say next month.
But the spill doesn't go into
effect until June. Is that
approved project?
eligible for this.
So Mr. Chair Representatives, we
do still have other funds out
into the communities right now
that they're operating off of,
so they will exhaust those funds
before they'll be able to come.
To be able to tap into this
money.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you for
that answer.
It wasn't a direct answer,
though, I just want to make
sure.
If we have a project that's been
pre-approved.
Before the act of activation
date of this bill.
They could
Uh, you, you could use funding
inside of this towards a project
that's already been approved and
started.
Mr. Cherry represented
Pettigrew, so we are still
working on that 70 million that
we got during the
HB1.
Sorry about that. God bless you.
So, uh, we're still working on
that 70 million and uh there was
some language that when we put
it in there, it didn't cover
categories A and B.
This cleans it all up. We're
still running on that money. So
whenever you write a, a project
worksheet through FEMA, it's got
to be approved. It don't get,
you know how FEMA works, it
don't get approved very fast, so
a lot of these uh political
subdivisions have their their
stuff in, but they're just
waiting for it to get approved
once it gets approved, if this,
if this goes through, once it
goes through, it won't be
retroactive. So they've got a
bunch of the projects in Q and
it might.
take, might take 3 months.
get them approved.
Mr. Chair and Representative, I
appreciate the answer. I very
familiar with the FEMA process.
I'm just in, and I'm not in
debate over whether this is a
good bill or a bad bill. I'm
just trying to understand the
extent and the capacity and
capability of the bill.
So, Mr. Chair, I appreciate
that. I think I'm gonna have
more questions for you
afterwards.
Yeah
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Pettigrew, uh,
Representative Verrero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representatives, uh, and
experts for uh this bill.
So I'm curious if you have a lot
of my areas are unincorporated
areas. So if the county would
declare a disaster.
Are, uh, you know, and the
county has the authority to do
that. The county declares it
then then communities in this
that are unincorporated could
get these funds through the
county to restore these uh
Disasters. Is that correct? So,
Mr. Chair Representative, the
only way that they would be able
to get this funds is if it
became a federally declared
disaster.
Yes, ma'am. So it has to be
federally declared for them to
be able to, they need the
funding up front in order to get
the work done. What we do have
though is a state disaster
program that does that mirrors
the FEMA disaster. It just
doesn't require them to hit as
many thresholds or as as big of
an impact, they can still tap
into that funding.
But this bill would not apply to
that. It only applies for
federal dollars. Uh, thank you,
Mr. Chair.
So, so can I ask you, so how
much is in that fund?
Mr. Chair, Representative, are
you talking about the state
fund,
so that is obligated underneath
executive orders, so when a
disaster occurs, the county
declares then the state will
then authorize executive orders.
For the county to be able to to
operate off of and receive
reimbursement on, and we sure
that will be a no interest loan
too.
Mr. Chair Representative, yes,
ma'am.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much for
representingetta. I don't see.
OK, Representative Hernandez,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, September of
last year, uh, Navajo Nation,
uh, received federal, um,
Um, uh, the, the, there was a
flood that took place in my
community of Shiprock, 40
families who were homeless
because of this flood. Now with
the nation applied for federal
disaster. They received the the
federal disaster should this
happen again, could the local
tribal government applied for
this and uh would that be
eligible entity, Mr. Chairman or
representative?
So, Mr. Chair um representative
is actually a really great
question and one I, I'd probably
love to work with you guys
better on the reason why it gets
really convoluted and and you
know this is because the Navajo
Nation is split across two
states. It is also split across
two FEMA areas. So typically
Navajo Nation chooses to go with
FEMA Region 9, which is Arizona,
Colorado, Utah, that area. So I
don't have any oversight of
their FEMA project, so I don't
know what gets
obligated. I can't see how much
money they get obligated, which
is a key component of this this
bill. I have to be able to see
it. I have to check progress.
Um, now, if they choose to file
with FEMA Region 6 to where I
can see all of that, um, they
would be ineligible entity for
this project.
I know it's, it's really
complicated for your area, and I
do apologize, but, um, but yeah,
and we do, we're in constant
contact with them. I actually
just met their new emergency
manager, um, great, fantastic,
and so we're having those
conversations with her.
That Chairman, that concludes my
question.
Thank you very much, Russ
Fernan, it's a great question.
OK, um, we now go for the motion
on uh Senate Bill 31 as amended.
OK. It's uh representative Lohan
saying by ranking member
Chatfield, any opposition to
this, Singan.
OK.
Uh, we're gonna go ahead and uh
ask for Representative Garrett
to go up for 2 bills, 133 and
343.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee.
Uh, the first bill is Senate
Bill 133 as amended. Educational
retirees returning to work.
Uh, this bill does two things.
It increases the salary that a
retired member may earn, uh,
without the suspension of the
retirement. This is for a 0.25
full time, it raises it.
Excuse me, I'm out of breath.
From 15,000.
2, I think 25,000. And the
second thing it does, uh, for
retired member that's out for 90
days and returns it used to be,
you could only return for 36
months.
Now it is 60 months, and if you
were here 3 years ago, we heard
this bill at 2:30 in the
morning.
And with that, I sent for
questions.
Is there anybody who'd like to
speak on Senate Bill 133 as
amended.
Thank you.
Hey, is there anybody online?
Hey, I don't see anybody online.
We'll go to the committee for
any questions.
Any questions from the
committee?
OK. We'll go for the motion.
OK, we've got a motion, uh.
Tagging from Representative
Vincent I do pass on Deville 133
as amended. Is there any
opposition to that? Say none.
OK, and now we're gonna go to
Senate Bill 343.
OK, Senate Bill 343 is teachers'
salary rates charging changes.
This applies to um vocational ed
teachers. Um, most of the
vocational ed teachers are paid
actually above the current
minimums in some jurisdictions,
some districts, this hasn't
happened. So if on page 3, it
ensures that a level 1 teacher,
it's the current minimum, page
5, level 2 gets the current.
Minimum of page 7, the level 3
gets uh the current uh current
minimum, which, you know,
currently is 50, 60, 70,000, it
would go up to 55, 65, 75,000,
and then there's one change on
page 7, just updating K5 to K12
plus, and with that I stand for
questions. Excellent. Thank you
very much. Uh, is there anybody,
uh, who wishes to speak on Cenel
34.
free.
OK, let's see, we have this, uh,
anybody, nobody online, any
questions from the committee?
Go ahead, please.
So, um, Mr. Chair and Madam
Presenter uh a year ago, so when
we gave teacher raises, uh, what
happened is there ended up not
being enough funding in the, in
our budget to take care of all
of the teachers and all of the
schools. So with respect to this
small increase that you are
asking for.
Will the funding be sufficient?
Yes, and, and Mr. Chair and, and
Representative, this address is
specifically vocational teachers
in most jurisdictions, they're
making up to 10,000 more than
the minimum, but in some
districts they were making less.
So this just ensures that
everybody's getting at least the
minimum amount for their level
focuses on vocational teachers.
I go back to my question, is
there enough funding to make
sure they get even the minimum.
Yes, Mr. Chair, thanks to the
latest Senate additions to the
budget there is.
Thank you very much,
Representative Hendon. Uh, we'll
go to Representative Baca for
the motion.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, I move a
do pass.
OK, it's been moved by
representative Baca, saying by
Representative Luhan.
Uh, any opposition to that
motion.
OK, I don't see any.
Thank you very much,
Representative Garrett. Thank
you.
OK, uh, committee, we've got
Senate Bill 142, um,
Excuse me, they continue to be
some questions with this. We
don't have, uh, and I think,
yeah, there continue to be some
questions with this, uh, we're
gonna, um, roll this until
tomorrow. Uh, it's also very
late. We do want to be back
here, uh, we'll have everybody
back at 10 to talk about the
Senate Finance Committee
substitute for House Bill 2 and
3. I appreciate everybody's time
tonight. Hope everybody has a
good evening. We'll see folks
soon. We're a drink.
1.
a.m. tomorrow morning.
