To consider.
I meant thank you Do a
I moved the amendment 0.2284 to
9.1.
Okay. So once everyone has their
copy and confirms that they have
the correct
Ah!
2 to 8 number.
And representative Chatfield.
Okay, You're getting a copy as
well. Okay?
Perfect.
Okay. All right. So once again,
0.2284 to 9.1.
Madam Chair? Yes. Okay, So we
have a motion. Um
To, uh, sorry for discussion.
Thank you.
Wonderful. So representative
Figueroa moved the amendment for
discussion. It was seconded by
representative Garrett. Do we
have, uh, discussion on the
amendment? Representative
Garcia? Thank you, Madam Chair
on this amendment. What do they
mean by creating a temporary
program? What is? Can you
explain that
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I
would let my expert witness
answer that.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative. I believe the
intent of that wording is
because this is only for a two
year period. If you know in the
bill is for you speak up a
little bit.
I believe that is because of the
intent of this bill is only for
an appropriation to last through
25, 2025 and 2026. Thereby it
becomes a temporary program, not
ongoing.
Thank you for that. What happens
after that point
What? What? What? Where does
this program go to what is
supposed to do so?
Madam chair or vice chair and
representative. The intent of
this program is to provide a
bridge until Senate Bill 17
kicks in the effects of Senate
Bill 17 will benefit all of the
hospitals, including these
hospitals.
From the time that the federal
government approves that
program moving forward. The
intent of this bill is to
provide support to our rural
small independent hospitals
until that kicks in so that
Senate Bill 17 is the long term
solution. This is the gap.
Thank you. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Representative Herndon, Madam
chair just for my own
understanding with respect to
protocol for this bill, so we
have the Senate amendment. I
mean, the Senate Committee
substitute which was amended and
now we are amending it again, so
that when we pass it, it's gonna
say twice amended, so both of
these will go to the floor so
that everyone knows that both
amendments are intended to be
there is that correct?
Ah, yes, That is correct. It
will be um Senate Finance
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 161 as twice amended once
we adopt the Second Amendment.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, any other questions on the
amendment?
Do we have a motion to adopt?
The amendment moved to adopt the
amendment.
Great, So we have a motion by
representative Figueroa, a
second by representative Garcia
and Luhan Any objection to
abduct to adopting the
amendment.
Okay, seeing none.
Great. We now have a
Committee substitute for Senate
Bill 161 twice amended, Okay,
are we
Yeah.
Okay. Do we have is there
discussion on the bill? Or are
we done with Madam Chair? I move
a do pass on the Senate Finance
Committee. Substitute for Senate
Bill 161 is twice a minute.
Great, um so motion made by
representative Armstrong and we
got our seconds. Alright?
Is. Is there any objection?
To a do pass.
Seeing none.
Do you have to pass?
Thank you, Master. Okay, room?
Yeah, we're done. Right, Madam
Chair tonight is, um,
Representative, Representative
Chatfield. Are you going to
carry this on the floor?
Excuse me. Are you carrying this
on the floor?
Uh, ma'am, Tara, I really don't
know. I was sitting quietly in
my chair and I got a text.
That's to me to put this bill
on. I will do whatever I'm told.
Um, Madam shirt. I just want to
advise you to keep copies of all
the amendments members. We are
do that KFC members could stick
around, please. We are going to
have a briefing by our chief of
staff.
But, uh
Mr. May. Do you have a
Do you know if we need to be
online Webcast?
We can be online, but
Yeah.
Okay. Okay. Either way, is fine.
Yeah, I mean,
We can go ahead and, um, go
ahead and leave us on. Um we'll
be on webcast just for full
transparency. Um
And we're not taking public
comment because members Mystic
Petty is going to provide us
with an overview. Um, a summary
of the changes that have been
made in the Senate to House Bill
two.
Go ahead. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Members. Um
So you should all have a list of
bullets like this before you.
This is just a very high level
summary of the changes that
Senate Finance Committee made.
This is the first time that
we're doing this sort of
briefing for members on what
came over from the Senate, so
we're not reviewing house Bill
two again, but we did want to
kind of put on your radar. Some
of the changes that you'll see
in, um House Bill two as amended
by the Senate.
So I again I'll just go over a
really high level points. It
shouldn't take very long. And if
you have specific questions, I
might know the answer. But I
will definitely get back to you.
If not
So for recurring, um, the
The Senate didn't change too
much in recurring. I guess I
should say net they didn't spend
too much in recurring, the
Senate added an additional about
30.
$1 million 31.5 million dollars
to Section four. That's the
recurring budget, so that leaves
the total overall with what you
all did, and house preparations
and finance and what the Senate
did Total General fund increased
year over year to 6.8%.
There is a little, uh, there is
kind of a reduction and increase
going on, so I'll go over that.
The Senate Finance Committee
reduced compensation by 1% for
both state employees and public
school support. So that saved
them essentially about 53 7
million and then they spent, um,
they spent about 2020 million
getting them to the 30. So what
the compensation reduction but
essentially is 4.14 $0.1 million
to raise snap benefits.
Ah $6.1 Million in recurring
general fund revenue for rural
healthcare rates.
Uh, 7 million for the new
healthcare authority, mostly for
administrative costs. Um, 10
million to, uh oh, my goodness.
Public Education Department for
SCG Reforms, 10 million to the
Department of Public Safety for
a law enforcement officer Pay
plan 4 million to AOC to raise
compensation for judges that's
attached to some legislation.
Um and then 2.2 million to the
Environment Department for
personnel services that employee
benefits and then 20 million
recurring to the public
Education Department for
Universal Free Meals. You'll
remember that HFC did that as
one time money this Senate took
away that one time one time
money and funded everything
recurring.
For non recurring I'll just hit
some highlights, but, um, if
you'd like a more extensive
list, we can make that available
for you as well.
The Senate added about $400
million in general fund non
recurring revenue, our
expenditures and that includes 5
million for food banks. I know
that was a top priority for this
committee. 3.5 million
additional General fund Revenue
for DPS for law enforcement
vehicles. 20 million additional
General fund revenue to the
Firefighter recruitment fund.
25 million for law enforcement
recruitment.
9.9 million to address the
universal free school meals,
shortfall that should make the
public education Department
completely hold for this year
for anything they were lacking
for that program.
Um, 15 Million for structure
literacy at Public Education
Department and that's another
one Where you all in a gfci
invested about half of the
request from the Public
Education Department and the
Senate came in and funded the
other half of that.
An additional 15 million for out
of school time learning
opportunities. And then there
was a total of 12.5 million for
the U. N. M School of Public
Health that was spread over
three years to help them with
some operational concerns. I
know that many had flagged that
as well.
Um, another one that they added,
was 4.4 million. In addition to
the 1 million, you all added for
cause I guess that will be
especially important this year
as we ask our cogs to do a lot
more work with the growth
funding. Um, so that will help
them build that capacity.
Which leads us right into the
biggest spend on the Senate side
was, they added in that $100
million for the legislative grow
ads, so I know you all haven't
seen your projects in a junior
bill like you have in years
before, But if you look at the
Senate finance Amendments to
house built to those projects
are all included in there now.
Finally, they added $50 million
for the water Trust fund. Um
70 million to the Department of
Transportation That's on top of
the 150 million. You all added
in HFC an additional 25 million
to the New Mexico Match fund,
bringing that total up to 75
million.
And then 50 million, um, for
subsidies to healthcare
facilities attached to Senate
Bill 161, which you all just
passed. There was some small
language changes. A couple
contingencies were removed. Um,
the total of those contingencies
is less than $5 million. I can
get you a list. There were both
Senate and house contingencies
that, um, weren't substantive
long that we're probably not
going to get through this
legislature. So
HDFC and SFC came to an
agreement on those
There was also a couple of re
authorizations from previous
years that, um allocated re
allocated on spending funds at
the FAA. Those were all agreed
to by the executive. That's all
that I'm sure
Thank you, Um, some questions
from folks representative Luhan,
then Representative Brown. Thank
you. Thank you, Manager. Um so
regarding the language. Um, the
last point there
Um we authorization of several
appropriations from period
including reallocating unspent
funds that do you have to
towards priority project? How
much was that?
Madam Chair, representative
Luhan. That's a great question.
so the total should be around
$20 million. The original
appropriations that were re
allocated was around $20 million
again that was done in
consultation with the executive.
Um and we're confirming those
numbers. I can get them to you
as soon as they're confirmed
Violence C and D F A and two and
also the projects that they will
be going towards
Uh, Madam Chair, Madam Chair,
representative Luhan. I believe
they're going to priority tribal
capital outlay projects, but I
can confirm that for you as
well. Great. Thank you.
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Amanda
always have questions about
transportation funding. It's
today is no different.
So, it says Here, there's 70
million in additional general
fund revenue for the Department
of Transportation.
Um, It's my understanding,
Madame Chair and Manda that, um,
the Senate Finance Committee
struck 150 million that we had
arranged for in our committee.
So can you confirm or deny that
for us, please, Madam Chair
Madam Chair Representative
Brown. Yes And no. They did some
rearranging. So, essentially,
What happened? Is they did we
sent over $150 Million with
pretty broad language. Um, what
they did was they kept $120
million with that same broad
language that you all sent over
And then they re allocated all
to Doughty. Um, I believe there
was
10 million for rural Air
service.
Ah 10 Million for
beautification and 5 million to
the wildlife crossings. Um And
then they added the additional
70. So the total General fund
appropriation going to dot is
about 220,000,120 million has
the same language that you all
sent over. Um and then other
things were sort of re allocated
their chair and Amanda. I heard
representative Hawkman V. Hill
say on the house for this
afternoon.
That somehow 450 million had
been gathered together for
transportation.
I don't know where that all that
money is. Can you solve that
mystery for us, please? I'm sure
Madam Chair Representative
Brown. I can try. I think that's
a mystery. That's a little bit
still an influx. Um, From what?
I'm aware of the conversation
has been to use
STV notes so very, very short
term debt that functions
essentially the same way as cash
to add an additional around 300
million for transportation that
would be able to be used
flexibly this year, Just as
General fund would I believe we
have quite a bit of consensus on
that plan, and I think, um, the
Senate is working to perhaps put
that in the capital Bill.
Okay, um, mentor that that that
sounds like a pretty good way of
solving the mystery.
We did have, um Yeah, I saw that
we had sent, um Senate Bill 300.
Um, that
Was a lot of chances. It was
bonding. It was two sections of
the bill that dealt with two
different ways of getting the
money.
And that Bill has not been heard
in house transportation and we
have finished for the session.
So I guess A lot of this is
still being worked out on the
Senate side. And I guess we'll
see a bill. Come over. Is that
right? And sure, Madam Chair
representative Brown. That is
correct. I believe there were
some concerns with your exactly
right. There were two mechanisms
and Senate Bill 300 the short
term notes, which is what I just
talked about, and then the
actual bonding against the road
fund. I think there was some
pretty serious concerns against
the
Road funds ability to pay back
that debt service. So I believe
the Senate is working out how to
get more capacity to
To meet the O. T s needs in
those short term bonds that we
know we won't have to pay the
same debt service on amateur.
It's getting exciting, and I
guess we'll just stay tuned and
see what what we end up with. So
thank you.
Thank you, representative Brown
representative Figueroa.
Thank you. Um, thanks, Amanda,
And we're not formal, so I don't
have to stay, Madam chair,
right?
Um, the 10 million per scg
reforms. What reforms? Madam
Chair, Representative Figueroa.
I'll have to get some more
information for you. My
understanding is that that was
in line with what L E. S C had
originally recommended, so they
used the exact LSC
recommendation. Um, but I can
confirm for you.
Okay. Thank you. Page 98 of our
House Bill two.
Um
And what's online for the Senate
version indicates that they
raised DD Weber.
They raised rates for providers
by 8 million more than we did.
We had 11 million in there. They
have 20.
We had 11.5, Um
Where did that money come from?
Madam Chair representative for
Figueroa. That's correct. That's
another area to answer. One
question. The money came from
the general fund, but that's
another area where you all in
HFC essentially met half of the
department's request. And then
the Senate came in and filled
some of that extra request, And
I believe that gets them pretty
close to their original request
for provider rates.
Okay, so
We were assuming they were
probably going to do that.
Okay. Page 176 has language that
the Senate version struck.
That the public Education
Department shall not approve the
operating budget of any school
district or charter school to
operate a four day school week.
No still in there? Yes, Madam
Chair moved. That's exactly
right. Madam Chair
Representative Figueroa. Rick
may, um so the House floor
amendment for that put it in the
program description.
Technically, the language has to
be below the appropriation for
it to apply to the money, So all
it does is it puts it below the
money. You can see it right
there after the appropriations.
Um, it's still in there.
Thank you, Amanda. I'm looking
at the old one. The new one was
online. So I appreciate that.
Um and down under non recurring
25 million for law enforcement
recruitment is that
Now Item 42 and Section five.
Is that where that is, because
there's no contingent
legislation and I'm wondering
Or maybe it's somewhere else but
42 section five has 25 million
for grants, and I don't know
what legislation outlines the
grant program.
Mm.
Madam Chair, representative
Figueroa. You're talking about
the law enforcement one.
Correct. I am not sure because
it's
I'm looking at my notes, and I'm
not looking at that one. So if
you look at the Senate version
in Section five item 42.
Where's the legislation for
that?
So, um, Amanda Representative
Figueroa. So if it's the 25
million for law enforcement
recruitment in the past several
years that has gone directly to
D F A to administer.
So it doesn't need language and
that was existing. Yeah, but I'm
not sure that's what it is
because my notes are unclear.
Yeah. So you said item number
42, right? Yes. So that's
exactly right. This is for law
enforcement. It's two d f A.
That was legislation. You all
passed through the body. I think
two years ago, so you don't need
contingency language because
it's an existing fund. Okay? And
the last thing I was gonna note
for representative Garcia was
there's a 500 K increase for bet
veterans services. I knew you
would appreciate that.
Representative. That's correct,
Madam Chair, representative
Figueroa. Um, I know for both
representatives Brown and
representative Garcia. You all
emphasize that you had hoped
that Veterans Services
department would come out of
this committee higher. We did
convey that to Senate finance,
and they did make good on that,
and it was increased. I should
have mentioned that.
All right, Representative
Armstrong and then
representative Herndon. Thank
you, Madam chair. Thank you,
Amanda for doing this. This this
is helpful where we can ask
questions. So what did the
reserves end up at?
Madam Chair, representative
Armstrong. That's a great
question. Um, the final general
fund. Financial summary shows
reserves that 31% from what the
Senate came out as I know there
might be some different numbers
floating around. Um, there was
some confusion about the the
original Gff s that was
published online.
Had the tobacco number. You all
remember this morning on the
floor, You said tobacco will not
be counted as a reserve. But you
all made sure in house but 196
that the corpus of the trust
fund for the grow the government
Results and Opportunity Fund
would be a reserve. So all
that's to say when you account
for those changes reserves
coming out of the Senate or at
31%.
Thank you for that. And what
would it be not counting.
The 196 and, uh, Amanda Director
Sally is here as well. If you'd
like assistance on that one.
They would be at about 26.
Okay. Thank you for that. And
then, um, Amanda on the 6.1
Million for rural healthcare
rate increases.
It. What is that?
You may have already explained
it. But can you tell me what it
actually is?
That's supplementing what was in
the HFC and LFC recommendation
for the rural hospitals. 20
smallest.
Okay. Perfect. Thank you. And
then, um am I correct in
thinking that when we did the
grow money, and we, uh
Allocated through the cogs.
Aren't the cogs allowed to
charge a percentage to manage
that money, Or is this money
that's in here?
Giving them the money. I just
want to make sure when we're
when they're doing those
projects if they're supposed to
be taking a percentage, or if
this is the part of their
percentage, they shouldn't be
taking a percentage because that
was the purpose of the direct
appropriations. Okay, thank you.
So we can all be watching for
that. When our
Projects don't get vetoed.
Um
And that was all my questions.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you. Ranking member
representative Herndon and then
representative Garrett and
Chatfield. Thank thank you,
Madam Chair, and, uh
Presenters. My question to you
is if I'm looking at the reduced
compensation by 1%.
To public schools and to all
state employees. We've received
lots and lots of questions about
this. What percentage now Our
employee is going to be getting
in terms of a race. Madam Chair,
representative Herndon 3%.
Um, could you I'm sorry. Just go
ahead and give us the once over
on that again.
So the HFC and LFC
recommendation was a 4%
compensation package that was
reduced to 3%.
For all public employees,
including education, higher
education, state agencies and
then the state Police have their
own separate.
Pay plan In addition to the 3%
Mhm and, um
And just to note that's a
fabulous question, because we've
certainly gotten a ton of emails
on that. And I appreciate sort
of the breakdown. Amanda, um,
highlighting where those funds
went to so that we can reference
that sort of the trade off. So
thank you, Representative
Herndon, where you still
Yes, I do so in terms of the 3%
in higher education, Madam chair
and presenters does that include
the medical residents?
This time.
Mr Chairman. That was a separate
appropriation from this
compensation and and madams here
in present as if we go back to
the 6.1 million for rule.
Uh, healthcare rate increases
just to reiterate is that for
doctors
That is for hospitals. So, um,
Madam Chair and Mr Sully, How
does that interact with with
Senate Bill?
Substitute 161 that we just
passed his head headed to the
floor. Is this a duplication?
That is one time funding for the
hospitals to help shore up the
very smallest rural hospitals.
This is for the smallest 22.
There's a another subset like
you know, in Union County as an
example and out in Gallup that
where they've got significant
Um, fiscal challenges that
That bill is intended to help
shore up
On a non recurring basis, and
these would be recurring.
Rate increases going forward
would also be helped by the
hospital.
Um
Rate and rate increase bill as
well.
So significant resources being
Put in rural hospitals to shore
up the health, Madam chair and
Mr Silly just for my own
understanding the rural
hospitals and let's take the
Gallup, for example, they will
get the benefit of what we did
in 161, plus some additional
amounts from this 6.1 million.
Is that correct? That's correct.
And then, um
Mr Madam Chair and Mr silly if
we go back, and we're looking at
The amount of money that was
available for
For vehicles for our
For state Police Vehicles House
Did half of the governor's
request for those in the Senate
to the other half.
Okay, so I just want to display
clarifications. So there was
there was also
Requests for growth funding. So
that's in addition to what
they're going to receive. Is
that correct? So they will get
more members gave
State police.
Make money for vehicles that
would be in addition to this,
Okay. Most of it we saw was for
local law.
Local law enforcement, Mr Chair,
not the state police. That's
what we saw in
What was submitted and then one
last clarification on the on the
The bill that we will be
receiving it. I don't know if
you can answer this or not, but
we will see Eve.
The allocation of these funds,
for example, on the recurring
funds that are shown on this
list, where they actually were
additional funding was actually
placed in the programs.
Madam Chair, representative
Herndon. That information is all
available online. Lfc published
their documents for this, and I
can make sure to print that for
you.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Um
Representative Garrett,
Chatfield, and then Garcia.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you both.
On the 3%. So that's all
educating all educator,
employees and all state
employees are getting the 3%. Is
that correct? Yes, across the
board.
Okay, Um
In the case of educators, we
have the, um
The fun, the gate friend.
I wish there can be
differentials for special ed and
hard to feel.
Positions so that could augment
some of that. Is that correct?
That's correct.
Okay. And then I understand
there's 10 million
Going to districts That's just
discretionary. Is that correct?
additional 10 Million for a
total of 30 million
That is in the SCG for a variety
of reforms that you've been
funding below the line.
everything from CTE community
schools.
The structure, literacy,
professional development
training, the districts would
have a choice on how to which
ones of those initiatives are
all of them to spend that 30
million
Okay, That's on top of money
that you put in to the base
that's laid out in Section four,
so that's new money.
Thank you.
And then my other question,
Madam Chair is Senate Bill 159
was the college trust fund.
And it was almost a billion
dollars. What? Where's that
coming from? I mean, the
governor has to sign it, but
How would that affect our
reserves?
Or would it
The
Um
You accounted for that in your
financial plan.
Um, and that came from a
transfer from the Tax
Stabilization reserve, and there
are just seeing the benefits in
this budget.
Of, um, the shortfalls that
opportunity scholarship.
Um has for this year and the
growth because of enrollment for
next year are being funded from
the distribution.
Coming from that new trust fund
contingent on its enacted
And representative Garrett. I'll
just add. You won't see the
transfer in this legislation
because, like Charles said it
was in your financial plan, but
the transfer is from this year's
reserves. So you won't see it in
here, and that's why
Okay, but better sure, does not
affect the reserve.
Correct. Thank you.
Representatives, Garcia
Thank you, madam. Sure.
You know, it's concerning to me
and that deduction of 1% for
state employees.
You know, because
Everybody that works in the
state. My correct
Yes, representatives. Correct
people work on the highways and
you know for us to cut him.
Another percent.
It's not a very good gesture, I
think
You know, not that I know it is
what it is, but it's very
concerning that we're doing this
to these people and another
three older, that one going, um
Not the bottom machine 15
million for out of school time
learning. How do you divide that
between the tribes and everybody
in the state?
Mr Chairman, That would be a
grant program or districts would
apply.
Uh um.
To operate those programs.
About 8 million of it is
designated for high dosage
tutoring intervention. Thank you
for that, madam chair. How much
can they apply for a new grant?
I'm sorry. I didn't catch any of
that, Mister Journal. How much
can they apply for each grand?
Because 15 million, not a whole
bunch of money. You know, it's
not intended to be a statewide
program. Um, but it is a grant
program that supplement other
Um, money local districts have
and PD would set those
parameters in the grant. I think
that I got one more enough
question, madam. Sure.
On on the features is $20
million recurring funding for
public school.
Education Department for
Universal School Meals.
Then on the bottom. It's got
another 9.9 million for the same
thing for a shortfall. Can you
explain that briefly?
Correct. So the administrator
you've put into the base
recurring budget about 20
million forced school meals last
year last session.
The department indicated.
That they're running short by
another $20 million for the
current fiscal year. You put in
9 million. The, um
The Senate put in another 9
million to close that gap for
the current school year.
But if you've got a $20 million
shortfall this year
Then that means you've got a $20
million shortfall that you need
to fund next year. And so that's
what the $20 million additional
and recurring
Um, is that the Senate added
Thank you, madam. Pure on these
shortfalls in the school, make
up the difference because some
of these schools have a big
bankroll.
Can they put any money into
these problems that we're having
with schools?
They could.
But they won't well, Yeah, won't
but you know, that's that's um,
we need to look at the whole
program needs examination. This
intern Mr Chairman to understand
what it really costs to pay for
meals for kids that would
otherwise not qualify for the
free meals. And if we're paying
a premium for the higher quality
meals, but not getting the
higher quality meals that those
rates would support.
Thank you. Thank you, Manager.
Mr Chairman. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thanks, everybody. Thank
you. Director Sally 0% figured
out
Sorry for the second time.
Questions about 3.4 million per
salary Adjustments for graduate
medical residents.
Is that right?
What page? It's in the old one.
It was on page 91.
And they also went from 5
million to 11.25 million.
For the rural hospital payment
directed payment increases AM
looking at our old HB two and I
just wrote in the Senate
changes. So this the Senate
specify the amount for the
residency pay. Yes, we just said
it was right. Okay if the cost
is 3.4 million mhm
That is probably you need to
factor in the federal match.
So okay, sufficient money to be
able to do the compensation
increases when federal funds and
then increased from 5 million to
11.25.
The directed payment rate
increases to the 20 smallest
hospital. That's correct.
Representing Brown. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr
Chairman.
So this is the logistics
question When we go home when
we're finished with the session,
we go home and people say
What was the final result on the
budget?
The question I have is, do you
notify agencies or any
recipients of funding that
they're getting this funding? I
mean, I assume there's a way you
communicate.
And of course, the governor has
20 days to figure out if she's
well, whatever she's going to
do.
But when do we know?
People are receiving their
notifications. I guess that's my
question, Mr. Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair, Representative Brown all
at Charles. Take the bulk of
this, but that's a large part of
what his shop at lfc does. Um,
the departments will be tasked
with making an operating budget,
taking this new money into their
operations. And then Lfc and DFA
do a lot of follow up to ensure
that those funds are being
spent.
But if you're talking about a
local nonprofit
Provider in your community.
They may not know what's coming
down the pipe from a new grant
opportunity.
You need to coordinate with
folks if you funded something
through the grove
And how much is in and how it's
supposed to flow out.
Um, through either an agency or
through the cogs. Well, I know
we're going to have a lot of
questions. I think I think I
will. And I can say is
Wait until someone notified free
to reach out to
Me or my staff. Okay? Any time
or have your constituents reach
out to us? If they have any
questions, we'll be glad to help
them navigate that process.
Well, the work of the LFC has
never done it Looks like so
Thank you for all you do.
Well said Okay. Um, thank you,
Director Slee. Thank you, Amanda
members. This is the first time
to my knowledge that we've sort
of had this sort of summary and
thank you all. Thank you. Vice
chair Dixon for going through
with the questions oftentimes,
we, You know, I go over and
present our budget to sf two
Senate finance.
I think we're moving where we
have these sort of public
conversations. I want to just
say thanks very much for
presenting this for the diligent
work LSC work is never done in
this committee's work is almost
done, but not quite in. Want to
say thanks again.
Yes.
Please. I just gotta fix from
somebody from the screws to read
it briefly, okay?
He says. We work tirelessly
helping the communities in our
highways. Cost of living has
skyrocketed. Any help to help to
improve our income is a
blessing. Thank you.
Thank God the biggest you
Thank you very much.
Okay. There books Okay in rooms.
Rio four, the Senate version of
the budget. The book is in
there. If you all want to see
that.
If you want. Yeah.
