Look, this is not the last time.
This is a first look at the
special and supplemental
requests along with
informational uh technology
request. This will follow the
same format members with an LFC
uh presenter, and we have a
packet here. It's a
31 page or 32 page uh packet
that has, uh, will go line by
line through that with the LFC
and the DFA analyst. You'll
notice probably in great to see
so many members of the executive
who are here. If there's a need
for sort of brief clarification.
This is an opportunity. Now,
we'll be mindful and I'll be
mindful members in sort of all
of us, uh, we won't be able to
spend, you know, a long time on
each line because there's over
330 different items that are in
this.
Members of the big thing right
here that we want to hear from
you if there's a flag for more
resources if uh you have maybe a
little bit more question about
some of the details, which we
can also have sent to you
offline, uh, in the way that
we've traditionally, we've done
this is uh the um
Analysts will go through sort of
a page of items highlighting
some of the more important
items, maybe items with bigger
funding differences,
recommendations between the
executive and legislative,
there'll be a time where members
can then flag and then we'll
sort of go from there. Again,
just emphasizing that this is,
uh, this is not one and done. We
will see these again. This is
meant to be a first and
completely public look with the
entire committee so that we can.
go through the special
recommendations from the LFC and
the requests from the executive.
Following that, um,
Oh, and also, uh, a big thanks
to Director Sole
every single special item in
here will have been is included
on our agency difference
packets, those things at the
very end where it shows, was
this a LFC recommendation was in
an executive request sometimes
it's sort of the same on both
ends. So ultimately, all of
these will correspond back to
the different sheets with our
agencies. Following that, we
will have a state housing.
needs and proposals, uh, we see
members you have the um the
folks will be part of the panel
here and also in front of you.
Um, under that housing trust
fund update, we solicited
letters from different
communities around the state,
uh, to share their own housing
proposals, needs, and ideas. So
that's something that we'll go
into uh during that first look
at housing.
OK, with that, uh, we would ask,
uh, our, uh, Mr. Simons to come
on up.
Um,
And
We'll go ahead and get started.
Everybody has our, the specials
packet, again, the 32 page
packet, uh, that's the one that
will be starting from first.
Oh, excuse me.
Uh, can I ask our staff to call
the roll, please? I apologize.
Yeah.
Here.
Here.
Great members, we have a quorum.
uh, great to see you, Ms.
Dinsmore, Mr. Simons, go ahead
and take it away.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, um, my name is
Joseph Simon. I'm your analyst
with LFC and Mary Beth Dinsmore
with the Department of Finance
and Administration is here with
me. We're gonna go over, as the
chairman said, the packet that
looks like this, and I'll just
make a couple of brief opening
comments, noting uh some things
here on the cover sheet. So this
cover sheet kind of offers a
breakdown of the uh different
kinds of appropriations that are
all in the back of House Bill 2,
so you've got uh.
A section 5 here, which that is
typically for, um, items that
would be authorized for, uh, the
effectively the last quarter of
um FY 25, the current year, as
well as FY 26, you'll see on
some individual items, sometimes
that's restricted to FY 26 only,
or maybe it's authorized through
something like FY 27 or 28, uh,
but generally those are for the
uh the end of the current fiscal
year and the next fiscal year.
So your supplemental and def
ency appropriations in Section
6, those would be, uh, the
deficiency appropriations are
for prior years, an agency
overspent their budget, um, and
we'll note some of those
supplemental appropriations are
then for to finish out the
current year. Um, finally, you
see that third line that says
government results and
opportunity that, that's the
growth fund. And I'll just note
for you, um, that, uh, that
funding source is typically
given out over a 3 year period.
So the the appropriate
you see in there in the other
state funds column, those are
generally divided over 3 years.
So they seem maybe a little
bigger than um than some of the
other ones. Finally, you've got
the fund transfer, uh, or not
finally, but the fund transfer
line on, uh, in section 10,
that um that's not spending
authority, that's you moving
money from the general fund to
other state funds, and we'll
talk about some of those.
Finally, we've got section 11
down there for transportation.
Those items you typically
authorize for multiple.
years because it takes a little
bit to get those transportation
projects through the process.
And so I'll just note, uh, the
total general fund, uh,
recommendation from the
executive was 2.344 billion, uh,
while the LFC recommendation was
uh a little over $3 billion. One
thing to note in particular, if
you take a look at section 5, so
the special appropriations
typically, uh, for FY 26, uh,
the executive recommendation had
a total of 1.56 billion.
whereas the LFC recommendation
was 855 million. So, you know,
given the the fact that the LFC
recommendation is so much
higher, what makes up that
difference? I would just point
you down to the fund transfer
line and so a majority of the
LFC recommendation was in fund
transfers, and we'll go over the
specifics of those as we work
through the document. But with
those opening comments, I'll
just note one more thing real
quick. This is uh a little bit
tricky. Uh, these sheets are
always a little bit tricky
because the recommendations
don't always
perfectly aligned. And so
there's some things like, for
example, that the executive
recommended as a special
appropriation that the LFC
recommended as a grow
appropriation or as a fund
transfer, and we'll try to note
some of those as we go through,
but there's differences in
strategy a lot of times with how
these appropriations are made.
So what you see here is the
language from the uh LFC
recommendation, um, unless there
was no LSC recommendation and
the executive recommendation and
typically the section reflects
where the item was placed in the
LFC recommendation.
Um, I'll just note for, um,
members, or sorry, for for the
public and and others at home,
uh we have on our website a, um,
you know, an interactive
dashboard that allows people to
take a look at all of these
recommendations and uh by
agencies, so there's a little
drop down, they can see the
executive and LFC recommendation
and sort of uh get that
information that we're talking
about there on our website. And
so, uh, with that, unless, um,
uh, Miss Dinsmore has any
comments, I'll get started with.
the courts on page 2 of your
packet.
And actually I, um, so, uh, for
the courts on page 2 and on page
3 as well. You'll notice there's
a lot of uh smaller
appropriations, uh, a lot of the
in the executive
recommendations, particularly
for, um, sort of facilities,
projects, and I'll just note
that as with previous years, the
LFC recommendation has has taken
the strategy of combining those
into a single line item. So if
you look on line 14, you'll see
a $6 million appropriation to
AOC for facility upgrades at.
courts statewide. Uh, another
big item, uh, that, um, Miss
Dinsmore is probably gonna talk
about is online number 9 for um
for remote and hybrid judicial
proceedings. So, um, there's a
$5 million recommendation from
the executive. I'll just note,
uh, you all have, uh,
appropriated money for this
project in the past. We, um, we
think there's a little more than
$4 million balance in that's
uncommitted at this point about
4.6 million that's committed but
unspent in that.
appropriation, and the LFC
recommends, uh, a reauthorizing
that rather than, uh, including
a new appropriation. Um, Miss
Dinsmore, did you have anything
on the? Thanks, Joey. Um, good
morning or afternoon, Mr. Chair,
committee members. Um, I'll just
briefly, briefly expound on what
uh Joey just said. So you'll see
in the executive for the
judiciary, there's kind of a
combination of things, right?
There are some individual
amounts going to specific
counties or uh judicial.
districts, but we do the
executive does have, um, you
know, a couple of these lump
things sort of going to AOC and
then uh to be distributed
throughout the state, so the
biggest one for the executive is
the one that Joey just
mentioned. It's the judicial,
uh, the hybrid, uh, remote
judicial proceedings, so, um.
Uh, across the state, um, but
for the judiciary, I don't have
anything else, so if we can move
on. And Mr. Chairman, if you
just want to stop us, would you
want to go to questions or we
can just do it all however you
want to do. No, this is great.
Thanks for starting us off here.
I'll look briefly if we have any
questions on the judiciary from
members.
Uh, I don't see any, we'll keep
going, and again, members, if
you have questions, we'll ask
them here. If you have a
question, you wanna come back
to, we can ask that off, we can
go into it offline. Uh, so,
let's keep going.
So, um, my next items, uh, Mr.
Chair, are with the Department
of Finance and Administration
that begins on page 4, but I'm
actually gonna turn to page 5
and note on line number 45,
where we have a $75 million LFC
recommendation for the New
Mexico Match fund and a $110
million recommendation from the
executive. So that was a fund
you all created last year to
provide a source for local
governments or state agencies to
be able to go to to apply.
for uh matching funds to pull
down federal grant money. So,
uh, DFA has um has awarded a num
a number of contingent awards,
um, for that. So basically and
it can a contingent award
effectively means the local
government or the state agency
has to actually get the federal
grant before DFA gives them the,
the match portion of that. Um,
we have a couple of quick
questions there, uh, Verrera,
then Representative Sanchez. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Joey. I just want to say
I know that they uh had more
than 200 million in requests for
this match fund. So that was
federal money that came in,
needed a match, couldn't get
one, and um, and, uh, you know,
I think 75 is way too low. I, I
think 110 is way too low. I
mean, if we're well, who knows
what federal money we're gonna
get in, but if we get in federal
money, uh, and, and you have a
10% match. It, it's well worth
it in this budget to, I think,
up that amount because
That's just kind of how it works
and um and I think that's that
is really, we have evidence now,
that was the first year. That
was the first year that we had
that, and uh and um uh Wayne
testified that he had over 200
million in requests, so they
couldn't fund 100 million of
that, and that's, that's, that's
amazing money that we should
really capitalize on, so I just
want to say that Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
just had a quick question on
9:34. I know in the past we've
uh
Given the auditor a million
dollars to help Pasea's uh.
And others to uh.
catch up on their audience, uh,
I know that was highly
successful. I'm glad to see the
LFC recommended that again. Do
you guys have an idea, and if
you don't, I can get the answer
later. You know how much of the
million in the past they spent
to help us.
Um, so
Mr. I don't know if you want to
ask Mr. Chair and
Representative, I think our
staff can maybe look that up
real quick and we'll get you
that number. I can get that
later, Mr. Chair. Uh, that's
great. Thank you for that. Well,
we have a few different members,
ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, kudos on the.
On the small
Local public bodies uh audits,
that, that's something that's
been really needed. Uh, my
question is about the DFA
appropriation for a housing.
Down payment assistance program,
is that a grant? Is that a loan?
Is that a
What I know the DFA goes through
DFA but exactly what agency puts
that out and how do you pay it
back?
Uh, tell me a little bit about
that.
So, Mr. Chair, Representative
Chatfield, um, those are great
questions. There are people in
um the audience today who can
speak to that directly, I
believe, um, hopefully somebody
is coming up to do that. I don't
see any volunteers.
Um, I will, we'll follow up with
you if that's all right. Um, but
yeah, those were great
questions. We'll get you the
answers, I would just think
that, uh, a gift would violate
the added donation clause and uh
a loan would give you 2 house
payments instead of 1, which is
not easy because I've done it,
but very true, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you. Uh,
next we have Representative
Luhan and represent Pettigroup.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm
looking at line item 30 for the
first uh judicial district and
the diversion program for
$100,000. I want to thank Elsie
for putting it in there. I see
it on the executive side, um.
And my question is,
Is there in any way, um, I mean,
Uh, I, I appreciate it, but I
think it needs to be more, but
I, I'm wondering how we came to
that 100.
To.
Uh, so, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I don't have
detail on how we got that 100,
uh, we'll, we'll talk to our
staff.
Thank you. Uh, next, we have
Representative Pettigrew, then
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, sir. Thank you all
for the presentation. It looks
like tons of fun. Um.
share my first question in line
45, the Mexico Match fun. If I
understood the explanation with
respect to that.
This is money that can be
available if somebody achieves
or gets a federal grant.
So many of our federal grants,
Mister Chair, require.
Confirmation that there is a
match fund available. So how do
we work in reverse on that?
Thank you. So, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, my understanding
of sort of the order of
operations is the uh local
government or agency goes to DFA
says we want to, we want to
apply for this grant. Can you
give us a contingent award, that
means you will fund the match if
we get the federal grant.
Perfect. Chairman, the only
other question I have, and then
I have a request.
Any responses that we say,
Chairman, uh, Madam Kutcher,
the, the, um,
We can get to this later that
comes that answer that result
comes to the entire committee,
not just one.
And for that follow-up question,
uh, 38 and 39. I'd like some
detail on how that gets
implemented on the, on one on
birth certificates and ID cards
for people, uh, released from
Uh, from jail or incarcerated
people, and then how does that
tie in the 38 separately. And so
those can come back to, to the
group maybe as a separate
answer, but not something that
we need to spend time on. Thank
you.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Duncan, and then Representative
Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, that
was my question right there on
my item 39.
Excellent. Representative
Herndon, and Representative
Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Mr. Chair, you moved so quickly.
I just want to take you back to
page 3 right quick and actually
to line 19, we heard so many
conversations and testimony
about the importance of security
for our judges, and I see in
line 9:19, there is security for
the 2nd judicial district, the
largest district in the, in the
state, but there is nothing for
the LFC and that's something we
really need to flag.
And Mr. Chair and uh Joy, maybe
you can explain why they don't
have security. Yeah, um, Mr.
Chair Representative Herndon, so
the LFC took a strategy of
combining a lot of these smaller
requests into a single request
on, so you'll see, for example,
on line number 14 for
improvements, repair and
security infrastructure. Uh, so
a lot of these, um, these
smaller items to individual
courts were aggregated into that
$6 million appropriation.
on line number 14.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you very much. Thank you,
Representative Hernan.
Representative Brown, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, I'm
looking at 5.
Line 46. Thank you. And this is
regarding funding for civil
legal services for that fund.
It says up to $1 million may be
expended in fiscal year 2026,
any unextended balances
remaining at the end of fiscal
year 2026 shall not revert to
the general fund and may be
expended through fiscal year
2028.
So, Mr. Chairman, I see that the
executives executive is
proposing $860,000. Again,
there's a limit of spending up
to 1 million, um, LFC on the
other hand, is suggesting $4
million. So is the point of that
4 million to basically bank
money in future years, Mr.
Chair. Uh, so, Mr. Chair,
Representative Brown, uh, that's
correct. I'll just say this
isn't one of those tricky
situations where what you're
reading here.
is not fully reflect the
executive recommendation, as I
mentioned, this is the language
from the LFC recommendation, and
so the idea, as you mentioned,
was put, put some money in that
program and then spread it out
over multiple years, so up to 1
million can be could be expended
in fiscal year 26 with the
remainder for those future
years, um.
Uh, I will, I believe if if
memory serves, the agency
request was that 860,000, the
LFC funded it for multiple
years.
Thank you very much. And um, Mr.
Chairman, uh, and Joey, uh,
Mississer, can you tell us, is
there other money for civil
legal services anywhere in the
budget that you know of, and if
so, where is it and how much is
it, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, um,
I'm bringing up, uh, Nicole
Mascias and Alice in our office.
Thank you. um, Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, the civil legal
services, uh, budget is
currently in um DFA under the
special appropriation, so you'll
see that in the agency hearing,
um, the executive did fully fund
the uh civil
Legal Service's requests in the
recurring budget, um, and
effectively supported the
agency's request as well for the
specials, um, and I know that
LFC is a little bit higher in
the specials, so there you go.
Thank you.
Thank you for that. And Mr.
Chairman, I ask these questions
not uh opposed to the funding
for CLS in a long-term proponent
of funding for legal services,
so, um, we'll see where this
ends up, but thank you for the
answers, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Brown. And as a flat, I would
add there um Mr. Simons, maybe
we can look at this, this is an
important thing for members of
this committee, having the
flexibility that is but in
having sufficient funding and so
this may be a
a place where a little bit more
goes a long way, uh, based upon
the committee's guidance.
Um, and let's, and let's go
forward from here unless, OK,
great. So let's keep on
trucking, uh, back to you,
whoever wants to continue it.
Uh, so, um, Mr. Chair, just very
briefly to Representative
Sanchez, we got the number on
that spending from the auditors,
$1 million as of now, it's about
800,000.
OK, uh, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, um, I just wanna
call your attention to a couple
items on page 5, and I, I wanted
to note something that I, I
should have mentioned earlier.
The lines 42 and 43, which are
the, um, it's the housing a down
payment assistance program and
the homelessness programs and
initiatives for 50 million each,
um, you all will be hearing, uh,
I believe a housing
presentation, um, after hearing
all of the non-recurring today.
So I
I just wanted to make sure
you're all aware, they will have
lots of information for you, and
you can follow up with specific
questions to them. Um, in
About an hour, I suppose.
um, that is all I have for page
5,
I will just start real quickly
on on page 6, there's just a
couple of things that I'll, I'll
bring to your attention.
Line 59.
is 2.5 million for grants
awarded under the Crime
Reduction Grant Act, and that
goes to the sentencing
commission. I believe this is
one of those um appropriation
recommendations that is also in
the LFC, but in a slightly
different location. So just uh.
You will see as, as we go
through, Mr. Chair, that this is
a very, very common, uh, theme
this year is, is matching up,
um, recommendation, location,
amount, um, and where the
overlap may be. Um, did you
wanna,
yeah, just.
Sure.
And, and just to follow up on
that, Mr. Chair, you'll see $2
million on line 55, uh, to DFA
for criminal justice
coordinating counsels.
Um, I also wanted to highlight,
um online number 54 $50 million
for regional recreational
centers and quality of life
grants. Uh, that's been a, a
pretty popular program you've
funded in prior years. LFC heard
a program evaluation of, of
this, of this program, uh,
earlier this year, and, and it's
been really helpful to a lot of
communities and building some of
these, uh, recreation
facilities. Um, and then, uh,
just on, uh, Mary Beth was
talking a little bit about
housing deals in the LFC rec,
you'll see.
a lot of housing throughout
different agencies and, um, in
different places, you will see
some at DFA here though lines 56
and and 57, where there's some
grants to local government to
local governments for, uh, so
for both consulting and planning
services, as well as services or
as um some some grants to help
address homeless and homeless
encampment issues in communities
around the state.
Uh
And with that, uh, Mr. Chair, I
think if we want to go on to the
Department of Information
Technology, um, Mary Beth, uh,
I'll, we'll go to questions.
We've got a few folks we'll
start with Representative Saana
please Mr. Chairman, I just
wanted to ask about information
technology.
Are we ready for that, uh,
let's, we'll stay on DFA. Any
questions on, on DFA
Representative Do please and
then represented. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you for the
presentation. Um, I'm trying to
make sure I have ones that are
not answered. OK, on this,
um line 45.
This is the federal match fund
because I, I'm confused maybe on
the wording, Mr. Chairman,
because it says for capacity
building grants to local
governments and technical
assistance providers. I don't
know what a technical assistance
provider is, uh, explain to me
how
And if this is the federal match
fund, or if it's located
somewhere else in the budget,
uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
yes, it is the federal match
fund. Um, so my understanding of
that purpose would be to allow
local go basically provide
support to local governments to
actually write the federal
grants and, and so build
capacity in that way. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you for
that. Um,
100, I mean, we have $11 billion
budget. I, I, we get to leverage
federal dollars, some of these,
I think the most might be a 25%
match, some are 10%, some are
15%.
I sure hope we put more money in
that one, but OK, and then, um.
I think the rest of my questions
were asked by someone else.
Thank you. OK. Thank you. We'll
go now to represent Herrera,
then represent pedigree. Thank
you very quickly and I should
have added this before, and
again, it is on about the uh
match fund, and that $1 million
that actually last year it was,
I think it was $2 million that
went to the cogs. There's 7 cogs
in the state. The cogs were the
ones that assisted local
governments in writing these
grants, and just in North
Central, I can tell you in the
last 3.
years, they have written, uh,
they have gotten $65 million in
grants for local communities in
just north central, they have
another 55 million out in grants
that they're asking. So this,
this, we should really help
these cogs do this work because
they are at the local level, and
that's what helps local
communities, uh, and, and
especially in rural communities,
Mr. Chair, it helps the local
small governments and local
small counties who don't have
the capacity to go after these
grants.
So I hope we can up that to 2
million and uh and really make
sure that language directs it to
the cogs.
Thank you very much. Uh, next we
have Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Chair. Um, at some
point in time, I'd like to.
I want to know what the concept.
Of the conferences for the New
Mexico Infrastructure
conference.
I don't need that answer today,
but I know there's 6 different
conferences to deal with
infrastructure, you're trying to
combine that into one, or what's
the game plan with that and
share, um.
Item number 50.
On the audit for statewide human
resources, accounting and
management reporting system.
I'd like to understand at the
end of the day is the goal to
get to a point where we're all
using the same system, if that's
the case, I'd just like to know
that.
Thanks.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Lujan and ranking member
Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, so.
And these could be consolidated
elsewhere to you may, uh, so
page 5 of uh line 4748.
The, are those, are we gonna see
those anywhere else because I
mean they're they're kind of
related. One is um.
Operational funding for the
infrastructure planning and
development division and the
other is for this contract for
services for assistance with
inflation Reduction Act.
Um
We can see that anywhere else,
it's just this is very specific
on these line items because
those are, those are, I mean, we
are, there are still contracts
that are gonna be going on for
the inflation reduction after
that we're going to continue
that program?
Or continue
So, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Lujan, I don't
have information on the, the tax
credit processing, uh, Mary Beth
might, but just to address, uh,
line 48, uh, the operational
funding for the infrastructure
division, there would be
operational funding in the
agency operating budget for that
and, you know, it's a concern
for us when we're funding
operational expenses out of
non-recurring service. Thank you
for the answer. Thank you very
much, ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, page 6.
56 and line 57.
Uh, 56 is to uh consulting
strategic planning to support
innovative models to end
homelessness.
Uh, 57 is local government
division grants.
To uh streamline housing
placements on campsite service
and outreach workers, housing
navigators to case managers.
Uh, we have a serious problem in
this state and if you want to
see it, just, just drive down
Sirius Road. It's unsafe. It's
unsanitary, and it's not good
for
Anybody's not the people that
are there, not the people that
are not there.
Uh, you know, and I'm looking
at.
$7 million.
It's not a lot of money.
To cover the housing and
homeless proud.
Problem across our state. It's
an enormous problem. There's, I
heard the number 2500 and
homeless in Albuquerque.
I, I bet it's at least that.
Yeah, Santa Fe. I don't know,
you know, I'm, I'm not a person
that could tell you how many, I,
I can tell you it's a big
problem and it's not just Santa
Fe and Albuquerque, it has that
problem.
Not just spit about a
A year and a half years in
Houston.
With my wife
Who was down at the MD Anderson
clinic.
There are no homeless people
there.
Is this enough money?
To look at how Houston solved
their problem.
Pull up the, I hope that we're
thinking about pulling up a
similar pro program here in the
state of New Mexico. Uh, it's a
crime problem. It's a health
problem.
But like I say for them.
Those people that are homeless.
And for us, we need to help
them.
Uh
Your response.
So, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative Chatfield, I
would just note, so as I said,
there's different housing monies
in different agencies, and we'll
try to point those out as we go
through. I think, you know,
you're, you're correct, you
mentioned Houston, um, these
particular recommendations were
based on some of the successful
evidence-based strategies that
Houston has used to um to
address these issues. This is,
this is would allow the state to
get started on some of those
strategies. Um, so, you know,
this would be, this is a single.
your appropriation to, to get
those programs started. There is
other housing money throughout
the budget that will cover, but
uh, so we, we think this is,
this would would allow us to get
started on those programs. So,
Mr. Chair, I, I would just make
a request and once you
understand the Houston model.
Did you let me know?
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. uh, Vice Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, just a
few quick questions. I'm
following up on um the
discussion about money going to
the cogs.
For um technical support, do we
get information back on the
success or metrics for each of
the cogs.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Dixon, I, I will say with
Relative certainty that yes,
they are supposed to report back
on, on what they've spent. Um,
I'm looking at DFA to see if
anybody is disagreeing. So, OK,
I will go with that. Yes, they
should be reporting on it.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, and,
uh, Ms. Dinsmore, I think um
some of us would love to see um
how the cogs are working. I
think we all know, not all cogs
are created equal, um, and so,
uh, you know, can we learn from,
uh, from others. Um, Mr. Chair
and um
I think Mr. Simon, this follows
up on Representative Chatfield.
The um evidence-based, um,
Housing initiatives. I was just
wondering what the difference is
between 56 and 57. It just
seemed very similar.
Yeah, so, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, my understanding
is so 56 is more for sort of
consulting and planning, whereas
57 would be, uh, for those
specific items that are that are
listed in that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Joey. You did, you did say that.
I apologize. And then, um, I
just hope that as we do, um, as
we put money toward programs
like that that we're measuring
accountability and ensuring that
programs are being um
implemented with fidelity.
Thank you.
Great. Uh thank you very much,
Vice Chair Dixon. Let's keep on
going.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I will direct you just really
quickly to the bottom of page 6
to a very high dollar item. Um,
it's to do it for $70 million to
support the satellite
connectivity infrastructure
deployment project, um, and
other related implementation
needs, um, I anticipate you
probably have questions on this
and the, the broadband office is
here, um, to, I believe they are
here to, to assist with that.
Uh, but I did want to put that
on in front of you, um.
Also for, actually, you know
what, that is all I have for do
it. Um, I'll turn it over to
Joey. Just very quickly, Mr.
Chair, I'll note uh line number
61. So there's a $15 million in
the LFC recommendation and $10
million in the DFA or in the
executive recommendation for
cybersecurity initiatives,
that's on top of some
cybersecurity money that, um,
both of the recommendations, um,
would reauthorize that you've
appropriated in prior years.
Great, thank you very much. We
do have members for uh on this
um uh do it site. We're gonna
start with Representative
Sareana.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, on 61,
so 10 million of it is
distributed to higher education.
Does do it have, do you have the
administrative people to do
that, or is there a problem with
that?
Can we
Ask that question. Uh, so, um,
Mr. Chair and Representana, I'm
looking at our duet analyst who
might be able to give you more
information on this particular
uh item.
Cha and members of the
committee, um, let's go ahead.
We'll, we'll ask our LFC
analysts and then, uh, with,
with do it if you want to come,
if there's additional
clarification,
um, there's language with up to
10 million dedicated for higher
education institutions. I do
know that do it would like that
language modified, um.
With specific amounts specified,
then what's in the LFC
recommendation, however, the
funding for cybersecurity, it
would connect all institutions,
including tribal colleges in the
state.
OK. Um, Mr. Chairman, but
Again, does do it have the
people, the distribution people
to distribute that much money to
all that.
Um, hi Ed Chair representative
uh Raley can correct me if I'm
wrong, but I believe that they
would be working with higher ed
and higher ed, mostly perhaps
UNM would be um distributing the
funding to the college or
Nicole, please.
Sorry, Mr. Chair Representative,
on that point for the higher
education cybersecurity, it's
called the checks program and so
they have a methodology. They're
gonna be a consortium to try and
assist all of the the tribal
colleges and the universities or
cybersecurity, so they will be
assisting those higher ed
institutions, um, with that
platform and, you know, kind of
assisting moving them forward
again as to reiterate what Emily
had said the LFC has 15 million
with up to 10 million.
dollars in general fund for
higher education institutions.
The executive has a separate,
um, appropriation in higher
education that is going to be
directed towards that checks
program. Um, the cybersecurity
for higher education
institutions. Just to clarify,
you.
Great. Thank you. Uh, do, do you
want to hear from yeah, please.
Thank you, Chair and members of
the committee, um.
And go ahead and introduce
yourself and then we'll, yeah,
thank you, Chair and members of
the committee. My name is Raja
Simon. I'm currently the state,
uh, uh, chief information
security officer, uh, thanks to
DFA and LFC, this is the first
time I got some clarity around
it and seems like still there is
some confusion about it. Uh, our
preference is not to, uh,
because we currently have worked
really hard and established a
portfolio of services, including
attack surface management,
vulnerability management as a
service.
of that nature. So, uh, we are
Not comfortable distributing
dollar amount to another agency,
and we cannot vouch for what the
true intent of where that money
will be spent.
So Mr. Chairman, how do we
guarantee it's ghost for
cybersecurity and all these
things. What are we, uh, thank
you, Chair and members of the
committee. Thank you,
Representative. I don't have any
control over unless I have
visibility into what they use
for, how I can control that in
terms of expense and the
procurement, things of that
nature for which I don't have
the necessary wherewithal.
OK.
Uh, thank you, Representative
Soon. Thank you for those, and I
think this is a good look. We'll
flag this for some of the
language that's part of the
special. I think your
questionspresentative Sareana,
and the answers help illustrate
that there may be more guidance
that we need to explore.
Thank you, Chair.
Great. Thank you very much.
Additional
questionspresentative.
Just the, the difference between
the executive and the on, on 62,
Mr. Chairman, um, the difference
between um executive and the
LFC? Can we explain the what the
funding on that one?
Sorry.
Representative be a million
dollars that is in the LFC
recommendation is to assess the
enterprise network statewide,
um, and then to come back for
more funding for uh implementing
those networks, so the million
is to assess what's needed in
the state and then um to.
Explain where that need is in
the future after the assessment.
OK. I
So do we know why the executive
wanted that much more?
Chair and members of the
committee, uh, the original
request was, um,
About 12 or $13 million and then
we kind of um went through the
process. We met with LFC. Right
now, the state has multiple um
equipment on the statewide
network, right? This is
something that state has
invested in and the state wants.
And every single agency uses it,
uh, not only is it the equipment
on either side of a piece of
wire that uh we uh procure from
third parties, um.
The capacity has increased. So
when we need to um change those
equipment because there is
software cost to it that
equipment, the hardware cost of
that equipment and the cost of
the circuit that we lease for
the agencies to use. So, um, in
the last 4 years, our bandwidth
has increased exponentially. We
used to have like 4 or 5 gigabit
circuit to send and receive
internet traffic. Now we have
220 gig circuits setting and
receiving.
traffic. So all the equipment
needs to be updated, and the
existing equipments are
outdated.
So not only do we need to pay
for the equipment, we also need
to pay for the licenses for the
product to function correctly
and then upgraded in such a way
as future, future proof so that
it can handle larger bandwidth.
Right now, some of the agencies
and branch offices are dealing
with 30, 40 meg and that is not
sustainable in a given
environment when we are using
teams and audio video
conferencing.
Mr. Chairman, uh, um,
Go, uh, what's gonna happen if
we don't have the money? I mean,
what will happen?
Um, chair and members of the
committee and uh representative
if we don't have the money, we
have to pick and choose which we
can upgrade, which has the most
immediate need, so.
In our presentation with um
executive and uh LFC. We went
through the process. So let's
say we have about 8000 devices
on the network. Not all of them
needs to be updated right away.
So we have a plan to upgrade
whatever that is going to expire
in the next 12 to 24 months
first and then have that.
Cadence of upgrading all those
equipment and it is just not the
equipment, as I said, we need to
work with the agencies,
understand, for example, it's
CYFD and CYFD has 30 different
locations within the state.
That's what circuit needs to be
updated. We need to put the
procurement in place for those
um for that circuit to be
upgraded, then a appropriate
equipment needs to go on those.
Receiving and transmitting
against.
So it costs money.
OK
Thank you. Great. Thank you very
much, Representative Sareana.
Uh, next we have Representative
Silva, then Representative
Duncan, so.
Thank you, Chair. Uh, thank you,
presenters and analysts, um, I,
we were in subcommittee for um
for this agency and so please
remind me, there are a lot of
agencies that have a line item
request for IT upgrades through
do it. And I'm wondering how
much, if we know how much money
agencies are requesting for IT
services for do it?
Thank you, chair.
So, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I don't have
that number off the top of my
head. I'm trying to think if we
can even pull it out of our
system. We may be able to, I
might have to look that up and,
and follow up with you. OK,
thank you and Mr. Chair, and um
Folks, remind me, do if those
agencies got all of those line
items approved for their IT is
the do it's budget included,
does it include those increases.
Thank you, Chair. Uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative Silva, if the
appropriation is to a specific
agency, then it would not go the
funding would not flow through
to it. It would only go to do it
for like a large appropriation
that they would then, you know,
disperse similar to AOC but if
you
See an agency name with an IT
appropriation, then just know it
will go, it, it's intended to
flow to that agency directly.
OK. So, Mr. Chair, so when an
agency requests and says, these
are for increased service fees
from doing.
Then they, but they don't flow
to do it.
So, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I think, I think
I understand your question now.
So do it charges rates to state
agencies across the board, and
those uh funding increase
requests that you're seeing, um,
do flow through to do it so in
their enterprise fund and uh if
you recall subcommittee, I
believe, you know, you'll know
there's, there's money in the
other state funds category in do
it to, you know, from those,
those fees that they're
collecting. OK.
And this budget also has a
deficiency in the enterprise
fund. Is that correct? Thank
you, chair.
Mr. Chair, we'll check on that
and get back to you. Um, but
we'll, we'll see that in just a
moment. OK. Thank you. Thank
you. Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Duncan, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, line
item 63.
Um, to support the satellite
connectivity infrastructure, can
you tell me, was there money in
that last year for the
satellite.
Or is that just simply this
year, Mr. Chair and
Representative, no, there was
not appropriation last year for
this program. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, and a follow-up question
on that is how will that
determine where that's going to
be going, um, both in rural and
on our Native American
communities.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, I believe we
have um
Oh, good. Uh, Drew Lovelace, the
director of the Broadband
office, and he will be able to
speak much more eloquently to
the uh elements of this program,
then I would be able to do.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative Drew Lovela,
acting director for the Office
Broadband Access and expansion.
So the request here is designed
to dovetail with our federal
programs that are last mile
connectivity and is designed to
make sure that we do not leave
New Mexicans behind for the next
4 to 5 years. It takes 4 and 5
years to build infrastructure
and with that said, we are
dovetailing the program because
we're running this concurrent
federal program, and we will
know the finalized bid locations
of where, you know, uh, unserved
and.
locations get, uh, you know,
service and how long it's going
to take to get out there. And
with this funding, we intend to
run it as an RFP so that way we
can control some of the, the
mixture of, you know, if that uh
customer will never truly be
built to, then we can look at
how to dovetail that into that
bead program and transition them
from a short-term fix here to a
long term. Now, that being said,
we've had a lot of conversations
with the industry as a whole,
uh, including a lot of the
the wireless industry service
providers and some mobile 5G,
uh, as well as many of the, the
fiber-based, you know,
technology ISPs. And you know,
there's a lot of concerns about
this and how they might compete,
especially in some of those
rural areas, and we've been
having some nice open dialogue
about how to address some of
those concerns. Um, we think
we're gonna be able to have a
path forward in an RFP process
to make it more competitive, uh,
with kind of multiple
technologies there, uh, not just
low earth orbit, but that does
take away from some of that
ability to dovetail it into that
bead program. So, uh, hopefully
that answers.
your questions.
Hey, um, let me follow up on
with one more then. So,
This is, this, you're waiting
for programs to determine uh or
bids on this to determine how
was it determined?
Uh, Mr. Chair, representative,
we have the authority in our
statute to have the statewide
broadband map. We actually work
very closely with the FCC and
getting their reported data, and
we actually have to go through a
process of uh seeing what is
being reported by internet
service providers, doing some
deconfliction, and in particular
this beat program required a
whole separate process for
challenging locations. And so,
you know, instead of using let's
say addressing which, um, you
know, some of the the committees
I've spoken in concerns around
how
You do rural addressing. This is
latitude longitude based and we
actually have some, some
software that's used by uh by
the feds in this program, uh,
that use a, a separate location
ID that we've been able to go
through. So this has been about
2.5 years' worth of work since
the start of the office to get
this level of detail going from
just kind of saying, we serve
generally in this area to like,
this is how much the service uh
availability is for a specific
location in the state.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate that. Thank you very
much Representative Duncan. Next
we have Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, I
have a couple of comments on,
um, line 63, we just were
talking about that.
regarding satellite
connectivity, um, Mr. Chairman,
I just want to stand up for the
little guy. Uh, we have a lot of
um smaller cooperatives in the
rural areas, they've made huge
capital investments and putting
in fiber.
And I think we have to be very
mindful of not
Under cutting them in any way or
putting them out of business. So
I hope whatever arrangements end
up being made that Mr. Chair
will be giving a great deference
and respect to these, these
little providers and um
Uh, there are pros and cons to
satellite systems and pros and
cons to fiber, but we need to
consider everything, so that's
just my, my desire. Thank you.
Thank you very much for the
really mindful guidance for, uh,
next, we're gonna go to
Representative Lahan.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair, it's
the same line item 63, um, we're
looking at the middle mile, um,
funding. I know this is when
we're looking at the federal
funding, you know that this is
like a majority of what.
Is a prioritized, so I would
just say that we need to take
another look along with
Representative Duncan and um
Brown, thank you.
Thank you very much. Next we
have Representative Pettigrew
and then ranking member
Chatfield.
pedigree.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for, um, who thought that 6
lines would give you so much
questions. Um, this is, this is
critical and chairman, one of my
biggest frustrations on my time
with uh uh science and
technology Interim Committee was
discussions about cybersecurity.
And specifically the fact that.
We pay a department to have
cybersecurity.
And then give the responsibility
to everybody else.
UNM Guerro, New Mexico State
Casero and Department of Health
gets there, da da da da da, I
can go through a list.
Somewhere around
I don't know, 18 different
department secretaries and 189
directors. So, um,
It is frustrating, Chairman,
that, that we continue to do
this and each department in each
secretary feels like
The department is so special
with respect to their security
that
Raja and his team can't handle
it and I think that's
sad.
That we continue to do that, and
I would challenge us as a state.
start consolidating.
Um, our services and maximizing
our efficiency on the money that
we spend, we can take this from
from cybersecurity to water.
studies. And so, I I continue to
applaud you for the work that
you and your group does, uh,
and, uh, well, I'm not in
agreement with everything that
do it does.
You know, it, it's relatively
new and, and the way that we
continue to grow it.
Chairman, I do appreciate the
fact that uh Drew stood up and,
and, and came up and explained
the fact that the $70 million in
the executive budget is actually
an expansion and continuation of
money that we've received from
several different federal funds.
One of my concerns as we
continue to go through this and
this is now the 4th time I've
seen it.
This money actually goes what if
if funded, would go through your
2027. Chairman, I would ask that
as a committee we
Anything that goes beyond the
next fiscal year.
We put guardrails on.
So that when we're sitting here
in committee.
A year from, from this month or
last month, um, we're receiving
the guardrails, we're seeing how
they
They responded to that.
And how well they're doing, so
we can make a determination if
we want to continue that funding
or we want to claw back.
The remaining aspect of it.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you
so much, Roger. Thank you, Drew
for what you do. Thank you very
much representative Petigro. Uh,
next ranking member chap.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, Mr.
Chair, how much money has the
state put into Broadway and
statewide. There's a number of
different agencies, projects,
and I don't do it's taking the
lead. What's the total number?
Um, chair Representative
Chatfield, I can get you the
exact number what I remember off
the top of my head was a 123 or
maybe $123 million that was
appropriated to the office in
2023, which both recommendations
support the reauthorization of
through expenditure through
fiscal year 2027, I believe, and
there was a 25 million
appropriation last year to the
office.
Uh, which the executive supports
an extension of that the LFC
does not, so there has been um.
Various state funding put into
the Office of Broadband, but I
will follow up with the exact
number, but those are the two
appropriations that come to
mind. So for a while it was kind
of scattered, now it's kind of
getting consolidated so we can
get control of it and move
forward and an organized manner.
I, I
Appreciate that. Uh, is it, is
it organized? Is it
consolidated?
I think, I think what we'll do,
we're on page 6 if Mr. Lovelace,
if you want to come and answer
that, I think it's, it's a,
obviously, the committee has a
lot of interest in this and then
um sort of breaking up of these
different funds and the lack of
consolidation is clearly a
concern, so Mr. Loveless, uh,
chair, that was why the office
chair representatives, that's
why the office was created,
right? It was to, to house a
singular place where we could
actually have a state broadband
plan, which we had a 3-year
cycle.
We just released our 3rd year,
and how we're actually tackling
this. So on, you know, the, uh,
the funds that were
re-appropriated from the
Connecting Mexico council, they
were given the expenditure
authority to the office. We've
actually announced $74.5 million
of awards so far this year, uh,
on that, out of 99 million, the
other 25, so that brings us up
to 124. We've actually uh been
using to support the statewide
broadband plan, bring on
contractors, make sure we roll
out the $675 million
B program for.
the feds, uh, and then
additionally on that $25 million
from last year, one of the big
things that we've been looking
at is infrastructure. Broadband
is infrastructure, and it takes
multiple years to do this, and
so that's part of why we're
we're doing that. So to answer
your question, yes, in the last
2.5 years, we've gone from 2
employees to 27 to support
roughly a billion dollars of
federal and state money flowing
through this office. 1 billion,
that's the number I was looking
at, uh, looking for. So, you
know, I'm kind of
I live in a remote area.
I've had dial-up.
Did work
went from there to fiber.
Uh
kind of slow fiber. It worked
pretty good.
And then from there we thought,
well, we're gonna get satellite,
so we got satellite.
It was marginal. It was, it was
not that fast, and it was not
that dependable.
Uh, went back to fast fiber.
Now, even though it's remote, we
have extremely fast internet.
Uh, the problem with that is,
uh, I know that the Department
of Transportation is charging
some of our carriers like $5000
a mile for right away to put
that thing in or more, uh, have
you guys worked out an agreement
with him, uh, chairs
representative, that's a great
question. So rights when
permitting continue to be a long
ongoing issue. There's a lot of
places, you know, state land
office, uh, you know, it's gonna
have a DOT is gonna have it,
right? And we also have a whole
host of federal agencies, but
with Department of
Transportation, you know, I need
to thank.
Secretary Serna for his
partnership. We've been working
with them on their new
e-permitting system, and they're
trying to standardize some of
that and we actually have with
some legislation passed a few
years ago, uh, have been working
on a process where the Office of
Broadband can certify that there
is a public good, a public need
for these unserved and
underserved locations where
those fees can be waived. And so
we're still working a little bit
of that out because the
permitting system was rolled
out, I believe last week or the
week before, um, but we've been
having very serious discussions
about how to make that happen.
How about the state
of us.
Uh, chair representative, I've
had a little less luck there
over the last 2.5 years, you
know, there's a constitutional
mandate for, for them and uh and
generating revenues, you know,
from state lands, uh, they have
been prioritizing and they've
been giving you a discounted
rate, you know, for, for
broadband projects, but it is
not free. So with Starleak.
Being out there now, is it
faster? Is this 70 million, uh,
something that we need. Uh is it
70 million something that we're
gonna put into a technology that
As I said, I've had satellite
before. What it, it was not as
fast or as dependable.
fiber
Barley's supposed to be super
fast. Are we put money into
something that we may not need.
5 years from now.
Uh chair representative, that
is, that is some of the
challenge that we're facing.
Fiber is the gold standard. It
uses light and the speed of
light, unless someone is a
physicist and has better tachyon
or some sort of science fiction,
you know, approach at the moment
is the fastest thing that we can
get to. And so that is why we've
been all in on it, uh, but the
realities of the landscape of
New Mexico and how much it
costs. It's going to require a
portfolio approach. And so we
need a little bit of everything,
and to your point, there is
going to be some, some in this
program that's going to take
time to build to, but when I go
visit rural New Mexico, I keep
hearing the consistent message
of I need connectivity and I
need connectivity now. And if
you can't get that for 4 to 5
years, you know, I, I've tried
saying, please just wait, we're
coming. And, you know, the
response back is, how does that
help me with telehealth now,
right? How does that help me
with education now? And so to
your point, maybe we have a
little bit of overinvestment,
you know, in, in this, uh, but
it is something that's an
economic drag on our economy and
it reduces those like social
determinants of health for our
our citizens. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. We have
Representative Hernandez and
Represent Dell.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
In New Mexico, Mr. Chair, there
are 56 Navajo chapter houses.
And um
And they're starting to, to
reach out, you know, to, to get,
uh, utilize the federal funding
that's available, um, my, my
question, Mr. Chairman, is on
the same same line item number
63. Is, is this a section that,
uh, the, the local governments
on Navajo can help, uh, install
the, the fiber strands cause
there's, Mr. Chairman, there's
um
Spoons of, of, of these orange
fiber that are just parked in,
in, in their parking lot, and,
and I'm trying to understand
more about the barriers and
challenges, um,
Within, within the, those
communities and I'm just trying
to figure out
what area fits in for uh tribal
leaders to, to reach out to, to
the department like.
Uh, representative, you know,
probably this would be a
worthwhile longer conversation
offline, uh, I don't, this
doesn't, you know, particularly
relate.
To the $70 million program. Um,
but if those locations have a
long build time and they are
unserved, they would be eligible
in, in uh this program and so
maybe we can take the
conversation offline and and
talk a little bit more about how
we can interact with the uh the
broadband office out at Navajo
Nation, some of their plans that
they're working on, uh, as well
as uh I believe the project
you're talking about is NTU, uh,
who has that that fiber and so
they're working on some things
outside of my office's scope.
Great. Thank you for that. Uh,
thank you, um, Representative
down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the presentation. I, I'm
I just want to reiterate
Representative Brown's concerns.
RV, so, so we're not.
Stopping what were federally
obligated to do. The contracts
that are in place.
And in the urgency of doing
something quicker than 4 years,
we're going to
Duplicate and well, we're, what
happens at the end of the 4
years when the fiber's on.
Chair, Representative.
It's hard to turn the microphone
and be able to look at you at
the same time.
Uh, so to your, to your point,
right? In the federal programs,
satellite is not considered a a
Serb technology.
The latency, the time it takes
for the signal to go back from
the earth to that satellite,
transmit to another satellite,
transmit to another satellite to
a downlink, and then back to a
data center takes, takes a long
time. And so,
Much the same way we've adopted
a lot of the the federal, uh,
designs. We don't really
consider it a true, you know,
served technology. If you are a
New Mexican who has DSL or maybe
doesn't have anything at all.
You really and you really want
something, it is a great
solution. And especially if it's
going to be, uh, you know,
something that you live so far
out there that you can't get
anything else.
It is not going to be the
technology that will take us.
To the future, right? And what
we were talking about was the
gold standard on on uh fiber. So
to your question is, will there
be an endpoint for it for some
New Mexicans, it's gonna still
be too expensive to build to in
these federal programs, and they
will be on satellite even in
that federal program because
there's no other alternative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and that's
what, that's what I'm getting
to. I will use, well, in my old
desert, I don't have beaverhead
anymore, but Beaverhead,
Snowlake up in the middle of the
Gila seems like the perfect
place to put satellite.
And be done with fiber.
The folks I know who live in the
frontier areas chose that
lifestyle, moved there on
purpose and recognize the
barriers they've chosen. I, I,
so we're, we're, I, I'm just
trying to understand, we're
going to spend $70 million.
To
Provide a convenience or
For folks, while we build the
fiber infrastructure.
And then at the end of that,
correct me if I'm wrong, they'll
choose to stay on satellite or
switch over to fiber and it'll
be their choice, but we will
have paid for both.
So, uh, Madam Chair, and I'm
sorry, Mr. Chair and and
representative, uh.
You know, I, I think you bring
up a great point, but I think
the the level of, of your
example is maybe not as, as
simple as the landscape across
New Mexico. For instance, in
Espanola.
OK, you can be in the middle of
Espanola right now and being
unserved, you know, territory.
Uh, you can be in Chimayo. You
can be in Pecos, right? You can
be in the middle of Sheila, you
can be in the East Mountains,
right? So some of these areas
are maybe even 10 or 15 minutes
outside of some urban areas, you
know, or even urban areas
themselves, but are in that
unserved, you know, category.
And to your point in the federal
programs, part of why we've
designed this, and this gets
deep into the weeds of how the
broadband equity access
deployment, uh, funds work from
the feds. We actually have to
not only.
You know, for any unbid location
that's gonna happen over the
next 3 months. We're going to
have to put out a 2nd year
round, and let's say a satellite
provider comes in and bids.
We would have to pay a
reservation capacity fee. We
have to pay $5000 per location.
To just hold the spot using
federal funds.
For that location to
potentially, you know, get
service in 234 years.
These programs are on the
federal side are going across 50
states, 6 territories, and we
are competing quite literally
for network capacity with other
states. And so some of the
design of this program is to
actually get out in front.
See how we can take a state
program that's funded to be able
to also then on the back end,
transition. And to your points,
there are some New Mexicans that
will get that fiber solution.
There might be some that might
get in uh unlicensed wireless
solution, you know, out of this.
But there's still going to be a
significant number, you know,
that are going to have a
satellite solution. And so in
that design and in the timing
we've developed here that we can
actually know who's going to get
that final bid and that final
build out, and we can work with
that RFP process to transition
those satellite, uh, you know,
state program.
The accelerate connected in and
help dovetail that into the
federal and not pay that $5000
which lets us take more of that
federal money and put it back
into fiber and underserved, you
know, into community anchor
institutions. So one of the big
thing with the, the bead program
is that we got $675 million
yeah, we'll concise, but it, I
know it's great questions, a lot
of interest from the committee.
Yeah, any final go ahead back to
you representative down. I'm no,
thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
yeah, I, I'm just trying to.
Wrap my head around it. Thank
you. Understood. No thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Lovelace. We
appreciate it right now,
obviously, there's a large uh
executive recommendation, uh,
there's not any right now in the
LFC, but it's a good chance for
the members to ask questions.
Uh, we're gonna move on to page
7,
and of course, we have about 25
pages to go. Yeah, which is
fine. I mean, that's one of the,
you know.
We won't take 5 hours to get
through this, which is our cur,
but on the other hand, members,
we do wanna, we wanna take a
good first look through this so
that, uh, you know, measure,
measure twice, cut once sort of
deal. Uh, we'll go to the
analyst to keep going, uh, on
page 7.
Yes, Mr. Chair, and moving on to
the uh sort of commerce and
industry agencies starting with
the tourism department, you see
a lot of uh the uh some of the
items there are some very
similar in the LFC and executive
recommendation, uh, including 16
million for national and
international marketing,
although 1 million of that is
for um litter beau uh pickup and
beautification, which uh was
requested as you see online 72.
Um,
For, uh, for the Economic
development department, um,
just, uh, well, you may have
questions on some of these, but
I'll just, uh, really point you
on page 8 to beginning on online
82. So this is one of the um one
of the areas where the strategy
was a little bit different
between the executive and the
LFC recommendation. The LFC
recommended a $35 million
special appropriation, the uh
executive recommended uh a uh a
grow appropriation for this.
for this, uh, very similar grow
appropriation, um, I will just
note that, uh, uh, the LFC
recommendation was was
contingent on legislation
passing that legislation has
been introduced um in this
session. Uh, another, another
big item that would be
contingent on legislation, uh,
that you all would have to pass
for it to be approved is that
$25 million included on line 84
for research and development and
deployment fund, um, there's a
there's a couple of other items
down below there that uh would
also sort of support the LFC's
uh um focus on economic
development and economic
diversification that we had
during the interim. Uh, and so
for any DFA comments on, on
tourism and economic
development. I'll hand it over.
Thank you, Joey, Mr. Chair,
committee members, I'll be
really quick, um, I just wanna,
uh, point your attention to page
7.
Line 75. This is to the economic
development department. It's $2
million for the healthy food
financing program, and this is
part of the governor's Food and
hunger initiative. So I wanted
to make sure it was on your
radar. Um, I don't have anything
else for economic development,
um, so I will turn it back to
Joey.
Great. OK. I think we have a few
questions here for economic
development. We're going to
start with, uh, Vice Chair
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I'll
try to be really fast. Um, what
is the current balance, uh, Mr.
Chair, Joey, uh, in Lita right
now. Do we know? So, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
my understanding is I don't have
the current balance. Oh, we
might have the current balance.
We have $60 million as of the
end of, end of the fiscal year.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
um, thank you. Um, for tourism
on online 74.
Um, I, we have been, if I'm not
mistaken, uh, providing large
special appropriations for
marketing with tourism, it would
just be good to sort of get a
rundown of maybe the past 55
years, um, and perhaps that'll
come up when we hear tourism,
um, but I'd appreciate that.
Then, um, line 72. I just want
to compare that with um line 81,
um, and just kind of note this
is not a question I want to
note.
the disparity um in uh funding
for marketing of litter pickup
at $2 million versus um
marketing and trade shows for
the economic development
department at 750,000. So I
think we might want to revisit
that.
Um, and then.
Uh, that's all, Mr. Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair. Uh,
next we're gonna go to
Representative Silva, then
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, chair. Uh, thank you,
Joey, and tell me your name
again, I'm sorry, Mr. Chair
Representative. It's Mary Beth
Dinsmore. Mary Beth, thank you.
Um, so I just want to name my
support for the um special funds
for line 65, 66, and 67 for the
Secretary of State and the
ethics commission, um, I just
think they're good agencies that
need additional funds to do um
the work that helps us, um, do
the work that, uh, establishes
public trust and integrity and
fidelity in the systems we're
doing, so just wanted to name my
support for that.
And also line 82 that you had
named already, um, there was a
lot of conversation about site
readiness, um, in the committee,
so I just wanted to bring that
to our attention again, um, and
I'm not sure where I would want
it, um, whether it's to grow or
special, so I think I'd like
some more conversation about
that later. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. Thank you very
much. Uh, next we have
Representative Garrett, please.
Mr. Chair and um analysts on
line 6.
7, does that 65,000 for the
ethics commission, cover their
security issue at their facility
on the UNM campus.
Or is this free that so Mr.
Chair and Representative, that's
my understanding, but we'll
follow up just to be sure. Um, I
will say on that, it's not in
the LFC recommendation, we
would.
caution you about including
recurring operating costs in it
from a non-recurring source for
that.
Um, for that purpose.
Right, Mr. Chair was just a one
time.
So, wherever that goes. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative
Garrett. Next, we have
Representative Luhan then
represent Pettigrew.
Thank you, um, I'm gonna go back
to line 73, um, for.
We didn't give a recommendation
for that for the marketing
excellence Bureau. Is that a
state mandate, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
the, uh, yes, that was created
by statute. And again, this gets
into an area where we have
operating budget expenses in, in
a non-recurring form. I will say
one of the things we, we do have
some, some marketing money in
here that's specifically, you
know, direct in the LFC
recommendation would be directed
directing the agency with the
appropriation to work with the
marketing excellence Bureau,
because that's why that bureau
was created to sort of, you
know, centralize, you know, the,
you know, are not our knowledge.
base around, you know,
professional marketing in the
state and um that was the point
of creating that. And so we
should be taking advantage, our
other agencies should be taken.
Maybe a little more offline on
that so you can understand it
better, Mister Chair, also, uh,
lying 75 for the healthy food
financing program, uh, we're
looking at a $2 million
executive requests, and that was
even cut down from, I believe,
initially at 3 million during
the interim and we had
conversation and now he's not
making a recommendation, but we,
um, this is a.
program that really uses all in
expenses all of its um it's
funding and it's very efficient.
I like to, I like to revisit
that and make sure that.
We have some uh more in depth
conversation on how we can move
that, um, back up to at least
the tube by the executive. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you. Uh,
next we're gonna go to
Pettigroup.
Thank you, Chairman. Uh,
Representative Lujan just
brought up one of them for me on
line 75, chairman and Joey.
Where are we funding healthy
food financing program right
now.
Outside of the non-reoccurring
section 5.
So, um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, I, I do believe,
uh, EDD had some in their FY 25
operating budget, but I don't
know of anywhere else that,
that, that program is funded in
the LFC recommendation.
So, uh, Chairman Joey, if you
could get a chance, add that to
um
Where's that, you know, where's
Waldo?
For I would appreciate that
very, very much, um.
Chairman, I think there's some,
some other discrepancies.
To uh representative uh our our
co-chair's question with respect
to the money inside, uh, in
currently in the balance and
Lita.
Jo, could, could you get back
with me with respect to how much
of that is, um,
Just not spent yet.
In other words, has it been
committed but not spent, and uh
if there is a separation there,
the second piece of that
question, Joey, is, do we have
funding in other places?
Besides
Just in section 5.
Non-reoccurring.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, we will get you
those answers. I would greatly
appreciate it, um.
Same thing on number 77, we
could get an understanding of
what outdoor equity fund, uh, is
about, when I say we, I don't
know if anybody else wants it,
but I'd love to have them in the
12 plus program.
And
Uh, and then line 84.
It looks like we're creating a
new research and development
fund, chairman, in fact, we
could get some detail on that.
I would greatly appreciate it.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Uh, Vier Dixon, and then we'll
move on.
Oh, sorry, is there, oh, I
apologize, said Duncan, go
ahead, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, just a
quick question between uh uh.
Looking at 85 and 886.
Um
Those uh could um
Mr, can we get an idea of um
How are, how are those uh
awarded, are those grants and if
someone could explain that to
me, I appreciate it. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Duncan. OK, uh,
Vice Chair Dixon, and we'll go
on.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, in,
uh, response, uh, quickly to
Representative Duncan. Um, I
know that economic development
department did a fabulous press
release on the recipients of
those advanced Energy Awards.
Um,
Joey, uh, there was a question
about uh line 84, um, which is
something that I am keenly
interested in, um, and actually
I'm working on. Um, do you have
information as to how much the
typical match request is for an
NSF.
Uh, grant such as the quantum
initiatives, um, the artificial
intelligence programs, any of
those large uh regional
collaborations that our um
universities in partnership with
private industry and, and our
national laboratories have been
requesting.
So, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I'm just getting
some information from our
analyst. We don't currently have
that number, but we can, we can
work to get you that number.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Joey, and I bring that up
because my understanding is that
uh frequently when states make a
commitment to provide funds in
order to leverage the hundreds
of millions from the federal
government. It needs to be
between 25 and 50 million, uh,
give or take, and given the
number of programs that are out
there, I just want.
to flag that as a um area that
might require an increase. Thank
you.
Thank you very much, Vice Chair.
Uh, let's keep on going.
OK, Mr. Chair, uh, committee
members, I'll, I'll still try to
keep us going along quickly.
I'll just draw your attention um
to a couple of items at the
bottom of page 8 to the
regulation and licensing
department, um, win 88.
It is $810,000 recommended by
the executive for um RLD to
purchase vehicles and equipment
for the cannabis control
division.
And on line 90 goes along with
it somewhat. This is for law
enforcement vehicles, um,
$465,000 to RLD. This one is
contingent on legislation, um,
that I, I must say I'm not sure
where that legislation is
currently, but the the
appropriation is contingent upon
that passage, um, that is all I
have for RLD. So I'll just note,
uh, very quickly, uh, Mr. Chair,
this is one that you'll find in
the LFC recommendation in the
growth fund. So we're very
similar there as well. Um,
moving on to the next page.
Office of Superintendent of
Insurance, you'll actually see
uh a two lines here, line 93 and
96. Um, they're not next to each
other, unfortunately, um, very
similar recommendations from
both LFC and the executive
related to the fair access to
insurance requirements program,
uh, so $50 million in the
dollars in the executive
recommendation in 49.5 million
in the uh in the LFC.
Uh,
OK.
Let's go through this page and
then we'll have a couple of
questions.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
again, uh, pretty quickly, um,
line 95. I'd like to also bring
to your attention. This is also,
uh, this is to the Office of
Superintendent of Insurance.
This is for medical professional
liability insurance premium
reductions.
Um, I would also like to point
you to line 99, which is, uh, to
cultural affairs department, $10
million to the rural libraries,
endowment fund, and then lastly,
I would like to call your
attention to lines 103 and 104.
Um, these are very, very similar
appropriation, uh,
recommendations for livestock
board, uh, LFC has 3, for
executive that 2.2, but both of
them are for expenses and
equipment um to assist the meat
and poultry, um, inspection.
I believe, um, so that's just
another example again of
different places a little bit,
um.
But yes.
That's all I've got. Great, OK,
we'll pause there. We'll go for
some questions. Uh, we're gonna
start with Representative Dao,
Representative Silva, and then
we'll keep on going.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I actually
had my hand up for economic
development. Can I go back to
that? OK, thank you. All right.
Um, could you explain to me, Mr.
Chair and Joey, can you explain
on this outdoor equity fund, is
that a transfer from Legacy or
is that in addition to the
legacy funds.
So I mis uh Mr. Chair and
Representative, so the, the $3
million amount in the LFC in the
2.5 million in the executive
would be general fund, uh, in
addition to any other funding
source that that has. And Mr.
Chair, Joey, is that growing the
the amount or this is above
their prior amount or this is
what that will be their total
budget, um,
Mr. Chair and and
representative, we'll follow up
to you and just see how much is
from the Legacy fund, but yeah,
yeah, this is a general fund
source. OK, thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you for that. I, I
keep hearing you say Ground and
is, is there now a separate
piece of legislation separate
from capital, separate from
that,
so how did you know that? I
don't remember if it was 52 or
54 was grow funds. Mr. Chair,
um,
Uh, and representative, so I
think I don't remember about 52,
but if you look on line 82 I'm
sorry, 82 and 8482, I, I just
remem, you know, so the, the
number of grow appropriations
was relatively small, so I
remember that that the executive
recommended that as a grow
appropriation. Also, um, this is
in the other state funds
category, which helps clue me in
that it's, so the growth fund is
separate from the general fund
and um there's not a separate
piece of legislation, Mr. Chair
and Representative.
When we get to the section 9
appropriations, we'll start to
see all of the LFC
recommendations for the Growth
Fund. OK, so there, thank you,
Mr. Chair. So instead of being
5, it'll be 9, so it's, it's
here in this particular item
because the LFC recommended as a
special. OK, thank you very
much. And on 84, I'm also very
interested in '84 and uh my
question about labs was
answered, but would research
institutes like New Mexico Tech
also be eligible.
So, um, Mr. Chair and, and
representative Representative
Dixon shaking her head yes at
me, you know, that would, it
would be based on what's in the
legislation that you would have
to approve.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
I'm, I, I'm assuming we're gonna
be able to look at how much
revenue we've generated from the
cannabis industry versus how
much because I saw them come up
multiple times throughout this
document needing funds for
enforcement and regulation
beyond the vehicles, um, just,
I'm kind of curious about that.
Oh
OK, so on, thank you, Mr. Chair,
on online, um, 95. This is
really pretty language,
professional liability insurance
premium reductions. Are, are you
to say, Mr. Chair, Joey, that
we're gonna supplement insurance
premiums. That's where we are
supplementing.
Insurance premiums.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Dao, um, I have a
little bit of information on
this, um, it, it appears that
it's going to be a discount on
medical professional liability
policies. It says 20%.
Um, and that would be applied
against the premiums for the
medical providers, um, and then
it does say OSI will administer
the premium discount in a manner
similar to the medical
malpractice premium reduction,
which reduced premiums by
requiring carriers to issue
discounts directly to
policyholders. So that's the
intent of um I believe of the of
the requests. Thank you, thank
you for sure. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much. Uh,
we're gonna go to representative
Silva and then representedrera.
think.
Thank you, chair. I, my question
was answered. Represent Verrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
wanted to go to cultural affairs
line uh where are we?
Uh,
rural libraries in Damaan, we
were hoping to get 26 million
and to kind of edge that uh fund
out, but uh I guess that'll be a
discussion for the future, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. Uh,
representative Little.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I am
looking at uh line 98 of the
For, uh, let's see, 5 million
was requested, um, for the
neighbor graves protection and
repatriation Act. It actually
has to do with compliance issues
with the federal.
Uh, Federal requirements, um,
and a deadline is established in
July of January 2026. So I'm
wondering, uh, what, uh, your
thought, what the rationale
behind cutting it in half would
be, and if there are, uh, Mr.
Chair, uh, uh.
Other sources of thoughts given
to where this funding might come
from, the remainder. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair
Representative, so the cultural
affairs Department requested and
the executive recommendation
included $5 million for fiscal
year 26 and 27 together, the LFC
recommendation is 2.5 million
only for fiscal year 26, there
would then be an opportunity to
uh seek additional funds next
year.
Thank you, that clears it up.
Great. Thank you. Uh, next we're
gonna go to Hernandez and
represent Pedigre.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I'm
gonna go back to that line item,
um, and again, Mr. Chair, I
wanna urge, urge this committee
to consider matching that, uh,
there is an irrigation project I
worked on in New Mexico, where
we had to stop the operation
because of, of pottery and uh
and so they had to get an
archaeologist to come and do the
investigation and, and, and, and
take all the pieces back.
To the location and uh and just
talking to other tribal leaders
about the importance of this
program, especially when, you
know, we're, we're fighting
other more artifacts, uh, you
know, and, and we, we, we need
A, a, uh, to increase the, the,
the, whether it's depository,
but the, there's, there's a lot
of need here and, and just wanna
put that out there for the
record that, you know,
requesting respectively this
year. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Pettigrew and
then represent Luhan.
Thank you, Chairman, and
Uh
Chairman line 95, my first.
feeding off of what
Representative Doll asked
questions about.
We're gonna provide a 20%
discount.
On professional liability
insurance premiums.
And I think, Chairman, I heard
that this is in addition to the
20% we already provide on
medical malpractice. So, uh, Mr.
Chair and Representative
Pettigrew, um, I misspoke
apparently, uh, the information
I had was not completely
accurate, but I do have, um,
Simon Miller here.
To give you the correct
information. Um, Mr. Chair
Representative, the 25 million,
my apologies, losing my voice.
Uh, the 25 million would be
actually a 100% uh a premium
holiday, basically for one year
for all independent providers
across the state, short-term
retention tool. Um, and
Short term in that it would just
be one year of 100% subsidy.
Mr. Chair, um, I, I think it'd
be good for us to do a review on
the anti-donation clause with
respect to that?
On how we can work that and, and
what the intent with respect to
that is, I am concerned that
premium.
Liability insurance. Would that
also cover medical malpractice,
chair.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
that's what the subsidy is for,
for, uh, medical malpractice
insurance.
The chairman for 3 years, we've
gone back and forth on
different.
Different criteria on, on
medical malpractice now that
we've created the problem, we
want our taxpayers to fund the
problem that this legislative
body in the 4th floor created. I
have a concern with that.
And Mr. Chair and I think we,
we, we've established thank you
Representative Pettigrew, thank
you for the explanation. Again,
this is one where the executive
has asked for it. Currently,
there's nothing in the LFC
recommendation that you
represent pedigree. I, I
appreciate that very much. At
some point in time, um,
I would like a
what.
For the implement online 94
implementation of the healthcare
Consolidation Oversight Act.
And I don't need that answer
now, but at some point in time,
I'd love to hear what this is
all about, what legislation this
is, uh, alluding to in here.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew. Next,
we're gonna go to Representative
Lujan and then Representative
Vincent.
Thank you, um, Mr. I don't know.
I believe we got if we're there
were 997, um, the board of
veterinarian medicine for
veterinary facility and shelter
inspections, um, I feel like
this is, this is something that,
um.
Could be an oversight, but if
it's not, I'd like to have more
information. I know that Senator
Words and I are, are, um,
Always talking about this during
an interim, he he himself and
maybe.
Maybe they want to add some more
on the set we're not there, but
I just like to to make sure that
we get to.
If I'm wrong, I find it
somewhere else. I, I'd like to
have that information. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Representative Vincent, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters, just some
clarification on um line number
96.
The superintendent of insurance,
the 50 million that's in there,
the wording suggests that it's
there um in contingent with the
pilot project.
So if the legislation doesn't
pass, does the money remain in
there. If it does pass, does it
stay in there? Would you explain
that to me, please? Sure, um,
Mr. Chair and Representative.
So, uh, this appropriation
you're seeing on line 96, uh,
for that to go into effect, the
legislation would have to pass
and be signed by the governor.
OK, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
great question. OK, uh, let's go
on, we'll try to let, uh, we're
a little bit behind. Let's do a
couple of pages, members will
still be tracking questions, um.
So go ahead, uh, we spend more
or Mr. Simons?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um,
members of the committee, um,
again, in the interest of time,
uh, page 10.
Line 107. Um, I'm bringing this
to your attention. There's 12
million, I'm sorry, this is the
energy, minerals, Natural
Resources Department for
wildfire mitigation programs and
initiatives, the executive is
recommending 20 million here as
a special, um, I do believe that
this is in a different
appropriation from the LFC, um,
is it in roll? So Mr. Chairman,
there is in the uh LFC
recommendation, a $12 million
fund transfer recommendation
contingent on some legislation
that would
create a wildfire preparedness
fund.
We this.
Um,
so I'm moving on to page 11, Mr.
Chair, so just to sort of cover
some of the the major uh items
online 120 you see uh two
recommendations for the um the
related to the Indian water
rights settlement, this would
be, this would allow the data
engineer to get started on some
of those projects, uh, that, uh,
are, uh, pending uh in Congress,
uh, for approval of those
settlements, um, the, the state
engineer indicates to us that
those if even
Even if those are happened
before the settlement is
approved by Congress, they will
count towards that settlement
amount, um.
And so, uh, do you have anything
else on the state engineer?
Yeah
And Mr. Chair, did you want to
move on to the environment
department or sorry early
childhood department, or did you
want, let, let's pause there.
This is through page 11, um.
The, we're gonna go first to
Representative Sanchez. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I just want to
go back to item 120, um.
I know uh we've uh signed some
agreements or um but water right
agreement settlement agreements
and um I know we talked about
this last year, it'd be good to
get those closed out to get
closer to a higher amount. These
affect a lot of the aseass and a
lot of the mutual domestics in
northern New Mexico, so it'd be
great to uh
Get that closer to uh the finish
line. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, chair. Um, on line
106.
It
I would like a good definition
at some point in time, Chairman
of what an innovative financial
product.
Yes.
Mr. Chair Representative
Pettigrew, um, that's a good
question. I don't have a
specific answer for you. I'm not
sure if anyone from M Nerd is
here today. Um, if not, um, not
a problem. I'd be happy to find
out what that is and, and get,
uh, OK, let's pause there.
Secretary Kennedy, I know you're
in the, if you wanna uh speak to
line 106, you're more than
welcome to if you want to follow
up offline, that's OK too.
That sounds great. Thank you
very much, Madam Secretary. So
that, that'll come to the whole
committee. Great, yeah, that
would be perfect and uh I'll,
I'll yield to everybody else,
uh, great, I saw, uh,
representative Sareana, uh,
representative Brown and
Representative Dow represent
Saana. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Online 113 to upgrade the energy
code compliance manual. I
believe we need to have some
money for that compliance in a
serious way.
You.
Thank you very much. Uh, next,
we're gonna go to represent
Brown, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, I
have a question on page 9,
cultural affairs.
It looks like nothing's been
requested for the Route 66th
anniversary that's approaching,
um, a question, Mr. Chairman,
is, is that perhaps in tourism
or not being asked for at all,
Mr. Chair. Yeah, so, Mr. Chair
and Representative, I will refer
you very quickly to line 74 on
page 7. The tourism department
requested as part of that $16
million advertising
appropriation, $2.5 million for
the Route 66 centennial
celebration.
there.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Next, we're gonna go to
Representative Do please. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you,
Joey, um, online 118. I I see
that uh there's money for state
parks for law enforcement. And
that is part of our
We are this is federal land,
most of our state parks, uh, uh,
at least ones where there's the
need for law enforcement I'm
thinking are like our flagship
parks, the lakes, those sorts of
places, and
Our, our, um, we are concessions
with the federal government, and
that concession agreement does
include law enforcement, but it
also includes economic
development. It also includes
tourism. It also includes
recreation and I'm wondering why
there's nothing in this fund to
build any
improve any of the parks other
than just law enforcement. So,
um,
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
so this, uh, recommendation
specific to vehicle replacement,
and it didn't, it didn't, I end
up in the, um,
Uh, in the LFC recommendation, I
have to follow up with our
analyst to get you information
on how law enforcement for the
state parks are funded in the
broader. I thank you, Mr. Chair.
I don't, I'm, I'm not concerned
about how law enforcement is
covered. I'm concerned that
energy and natural resources,
not asking for improvements at
our state parks for the other
obligations we have within our,
our concession agreement with
the federal government, our
state parks are in disarray.
Some of the roads look like
arroyos. It's a 1 1.5 miles at
times to walk to a rest area if
there is a um
Restroom, most of them are porta
potties. I'm wondering why I
feel like state parks is the
evil stepchild underneath in
energy and mineral natural
resources, and I want to see
funds going to our state parks,
invested in our state parks. Am
I missing it in another line
item? Is it somewhere else? Is
it in growth funds? So, uh, Mr.
Chair, we'll follow up with a
more complete answer. I do I do
uh recall there is some capital
outlay dollars for the um for
the state parks, um, and, but
we'll follow up to get you a
more complete answer to that.
OK, thank you and thank you.
Chair, thank you for that. And,
and I'm the same on 121, um, I
don't think the lawsuit's over.
Why is there for the um the Rio
Grande Compact.
It's very, very important for
us. Why is there no funds
recommended in the LFC budget,
but there is in the executive.
So, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, the LFC
recommendation includes a
reauthorization of an
appropriation you all made back
in 2021 to the Attorney general.
So that, that appropriation was
$6.4 million. Our information is
about 2.5 million of of that has
been spent. Um, and there's a
balance of about 2.6 million.
Thank you very much. I
appreciate that. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you very much
Representative. Uh, next we have
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and joy
after uh a consistent number of
years in which the budget had
been cut for the commission on
the status of Women. They then
brought back a, for the first
time in the month of November, I
think it was a, their conference
to address the needs and, and,
uh and uh and, and secure the uh
The equality for women and girls
in the state, and I see that the
LFC gave them no money to
continue these conferences to
make sure that they can address
that. Can you please tell me,
Mr. Chair and Joey, if that
funding is showing up someplace
else. So, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, my understanding
is there is uh a partial amount
in the LFC recommendation for
the commission on the status of
women in their recurring budget,
um, for, uh, uh, for this
purpose, um, and I believe Mary
Beth has some
additional information. Yeah,
thank you, Joey, Mr. Chair,
Representative Hendon, um, I did
just want to clarify that the
200,000 here, as Joey said, part
is in the base for the agency,
but, um, the LFC recommendation
was adopted for the commission
on Status of Women, and it is a
flat budget to FY 25. So there
isn't anything additional is
200,000 in, in the LFC
recommendation. um, just to
clarify, the activities noted in
here, some of them are funded
through the base.
Um, but the adopted
recommendation doesn't have any
of this $200,000. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I'll just note that and
hopefully you will too. Women
and girls who make up the
largest population are not
included in this budget or
conferences. Thank you very
much, Representative Fernan. Uh.
I want a couple of quick things,
um, the think Dow was brought up
the sort of the in the lower Rio
Grande, uh um litigation that is
continuing, and I think there
are a number of, of timely
moments that are coming up where
we want to make sure that the
state is fully protected.
Um, would love for us to uh
Look closely at uh item 1123.
And understand how some of this,
this may, some of this may be in
technology, uh, but, yeah.
I think it'd be great to really
scrub that and see if there are
places for us to invest here
with the state engineer's
office.
Um, OK, uh, let's continue on to
um
I guess we're on page 12 now.
Oh,
go ahead, uh, representative
little.
Thank you. Uh, before we move on
to page 12, um, Mr. Chair, I'm
interested in finding the uh um
also checking on line 127, 128
to the Indian Affairs
department, uh, the, uh,
executive had the
recommendations of
Uh, 2.5 and a 50.
Uh, in line 128, and there is no
appropriation. Are we going to
find this somewhere else, uh,
will it be funded, is it another
light item. So, um, Mr. Chair
and we're we're thank you,
sorry, sorry, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, uh, I don't have
information on that right now,
but we can follow up and with
our analysts and and get you
some additional information. And
please do, uh, thank you. I'd be
very curious in getting the
information. Great. Thank you,
thank you for that, uh,
Representative Lohan, please.
Um, thank you. I, I'd like to
lend my support to line item,
um, the discussion of uh line
item 12121, particularly the 5
million there. Thank you, I
think I'm being redundant, but
for time's sake, I'll just go on
to um.
A question on line 123, you
brought that up. Does that
include the water data Act.
In funding as well.
Volume 123. State Engineers.
Sorry, uh sorry, Mr. Chair, and,
and Representative Lohan, that's
another one we, we don't have an
answer for, we'll have to get
back to you. Well, I'll, I'll be
looking forward for that answer,
and then, uh, Mr. Chair, um, um,
energy, minerals and natural
resources, I'd like to say I, I
like the funding we have on
1:15, um, I support that and.
Uh, like 107 for a while fire
mitigation program and
initiatives that's just
redundant are we seeing that in
other places in the budget. I
mean, we keep hearing thank you
it's a quick uh answer, um, and
then I'd like to focus on, um,
line 108, the geothermal
projects development fund to
advance geothermal projects in
New Mexico, expand state level
investments into the project,
there's $20 million there.
I know we, we had some um
legislation last year, how are
we looking to to continue the
funding for those projects, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative. I'm not sure if
the secretary is still here and
wants to. Oh, there you are. Hi.
Please come up Madam Secretary,
please come on up. Thank you.
Thank you.
The uh um
Mr. Chairman and, and
Representative Luhan, uh.
The $20 million
requested by the administration
is, I think, hugely important.
Um, I have been doing a little
research on that 15 counties in
New Mexico, so 45% of the
counties in New Mexico have very
high quality geothermal
potential, and, and, uh, the, I
would say a couple more things
about geo and we are.
New Mexico's already 6th in the
country in geothermal capacity,
so developing uh the resources
in those in those uh uh 15
counties, I think could its
economic development, its zero
emissions electricity, but uh I
think very importantly as well,
it's zero emissions electricity
that does not require battery
backup. It is baseload power,
and which
which uh it it doesn't have the
same uh uh supply chain issues,
it's a cost issues, etc. etc.
associated with uh with um uh
Uh, uh, zero emissions
generation, and so I think it is
one of the more important items
in our budget, uh, new items in
our budget, and I would hope
that the uh uh members would all
consider supporting that $20
million.
Madam Secretary.
I really appreciate that and I
just like to say, Mr. Chair, for
the sake of time throughout the
the the budget requests in this
um agency. It's the same thing.
This goes to the ETA that we
have in place. This goes to how
we're going to decarbonize um.
In a very efficient and
effective way. I mean, line item
111, uh, 114 and
These are, these are very
necessary steps in the
modernizing and and moving on
forward with the ETA we have in
place and without these kind of
measures, so I don't know if we
can just do a quick review
separately, maybe a
subcommittee. I mean this is,
I'm happy to have that top when
it with your direction, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Um, great
points. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. Uh, any other, let's,
we'll turn the page to page 12.
And let's go through 12 and 13,
so we'll go through ECCD and
then get a start on healthcare
authority.
And we'll see if there's any
questions.
Sure
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um,
Let's see, we are on page 12 and
I will direct you to line 131,
uh, 1 of the biggest
discrepancies here. So the
executive is recommending $104.6
million for the early childhood
education and care department to
pilot several quality
improvements in childcare. Uh,
this is a special, not in the
base, so we are sure to evaluate
these elements that are included
in these pilots, ensure that
they ensure their fidelity and
um, uh.
and efficiency and um if that is
determined, then as with grow
appropriations, um, we would,
uh, hopefully ask to put this in
the base budget. Um, I will also
very quickly just point out to
you that the other funding
sources in this column is from
the early childhood Education
Trust Fund.
Uh, the executive is supporting
uh legislation, House Bill 71 to
increase the distribution from
the fund to $500 million. The uh
bulk of that 430 million and
changes in their base budget in
the executive recommendation to
fund um initiatives. This is the
balance, the 69487 of that 500
million, um, but I will leave
you with that one, and I think
that is good for page 12.
Um,
on 13th, OK, um, page 13, um,
there's a couple here that I'll
draw your attention to, starting
with the healthcare authority
line 139 is $50 million and this
is for the rural healthcare
delivery fund, um, the, this was
an executive ad uh due to the
success of the program, it is
currently functioning and my
understanding is they get more
grants than they have funding to
support, um, and it does support
a rural.
uh providers, clinics,
hospitals, um, in, in, uh,
operating losses and in um
funding for services to keep
them going in rural areas. Um,
and then I will direct you to
line 140. So this is one of the
places where you'll see big
discrepancies in where funding
is in each recommendation and
what the approach was, so online
140, which is for behavioral
health expansion initiative
statewide.
This is a $100 million
recommended by the executive,
and this encompasses multiple,
um,
Um, efforts, it's peer support
workers. It's justice involved
training. It's patient
navigation, um, it's a regional
behavioral health offices, um,
and more. Those are the items
that are, are being considered
in the executive package, but I
will note for you, uh, when you
get to page 14.
Um, and you look on the LFC
side, you will see lots of
behavioral health initiative,
uh, recommendations there as
well for smaller amounts. So in
this instance, you can just see
that the LFC has divided them up
a bit.
Maybe more specific with the
language, well the executive has
a large bucket. um.
I will stop there on this page.
Uh, no, that's great. Thank you
very much. Uh, any quick
questions down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I don't
know if it's quick cause it's
early childhood and health, but
I will try to talk faster.
OK. Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. On
line 129, um, furnishing
facilities are these early
childhood facilities or are
these state agency facilities.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, I believe that
these are office uh spaces for,
um, the agency around the state.
OK, thank you online 131.
$104 million for
That's
That's a lot.
Mr. Chair Representative, yes,
it, that is definitely a lot of
money, um, is there a bill, Mr.
Chair, is there a bill attached
to this? No, there's no there is
no legislation. What this is
really and, and we can get you
more specific information on the
components, um, but it, it
really addresses a few of the
issues I've been brought up
repeatedly in the early
childhood community, uh, one of
them, for example, being the uh
floor for pay. It's currently
$15 an hour and this initiative
would raise it to $18 an hour.
So that's just one of the
components, but they, they have
a pretty big price tag, so Mr.
Chair and thank you for the
presentation. They're asking for
104 million of discretionary
because like this one here for
children with special needs
definitely perks, I mean, I
haven't been in the, I've not
worked in early childhood since
2019, but we've never gotten
differentiated rates for special
needs children. They've asked
for it, and I saw a bill to
prohibit expulsion, but it
didn't have also with it a
different.
rate for children with special
needs. So this much at the
discretion of the agency, I
think we've heard enough from
our providers and from families
served to, to know where some of
those needs are, seems pretty
broad, um, but also important,
so I'd like some more details on
what this might be. Um,
On aging and long-term services.
Mr. Chair, is this the Kiki
Savera Fund?
It is the key key
key surveyor Mr.
Chair Representative, line 134
is the key kissed.
What's 33 go to?
Yeah
Mr. Chair Representative, the
um,
The $600,000 appropriation is
the one you're speaking of,
right? 133. So that is, um,
actually just a non-recurring
appropriation that historically
has gone to the aging and long
term services department, um,
just to assist them in, in case
of emergencies, um, so that's
just being recommended as usual.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Do you
happen to know what the balance
is in the kiki Sara Fund and
what the annual expenditures are
a year.
I'll go to the next question if
you want me to. OK. On, um, on
139.
Is there uh RFP process on this.
I, I'll just, I'll just give you
my how many federally designated
critical access hospitals are in
New Mexico.
It's either 13 or 16. I don't
know the number, but it's around
there. So I'm, I'm concerned as
I am concerned with the early
childhood expansion that we do
land and construction.
And new facilities that compete
with the services provided by
the rural Critical Access
Hospitals and it's pretty, it's,
it's, it's
Is there any sort of indicators
to make sure that we don't
duplicate services that those
hospitals may be providing
physicals for high school
students, and now we want this
school-based health clinics to
do it. I mean, like, are we
preventing duplication?
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Doo, um, I believe so. It's a
grant application process, so,
um, the agency and actually a
couple of people from um our
agency as well assisted in going
through the grant applications,
um, given that it's, you know,
it's people, we go through them,
um, I think it is something that
can be put up at the forefront
that we are ensuring that the uh
the grant applications that are
funded do not duplicate things
like federally qualified health
centers or um.
You know, uh, that sort of
thing. I did also want to say
that my understanding of this is
not so much new facility
building, but more.
Services, just given the number
of grant applications that this
gets. I don't believe that it's
intended to, that there's enough
says except for. OK, sorry, my
bad, sorry I I got your
appointment on Friday. This is
getting pretty blurry, OK, and
then, um, online 140, is that
one attached to it? This is $100
million in the entire definition
is for behavioral health
expansion initiatives statewide.
So if we choose the executive,
It's that broad. If we go
through and go line by line and
then choose the LSC, it will be
more directed. So yes, Mr. Chair
Representative, but I do want to
emphasize as well that I, I
don't believe the intent of the
100 million is to hold on to the
money and, and not working in a
concert with the legislature.
I'm sure that with that word to
be uh adopted, there would be
good conversations about the
items that would be funded
within it. And last question,
Mr. Chair, and I guess Joey will
have an answer for me, but on
the school behavioral health.
Uh, where, where's the funding
for school behavioral health
services because
I guess I'm not finding it.
Yeah, uh, so Mr. Chair and
Representative, I don't know
that there's anything in here
for that, but we'll follow up
with our analysts just to double
check for you. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Uh, next we have
Representative Hernandez and
Represent.
Thank you was chair, um, also
with the, uh, early childhood
education, if you could uh
include me in that when uh
speaker uh held a meeting with
the tribal leaders that was a
common uh message as well, uh,
just Navajo alone, Mr. Chairman.
We have 32 Head Start centers,
and those are really successful,
uh, community project with
Standing Rock Head Start, uh,
ECECD granted uh funds with that
was.
by the Navajo Nation money $4.1
million Mr. Chair. Brand new
Head Start center and, uh, and
we're working on replicating
that model uh throughout uh
communities. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Duncan and
Representative group.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a
quick question for you, uh, line
item 131.
Um, can you assure me that none
of that money is going to pay
for the FMLA expenses for
childcare workers.
Representative just to clarify,
did you say FMLA, um, I honestly
don't know. I, I will chat with
the department and we can get
that information for you.
Mr. Chair, I'm worried about
that because if we start carving
this out for certain folks, um,
what about everybody else? And
we seem to, we seem to, you
know, that, that, uh, uh piece
of cheese we have, um, just
keeps getting holes punched in
it and so I'm very concerned
that that has that to do with
it, and I will fight that
openly.
Thank you very much
Representative Duncan. Uh, we
have Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, chair, and
Thank you guys for continuing to
play along.
Uh, very similar statement with
respect to 131 and 140.
I, I am concerned and 131 to
pilot quality improvement in
childcare, including da da da da
da da da da da.
Mr. Chair, I'd just like to see
language that places guardrails
out there with respect to that
$104.6 million is a lot to spend
in one year and a one-time
appropriation. So we know it's
going to continue over. There's
probably something somewhere
that says this doesn't revert
back if it's not spent, it gets
to stay in whatever pocket
that's there, so.
Placing guard rails with
responses to that. And
especially in the department
like early childhood whose
budgets now almost what, in
excess of $800 million.
Mr. Chair and and committee, I
would just ask that we make sure
that we put good guard rails
into place there and on
behavioral health expansion
initiatives.
Understanding exactly what those
definitions are before.
HB 2 is passed. Thank you. Thank
you, Represent Pettigrew, and I
will go to represent Ferndon
again, members, I think this is
a good example of where the
You know, there is not the, the
executive recommendation or the
executive request is not matched
by currently an LFC
recommendation, so maybe it's
bearing out a little of the
detailed work that's been done
over the interim, while I think
really uh crediting what Miss
Dinsmore and Mr. Simons are
saying there's a lot of
alignment overall and goals. Uh,
there's more detail at times in,
in some of the different
approaches. And, and we, we
won't need to spend as much time
if there's not an.
recommended amount simply
because we really don't like it,
it's already not in there, so.
Um, we're, we're gonna go, but I
appreciate very much the
detailed questions. I think the
feedback, and it's really
helpful for LFC to, to be
hearing us on that. We're gonna
go to Representative Herndon,
uh, and then Representative
Lujan and then uh I'll have a
quick thought.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Chair, I just, I'm bringing your
attention and, and the attention
to the presenter's two line 138
on page 12, and that is a $9
million appropriation for the
administration of the 9.
a suicide hotline, but it says
that this, uh, this
appropriation is contingent upon
charging fees. So if I call
because I'm having a suicide
moment. I have to pay a fee and
then on the second thing, there
is nothing there from, from the
LSC to support this unless it's
someplace else.
Mr. Chair, and presenters. uh,
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Herndon, I believe the LFC
recommendation just has it baked
into the base, using the fees.
As the funding source, uh, the
executive just put it in as a
non-recurring pointing out that
the general fund, it's sort of a
backwards contingency if the
bill passes, the general fund is
not needed, um, because it will
be covered by the fees that, um,
I'm sure will be spelled out in
the legislation. I apologize
that I'm not familiar with
what's in it yet and how it
works, but I do know that that
is the intent. And Mr. Chair,
just for clarification, we are
looking to charge people fees
for using the 988.
hotline?
Uh, Hernan, let's go back and
pull the legislation to get
clarity. I know there's been a
great deal of work to make this
a better service that serves New
Mexicans more. So we'll get that
legislation. And anything else
represent Fernan? No, Mr. Chair,
thank you. Great, we'll go to
Representative Luhan and then
we'll ask the analyst to go
ahead. uh quickly, mister um
chair line 1342 of the Kikiage
senior dignity Fund. I know this
is something that is just been
near and dear to um or.
Oh, vice chair and Senate
Finance and Nancy Rodriguez, and
this is something she always
championed and I'm just
wondering maybe if we don't do
it here, if we don't make a
recommendation here, maybe it
happens in the Senate, but I
just want to make sure that if
like that. Thank you.
Great, uh thank you very much.
Um, I, I would just ask briefly,
uh, Mr. Simons and Ms. Dinsmore
on line 131, any of that
funding, does that come from the
land grant permanent fund
dedication.
Uh, Mr. Chair, no, there is no
land grant money in this
appropriation. OK, well, when we
get to ECCD, we'll see sort of
some of the breakdowns because
there's obviously a lot of
braided funding there. um, OK,
so, uh, members, the next piece
through line 155 is gonna be
related to a lot of the
behavioral healthcare
initiatives. We'll ask the
analyst to go through any of the
highlights. These are things
that we've seen and we'll
continue to work on pretty
diligently. I don't know that we
need to take.
a ton of time, we do want to
sort of continue through it
though.
Yeah, I, I would, I would just
put it, I thought Mary Beth did
a pretty good job uh of the
whole healthcare authority, so
wasn't planning on on covering
these in great detail, you will
notice though, yeah, there is um
some behavioral health funding
uh online 152 $10 million for um
uh assisted treatment and um
uh funding on a a a larger
amount of 43 million on 153 for
um acute care facilities and
certified community behavioral
health, and then, uh, online 154
for for mobile crisis response.
So again, just what Mary Beth
covered before about it being
different.
That sounds. OK. Thank you.
OK, uh, let's keep going. Moving
on to the workforce solutions
department, Mr. Chair, on page
15, um, yeah, there's a lot of
uh similarity here. I will just
note on 157 and 158, we've got
another example of where the
executive chose to fund certain
items in the grow, so, um, that
1.2 million would be over 3
years for, um, youth
pre-apprenticeship programs and
a 1.5 million over 3 years for,
um, intensive outreach uh for
at-risk youth.
Um, I would also just note for
the workforce solution
department, uh, down on online
163 funding um for the
department to implement the paid
family Medical Leave Act, should
that legislation pass, um, if
that legislation were to not
pass this, appropriation would
not go into effect.
OK.
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I prayed
my hand signal got blocked by
the chair next door to me here,
but I do want to just briefly go
back to page 14 line item 153.
And this is behavioral health,
um.
So we have uh and I'll be, I'll
be quick. Um, I had heard that
there was a $43 million proposal
for uh items mentioned in this
um line item. Um, we have a
category of uh behavioral health
centers that are part of a
federal demonstration project.
There are 5 of them, Mr.
Chairman, in the state and um
they're asking for $3.5 million
appropriation so they can
Do that full continuum of care,
including emergency response 24
hours a day and so forth.
And uh I, I really think the
language here online 153
excludes them from
consideration. Um, I noticed
that the executive request takes
3.350 million puts in.
Basically 11 million from other
category of funding and then a
total of 14 million, but LFC is
requesting 43, so I would just
like us to
modify that language to make it
very clear that these um
Community certified community
behavioral health centers may
participate in this. Many of
them are not attached to a
particular municipality or.
Uh, other entity, but there
existing and they're very
successful, and I want to make
sure that they are truly the
model for the state that we give
them what they're asking for, so
they can really hit the hit the
home run.
So I appreciate that. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you very much
for the flag and the CCBHCs. I
know it's been a constant part
of the discussion over the
summer in LLC, really appreciate
your flag to make sure that
those are included in what comes
out of this committee.
Uh, OK. Do we have, um,
I don't know that we have any
other questions, so let's keep
on going.
Oh.
Representative Lujan.
This, are we, are we on 15.
Yeah, we're on page 15. Thank
you. I'm kind of reading ahead.
I, I apologize. So, um, line
item, uh, we are 165, we are
putting the uh 500 out of the
650 requests from the executive.
I'd like to see if we, based on
testimony in a guardianship
services. I think we can, um, I
think we can look at if we can
flag that to get it to that full
amount if possible. Thank you.
Thank you. OK. Um, let's keep on
going.
OK, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, the last item on
page 15, um, it's line 167. It
is 5.4 million for the
Department of Health, uh, to
offset projected shortfalls at
two of their facilities, the New
Mexico Behavioral Health
Institute and the Los Lunas
Community Program. I just wanna
put this on your radar as well,
uh, Department of Health has
struggled for years with the
facility, um, with that program,
uh, they have a structural
deficit within it. So every year
is a challenge for them. They
are working on.
Um, things like increasing the
census to try to help with the
revenue, but they are still
seeing a shortfall. So I just
wanted to make you aware of that
5.4 million to help keep the
facilities running, um.
as well as they can be, um,
going to page 16, uh, 1 other
DOH item I'll bring to your
attention is line 169. This is
for local health councils is $3
million. Um,
I think that works for DOH. I'll
take you down to environment
real quickly, just a couple big
ticket items, um, line 175 is
$50 million and that uh is to
support funding the
investigation and remediation of
neglected contamination sites.
And online 178 $75 million for
the development implementation
and support of the strategic
water supply program, um, I
realized these are two very
large amounts. I believe I saw
the secretary here earlier if
you have questions, I don't know
if he is still here.
There he is. I, I'm not doing
very well with these secretaries
right behind me.
Um,
so, uh, but with that, I will
turn it back over to Joey.
Great, let's go through page 17
and then we'll flag for
question. Well, actually, let's
go through line 181.
And um.
Yeah, just take us through line
181. Sure, Mr. Chair, so, uh,
yeah, online 18 when you see um
uh $10 million recommendation
from the LFC and $20 million to
the Office of the Natural
Resources Trustee to support,
um, uh, their work, uh, uh, for
injury claims, um, for.
For uh New Mexicans, uh, the
LFC, um, and I think actually I
think both the LFC and the
executive have $10 million from
the consumer settlement fund,
the other 10 million, uh, for
the executive would be from the
general fund.
Great. OK, let's go back. Let's
have, uh, any questions on, uh,
page 16.
Uh, first representative Saana,
then Representative Doo, and
then we'll keep going.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, I
want to start at 171.
Uh, for the development
and patient support of climate
change initiatives. It is
February 4th and 61 degrees
outside, Climate change is real.
Is this part of this for the
tree tree, um.
Thinning, is that part of this
or no?
Um, uh, thank you. I don't, uh,
I know the secretary is here. My
sense is that this is not
related to watershed restoration
and some of the thinning
practices. Uh
um.
This, uh
We're here on uh line 171.
Uh, Mr. Secretary, if you wanted
to add anything to that, that's
great. If not, you can follow up
offline too if that's OK.
Mhm
Sounds like, go, come on up.
Um
Yeah.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
good to see you both. Um, the,
the special appropriation that
we're seeking for our climate
change initiatives has
everything to do with, uh,
implementing, uh, the clean fuel
standard, uh, building a bridge
to when we're generating the
fees in order to be operational
for some of our climate work,
greenhouse gas emission
inventories and things like
that.
OK.
Mr. Chairman, I believe we need
some money in that, especially
for clean fuel standards.
Um, OK, 172.
Got stay there,
um, for the development and
implementation of compliance and
enforcement strategies,
including laboratory analytics
and confinement and and
enforcement strategies, um, this
morning we talked about, um.
60 or 70% of the gas and oil
industry polluting beyond the
legal limit, breaking the law,
so I believe this is where we
are actually totally need money
for compliance and enforcement
strategies.
OK? And then I want to go down
to 175.
contaminated site contamination
sites. I know in Burnley
Academy, it's probably all over
the place, but there are a lot
of contamination sites that that
need to be dealt with, um, I get
it every day because there's uh
dry cleaners in my in my
district, but I believe it's
everywhere in the states, so,
um, this is something they need
to look at. We need to fund if
possible.
And then, um,
The the 176 for the development
implication support of PFAS, um.
Substance rule litigation with
the findings out at Hollman
Lake, things are only gonna get
worse, so we need to make sure
we have money in that for this
department to do what they need
to do in that area.
But they
is that
one word in 181 for the National
Resources Truste again PA
pursuing emerging natural
resource injury claims because
Hole Lake alone is gonna be
pretty big, right, thank you.
Great, thank you very much. Uh,
we're gonna go now to
Representative Dow then
represent little.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you Secretary. Um uh my.
Question is, where did it go?
Oh, on 177.
Um, what is the fun balance
right now and our communities.
And what, what are our
communities able to access this
loan fund.
Most people want grants.
Um
Mr. Jarrett and Representative
again, sorry that my shoulders
to you, just trying to use the
microphone here, um, yeah, the,
the fund balance we've deployed
all the money out of the rural
rural infrastructure, um, fund,
the RIP program, if you will, at
this point, um, it's one of our
most popular funds because we
can grant money out of that out
of that fund to the detriment of
its revolving nature, though,
um, but we can grant it's one of
our most nimble funds. It's been
the most productive to use
after.
fires and floods, um, so, uh,
balances down.
There are, there is some money
coming in out of the revolving.
And um
I apologize. Was that the extent
of your questions? Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you Secretary.
That's fine. I, I mean, I, I
want to advocate for this fund
to be higher, um, when the
governor gave um this sort of.
What's your reach for the moon
idea for your ICIP if we could
fully fund one project, this is
a couple of years ago. Um, I
couldn't believe how many were
water wastewater infrastructure
projects, it, I mean, I don't
know that we could ever find
enough for this, but it's hard
to take care of healthcare when
the hospital loses its water,
it's hard to have children at
school when you have to send
them home because there's no
water at there's no water at the
at the schools. I mean, we are
facing that in a lot of our
communities, and I hope we can
get a lot more fun.
than this because when we've had
our school shut down multiple
times. Our hospital has, has
been in crisis. I mean, and if
we're talking about climate
smart practices, losing so much
in um just bad pipes, lack of
infrastructure, I hope we can
put more money in this. Thank
you.
I'm happy to hear it's, it's
being utilized. I was concerned
that maybe folks couldn't. Thank
you. Great, thank you,
Representative Dow. Next we're
gonna go to Representative
Little, then.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I
would like to direct us to uh
line 169, please. Um, the
request for local health
councils, uh, of $3 million. Is
this inclusive of the tribal
health councils as well in the
state and and uh.
Sure, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative Little, I, I
believe so. I believe that this
is intended to reach all of the,
the health councils, including
the tribals.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, and uh
uh I'm curious about this number
because I'm aware of, I believe
we just heard House Bill 75,
which was a request of 43
million big difference of 43 to
3 million, so I'm uh uh would
like to flag this Mr. Chair if
it's uh appropriation in a bill,
um, there may be other uh
considerations made.
Thank you so much.
Thank you very much,
Representative Little. Next, we
have Representative Pettigrew,
then ranking member.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Uh
Presenters with respect to
Line 177.
Um
talked about the fact that the
balance is down. We have an
option for a grant.
can
And I don't have to have it
today, but does the rural
infrastructure revolving I says
long fun, have an option for
issuing grants in lieu of loans.
Mr. Speaker, and, and, uh
Presenters
You know, this summer,
Um
was a $100 million.
Dedicated to uh portions of it
to DS DHSEM and to the travel
units and to enemy.
And then to the local community
in Riosa.
And
It was interesting was the
tribal side of that.
was guaranteed a grant.
The village of Redosa and the
damage that was done around
Redosa and downstream.
That was a that was a loan.
That's the way it was described
in the, in the bill that was,
was done during um.
During the special session, and
that concerns me with respect to
that, so, Chairman, I'd, I'd
like to have an answer on that.
And the other thing I'd like to
have an E on the water. We have
a house joint memorial that
represented Sanchez is put
forward with respect to water
and wastewater, um.
Personnel
Assisting with, with getting
certifications and some other
things and that.
Does that, does that from a
community, from a,
from
Because a municipality out
there, does that give them the
ability to go after.
certifying their people is that
considered a project because
it's a long term process.
Right, from getting from a level
one all the way to a level 4.
So I'm just kind of concerned,
is there a way that this could
be converted because I'm not
saying that it's not needed. I'm
definitely not saying it's
enough.
But
We're kind of picking personal
out who gets it as a grant and
who doesn't.
And that concerns me and that
first state that
Lives in equity. I have a
problem with that. Thank you.
OK, uh, thank you. We're gonna
go now to ranking member
Chatfield and represent Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
I'm looking at line 181.
The Office of Natural Resources
Trustee.
Excuse me.
And I'm thinking about the go
King mine. I'm thinking about
POs in eastern New Mexico
thinking about POs over in
Albuquerque.
And uh I know there was recently
a, a settlement award that was
about like $17 million and, and,
uh, I don't think she got any of
it and it should have went all
to her office and uh Mr. Chair,
I know that uh we have 10
million in here, uh, proposed by
the LFC. I wonder if we could
get a little closer to the full
award.
Uh
Thank you, Mr. Chair. What say
you?
Thank you very much for any
member Chapfield. I think we'll
flag that we see Miss Stebbins
there, as Hart Stebbins, um.
Anything you wanna add about
your ability to to pursue
natural resource claims.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Maggie Hart Stebbins.
I'm New Mexico's Natural
Resources trustee. Um, the
request that LNRT has made for
um in the special appropriations
is for assessment fund that will
allow us to pursue new claims
against polluters, um, and, um,
Relieve the taxpayer burden for
restoring sites that have been
injured for natural resources
that have been injured, um, uh.
Mr. Chairman, uh, ranking member
Chatfield, um, you're absolutely
correct, there was a natural
resource um injury settlement
that was reached, it was not,
did not include the trustee's
office at the time, but there
was, there was, it was a $23
million recovery from Monsanto
for PCB contamination, um, after
attorneys' fees, I believe it
was about 17 or $18 million that
went to the consumer settlement
fund, um, but federal law and
state law do um direct.
Natural resource damages to the
trustee funds so that they can
be used for natural resource
restoration. So, um, again, we
were not part of that claim, but
um I think there's a good
argument that those dollars
should have come to the trustee
fund, right, and, uh, regular
member Chatfield.
Anything, I, I guess trustee uh
will you be able to pursue a
wider range of claims with
additional funding.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, absolutely.
And so I have now been in this
uh in this job for 5 years and
we have now identified a number
of natural resource damage
claims that we wish to pursue,
um, and they are long term
claims, so they involve uranium
mining in um the grants mining
district, um, claim against um
potentially against Los Alamos
National Labs for Natural
Resource injuries there, the
PFOS cases that you mentioned,
um, we expect those to be um
multi-year um expensive claims,
um were expensive assessments
that will lead to our natural
resource injury claims, um, and
this year we were um informed by
the Attorney General's office
that we will now be responsible
for the cost of any outside
counsel and for um some of these
claims that will absolutely be
necessary. So we have tried to
factor that into our estimates
for the um what it's going to
cost us to bring these claims
into the future.
So Mister Chair, I think what I
wanna bring out here is that
it's not just pursuing claims,
although the claims that we're
talking about are huge.
Federal government, there are
things that a normal person
can't deal with.
But it's also restoration of the
areas that were affected, which
can be a monumental task.
And uh we need to, we need to do
that restoration, we need to put
the money in there and I just
think she was unfairly left out
of the.
Award
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much, ranking member
Chatfield. Uh, we'll go next to
Representative Duncan, then
Representative Lohan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, my
question was asked by the
ranking member.
OK. Uh, Representative Luhan,
thank you, Mr. Chair.
I would just like to support
what represent a little um
flights and also, um, and you
the discussion with the natural
resources trustee. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much. Uh,
and then, uh, oh yes, pleaseent
Hernandez.
Thank you uh for the trustee,
uh, Mr. Chair, uh, uh, I
understand that that there's
gonna be a community meeting
Wednesday in water flow, New
Mexico regarding the San Juan
Jeation, um, mine clean up, um,
the cost of of these community
outreach engagements, is that
factored in to your budget
requests, or is that something
that uh, you know, we'll need
require additional funding.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, sorry.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Hernandez, thank you for that
question. We do include
community outreach as part of
our um.
Staff costs. So we do not, so
for example, with um when we
have a recovery and we have
dollars to use in a community,
we will um do that outreach, um,
but we do not charge that
against um against the, the
dollars that will be used for
restoration. We, that's what we
do internally, um, and
Um, Mr. Chairman, um, I'm not
aware of that meeting, but I
would love to get information,
so I'll reach out to your office
if that's OK.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Representative Fernandez.
Uh, OK, Represent Bohan.
Oh, you, I apologize. I gotta
keep up on my list here. Uh,
thank you all members, um, if I
could ask for the, uh, the
secretary to follow up the
member's flag the cleanup fund,
um, if we can sort of have if
there's a list of sites, uh,
that can be addressed as well as
sort of an overall assessment of
sites, uh, we don't need to go
through that now. I think it'd
be great to follow up on,
appreciate the interest that's
been expressed by different
members.
Um, on the potential for using
these dollars to help clean up
sites all across the state.
OK, uh, let's go ahead then to.
Uh, finish out page 17.
So yes, Mr. Chair, I'll just
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'll just point out
one, on the line 188, the
children, youth and Families
department. So there's been a
lot of discussion uh about uh
liability uh of the of CYFD and
some and some large payouts.
This would represent the
agencies um insurance rate
increase for FY 26 and, um, we
just included it as a special to
highlight that particular item.
I'll also, if you want me to to
move on to public safety, I'll
I'll note a big item online.
192 $40 million in total from uh
the LFC and 25 million from the
executive to continue uh
hepatitis C treatment in our
prisons.
Um, Mr. Chair, committee
members, I just wanted to add
something very, very quickly
line uh 188 picture we mentioned
with the liability rates, that
is in the base of a
recommendation on the executive
side for CYFD.
Thanks.
Great. Thanks. Quick question
for some doubt.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the presentation. I am
looking at the number of lines
that are for contracting with an
external entity to conduct a
great study, conducting uh that
was on 186 at external energy to
conduct an organizational health
and employee survey and develop
strategies, um, on 189 to uh
hire an external contractor to
maximize drawdowns of the the
title 9 revenues.
I do think we probably need the
foster care provider study
because they've their voice has
been left behind, but why do we
keep conducting studies instead
of implementing the reforms.
This is millions of dollars'
worth of more studies when it's
time to implement reforms. Thank
you, Chair.
Thank you. Uh, Vice Chair
Dickson Thank you.
Um, just a quick question, um,
line 185, the Children's Trust
Fund.
I thought that LFC had a
recommendation somewhere. Sorry,
um, Mr. Mr. Chair and
Representative, this is one
where actually we should have
consolidated two lines, there's
one in the fund transfer for
LFC, $10 million. Thank you so
much. I appreciate it.
Thanks. Uh, let's keep on going.
So, uh, I represent Lohan.
Thank you. I want 93, um,
corrections, uh, to expand the
re-entry services, career
technical programming and
housing.
Opportunities for New
Mexicorections Department
population.
Um, the other state funds
appropriation is from the.
So it's this is a 2 million
that's recommended from the
Community Corrections Grant
Fund.
And can you, can you expand on
this, please,
Mr. Chair Representative Lujan,
yes, this is uh recommended from
the Community Corrections Grant
Fund, um, I'm not sure if
anybody from corrections is here
today. I don't have too much,
yes, wonderful. I will.
Uh, defer.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Luhan,
so that we've had that special
the last couple of years and
what we've been using it for is,
you'll see in the two
recommendations that the
contractual services in the
community corrections fund has
not been funded at the level
that we've had the growth, um,
in the in our RFP awards from
2024. So we've been using that
for behavior health services to
transitional living centers.
It's to support the current
contractual services in the
program and the community
correctional.
Fund is
All the appropriation to our our
relatively new reentry program
and non-recurring, so we have
been trying to support some of
their initiatives using our own
money instead of asking for
additional general fund.
OK, mister, I, I'd like to.
Yeah, I'd like to see how you,
how those are more on that
because this is necessary. This
is working.
We've been to, and you know, we
see uh LFC went and visited some
of our um.
State facilities and we know
that these are really important
programs, so.
I'm just not, I think I'm not
capturing everything. I know
this is separate fun, but I, I,
I really think this is really
important program that we have
in the in corrections and Mr.
Chair, just real quick, uh,
Representative Wuhan. So for a
couple of years, I know the
secretary introduced, you know,
Mr. Brown or new reentry program
director, but a couple years
prior to that we had had some
large
reversions to the fund, so we're
just trying to help support that
and use our own money where we
could.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much.
OK, uh, let's keep on going.
Moving on to the next.
So
Sorry, Mr. Chairman, we went on
to the next page Department of
Public Safety. I'll just notice
a uh note a couple of things
here. So one on line 196, the
million dollar for helicopter
maintenance should be included
with line 203, 1.5 million for
law enforcement aircraft
maintenance, uh, additionally,
I'll note, uh, there is online
$2026 million.
Uh, recommendation for purchase
of law enforcement vehicles, um,
I believe that was actually
requested, uh, in the executive
as a, as a capital outlay. Um.
And with that, Mister, Mister,
Mr. Chair, I don't have anything
on Homeland Security, so I don't
know if, if we're good to before
we get into public ed, if you,
if there are any questions. I
don't know if there's any
questions there. Um, we're gonna
have public education for the,
oh well, are there?
Uh,
OK. Let's
Go ahead. Sorry, Mr. Chair, I'm
on a high learning curve here on
the Department of Public Safety
for the vehicles with those, are
those only for state police or
could city and counties apply
for those.
So, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, uh, this is for,
this would be for state police.
OK, thank you. Great.
Uh, thank you very much. OK, uh,
members, the next couple of
pages are public education.
Um
We have a, we have a uh.
A work group dedicated
specifically to public public
education. I think that's where
we'll go through in detail these
um.
Let's just, so let's do this,
we're gonna, no questions on
this, like the analyst to go
through some of their
highlights. There's a public ed
work group that's going to delve
deeply into this, uh, good
though just to highlight it now,
we won't have any questions
since we have that work group.
So, yeah, Mr. Chair, I really
the only I'll highlight a
couple, but really the only
comment I'll make on public ed
is that, um, the LFC
recommendation continues a lot
of programs that had been funded
in prior years, so there's a lot
of initiatives, um, that are
currently existing that are
continued. I'll note line
$21,240 million for career
technical education in both the
LFC and the executive. So some
uh recruitment and retention uh
work online 214 out of school
learning opportunities.
$15 million online, 218, and
then um on line number 226 on
page 20, um, reading in inter
intervention programs, $30
million in both the LFC and the
executive recommendation.
Thanks. uh, Mr. Chair, committee
members, yes, I'll just
reiterate real quickly, uh, what
Joey was just saying about
continuing projects, you can see
pretty much in those line items
that they're all support, they
are supported by both the LFC
and the executive typically.
It's sometimes a differ of um
differing amounts. Um.
As for that, uh, just a couple
that I'll point out to you
really quickly on page 19, um.
Oh wait, I'm so sorry. Did I
miss the page?
Well, that one.
Oh, OK. Apologies. Yes, OK. Line
210, um, executive has a
recommendation for $4 million to
implement special education
initiatives, um, and then online
211, there is a $9 million
recommendation from the
executive, and that's to support
schools with the highest ranked
family income index. Um, but I
don't have anything else on this
page, so.
Great, uh thank you for that.
Um, we'll go into higher
education again, uh, this will
be a subject of its own specific
work group.
So Mr. Chair, moving to higher
education, um, on, I'm gonna
start on page 21, line 232, so
there's a $40 million LFC
recommendation, uh, and a $25
million executive recommendation
for building replacement and
renewal for higher education
facilities, uh, the LFC
recommendation that includes up
to $10 million for a facility
demolition. Um, we talked a
little bit about line 233, um,
when we were, we're talking
about do it, um, also a note.
uh online 2036 of $15 million
recommendation from LFC and a
$25 million recommendation for
the health professional loan
repayment program, um, in the
LFC recommendation that would uh
include a priority for those
working in a behavioral health
setting, uh, another large one
we have here is online 238, uh,
the technology enhancement fund,
that's $20 million in the LFC
recommendation and $10 million
in the executive.
Um, OK, uh, let's, let's see if
there's questions on page 20 and
21.
OK,
uh, we've got, uh,
Representative Silva, ranking
member Chatfield, Representative
Baca, then Representative Mohan.
And we'll keep going from there.
Thank you, chair. I'll skip on
one, on a couple pages it builds
up. I know. I'll, I'll be brief,
so, um, thank you, chair, um,
and thank you, uh, Mary Beth and
Joey for sticking it out with
us. So, um, I just wanna name
online 229, uh, I would like to
recommend that the committee
consider moving that 3 million
to um to the LFC side. Um,
Burrell College, just I think
provides a lot of resource for
southern New Mexico and for New
Mexico in general in terms of
recruitment and retention of um
of healthcare professionals in
the state. Thank you. Thank you,
chair.
Thank you very much, ranking
member Chatfield, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
we have a huge shortage of
veterinarians in the state of
New Mexico. We recently, uh, did
a, an agreement with uh
Texas tech to have a vet school
over there in uh in Amarillo
close to where I live and, and,
uh.
So we need to support the
various things that would bring
more educate more uh
veterinarians into our state
and, and keep them there, uh, so
I see in the veterinarian loan
repayment fund. I see that the
executive.
Has 5 million in that fund, but
LFC has nothing. Uh, I wonder if
we could.
Think about that a little bit.
We need vets in this state.
Excellent. Thank you for
flagging that ranking member
Chatfield. We'll go next to
representative uh Lujan and
Reinbach.
Mr. Chair, um, I echo on the
the.
The comments from Representative
Silva and Representative ranking
member Jatfield. Great, thank
you, Representative Baca,
please. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
and uh thank you for your
presentation. Uh, Joe, I got, I
got a question for you. Is there
anything in our recommendations
or re regarding funding for our
major college athletic programs.
Um, you know, one of the things,
Mr. Chairman and Joey, we, we've
been with you guys have heard me
talk about is that when we're
looking at our programs here,
it's in my, it's my opinion that
I would like our coaches to be
focusing on the sport rather
than fundraising and other uh
activities just to make basic
needs, um.
You know, I, as, uh, as a, as a
player myself at UNM, I did get
to see a couple of good
athletes, uh, one at Florida.
One at University of Texas.
We didn't win though, but I did
see Evan Smith run for 300 yards
against us, but that was uh, you
guys may have heard about him,
right? Um.
But Mr. Chairman, I, I do think
that uh I understand that.
It's very difficult with
reoccurring funding. So Mr.
Chairman, I would ask
respectfully consideration that
we look at growth funds and give
our major colleges an
opportunity to help build their
program, um, and so that they
can, you know,
Not we see the benefits to the
actual progress we're talking
about UNM in New Mexico State,
but also to see as far as the
benefit to the community. We
talk about economic development,
we talk about those businesses
in those areas around the
stadiums.
And also we know that they're
very the the balance between.
Our revenue sports and how they
fund other sports. Um, now, Mr.
Chairman, I just, uh, I don't
know the amount and I don't know
if, uh, if possibly Charles can
look at the amount and and maybe
get some recommendations on what
that would look like, but I, I
do think, Mr. Chairman, that
that
Would be an opportunity for this
committee, especially if we're
utilizing growth funds.
Excellent. Thank you very much
for that, uh, that flag we're
one of members, one of the
things here is, you know, as we
work to have capacity for
legislative-driven initiatives.
Thank you for flagging that, um.
Then, so, uh, now we're gonna,
we've got I've got
representative Garrett,
Represent Duncan, I know there
will be other representatives
Sareana, uh, so let's go to
Representative Garrett. Uh,
thanks, Mr. Chair. On line 228,
uh, the Higher Education
Department for high school
equivalency tests. I know that
the executive put in uh uh
1,250,000.
Um, they have asked me to
support a bill bringing it up to
2 million, so I just wanna.
Take that, that'd be $750,000
more, so please tag it.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Representative Garrett, uh,
Representative Duncan and
Representative Sainana.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I'd
just like to echo also, uh, for
my good friend, the best looking
lineman that ever came out of
UNM.
Um, and obviously great
statement statesman, um, and
ambassador for UNM. I agree with
that, uh.
It takes money to make money and
and uh so we need that one
clarifying question if I could,
238, um, technology enhancement
fund. Can you tell me what that
is?
Yes, I'm Mr. Chair and and
representative. So the
technology enhancement fund was
created in statute, and this is
sort of, um, we can get you more
information on what exactly that
funds, but it's a statutory fund
and it's for research at our,
um, at our uh research
universities and and said thank
you, Mr. Simon's secretary, if
you want to add anything, feel
free, you don't have to. I just
want to recognize and appreciate
you.
Mr. Cherry, it is a matching
fund for universities and
specific fields of interest to
the state of New Mexico, such as
water, ag, and other technology.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. That
answered it. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you Secretary.
Thank you very much from Duncan.
Uh, we've got Representative
Sareana, then Represent down.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, really
quickly, 2:33, um.
improve cyber posture to comply
with the state's cybersecurity
standards. I'd like to see some
money in there because um.
As universities get hit with
cyber problems or attacks, uh.
We should have something in
there for them to bounce back
quickly. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you very much for flagging
that Representative in Yemen.
Uh, we've got represent Dow and
represent Verrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Joey. Um, I just want to
echo what several of my
colleagues have said on line
229, uh, we've got to grow
interest in the healthcare field
and um uh the College Burrell is
a great example in southern New
Mexico that we need to, to
support on 234 on the statewide
support for dual credit programs
for Mexico high school students,
I am thrilled to see that and
I'm very appreciative of all of
our colleges that have invested
in.
this, you know, and some have
MOUs or memorandums of
understanding with the high
schools, a lot of them don't.
really excited about this and to
see where it goes, and I hope
that um
We have some
Program, some, some certificate
programs that we can promote as
well. Um, also on
Oh, I lost my place. But I saw,
maybe I, maybe it's under
Department of Ag. Wait, hang on.
University of New Mexico. Am I
too soon?
We're not there yet, are we?
We're not quite there yet. OK,
that's it for me, chair. Thank
you. That sounds good.
Representative Erata, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I'm
just a little confused by a line
240 for the Osean Community
ditch fund for expenditures
through fiscal year 20271, we'll
be to that one we're not quite,
we're finishing out on higher
ed. We'll be to that one, no,
you're fine, uh, we've got
ranking member or excuse me,
vice chair Dixon's.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, uh,
question about the healthcare
loan repayment fund.
Um
Could you tell me if um we are
expending all of, you know, up
to the full cap on um
On the loan repayment for
healthcare professionals if
there is need beyond what has
been funded, so are there
applications that are not being
accepted because we've run out
of funds and then also what is
the average um student loan debt
for healthcare professionals and
is our loan repayment program,
competitive with.
Other states, uh, particularly
those nearby.
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
thank you for that question.
Historically, we have spent all
of the money in the health
professional loan repayment
program with the exception of
this last fiscal year. We had a
$5 million reversion out of the
$25 million that was
appropriated. That is because we
had over 1400 applicants,
however, 500 were not eligible
for the program because of this
next year, we will reopen the
program before the end of the
fiscal year to allow for people
to
reapply and do more marketing
around it, but historically we
have spent all of the money. As
far as um the average debt in
the health professional loan
repayment program. It's
approximately $100,000 the
highest debt being our
physicians, of course, the
lowest being ally health
professionals at approximately
$70,000 of debt. Um, as far as
other states, our program is now
very similar to other states
thanks to the bill that was
introduced and passed last year,
we only had a.
2 year service commitment,
however, with the bill that
passed last year, it is now a
3-year service commitment for
people who participate in the
program. It's also important to
mention that there is a federal
program named HSA that also
provides loan repayment for
health professionals in the
state of New Mexico. And if
people apply and are eligible
for that and they receive it,
they typically go with that
program over our program because
our cap is at $25,000 per
year.erssa has a higher cap.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
um, Madam Secretary. I, you
know, I think from constituents,
one of the things that I've
heard is that um, you know, our
cap, the $25,000 per year may
not actually be high enough, um,
and so I would really appreciate
if that's something that uh
could be looked at. Um, I don't
know if there's legislation
floating around this year to
address that, um, but I
certainly, you know, I think
we're all keenly aware of, um,
our healthcare challenge.
and this is an easy program that
has shown results and um so we
could expand upon it. Thank you.
Uh, thank you very much, Vice
Chair, and I want to echo those
comments. I think we have a
unique opportunity to invest
more here, and it sounds like we
would need statutory changes in
order to uh expand the ceiling
or is that something that can be
done uh by rule, Madam
Secretary.
Sorry, we should have.
Mister Char, yes, you would have
to change the statute for that.
OK, great. Uh, we've not asked
that introduction timeline.
Thank you, Madam Secretary. I
think that'll conclude it, uh,
let's, um, and I see directorly
there, we can try to explore
that, uh, adjusting that.
OK, uh, let's keep on going then
to the endless.
So now, Mr. Chair, we're, we've
moved on to the uh higher ed
institution items, um, in, in
our in specials, I'll just note,
a handful, um, before passing it
over, so on line 253, you see
$19 million from LFC in 28.8
million from uh the executive to
the Bureau of Geology at New
Mexico Tech for aquifer
monitoring and um groundwater
characterization, um, and that's
really
the big, uh, line item that's
here in the um here in the
institution items. Maybe you
will not cover any.
Thank you, Joey. Um, Mr. Chair,
um, I don't have anything on
this page. I apologize, but I, I
would ask you to just look at
page 22 very, very quickly,
lines 239 and 241. I just want
to point out these endowments
that are being recommended by
the executive $25 million to
support the UNM School of
Medicine faculty recruitment and
then $25 million to establish an
endowment to supplement the
school of medicine's student
recruitment and retention as
both of those efforts to feed
into
The overall discussion of trying
to recruit and retain healthcare
professionals in the state.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, very
quickly on the um faculty
endowment uh item, so the LFC
recommendation doesn't include
the, the endowment, but does
include $2 million in uh in the
base in the operating budget
for, um, for faculty, uh, for
faculty, uh, initiatives.
Street
OK.
Um
OK, we've got uh representative
Pettigrew, represent Lujan, and
then ranking member Chatfield
represent Pettigroup.
Thank you, Chair. Um,
My first question comes on line
254.
Is there an LLC component of
that somewhere, Joe.
Uh, so, uh, Mr. Chair and uh
Representative, I don't know of
that, but we can, we can check
that out. I don't know of one,
but we'll, we'll make sure that
that's the case.
Thank you, chair, and the
impetus for that question is
Skills is separated.
We are fiscal agent at CNM.
But the money is through PED.
So, just making sure that
there's a way for that.
Continuation of the statewide
conflict.
And in what CNM does with that
And also,
With respect to how they get
their funding to proportion out
the money, um, some of those,
some of those parts and pieces
will come out in the PED
discussions in our, in our
group, and then hopefully well
before the 14th cause it'll be
too late to act on some of those
things.
So, um,
That was my first question, uh,
chair and, and Joey with respect
to
The money on line 253.
I would like to have a more
detailed.
Response and
Given the Bureau of Geology for
Aquifer monitoring and improved
groundwater characterization.
Um, I know the work that New
Mexico Tech has done with
respect to this since the water
Data Act.
There is a level of concern for
me, Chairman, that we're funding
the OSC.
funding the Mexico Tech, we're
funding New Mexico State and UNM
for water quality.
And once again, it's a spread
just very similar to what we're
doing with uh cybersecurity.
And what, what I talked about
earlier.
Um
Where's the right place for
this? This is the right one. And
in my opinion, our land grant
institution would be the place
for that for the OSC's office.
My thoughts and I'd love to have
some detail on that and
Moving forward later, not
obviously not today. That's
great. Thank you, Representative
Pettigrew. Please provide that
detail, uh to represent
Pettigrew in the committee. OK,
we're gonna go next to
Representative Luhan and then
ranking member Chatfield.
Uh, Mr, Mr, thank you for
bringing up lines, um, 2:39 and
241.
And those
both, you know, combined with
$50 million. So what, what are
we doing to
To address this, or we just a
little far out because I know we
had the interim, um.
Appearing on the planning of the
expansion of the, the, um.
School of medicine at UNM. Is
this part of that plan, Mr.
Chair?
Mr. Chair Representative, it is
not part of the official plan
for the University of New
Mexico's medical school.
However, they do want to double
the amount of students that they
have and they do want to double
the amount of clinical faculty
that they have on rotation. So
this money would go towards that
initiative, so we can enroll
more new Mexicans at the School
of Medicine and we can pay our
faculty at the levels that are
competitive nationwide.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, you
know, I got to talk to a lot of
the the um students that were
coming through the halls over
the weekend and one of the
things they said is that, you
know, to enhance um these
programs, a lot of these things
that we're doing now, and this
is important, you know, to the
growth, um, as well, and
That was my concern during the
hearing is that if we don't
start this part of it, this is
the infra infrastructure part
we're not gonna be to the other
part, so thank you for that. My
next question is, um, um,
Line 244 to support
accessibility needs for the deaf
and hard of hearing medical
students at the University of
New Mexico. I think that that's
essential. I don't know, can we,
can we expand the ADA, what is
going, Madam Secretary, this is
a
Yeah, this is a higher education
issue. Why is that specified
here and how is it not under the
ADA requirements that we that
should already be in place, Mr.
Chair.
OK.
Mr. Chair Representative, on
that point, um, you and them
submitted this supplemental
request to support accessibility
needs, um, for their deaf and
hard of hearing, and I think
there was an operational
expenditure that they weren't
expent, uh, expecting, but we
will get clarification for you
in um update you.
Thank you. And lastly, a line
item 246.
Uh, for the sake and community
ditch fund for expenditure
through fiscal year 2027, New
Mexico State University as well.
Um
Is that already an existing,
something we're already doing,
Mr. Chair. Yes, Mr. Chair
Representative, um, that funding
will be a supplemental for the
Asean community ditch fund, so
then they can use the the
funding over the course of 3
years, um, they currently have
funding within the recurring
budget, but this would just be
an additional supplemental for
that program. Thank you for the
information. Thank you.
Thank you very much,
Representative Lujan. Ranking
member Chatfield and then
represented.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm gonna call your attention to
uh line 253.
Um
This program is, is in been in
existence for a good long while.
It's put on the ground by a very
dear friend of mine. I've worked
with her for 11 years. 2 years
ago, I put $200,000 of my
discretionary funding into this
program and the governor vetoed
it.
So, uh
You'll have to excuse me if I'm
a little bit tentative and
wondering what changed and all
of a sudden she beat out my
200,000 a couple of years ago,
we have scraped and and got
donations from ranchers. We've
funded it through the soil
conservation districts, we have
studied our waters, uh, Doctor
Kate can tell how old it is, if
it's recharging, uh, she can
tell it by the tritium in the
water.
Tell the age, uh, because of the
atomic bomb that we exploded
once upon a time here in New
Mexico. Uh, she can tell if
it's, if you're gaining water,
losing water, uh, she dealt a
lot of things about the water
and it's always intrigued me.
I'm just a very curious about
why it suddenly intrigues the
governor when she vetoed my
funding 2 years ago, um.
I, I hope.
Against hope that it's not a
weaponization of this program. I
did call the lady that puts it
on the ground. She had no
knowledge that there was a.
$28 million request in the
budget by the governor.
So I, I
Uh, if you have, uh, any
knowledge of what changed, let
me know. Otherwise, it's just a
statement.
Thank you and uh I don't think
that she's here today, but
Director Sali will ask uh Ms.
Carswell.
To offer some follow up uh on
because the LFC recommendation
is also pretty robust here with
the 19 million.
We'll get some follow up for the
committee on sort of the
outline. I think it's our
understanding that this is, uh,
to support a lot of the work
that you've seen, um, and
supported to bring that work
statewide, not change it, but to
expand it.
Great work. Thank you very much,
OK, uh, we're gonna go now to
Representative Herrera and then
representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I, I,
I still am a little confused
about the uh the um the ditch
fund, the community asse and
community ditch fund because as
I understand it, they have 2.5
million in, I think it's a state
engineer's office or or the
environment department for uh
infrastructure uh funds there.
And, OK, great. And, and so I
don't understand why why this is
here, because I know I was gonna
try and get 5 million into that
fund because our infrastructure
is just being ravaged, uh, so I,
um, thank you, secretary.
Great, uh, secretary Whitty.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, representative
Herrera. This one that we're
talking about is these Community
Dysfund for the adjudication
process. So, so it's completely
separate than the, the
structural.
Great, thank you very much from
Cerrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, my
question is for University of
New Mexico, uh, School of
Medicine, um,
How are, uh, residencies
factored into the budget, or is
that an item that gets carried
over by by another entity. I'm
asking, uh, Mr. Chairman, I'm
asking the question because uh
you and I just started a
residency program at the
Northern Navajo Medical Center,
first in the nation and all
other states are looking at how
New Mexico's doing that and, and
I'm, I'm hoping that we could
see a sur uh increase of uh of
folks from the community into
that program, but um just
wanted.
Make sure that that's secured.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman Representative, uh,
they fund their uh graduate
medical education programs
through a partnership with the
healthcare authority and get
federal matching funds, so they
put up a significant amount of
money that helps draw down
federal funds uh to help pay for
those programs.
But, uh, what, what, one last
question with you and them, uh,
Project Echo, I, I, I've been
hearing that, uh, uh, a lot
often through these hearings,
um, um, you know, I, I, I feel
like that's, that's really
successful program. Uh, I know
this, this body has, has funded
that before, and, and I know
that there's, there's a need for
that, uh, especially with, with
the with the priority of
behavioral health and just
trying to see how that factors
in into the budget request with
UNM. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Hernandez, and uh Director Sali,
can we, uh, we'll get to ask the
analyst to answer the second
question with regards to your
first question, which was
excellent. Can we see if there's
additional residency capacity if
we looked at increased
investment because I think it
the program's been around a a
while sounds like it's being
expanded. It'd be great to see
if there's uh potentially more
capacity where we could have
more residents placed in more
rural places all around the
state.
If you have anything on that
directors sleeve, that's great.
If not, we can follow up on it.
A little less than 10 years ago,
Mr. Chairman, we started um
trying to fund state funded
residencies.
Very expensive, but there are a
handful that are built into the
base budget.
I think the more effective, cost
effective strategy has been
UNM's leveraging of Medicaid and
a very significant way.
Uh, to
They've increased residencies
from strategy. Uh, but we can
get how many they've got uh
where they're placed, most of
them are gonna be placed in.
The hospital and then if they do
rotations out into our rural
communities, uh, it would be on
a rotation basis, but that is a
new program that they represent.
Excellent. Thank you.
OK. Uh, and one other quick
flag, um.
Here on uh
Line 250.
This relates on the water side,
uh, can we look, I know there's,
we're looking at investing with
enemy D for water
laboratory services, uh, I think
that this uh item we may need to
increase this to meet capacity
needs and demands that are being
placed on New Mexico State
University.
For um
Line 250.
OK, um, let's continue on.
So, Mr. Chairman, with that, we
are, um, done with the special
appropriations and can move on
to supplemental and deficiency
amounts. Um, I'll just really
flag, uh, two items, um, for,
uh, supplementals, um, there are
some small, some smaller
deficiencies you'll see, for
example, online 262, there's a
deficiency, um, but on, uh, line
261, you see it to a million
dollars from in both the LFC and
the executive recommendation to
fund uh increase.
Uh, judicial salaries that were
approved by the legislature last
year, and, um, a large uh amount
on page 25, line 287. So the LC
recommendation has a 124.2
million for um, a shortfall in
the state health benefits
program while uh the executive
recommendation includes 87.2,
uh, just a clarification on
those differences. So at the
time the funding was requested
by the department, they were
projecting 120.
2 $4 million deficit in the
current year. They've since, uh,
reduced that number and I'll
hand it over to Mary Beth to
provide some additional
explanation.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair, and,
uh, members of the committee,
so, uh, really quickly, and the,
the healthcare authority has
been working with their
actuaries to get actual actuarly
sound numbers to base these
projections on, um, much more.
accurate, uh, when you use an
actuary. So they've been working
on this and refining their need
and so at this point it is um
they are settled on 85 million
is the total. So both
recommendations um actually
already fully fund what they,
what they need, um, and just for
your information, the 85 million
would um encompass.
Uh, state employees as well as
local public bodies. Um,
So yeah, with that, we can move
on, I think.
And I'm sure we're happy to
stand in for any questions on
supplemental in deficiencies.
Perfect, thank you. Um, we've
got a few, uh, we'll start with
Representative Pettigrew and
Representative Little and then
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Back to 287.
Understand the healthcare
authority is a new organization,
but.
It's a compilation of a whole
bunch of work of
Departments from before.
How do we miss the target that
much.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Pettigrew, so
I don't want to take too long on
this. This is quite a, yeah,
you,
Madam Chair, um.
How about giving a, a written
response with respect to that
how, how we can, how we can get
to a point where for all these
years.
All these different departments
have been doing this job and,
and they have failed a couple of
times now in very significant
areas.
And, and so I'd really like a
good detailed answer on, oh my
gosh.
We had no clue or oh my gosh,
whatever the answer is. Thank
you very much, chair.
Great thank you and thanks uh
Madam Vice Chair. Uh, we'll go
now to Representative Little.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Uh, let's see, I've got a couple
of lines that I'm interested in,
uh, line 265, on page 23.
Um
Line 266 on 24 and line 269.
Uh, I'm curious as to uh the um
A cut in half.
And by the LFC in uh line item
2265, um, it's one of the
largest, uh,
The workload or the the the jury
pools that are um used and I'm
just curious as to if this is
gonna, where else this might be
uh funded from where the
thoughts behind it.
Yeah, so, um, Mr. Mr. Chair and
uh representative, so I just,
uh, online 265, so these are
supplemental appropriations to
the, uh, would be to the
district attorney in this case.
So it effectively supplements
their current year operating
budget, you know, a million
dollars increase for the last
quarter is effectively a $4
million increase over a full
fiscal year, so thinking about
it like that, um.
On, I'm gonna have to, I might,
uh, ask some other questions.
I'm, I'm gonna have to to take
uh a look at uh like 266, we
might need to get back to you on
that. Um, and, uh,
Did you say line 269.
Yeah
You know, uh, it's a $2000
difference. I, I don't exactly
know why.
Thank you very much and thank
you, uh, Mr. Chair, for the
reminder about the supplementals
being used to complete the
funding to the end of this, this
fiscal year. I appreciate that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's
all. Thank you, uh, Herndon.
Mr. Chair, I was just trying to
uh looking at uh line 265 on
page 23 in terms of personnel
costs, was this also to include
the additional judge that uh
that the second judicial
district was asking for is this
included in this line item, um,
Mr.
Joy. So, um, Mr. Mr. Chair and
Representative, I, I don't
believe it. I believe that would
be for the for the future, not
for the current, OK,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
OK, I, I don't see any other,
uh, representative Johan.
Um
She
Are we
we're going to page 25 yet or?
Yeah, we are, we are. OK, then I
would like to.
Um, look at.
Yes, line 289 development
disabilities council to the
Office of the Guardianship for
Personal personnel services and
employee benefits through fiscal
year 2026. Where's the shortfall
there? What is?
Going on there, Mr. Chair. um,
Mr. Chair Representative, um.
Just a brief overview. My
understanding is that the Office
of guardianship has struggled,
uh, for the past few years and
actually having their 200
category funded to the level
that they need. They have done
bars from the from contractual
services into personal services
in order to make sure that their
staff are paid, um, of course,
this is, you know, it takes away
from the services which nobody
likes, um, which I believe is
why they're trying to get this
request to be whole and not have
to do that, um, at all.
So
Joe, did you want to say
anything, OK, thank you. Yeah, I
think, I mean, I if like we have
to do it this way, obviously,
but I, I like to just look more
into that but to make sure that
those benefits are covered in
with this group that are doing
this work, um, also, uh thank
you uh just to 2290 $300,000 to
reduce weight lists for
guardianship. Thank you. I think
this is, this is one of those
areas that we need to one of the
services and areas we really
need to kind of
Uh, look a little more
holistically at Mister Chair,
and
I think that's all I have right
now. Thank you. Awesome. Thank
you very much.
OK. Uh, let's keep on going.
Yeah, so, um, Mr. Chairman, our
next section is, uh, would be
section 9, that's the, the grow
appropriations, um, as I
mentioned, uh, so these
These items are for uh a cover 3
years. You'll see, uh, in some
cases, um, in the executive
recommendation where there's a
general fund amount, really the
reason for that is because going
back to what I said at the start
of this presentation, some
sometimes they funded items that
were in the LFC wreck as grow as
as special appropriations.
That's why there's a general
fund amount and the LFC is, is
looking at other state funds
from grow. So I'll just
highlight a couple of these, uh,
very
Quickly, um, so online uh 307,
we have $7 million to the
administrative Office of the
courts for um judicial
districts, uh, and in related to
behavioral health, um, issues.
Um, and then on, uh, line 316.
Uh, sorry, uh, 3:14 to 316. We
have uh a couple of large
appropriations for the, um, for
the healthcare authority, which
I'll actually let Mary Beth get
into a little more deep, more
detail on, uh, the differences
there, um, and then, uh, just
I'll very briefly note because
you noted, Mr. Chair, you're
gonna have a work group on
public education. There's a
number of public education, uh,
items in the gross section, uh,
and you'll see in the language
for that, that those
Creations are from the public
education reform Fund. So LFC
endorsed legislation to uh to
reform the reform fund, uh, to
uh build in some of those, uh,
uh, you know, performance
measurement items that you all
placed in the growth fund and
have the uh public education
reform Fund reflect that, um, so
that we're measuring what we
expect to be seeing and are able
to judge whether or not we we
are uh getting value for those.
um, for those appropriations,
um, you know, there's a, there's
a, a number of different items
here from, uh, uh, investing in
evidence-based reading
instruction and evidence-based
math math instruction in um uh
initiatives to improve outcomes
for Native American students,
uh, in, uh,
Alternative, uh, you know,
innovative school staffing
models. You all heard our LFC, I
should say, heard about that a
little bit uh at the January
meeting, um, and for attendance
initiatives, uh, uh, as well.
Um, a lot of those are also
reflected in the um executive
recommendation as well, and I'll
I'll just go back to uh Medicaid
real quick and have Mary Beth
explain the differences there
related to that. Thanks, Joey,
Mr. Chair, um, committee
members, um, again, I'll be,
I'll be as quick as
I can. This again, this is an
example of just different
approaches to funding similar
items, healthcare authority had
a request for um $96 million I
believe over 3 years, um, and
it's for a demonstration waiver
expansions in the Medicaid
program and there's 5 of them
included. They, um, range, you
know, for supporting homeless,
justice involved, um,
individuals, food for pregnant
mothers, things like that. Um,
the executive.
Just funds the entire both funds
through grow. Excuse me, I will
say, so, um, so we have that uh
in common on this one. The
executive has a bucket for all
of the initiatives, um, with,
uh, not about $90.5 million.
That's a 3 year amount. So they
get about 30, a little over $30
million a year, um, from the
growth fund, and I'll note very
quickly that does not include
the federal match. That is one
difference here when you look at
the LFC numbers, so the LFC has
pulled
some of those initiatives and
chosen to fund those directly
rather than within, you know,
the full uh 5 amount total that
the agency had requested, so
just a different approach, um.
But the, uh, the LFC
recommendation, I believe those
numbers do include the
anticipated federal match from
Medicaid once these programs,
um, are, uh, implemented and
some of them are already in
progress, uh, but I believe that
that's probably a, a, a high
level for you on, on the
differences there.
Great, thank you both very much.
We're gonna go to questions.
We're gonna start with
Representative Herrera, and then
go to representative Doo and
then go from there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I
wasn't on the interim, so I
would like to know how much
money have we budgeted for the
entire growth fund. How much?
Does the executive have, how
much does the uh legislature
have that and and how much has
been?
Already, I guess, spent or or
suggested and I know it's not
spent, but suggested in this uh
in this spreadsheet. Yeah, uh,
Mr. Chair Representative, we'll
have, so for the appropriations
that were made last year we'll
have to get you information on
that, um, Maggie can, can get
some information there. Um, so
for, uh, the recommendations for
the next 3 years, uh, the LFC
recommendation for, for, for
grow including those items from
the public education reform fund
that I mentioned.
was 49 was essentially $500
million. Um, that's on the first
page of your, of your package.
Um, the executive
recommendation, it doesn't show
up here very clearly because of
the issues I've met where some
specials moved, I believe the
executive recommendation for Gro
was 169 million.
Mr. Chair, that is what I have
as well, um.
If I, if I learn that it's
different, I will, I will let
you know. Thanks. And, and is
there, is there more money
available in the girl fund for,
for legislation that may come
from this, from the committee,
well, from all the people of
the.
The Senate and House. I, I mean,
is that, is that a stop on there
at 50169. Uh, so, um, and
sorera, I think we can move
around, excuse me, we can move
amounts around within sort of
the the level that's already
been set. We wanna not exceed an
annual amount that we can sort
of absorb uh as we go forward.
We can move amounts around
adding additional grow projects
with.
reducing the current list of
growth projects is difficult,
but I think there it is sort of
uh the province of us in the
legislature, but starting with
the appropriations Committee to
make suggestions about um the,
the current proposals. This is
the first year where the
executive has been able to
propose their own grow uh
proposals, so for sure, uh,
moving money around or
suggesting asking different ways
to move funds around.
much fair game for the
committee.
But, but the limit is pretty
much 500
for a 3 year period. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, OK, I will go back to my
list. Representative Herrera,
and then Representative
Pettigrew.
Yeah
Excuse me, Representative Doo,
thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I am
back on page 25, um, I went to
make note of line 2.
I'm start I think it says 264 or
the early care and education
department for the provider
rating has increases for the
infants and toddler, um,
providers, the FIT program, um,
is, is this bringing them to
market rate?
Uh, so, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative, I don't believe
this has to do with adjusting
any um amounts. This is, um, due
to the fact that the uh
projected number of children
increased for FY 25 that they
need to support as it's an
entitlement program, which I'm
sure you know, um, they need to
support and, and provide
services uh for all these
children. So that amount is
simply to ensure that they are
whole for FY 25 in that program.
Thank thank you, Mr. Chair. I
thought that's what
285 and 284 says provider rate
increases. And I could have said
that backwards. No, Mr. Chair,
um, Representative, I apologize.
I had my lines backwards. So
line 285, the 7.6 million, that
is due to the increased number
of children, um, the, the one
above it is the uh the provider
rate increases and uh you see
two different numbers here a
little bit. The, the agency
requested the 1.1 million that
would cover the 4th quarter of.
25, um, to provide those
increases to the providers, um,
whereas I believe LFC is hoping
that they will go back an
additional quarter, um, which I
think, uh, accounts for the
difference in the amount. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
because I know they were told
they were getting a rate
increase. They gave adjustments
accordingly and that, and then
it was OK, and is that coming
from the general fund or are we
transferring that from the early
childhood fund, um, Mr. Chair
Representative, that is general
fund, general fund, OK.
Um, and then online.
I really do not know what that
says. We're CYFD starts, OK.
To address a delinquency in the
facts childcare payment fund.
What is the facts childcare
payment fund.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
that's how the agency makes
payments through the childcare
system, and the reason this is
here, so last year the agency
had a deficiency in this system.
Um, I think it was about $46,000
not very much, but unfortunately
they discovered doing the audit
process that they needed a
little bit more so that's all
that is.
OK, now. OK. All right. And OK,
so then, um, thank you, Mr.
Chair. And, and then on the, the
protective services division,
that one gets a little bigger. I
mean, I would agree with you
that 50,000 is not that
significant, but 12 million and
then the next line.
I, um, anticipated shortfalls
for protective services of 20
million. So 32 million in
projected shortfalls. OK,
here's, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Charles.
So, Mr. Chairman, uh, committee.
The line 295 to 12.2 million,
they overspent the FY 24 budget
by over $12 million according
to.
And what appears to have been
happening is at some point in
time, they were not claiming as
much in federal funds for uh
foster care placement staff.
But still spending money as if
they were, and so they
overspent.
Their budget and essentially
pulled that money out of the
general fund, they're projected.
To do that again this year. And
so they're asking for 20
million, and that was the
purpose of one of those
contracts that you asked about
earlier is we think that they
need to go in to have somebody
figure out how to better claim
those federal funds because in
prior years, they were, they
were claiming significant
amounts of federal funds and
then all of a sudden.
This drop off. And so go out and
get some people who know how to
do this work, uh, to help figure
out what's going on on a.
Backward looking base as well as
a current forward looking basis
to draw down all the federal
funds that we can. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you for
that, Charles, and I, I think
what we're going to find out is
we're,
I guess, you know, actually I
don't know because I, I don't
think we're compliant on any
single requirement on the family
first funds, maybe something's
changed recently, but I don't
know of them actually
withholding funds when, when
you're not compliant.
Mr. Chair, uh, we don't qualify
for families first because we
don't have a federally approved
plan, so all of those prevention
services at the federal
government would be paying for
at the Medicaid rate, uh, are
not at, at this time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Charles. So the next line, the
30, the 20 million. Oh, that was
both what the 12 and the 20, you
just, they were both, OK, of
those are related to paying for
the caseworkers to uh work with
foster kids. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you, Charles,
just outside of the box
thinking, um, when considering
that 60% plus of the cases that
CYFD deals with are children
under 5. Have there been
discussions of looking at the
early childhood fund, or, you
know, to help.
Uh,
well, because in another line,
they're asking for funding for
caseworkers. And I think that
was in the growth funds. They're
asking for caseworkers, and
that's very different than
social workers. I think I heard
less than 4% are social workers.
Um,
I'm just wondering if I know
those caseworkers are have a
heavy load and their um probably
not paid enough, but that's
where we need social workers,
that's, that's correct. And
The uses of the early childhood
fund, um, for this particular
department, uh, weren't, weren't
explored um by staff, but
because we weren't recommending
increasing the distribution
through another statutory change
we're recommending living within
what it would produce, uh, if
that were opened up, that could
be a possibility. Uh, um, my
recommendation right now,
particularly for the deficiency
is to let that sit.
Uh, until they can go back and
and build, uh, for those
services, uh, possibly the same
for the supplemental, uh,
otherwise they're just gonna
have the general fund subsidize
what otherwise the federal
government would. Thank you, Mr.
Tur, thank you, Charles, and I
just, I.
You're, you know, I, I think
we're in the same place we were
two years ago. I'm looking at
the expansions for the ECECD
agency, and I know we are not
graduating qualified early
childhood providers and folks
that are going to be qualified
to walk into those early pre-K
and pre-K rooms and hit the
ground running and we're
starting with entry level staff
and uh if we're looking at
prevention and early
intervention, I sure hope that
we can give CYFD what they need.
To, um,
Reduce the number of children
who are in crisis. Thank you.
Thank you very much,
Representative Do. Thank you,
Director Soli.
Uh, OK, we're going to go now to
represent Pettigrew and then we
have Representative Duncan.
Thank you, chair. I was gonna
move on to grow first, but since
we opened Pandora's box back up
on uh on supplementals and
deficiencies.
I will say, chair, that, that it
is concerning the number of
departments that have
deficiencies that overspent.
Or, are projected to overspend.
And then going through these
books, I'm not sure that our
books truly identify.
The
The red, the yellow, and the
green when it comes to some of
this stuff, and that that's
concerning to me and
Mr. Chair, to me, I thought it
was illegal to spend money you
didn't have.
Obviously, if you project and
you come in and you ask for a
bar adjustment or you come in
and ask for something and that's
different than
And that, and so, um, I have a
feeling, Mr. Chair, that, that
when we get to my question on
line 287, we're gonna find some
of those answers go with the
fact that we haven't been
increasing premium rates.
But intentionally, and so, not,
not us.
The, the 4th floor, so that
concerns me.
Um, with respect to the grove.
Mr. Chair, you may recall that
last year I, I gave a
significant amount of grief.
Or had a significant amount of
grief with respect to the grown
up having guard rails.
And um now we're looking at
another 500 million and I'm
hopeful that we start with guard
rails.
And before one of the comments I
heard earlier was that, you
know, it's hard to go back and
reduce the current list.
Well, if we had guardrails, it
wouldn't be.
We would be able to sit there
and say, you know what, you
didn't fulfill what you should
have fulfilled the first year.
And we're done. That was the
impetus for the grow, right?
We're gonna do 3-year trials,
and if they're not hitting
anywhere near the targets, and
we had the ability to call that
back.
That was the discussion that we
had in this very chamber.
With respect to that. So as we
go through $500 million on
The plethora of stuff in here.
Um, I hope that we, we do our
legislative duty.
In that guardrails and start
holding our government, uh, our
secretaries and our departments
accountable for it.
Specific question, and this is
something the return back at
whatever point in time we can
get it, um, preferably before we
approve the budget, but, um,
line 316.
Chairman, I would like to have
A list of every code.
The medical services for
incarcerated individuals.
Every medical code that can be
funded out of that $80 million.
So
Just getting a complete
understanding of what we are
providing for our incarcerated.
Personnel or people and uh so I
can compare that to what we may
or may not be providing.
To state taxpayers. Thank you,
chair.
Thank you very much, um.
OK, uh, we'll go now to
Representative Duncan and then
Vice Cha Dixson please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, very
quickly, uh, line 312, um, and
I'd love for an email on this
one. I explained capacity
building and um
Explain that whole thing to me
and what the goal is there if
you could, and where that, how
that money is going to be spent
on that.
Yeah, so, um, Mr. Mr. Chairman
Representative, so this, uh,
particular line item. So, uh,
the Department of Game and Fish,
uh, I think, I think there's
there's a.
There's a desire to want to
increase the capacity of the
Department of Game and Fish to
focus on conservation, uh, and
that would be the purpose of
the, the funds that would be
included here in the growth
fund.
I think Mr. Chair, could I get
that definition from them and
exactly what they're going to do
with that. Sure, um, Mr. Chair
and Representative, we can
follow up uh with a little bit
more detail on that. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you. Uh, now
we're gonna have, uh, Vice Chair
Dixon and then Represent Mohan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, my
question, you may need to tell
me that it needs to wait for the
public education working group,
um, but regarding the growth
funds on 320 row 325 for
attendance initiatives. I'm
actually curious, um, because I
know LESC had a recommendation
for a 3 year pilot program for
uh GPA cash transfers for
homeless students.
Um, and I, I don't believe that
it's in the LFC recommendation,
um, and so I'm just confirming
that that is not with 325 is and
flagging it for the working
group.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Great.
Thank you very much. Uh, next
we're gonna go to Representative
Lohan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So I'm gonna go back a little
bit to a line item 246, which I
flagged earlier. Oh, I'm sorry,
no, 244.
And then the supplemental again.
Just had it. Sorry,
uh, 305. So one is, one is a
request, uh, uh, special and the
other is a supplemental. Is that
correct, Mr. Chair?
for the same issue,
Mr.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative,
yes, um, the, the first one in
the list would be a special
appropriation, so that's able to
be spent for the rest of FY 25
and the entirety of 26, whereas
the section 6 appropriation is a
supplemental, so it's only good
until the end of this fiscal
year.
Mr. Chair, I'm just, I'm just a
little concerned with that
issue. I need, I think we need
to talk offline, maybe offline
about this. I mean, why is my
question is why, why wasn't
this, um, already incurred or
how was dismissed and we have,
I'm just, I'm, I'm concerned
about the liability here, to be
quite honest, so, um, and we can
have that discussion offline,
um, but I need more information
on that. The other thing on here
is um well I had it.
Apologize.
to chair.
But I was looking at
A corrections department. Oh
yes, here it is for uh line item
uh 298.
For projected shortfall in the
personnel services and employee
benefits and contractual service
categories of medical behavioral
health services and inmate
management and control program.
Can I get a little more at $7
million that we have a shortfall
there, and I'm a little
concerned.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Lujan. So
Our medical vendor, we went
through an entire RFI process
this last fall and the projected
shortfall for the new contract
is about $4 million you know,
it's just.
All of us as state employees are
healthcare keeps going up and
it's just risen. So with the new
contract and the behavioral
health services built into that
were about $4 million short and
then in the salaries and
benefits, um, as we discussed
yesterday in our budget hearing,
you know, we've had a lot much,
excuse me, we've had a lot
better luck with some of our
cadet classes where they used to
be about, you know, 20 cadets in
a class they're now running 40
and 50, so with our projected,
you know, with two more spring
cadet classes were projecting.
to be short in the salaries and
benefits and inmate management
control program, you know, this
kind of that kind of is just
coming to fruition from some of
the things that have happened in
our budget the last couple of
years, you know, rate increases
for those that fall into the
salaries and benefits category,
you know, this has been an issue
recurring issue and we're trying
to understand recruitment and
retention and all those sorts of
things, so.
I just think it's a flag for me
to for us to take a little bit
um more concerned with this and
this.
apartment. I have more, but uh,
it's getting I like it to get on
and if I can.
Have more information offline.
Thank you. Great. Thank you very
much, Representative Mohan.
OK. Uh, I think, uh, analysts,
thank you all very much. You've
been in the hot seat for a
little while here. Um,
Let's go, I guess we're we're
gonna go on to this now to our
uh transfers, is that the last,
last? Well, so there's 2 more
pieces, but I'll, I can try to
cover them both for uh.
Quickly and and then stand for
question. So, um, yeah, so
you're correct, Mr. Chairman,
Section 10 includes a large
number of fund transfers,
including some pretty sizable
ones, so you'll note online 332
of $534 million transfer from
the general fund to the growth
fund that would provide you all
an opportunity in future years
to continue investing in those
pilot programs, uh, before
building those uh items into,
um, agency operating budgets,
online 333, you can see 2
22 million to the water project
fund that would um allow you all
to appropriate additional uh
water projects, um, uh, you
know, through, through that
separate, uh, separate bill that
has those and, um, and continue
investment in those, in those
water programs. The 300 and uh
uh online 334 you see $350
million to, uh, that would
transfer to uh the community
benefit fund that fund is based
on some proposed legislation
that's currently being
considered, uh, and would relate
to infrastructure funding, um,
uh, and, and climate change, uh,
so online 3:35 you can see 50
million, so uh we talked a while
back and when we were talking
about DFA about some housing
money, so it's online 335, you
see a $50 million transfer to
the housing trust fund of the
mortgage Finance Authority, uh,
for, um, supportive housing.
Uh, also note, uh, uh, on, uh,
lines 338 and 339. So, um, this,
these particular items would be
for the public school insurance
Authority, so they have been
seeing some, some cost increases
and uh, you know, held off this
year on a, on a pretty
significant rate increase that
would, um, that would have been
above what was budgeted by you
all, um.
So one of the one of the things
about this is a lot of times the
public school insurance
authority is increasing rates at
a higher level to build fund
balance. This, uh, these
appropriations in both the
executive and the LFC
recommendation would alleviate
that need to pass along higher
than trend, uh, rate increases
to build fund balance.
Um
Online 340 you see uh request,
um, of, or sorry, a
recommendation for in the
executive recommendation for the
public liability fund, so it
would be a total of $50 million.
There's a, there's a $5 million
transfer in the LFC
recommendation in addition to
that, uh, you all are funding
additional rate increases in the
recurring, uh, part of the
budget in Section 8 at $17
million additional for the
public liability fund, but
that's in the recurring budget
and not uh.
Not, uh, the uh fund transfer.
Um,
Uh, uh, note again on line 341,
we've got $12 million for the
wildfareparative fund. We talked
about that earlier with Mner
where the executive had
recommended a special
appropriation for for some
wildfire preparedness programs,
um, uh, again, this is another,
uh, uh, the next line, I'll just
mention it because it is in the
executive recommendation in
another location, uh, the
workers' compensation fund, I
believe there's 5 million or I
don't might not be 5 million,
Mr. Chair, we'll have to double
check the amount um of
workers' compensation fund
Administration and the executive
recommendation. Um, it's 5
million, and um, uh, and again
on line 343, we had talked about
this earlier, uh, Representative
Dixon, there's the Children's
Trust Fund transfer. I also
mentioned 345, another sizable
one, that's 150 million to the
public education reform Fund.
Also in the area of of public
education, I'll just note, so
both the executive
recommendation and the LFC
recommendation included um
funding to support the unit
value in the current fiscal
year, the LFC recommendation
took a little bit different, uh,
approach than the executive and
uh funded that uh through a
transfer to the state sport
reserve Fund, which the
department has access to
specifically to support the unit
value.
Um
That was a lot, Mr. Chair. So
actually, before I go on to
transportation, I'll just uh uh
ask Mary Beth if she wants to
comment on any of these and then
go to questions. Thanks, Joey
and Mr. Chair, uh, very, very
quickly, I just wanted to point
out an item, um, that is funded
in different places, just so you
are all aware, is a line 331.
It's to DFA and it's the
childcare revolving loan fund.
Uh, both recommendations have
$10 million but you'll see the
LFC recommendation as a fund
transfer, and you'll see the
recommendation from the
executive in
the specials. Uh, so just
another one that's in different
parts, but is, is supported by
both. Thanks.
Great thing it sounds like Miss
Dinsmore. We're gonna go first
to represent Pettigrew, then
represent Garrett, and then
ranking member Chatfield from
San Pedigrew.
Thank you, chair. I assumed we
were gonna go through section
11, um.
We, we, we will, yes, the
presenters, uh, answered some of
my questions so you'll be. Got
it. Thank you very much,
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to
make sure I understand, uh,
pretend like I'm a 10 year old.
don't know anything, um, line
332. The government results in
opportunity expendable trust,
the general fund transfer for
fiscal year 26. Is this a new
Transfer for a new series of
grow projects, or is this
related to last year's 3-year
program that we're in year 2 of.
I, I need it kind of spelled
out.
It it's new, we'll go to
director Sali for the nuance.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Garrett, this is socking money
away for future years grow
appropriations, and it sits in
the reserves.
And so you need this transfer in
order to get 30% reserve.
And, and, and Representative
Garrett, this um this will
provide a foundation for.
Doing additional grow
dedications and serve a key
purpose in supporting our state
reserves, um, and so that's,
that's its main purpose. So Mr.
Chair and and Charles, we're not
gonna make a new series of
appropriations now.
Is that right, Mr. Chairman.
The grow is set up as a large
expendable.
fund that spins off 25% of its
corpus a year. So the intent is
not to save it all, but to spend
it at a slower pace.
And then there's a separate grow
program fund.
So the money from the
The big fund.
Spins into the program fund,
that's what you're appropriating
in section 9 for those 3-year
pilot programs.
This other transfer is loading
that big fund up again.
To prepare for the next couple
of years. This is the strategy
of spreading out our surplus
over a longer period of time.
I think that helps.
Thank you very much
Representative Garrett ranking
member Chatfield. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, on page 30.
Uh, like 3:34 community benefit
fund, you said it was a, a, a
fund to uh fund the bill that
was in the works if the bill
passed, what was the, what is
the bill and what's the bill's
number?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Chatfield, I
It's one of the very first
Senate bills. I'll double check
that number and get right back
to you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, do you know what
the bill does?
So, uh, Mr. Chair, uh, so the
bill would set up the fund and
then I believe there is a, is a,
a companion bill that makes
several appropriations from that
fund. So how do we find out, Mr.
Chair, what the, what the bill,
what the purpose of the bill is,
the purpose of the funding.
Yeah, so, um, I'm being told
Senate Bill 49, uh, has
Yeah, so Senate Bill 49 is, is
the appropriations or?
Well
Let me, let me do some quick
research and get back to you on
that. I just, it's $350 million
that we ought to kind of know
what it does. Um, next, uh,
My next, uh, probably more of a
statement. I know what it does,
and that's the perfect.
Public education reform fund,
the 350 million ft transferred
over to it and it goes, that
fund was created when money was
left over from the five-day
week, uh, schools.
Uh, appropriation and, and none
of the 4 day week schools wanted
to do it. They didn't want, they
didn't want to do it, so they
had all that appropriation they
left over, they put it, they
made a fun, they put it in
there, and they've been just
spending out of it and, uh, at
leisure.
And uh now they've just about
spent it all, and they want us
to put another 350 million in
there, uh, to, to reestablish
the fund to refurbish the fund.
Now, Mr. Chair, uh, we were in
education the other day.
Along with uh Sonny Lou and
John.
Uh, from LESC and uh it says
that the money will be spent and
approved by the
Secretary
In, in consultation with LFC and
then consultation with LESC. I
asked the two of them, does that
mean not upon approval, but in
consultation, they shall
approve. So if you read the
bill, there's, you know, a
little bit about legal
terminology, that means the LFC
just cut their self out of any
uh oversight of that bill of
that money along with the LESC
also uh cutting
herself out of oversight and
they can consult with them, but
not upon approval. So Mr. Chair,
I'd just like to register my um.
I'd like to not make that
transfer.
Or, or, or change the wording
where it's uh, where they have
to have oversight by the ESC and
the LFC like all the other
funding that goes to all the
other agencies.
I don't think it's fair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much, Ranking Member
Chatfield,
just very quickly in answer to
Representative Chatfield's
earlier question. So Senate Bill
48 creates the community benefit
fund, Senate Bill 49 makes uh
several appropriations from that
fund, so you could look at
Senate Bill 49 for the exact the
appropriations from that fund.
Excellent, thank you very much,
great questions, ranking member
Chatfield. OK, uh, I think we're
just abouthan, do you have
anything, and then we'll finish
out for today for our first
look.
Go ahead, though, if you have
any questions.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair,
um, I'm making a lot of notes on
some of the information that
you're giving, so thank you a
lot of the questions have been
asked, but I am looking at.
OK, yes, uh, line item 2 or 327
is still still public education.
I just have a question about.
Um, for the innovative
innovative strategic school
staffing models continued on
legislation of the first session
of the seventh legislature, so
this is contingent.
I'm looking at, uh, requiring
evidence-based programs, um,
using the the public education
reform fund, um, this has a lot
of information on it, um.
What project or what programs
are in the public education
reform fund, or can, you know,
how, how is this?
What bill is this maybe that
would help me and I can just get
to the bill and and get my
questions answered.
Yeah, thank you, Representative
Mohan, if you could maybe we can
follow up offline with the, the
projects that are included
there. Yeah, Mr. Chair and
Representative, we can get you a
list of those projects. I'd
appreciate that and also, um,
regarding the Department of
Finance and administration 335.
Um, so we're gonna be talking
more about the housing, um.
Budget and everything, but this
is specifically the 50 million
to MFA. Is that correct? Yes,
so, um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, just, you know,
on the fund transfer section is
a little different than every
other, every other section, so
the the transfer.
Where the agency would normally
be is the fun name, right? So
you're transferring money to the
fund. You're not appropriating
it to a department. The issue is
when we put things in our
system, we have to associate it
with the department, and so for
fund transfers, it seemed like
the logical choice. Um, but no,
you are, you're making a fund
transfer to that fund, uh, not
to DFA.
Understood, Mister Chair, but it
is the money that we
appropriated last year, that $50
million it's going into the
fund. Is that correct? So Mr.
Chair and Representative, I do
believe there was a a a similar
transfer last year. This um fund
transfer you have here line 335
would be a general fund transfer
in FY 26. That answers my
question. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great, thank you very much
Representative Mohan. OK, uh, I
think analysts that'll, that
should do it for, for us. Any
additional, yes.
So sorry, I was, I wasn't able
to get to the road section, Mr.
Chair, just very, very quickly,
um, so the both the LFC and the
executive recommendation had um
some, some items here for, for
roads, but there's just there's
a couple of differences in
total, the executive
recommendation is 322 million in
the LFC recommendation is uh 350
million. That includes $100
million for the transportation
project fund, that's a local and
tribal road projects that go
through a planning process.
And I received grants from the
Department of Transportation.
There's $188 million in um uh in
there, and I'm apologize
actually, this is cut off and I
will um get you the full
language. It, this is, uh, just,
this would be for major road
projects, um, and, uh, that full
language is included on the
dashboard that I published
earlier, and we'll also get you
a, a follow up for that and that
total language, um.
On that item. There's also $12
billion for equipment purchases
and $50 million for wildlife
quarter, uh, fund where the
department has, uh, you know, a
plan to, to roll out some
projects there.
Um
And uh just if Mary Beth wants
to
Couple cover a couple of things.
Thanks, Joey, Mr. Chair, just
really, really quick. Um, again,
you'll see a little bit of the
different approaches here, the
executive has some larger
buckets of money for kind of
more broader purposes, uh,
whereas the LFC has what Joey
just took you through, um, but I
did want to point out that there
is a $12 million appropriation,
um, on the executive side, uh,
being, uh, recommended and
that's for rural air service
enhancement, um, and that is, I
believe the only call out uh
that uh the executive has for.
transportation funding.
Excellent. Thank you both very
much. We're gonna go uh to
represent Petta Group for
questions.
Thank you, Chairman and
Then we're down, down to the
last one.
Chairman on line 352.
If I heard the numbers
correctly, there were 100
there's $100 million into the
road fund for local projects.
Yeah, so, Mr. Chair and
represent Pettigrewth, $100
million for local projects would
be on line 349, the
transportation Project fund.
this that, OK, yeah, thank you
very much.
And the 12 million is up there.
Um
equipment split between.
So
Chairman and Joey.
Where is the money and the LSC
side for road maintenance.
So, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, there, there is
not in the special
appropriations, uh, money for
road maintenance there, um,
there is money in the LFC
recommendation in the operating
budget that's part of um their
budget every year, um, for road
maintenance.
Chairman and Joey, what is that
dollar amount in the operating
budget. So, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I'm gonna have
to, to double check that number
and get back to you on that.
That would be wonderful.
Mr. Chair, I appreciate your
your willingness to allow us to
go through most of these or go
through these sections and have
this conversation, I would like
to end with a note that
At the end of the day, there's a
$3.6 billion request from
section 5 to Section 11.
We should all be we should all
remember to
Um
I think the oil and gas industry
for. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Pettigrew. We're gonna go now to
represent Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, um, I got one last
question and it's just
clarification line 317, please.
I, I know it's back, we were, I
was looking at this and I know
we were talking about.
With the public ed that we're
gonna have a subcommittee, but
can you just really quickly kind
of provides just clarification
and just a couple lines, so.
But I understand, um. Sure, Mr.
Chair, Representative Baca, so
you're talking about line 317
for the development of
Disabilities council. That is
correct. OK, great. So there is
a, you probably know that they
have an office of special
education um but it's stood up.
They've had it for a few years
at this point. So I believe that
this is just some additional
funding that they're looking for
to just increase the reach and
the services that they're
providing, um.
It's uh
Yeah, I think that's what it is.
It's just enhanced services that
they're looking to uh implement.
Thank, thank you very much for
presenting, um.
OK, I think that uh takes us to
the end of, uh, thank you,
members. So
uh, before you go, can I just
get a clarification on
something. So on your line, uh,
3:49, you do talk about the
Department of Transportation
Project fund, and then again,
which is only for the LFC, but
then on line 354, you talk about
the intra, I mean the uh rural
air service. I'm confirming that
is for an intrastate airline or
can you confirm that?
Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair, Representative, I
cannot confirm, but I do suspect
that it is intended to be, oh,
never mind, you can have a
better answer. Yeah, so Mr.
Chair and Representative, the
rural Air Service program, um,
does, it's, it's a, it's a
subsidy for uh for
For routes that are in New
Mexico, but some of those routes
do go to other states, notably
to Phoenix. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Joy. Thank you
very much, Representative Feron.
OK, remember, uh, analysts,
thanks. Let's give them a quick
round of applause.
Uh, members, that concludes our
first look, again, it's not the
last look. Appreciate the, uh,
everyone's questions in time. We
know it takes a long time. We
want to take that time,
appreciate very much the ability
to involve the executive,
hearing from various executive
leadership today, that's gonna
help us do a better job and you
all dug really deep. We do have
our second piece today, which is
our housing hearing. So we'll
let our two analysts, uh, go. I
want to thank all the housing
folk.
fo lk s who are here today
we're, we're gonna continue,
we're we'll have that hearing
next, um,
And so, uh,
Well, if, if members need to
take a couple of minutes that
which is OK, but uh we do
housing is a very important part
of uh what we want to talk
about, so we're gonna go to that
next.
Uh, yes, and please, Mr. Warwath
and
Um
Go back here to our
Yeah.
Uh, we, for our state housing
needs and proposals, we've got
Daniel Worwa, uh, office of the
governor.
Uh, we've got Taylor Cook.
Invite Taylor up.
Gilbert Ramirez.
Uh, and Izzy Hernandez.
Members, what we've done today,
uh, because the focus right, you
know, as we've heard.
Uh, the overwhelming majority of
unhoused people are in the city
of Albuquerque. We thought for
today, obviously there's a folk,
there's representatives from
Albuquerque here, members, uh,
underneath our housing trust
fund update. We have um
additional information from
communities around the state.
Uh, you know, we're not going to
have every community from the
state, obviously at the table or
or um.
Presenting to us this evening,
but we did reach out and again a
big thanks to Director Bri for
that.
So,
With that, uh, I don't
necessarily, Mr. Worth, if you
want to start us off, that's OK.
Um, appreciate again everybody
taking extra time to be here.
The committee's been here since
2 and obviously we're committed
to, to, you know, being here and
really taking the time.
Appreciate you all taking that
time with us, Mr. Warworth.
Thank you, Chair. um it's loud,
um, appreciate the opportunity
to speak. Uh, I appreciate the
initiative on the part of
Of the committee
to organize a housing-focused
meeting. Usually we do housing
in little pieces and little
snapshots, and so I really
appreciate the intent of having
a concerted, uh, presentation on
housing. Um, I'm looking here
and I don't see, I did send an
updated presentation to the HAFC
email that's slightly shorter
and uh recognition of the
lateness. Um, I don't see it
here in the shared drive on the
computer.
Um,
Uh, director Bri's gonna work on
that. OK.
And we can just dive in. I, I
think, you know, one of the
places we wanted to start,
first, I want to introduce
Taylor Cook. Taylor recently
joined our, um, our office at
the Office of Housing in the
governor's office, um, Taylor
comes to us, uh, just having
recently, um, or I guess you're
not, you're a doctoral
candidate, uh, at the University
of Austin. She actually um
focused on the Houston, uh,
homelessness model as what she
studied in that work.
has done a lot of work both in
Austin and Houston on
homelessness as well as
statewide. So just wanted to uh
introduce her, um, do you want
to say a couple words?
Just want to thank y'all for
having us today and giving us a
chance to talk to the Office of
Housing. And I think really what
we wanted to start on is a
couple things, um, some just
framing statistics around
housing. I think one of the big
things that we hear, um, a lot
is that housing affordability
issues are happening everywhere.
Um, I, I hate to break the news,
but they're happening worse in
New Mexico. Um, we've seen the
average home prices since 2017
go up 70%, um,
The median rents, um, have gone
up 60% versus 27% nationally. So
we've almost doubled the rate of
rent increase that the the
nation has seen, um, and
homelessness, um, may be most
dramatically is up 87% compared
to 40% nationally. So we're
actually experiencing much more
acute issues, um, then we're
seeing, uh, nationally around
housing. So when people say it's
happening everywhere, um, I
tried to remind folks that um
It's happening a little worse
here.
Um,
So that
To
Take me to.
There we have it. I think the
other alarming statistic is
really around new homes and one
of the big places we want to
work on is just lowering the
cost of new homes. The median
new home in New Mexico is over
$440,000 now, and that price is
out, uh, roughly 82% of New
Mexicans from, from, uh,
ownership. So this is a big
problem and something we need to
think about in a, in a, in a
more comprehensive way. This is
actually, um, our smallest money
ask is actually the biggest
deal, and that's where I'm going
to start in this presentation to
talk about the.
of housing, which is a $2
million appropriation.
Um, this is just some context to
help understand. This is
building permits in New Mexico
over the last 30 years. You can
see the Great Recession and the
drop off following that. We have
15 years of underbuilding
housing, that is the main driver
of our affordability and
homelessness issues in the
state. We simply don't have
enough housing. Uh, when you
don't have enough housing, the
limited amount of housing is
competed for most successfully
by the highest income people in
the, the prices reset to those
folks, so we really need an
approach that's not just focused
on.
unaffordable housing, but about
bringing lots of new housing.
Into the market, uh, to help
ease those, those pressures.
Unfortunately, we're trending
the wrong direction on housing
supply. You see the um the
warning orange on New Mexico in
just 4 other states that
experienced declines in building
permits over, uh, the last year.
So we're actually down 4.1% on
single family permits year on
year through November of this
year, we were down 2.2% the year
before. We're down 24% on
multi-family permits. So we're
Instead of addressing the
problem and building more
housing, we're building less
housing. So we're, we're headed
the wrong direction and.
So, and
I think the main way we think
about housing in New Mexico is
as a subsidy problem and uh
housing New Mexico does a great
job managing our affordability
programs, but this is a great
example of this is on the left,
that's the cost of the average
of uh affordable rental unit
under the low income housing tax
credit program with application
over the last few years and on
the right is the number of
units. So we're getting less
housing for our money because of
the underlying systemic issues
around housing development
costs, regulations.
ator y delays, other things that
are causing problems with our
housing market.
Um,
and I think the thing that we
found over the last year,
visiting with about 40 different
counties, towns, cities, tribes,
pueblos, um, we have really
diverse housing problems in our
state, and they range from 300
plus vacant homes in Ratton to
needing tens of thousands of
housing units built in the
Albuquerque metro area. And so,
um, our current approaches
aren't really dealing with that
huge variation in the problems
we're.
trying to address.
So what we're proposing with the
Office of Housing, Planning and
Production, which is SB 205 and
uh and HB2 appropriation. We put
the money, uh, as an
appropriation in the executive
recommendations so that the
money could move forward
regardless of the statutory
authority, but it's $2 million
and the idea is we, we really
need to create a longitudinal
approach to work on some of the
aspects of the housing system
that we're not dealing with with
subsidized housing. And so
that's really getting better
housing data and having that.
feed into a data dashboard,
working on housing systems, so
lowering the cost of
development, removing
unnecessary regulation, right
sizing building codes, the
things that help lower the floor
on development cost. Um, and
then helping local governments
to do better at solving their
problems locally. So think of it
as everything that goes up to a
group paying for, uh, or
applying for funding at the
mortgage Finance Authority,
Housing New Mexico. So one of
our biggest goals is to create a
housing dashboard for the state
of New Mexico that shows
Exactly, uh, what the needs are
in a given community and what is
happening. Um, right now, we
don't have good consistent
housing data around the state.
Uh, we don't have goal setting
in most communities, uh, Santa
Fe County needs about 7000
housing units right now. Um,
Not the county itself, but the,
the county area. And most of the
jurisdictions, including the
city of Santa Fe, don't have any
circles in terms of annual
production. So starting to move
towards goal setting frameworks,
I think across the board in
terms of just evaluating our
success towards closing the, the
supply gap. Um, coordinating
state efforts, so this graphic
shows you that's all the
different stops and state
agencies that an unhoused person
has to go through, say, to go
from an encampment to housing.
Those are all different state
agencies and it starts.
Strangely enough, with vital
records, because you can't do
anything without a driver's
license. You can't enroll in any
services, and so it starts with
a certified copy of your birth
certificate and then an ID and
then enrolling in Medicaid, and
then enrolling in SNAP benefits.
So this just shows you that
right now we are doing a lot of
things that are housing and
housing adjacent in the state,
and they're not coordinated. And
that's true for homelessness,
that's true for workforce
development and the construction
and trades industry, that,
that's true for even our
building code.
environments where we have, you
know, energy codes coming from
one department and building
codes coming from another
department, and these things
aren't aligned in terms of the
bigger goals. So that's one big
hope of ours is to bring better
alignment.
Bring wider resources to the
issues that we're facing. Um,
we've convened a working group
that's looking at reducing the
regulatory red tape around
housing, New Mexico has one of
the bigger problems around
regulations. There was a Pew
report that just dropped at the
beginning of the session that
talks about regulatory barriers
being one of the main drivers of
additional housing costs in New
Mexico, and I can tell you from
coming from my background in
affordable housing development,
we see in housing investment
capital go around New Mexic.
Mexico because of our
notoriously uncertain regulatory
environments and the amount of
time it can take. It can take 56
years to get a scale development
approved in Santa Fe County,
right? And that's, um, their own
housing plan estimates that cost
$80,000 a housing unit, that
holding costs. So these are ways
that we could reduce costs
without putting money into the
system and make our subsidy
dollars go further.
I think the last part and the
most inspiring one to me, um,
aside from building affordable
housing around the state. I also
have the opportunity to work on
7 housing plans over the last 20
years in different communities
from one end of New Mexico to
the other. And what I've seen is
everyone wants to solve this
problem at the local level, but
they don't have the resources or
planning and production to
support local governments to
create solutions to their
problems that work in their
community, right? in Clovis,
it's probably working with a
church group to help stand up
some immediate emergency
response for unhoused people in
other parts of the state, it's
going to be other resources, but
we need to work with what's
there and create the right
solutions for the communities
and one size fits all, um,
programmatic approaches don't do
that currently.
Um
And why is this, uh, why is the
legislative action and the
funding critical. So we need
statutory authority because
we're in a fifteen-year housing
hole. If we're going to fix
this, it's gonna take the better
part of a decade to fix our
housing affordability and
homelessness issues. Um, we're
going to do the best we can over
the next 2 years to do as much
as we can with this
administration, but this work
really needs to be longitudinal.
We're talking about structural
change to things like regulatory
environments, workforce
development, these things that
take a long time and so.
That's really important, um, to
keep this work going. Um, again,
the specific funding asset of
the executive budget are $2
million for the Office of
Housing. This is a very minimal
amount of money. We're not
trying to create a big office.
We're trying to leverage what
already exists. Um, we're
talking about 6 FTEs as the
initial hire with, I think some
additional funding needed on the
administrative side for, for
DFA. But it's really focused in
a couple areas of trying to
pilot some new ideas, continue
to identify where gaps are.
and come back next year with
some more concrete funding
recommendations about what needs
to be addressed. Um, but we're
trying to stay light, uh, not
another bureaucracy, but
actually an anti-bureaucracy,
one that works to sort of smooth
things out and make things work
quicker.
We also have two large executive
requests for um funding. We have
$50 million for homelessness, if
you'll remember last year, the
governor included $19.7 million
for statewide homeless
initiatives, um, over the last 6
months, we've solicited more
than $45 million in proposals
for that money. Um, and I think
the idea behind these, this
funding is really on, um, in the
best case scenario, this is like
About twice what the federal
government provides us in
homelessness intervention money,
and that we can actually turn
the tide on the like precipitous
growth of homelessness in the
state and start to implement
some systems and best practices
that have that number going down
every year. I think in a worst
case scenario where we maybe
lose funding from HUD, this
helps backstop things like we
were getting calls last week
from shelters saying that they
had, uh, 2 weeks to operate if
the when the federal funds
drawdowns closed, uh, at the
beginning of last week.
They have about a two week
window, some of them for
operations before they run out
of money. So it helps us
backstop potential changes at
the federal level.
Um, we've asked for $50 million
to focus on people priced out of
home ownership, and this is
really different. It's listed
wrong in your budget. It is not
for down payment assistance.
It's actually for the
development of new first-time
homebuyer housing and the idea
here is that with the interest
rate increases in the last years
with, with the 70% increase in
the average home price in New
Mexico. Um, we've got a bunch of
higher income renters who are
still working-class folks, but
high income for renters
typically.
that don't have options in the
market. They've seen a a quarter
million dollars dollar obstacle
put in front of them to to home
ownership. So the idea is if we
do a front end development
subsidy that gets a new unit
built, and then that money
converts into down payment
assistance, so we get a consumer
benefit and it frees up a rental
unit. This is a targeted
one-time investment to sort of
open up the housing continuum
where there's a bunch of people
stuck in our rental market. And
when you have higher income
people stock renting.
They're pulling rent up, and
that's putting pressure on the
lowest income people. So this
is, that helps contribute to
things like displacement and um,
and, and homelessness. So this
is sort of an example of a
targeted investment to fix a
very specific problem in the
bigger framework. Um,
The other thing I want to
highlight is some of the amazing
projects and proposals we've
seen for housing around the
state, again, traveling around
the state, connecting with
different folks over the last
year. Almost every community has
some sort of housing initiative.
You'll see a lot of asks. Um,
we've got a lot of these folks
in the room, the ones that have
didn't have to head home on the
train or, um, leave earlier, but
I want to just point out that,
um, there's some communities are
doing really good at this. Uh,
Las Cruces, by far the leader in
the state right now.
They're updating their land use
and zoning to be the most
liberal pro-housing zoning we
have in the state. They are
backing it up with a very
sophisticated housing department
that is queuing up housing
projects and winning lots of,
um, federal funding and other
funding to get these projects
done, and it's really a
laudable, um, program, and they
come to us with relatively small
asks to get these things
finished. They're also building
the first, um,
Sort of social housing built in
decades with, uh, the Amador
Crossing project, which they're
actually building themselves on
city land, uh, which is really
sophisticated and something we
don't see a lot. Um, other great
examples, Santa Fe County has a
pipeline, the actual county of
Santa Fe, not the geographic
region, but Santa Fe County has
asked and they have several 100
multiple affordable rental
projects in their pipeline that
they're asking for support for
Los Alamos County actually has
uh a workforce housing and
affordable housing projects that
are coming up.
I think sometimes we think, oh
Los Alamos, they've got plenty
of money, they should figure it
out themselves. But to see them
take the initiative to build
affordable and workforce housing
in their community actually
relieves a lot of negative
impacts on the surrounding
community. So I think it's
commendable the work that
they're doing. And then the city
Carlsbad, who is working on a a
city sponsored development is
actually working to acquire
land, uh, to do development on
this uh model that was done back
in, in Santa Fe in the 90s, and
it's a really good one. A lot of
communities have
land and we should be working to
help them put those in play. Um,
so I think that's one another
great sort of bright spot in the
state.
Um, I think the other thing I
want to impress on you is the
decision makers around funding
and the way funding spent at the
state housing investments, we
literally can't invest too much
money in housing right now, and
housing investments are really
different than other types of
investments in the state. When
we help fund a new housing unit
to get built. We generate 20 to
$30,000 in gross receipts tax,
we create long-term property tax
revenue. We create more
disposable income and working
families.
Pockets, which means more local
business activity, more grocery
seats, um, and the other impact
on the other side of the
spectrum when we're working to
help housing, uh, instability
when we're uh, helping defeat
homelessness. Most communities
in New Mexico are already paying
for homelessness, right? And if
we can stop it in the front end,
we can stop those costs, those
downstream costs, or the cost we
spend to help a kid get a GED
and get reintegrated into, uh,
job training and other things.
We spend a lot of
downstream for things that we
could stop upstream if we invest
in housing, and so I really
impress on you that it is, um,
Unlike anything else, we have
the opportunity to invest in.
And it works with private
sector. It does a ton for the
private sector building
community. I mean, the average
house is like $300,000 to build
in New Mexico now. That is a ton
of economic generation that
comes with every housing unit.
So, um,
That's our phone numbers. Happy
to stand for brief questions. I
know you all, thank you very
much, Mr. Warrath, uh, Ms. Cook,
great, thank you. Uh, we're
gonna go through our presenters
and go to, I think probably and
this is great, uh, uh, Ms.
Chavez or, uh, I guess Mr.
Gallo, whoever, however we want
to structure it.
Uh
They're gonna pass.
Uh, if there are physical
slides, we'll make sure that
those are passed out.
Also noting uh ranking member
Chatfield, I think is, yeah,
we'll get to that part, but um
it's, it's great to know that
you worked a great deal on, on.
Studying the successful efforts
in Houston, which I know is.
Uh, the ranking members brought
up a significant amount, which
is great.
Oh, we're
Right.
Please, good evening, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Gilbert Ramirez. I serve
as the director for Health
housing homelessness for the
city of Albuquerque and my
co-presenter.
Good evening, everyone. My name
is Cindy Chavez and I'm the
county manager of Pernao County.
So one thing I've never been
accused of as being a slow
talker, so I'm gonna talk fast.
I wanna appreciate your night
and get you through this. Thank
you. So, um, well, let me start
off and I appreciate what you
heard earlier, um, you know, the
number one predictor for the
increased homelessness
populations for any municipal
area is going to be availability
of affordable housing. And so
until we continue to address
this, I want to highlight that
without a doubt we are easily 2
decades behind.
In keeping up with the
Affordable housing needs of our
state and therefore as a result,
you're seeing an increase in
homeless populations. So there's
a direct connectivity to not
only going upstream and
investing in affordable housing,
um, that's a huge piece. But the
second piece is also downstream
is the amount of money we're
going to continue to invest in
vital continuum of services,
whether it's in the behavior
health arena and or other case
management services as a result.
So with that being said, you
have 3 documents in front of
you, the PowerPoint in which we
will present, you'll have a
graph with project items for.
social services that not only
shows the amount of individuals
served, the cost of those
services and what we're asking
for. And the last piece is gonna
be 21 development projects
between the county and the city,
uh, in Bernalillo and
Albuquerque that are either at a
point in position of
availability to be able to move
forward, the impact of that and
how many units they would
actually create. With that being
said, I'll jump into this.
Um, critical need for housing
and services. Without a doubt,
we're in a space of crisis, um,
most cities are experiencing
this, and you can connect this
to any city that again has low
rates of affordable housing, um,
California, you're gonna see
that San Francisco, New York,
and other areas. If you don't
have it, you're going to see a
huge boom and homelessness
populations because they are
being costed out of ability to
be able to maintain that. So
what you hear, what you see here
in front of us is our uh
calculations of what we are
short. Not only that, the point
in time count from last year.
which identified roughly 2700
individuals just in our
metropolitan area who are
homeless, and we know that's an
undercount and not only that,
50% of the Albuquerque residents
are paying more than 30% of
their income. The average income
in our area is about $66,000 a
year, you take that down and
look at um how many individuals
are spending more than 30% of
their income on their either
mortgage and or rent and you're
starting to see what that trend
comes from. Um, now I am gonna
paint a grim picture, but I also
want to highlight that.
You know, there's an old Chinese
proverb that says in crisis,
which we are in, there's
opportunity and that's why we're
here before you today.
Oh. So thank you, um, just to,
I, I thought the governor's
office did a really good job of
explaining the problem, but I, I
do just want to highlight one
thing to think about, and that
is that we see in our region
that the average rent is about
$11,000. That is a lot of money
for families to pay. And in
addition to that, well, I, I, I
will just say that while there's
no silver bullet, the one thing
um that I know you were
demanding of us and that we are
really focused on.
is working in partnership. So
the reason you see the county
and the city sitting next to
each other is really under the
leadership of the elected
officials, both the councilors
and the commissioners. I mean,
we have one of ours uh here,
former chair Chair Baca, um,
really was the idea that we
shouldn't be competing with each
other for resources. We have to
figure out a way to work
together. And so what you see in
the documents in front of you
lays that out. I also just
wanted to
say that both the city and the
county are making strides to
make changes that will make it
easier for us to get housing out
of the ground. The city very
impressively is now allowing
Casita, they are permitting
hotels to be converted into
housing and increasing locations
for high density housing to be
built along significant
thoroughfares, and that's
important because we know we're
gonna need as many places as
possible to be able to develop.
So with that, I'm gonna turn it
back to Gilbert.
So, let me move over to
Funding uses, uh, 100% of
funding received from the state
will, and I want to just
reemphasize this, go to
individuals who are at 80% of
the average median income. I
mentioned that in the area of
Albuquerque, that is $64,600 a
year. So if you look at who is
actually going to benefit from
this. They're at 80% of that,
which is an income of about
$52,000 annually in which they
need that support. Now, under
this, I also want to reemphasize
that under our city's workforce
housing program, we are also
going to invest money in
individuals who are at
50% of the AMI and also at 30%.
So just to give you a concrete
number of what that looks like.
Um, that means individuals who
are making $32,000 a year, 50%
and at $19,000 a year at 30%.
Um, that is the salary in which
individuals are trying to uh not
only sustain but also live, and
we know that the poverty rates
range, uh, depending on the area
or region, for I think for the
state of New Mexico, anywhere
from 16 to 18%, and that means
individuals are living with less
than an
able income to be able to not be
at risk of being unhoused, um,
for every $1 we provide, and I,
I know this is an important
thing, uh, we like to say that
for the investment toward our
area to be able to do this. If
you give us a dollar, we'll turn
it into 3. I say, uh, in some,
uh some of our development
projects we've turned $1 into 5
as through leveraging and
appropriations and so this is
just an assurance of letting you
know that the projects we have
that could be built ready and
that we can move out are going
to be wise investments to be
able to leverage other dollars
to bring them to actual
fruition.
Um, we're prioritizing senior
developments as well. We
understand we have an aging
population that has a uh limited
income that is not increasing
with the rate of inflation. And
that is important. We have uh
completed 3 projects alone that
have all been around senior. We
have one in collaboration with
the county because we're
prioritizing that as well. Uh,
we need housing across the
spectrum. More importantly,
making sure that it addresses
the individuals that have the
limited income, um, but that is
a crucial piece for us. I will
say on behalf of the city last
year, we doubled our production
on average, we were
building about 200 units of
affordable housing a year. We,
uh, last year, 408 units. We
probably could have built 900
units or we have the funding, I
think uh what you're gonna see
proposed in front of you between
the city and county joint
collaboration would allow us to
produce up to 1000 units of
affordable housing in a year
with the collaboration and if we
have the appropriate funding.
So, um, let us, let us talk to
you a little bit about what
we're asking for. So,
We're working together to ask
for in house Bill 2 $100 million
to go to the city and the
county.
And for Bill 145, we're asking
for 40% of the 500 million to be
allocated for sitting counties
with 20% for rural and 20% for
urban because we know this
problem is a statewide problem.
In addition to that,
As part of the mental health or
behavioral health bill. We're
looking for 79 million and the
big sheet that you have, this is
the list of housing projects
that are in the construction
side. This is the 79 million
that are in um both in some uh
construction, but also for
services to be able to improve
the amount of services that are
available to um folks who have
behavioral health issues. So I'm
gonna let you, if you want to
add anything else to that one.
Which
So I think, yeah, um, we'll keep
going. Uh, we've got the, a very
large handout. I'm not sure that
we have, yeah, that, that very
large handout is a list of the
of the, of all of the
construction projects and what
you'll see on these actually
thanks to the vice chair, um,
Dixon, you'll see a lot of
detail in terms of where we are
with each of the projects, so
you have a sense of what is
shovel ready, which are 8
projects and then another 13.
projects that are in
pre-development and these
projects you'll see also show
you how many and you'll see this
at the bottom of this slide that
there's a total of 2,716 units
and also uh
For a new construction, but
we're also looking at rehabbing
properties so we don't have
people becoming homeless because
the the dilapidation of those
housing developments.
Correct.
Well, again, highlighting in our
funding request with regards to
what's coming, um, and, and this
does cover the 21 affordable
housing projects, the estimated
gap of what is needed to kind of
complete those and summarize
there also with the impact
you're seeing the $237 million.
Again, most of these projects
are going to also be leveraged,
so it's a public-private kind of
leveraging sector to be able to
bring the $100 million in state
funds to be leveraged to
actually turn that into $500
million investment, right? So
this is where I go to at the
very low end, the 1 to 3 ratio,
and as high as the 1 to 5.
for every $1 we invest in
affordable housing.
Thank you on our next slide.
What you'll see is a county in
the city have also identified 12
parcels that have been
landbanked for the development
of affordable housing, and 4 of
these parcels were purchased
with funds from the Governor's
office for the proposed land
banking and affordable housing
based on zoning parameters, the
acres in this list represent a
potential for at least 600
additional new homes.
All right.
So as I mentioned earlier,
affordable housing is a crucial
component to being able to kind
of offset the amount of
individuals experiencing
homelessness, but without a
doubt, there's a need to also
continue the homeless services
and build out the continuum of
care. City of Albuquerque
currently runs the largest
shelter in this state. Um, our
numbers this past week with the
lowest temperatures we've hit in
11 years, I actually put our max
capacity at over 725 individuals
being sheltered nightly. We
opened up overflow shelter and I
actually worked that shift
myself to serve.
another additional 87
individuals per night. If you
include our family housing
navigation center and our
women's housing navigation, we
were averaging over 1000
individuals being sheltered per
night, um, and that was just
within our network. Now I know
oftentimes we talk about the
fact that individuals uh or New
Mexico in Albuquerque or or the
county that some of the funding
um is dominated by our regional
area. We continue to do
improvements in regards to the
data of who we are serving, and
we know that um overwhelmingly
a large percentage and I would
say it's just under 80% of the
individuals were identified are
identifying as New Mexicans,
whether they're in Albuquerque
or not. The work that we are
doing serves New Mexicans, and
that is our, our role and our
job. We do not turn them away
because they're from other
counties, but we also know that
the surrounding cities and other
areas do not have the ability to
stand the shelters up as we
have. Our shelter has been
renovated. We have 12 dorms, 9
of them have been redone to be
able to have it more humane and
and uh reliable services for
them. The acquisition of the
Gateway Center, which is the old
love.
Hospital off of Gibson, uh, many
of you may know that hospital. I
had my tonsils pulled out in
that hospital and my Lamaze
classes for my first daughter in
that hospital. The city acquired
that in April of 21, and I know
there's been a lot of talk that
a lot of money has gone there
and nothing's been built in the
last 7 months, 3 of our programs
have opened. They are completed,
the construction is done. We
have taken the funding that we
have received both at the
federal level, again,
contributions from the county,
as well as the state, and make
sure they're up and running, and
we have most of those out to bid
for operators to be able to
bring services.
I like, I want to highlight, we
are moving away from sheltering
and more into housing
navigation, sheltering is really
an idea of creating bathtubs
that are going to get clogged
and will fill. You can build as
many shelters as you want, but
if there's not a housing for a
component to it, which is vital
and we're doing it by
population, being very
intentional with our families
and what their needs are. Women
and their needs, men, etc. Um,
and so those are the service
components that need to continue
to happen. However, the success
of us being able to place them
is going to rely on.
affordable housing units to be
available and our investment of
our general fund dollars and
vouchers to be able to make sure
we're offsetting those incomes
to make sure that people stay
housed. So what you're going to
see here is a large investment
in uh not only uh continuing to
build that, uh, continuity of
care and continuum of care
services for individuals, but
you need to have entry points
for every area. Average day it
takes to get an un-house uh
person uh housed is 200 days
assuming there's a unit
available and a voucher
available. Um, you take those
factors away, you're sheltering,
and that
is a critical component to be
able to understand that. Now,
without a doubt, when they did
the point in time count of the
2700 individuals nightly that
were experiencing homelessness,
um, of that they found out that
roughly 60% of that population
was chronically homeless,
meaning they have entered in
this cycle and back out and then
back in, they're not sustaining
themselves. We also know the
numbers in our state with
regards to substance use. Um,
alcohol by far continuing to
have the biggest impact on
individuals, but we're seeing an
increase in also meth
consumption as well as fentanyl.
We are not addressing the issues
of substance use and behavior
health, we are also going to
fail to be able to have
individual stay in house. That's
why the critical piece for
having components of services is
so vital. We're partnering with
the county and we appreciate it.
We have finished uh construction
on the very first medicals
sobering center in the state.
There's about 60 of these in the
nation, and that's innovation.
However, it does require
operational funds and continuing
going. It's a need, and I can
tell you that we did a
feasibility study that
identified over 3.
year period, 42,000 of these
people were actually taken to
the hospital. So you can imagine
the cost, the ERs and the EDs,
the hospital beds that were
taken in or consumed. They could
have been given to other
individuals, and we also had a
little thing like a pandemic in
the middle of that in which
every bed was necessary. We can
offset that by serving roughly
under 19,000 individuals. We
have 50 beds available in our
sobering center. It will no
longer go to emergency rooms.
That is vital and it's
important, and that's one piece
in collaboration with the county
as they supported us.
And building that structure with
behavioral health tax dollars.
We know their care's campus
plays a crucial role. That's the
integration into detox and more
permanent and transitional
living. These services can be
stood up and we are working in
great collaboration with the
county to be able to do that,
and they continue to need
infusion of dollars for us to be
able to do that. The acquisition
of an old hospital is probably
the best thing that could have
happened to that neighborhood.
If you're not from Albuquerque,
it is located in an area of town
in which is research resource.
There is nothing there. It's a
food desert, it's a pharmacy
desert, and there's nothing else
available, and we are working to
be very strategic of the
services coming in that area. We
have the campus down the way for
the detox services, and you have
the investment in the hospital
to be able to bring a variety of
services, everything from map
providers. We would love to see
a pharmacy there. However, that
building was neglected by its
previous owners, and we are
continuing to make it the
shining star can be and the
resources it could be for that
community that's still in need.
Um, so therefore, you'll see
what these are and what the
appropriations are.
Um, all of our, uh, facilities
are now under a gateway, so
Gateway West is our large
shelter that's located about 22
miles outside of the central
area of Albuquerque. It's the
old jail, and that is what we've
renovated. You'll see that um we
also continue to look at
investing in our gateway young
adult, we've acquired a hotel,
it's gonna be the first young
adult housing navigation center,
uh, that we have in the city,
but it's also meeting a crucial
need to making sure that these
young people who are
transitioning oftentimes from
other systemic CYFD custody
care, etc.
end up in longer term unhoused
systems or shelters because we
know that's costly. Um, and so
that's where those investments,
uh, would be going. And I'll
just wrap up with the, the uh
one piece and that's the cares
campus, this is also for
homeless services and
transitional housing, but we'd
like to be able to do is add
another 30 units for recovery
stays for up to 2 years. This
could also allow for families
and women with children.
Family and senior wellness
hotel, this hotel conversion,
um, would allow people to stay
for up to 6 months, and we think
we could transition up to 150
beds, and we know that seniors
are one of the fastest growing
populations of homeless, which
is just astounding and
unacceptable, and then the
establishment of 3 mobile tiny
home communities to provide
recovery housing for up to 9
months for 90 individuals
because we know without
services, it makes it riskier
for us to be able to have an
opportunity to place them in
permanent housing.
them to succeed. Just one last
thought and then I'll and
Gilbert's ready to jump in
again, um, one last thought, I
was looking at the cost for us
to house somebody in the um in
our uh in MDC or detention
center or jail. It costs $211 a
night, and if the person has a
serious mental illness, it's up
to $256,000. That is a lot of
money that we're spending that
we could be spending in housing
instead of having people in
custody or incarcerated.
And so as we think about all the
the the solutions, whether it's
for education, health.
There really isn't anything that
gets better unless people are
housed properly.
And uh just to build off of that
cause I, I, I think I felt a
touch on it, but the, you know,
the city county came together,
we actually commissioned a
feasibility study to look at
recovery housing, both HUD and
Samsa have issued statements
that any municipality that does
not have recovery housing as
part of their housing plan is
probably failing their
community. Um, we've taken steps
to be able to launch our first
microcommunity. It's a pallet
shelter in collaboration with
the county. We appreciate that
and we're using our opioid funds
to be able to say, we know
that you have to have various
levels of housing uh for
individuals in different areas
of transition. Somebody coming
out of detox that goes right
back to the exact same
environment that led them into
that is going to relapse and end
up in that same situation.
Recovery housing allows them to
be in an environment in which 18
to 24 months of supportive
services, uh, with case
management and continuing their
treatment plans to be able. What
we know is that if you can
sustain um any uh use of
substance for an 1824 month
period.
You're less likely to recidivate
ever, right? And so creating
those environments, um, we're
almost done with our very first,
uh, micro recovery and it is on
a state land which we
appreciate. We've been using
that at the old MVD. If you're
familiar with it, um, there will
be, uh, the first resource for
that. The other thing is
identifying other providers who
were providing recovery housing
in our community so that we can
issue vouchers, and we can use
our opioid dollars and
investments in that to be able
to say we will pay for your stay
if it supports you in that
environment to be able to
stay in your recovery. Um, it's
so crucial, and I appreciate
that, you know, we're, we're
leaning in ways to be able to
address those needs and have the
different type of housing that
supports folks, and then just
building off of the investments
of permanent support of housing,
individuals who need the case
management to be able to be
successful because they have a
disability and or uh behavioral
health issue, um, we know that
those vouchers can average
anywhere from 12,000 to $14,000
a year.
It's better than a $42,000
annual cost for a prison stay,
right? And so we know those
investments are smart. We know
that if you wrap around case
management, and they can be
successful, that we can maintain
them in housing situations, um,
and of course it will go back to
we need to build the units to be
able to place them in as well.
Um, so with that, we appreciate
your time and allowing us as a
city and a county to come to
you, I will always say that I
will advocate on behalf of the
entire state, not just our area.
Everyone does need this. We
appreciate the consideration,
um, we are trying to get ahead
of this in partnership and show
that collabor
and we hope that we provide it
to you today not only shows the
impact that dollars, what's
built ready, the amount of units
that it could affect so that you
can make some good decisions on
that. Uh, we want to be good
stewards of the funding that we
get and we definitely wish that
we can, uh, we, we're pretty
confident we can execute if we
got the dollars to push out
because the, the need is so
urgent, so we're very confident,
not pretty, we're excellent.
That's great and it's great to
see the city and the county
working together. I know we've
all read over the past number of
years sort of challenges, and
it's very good to see.
That, that you are here
together. want to invite Mr.
Hernandez, um.
And uh members we're gonna wrap
up here, then we'll go to
questions and obviously have our
presenters stay here as we dive
into some of our questions. And
Ms. whoever wants to stay up,
yeah, go ahead, please, and
we'll, we'll be, I know we.
uh, MFA is sort of a, an
established part of our housing
presentations. We want to make
sure that's part of it, but we,
the, the new part of this that
we haven't really heard from,
uh, or is that some of that
local perspective, so we'll keep
this relatively brief and then
go into questions from members.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate the opportunity to
present to you, uh, we've had
the pleasure of uh meeting
several times with the
presenters that uh that came
before us here today and I'll
say that uh we agree with the,
with the needs uh and the, the
challenges that are ahead of us
here. It does take a team, uh,
and, uh, we at the Housing New
Mexico, uh, have a, a huge uh
team across the state with close
to 400 partners that deliver
services at the local level. Um,
you saw from the previous
presentations, there's a great
need and some challenges, um, it
has in New Mexico, we address
the full, um, or serve the
entire state with the partners
that I mentioned and we serve
the full continuum of housing
from homelessness to
homeownership. We have a
close to 40 different programs
across the state. Uh, today,
however, uh, and we receive a
lot of different funding sources
for those, uh, some federal,
some state, uh, some private,
and then some uh self-generated
funds. I'm gonna focus on the
housing Trust one today, and we
want to thank you for entrusting
us to, to manage those funds.
Um, you'll see on this page here
that uh Robbins got up, uh, that
over the last 17 months, um,
we've received $122 million from
the state.
Legislature, two sets of
recurring funds, the first year
was $307 million second year,
which just started in July of
last year, uh, was $34 million
and then last year you also uh
appropriated $50 million a one
time allocation. So in the last
7 months, if you will, since
July, there's been $84 million
made available to us.
Um, 85% of those funds have been
encumbered uh in a very short
period of time, 100% of the
recurring funds have been
encumbered and 64% of the
one-time allocation, the $50
million has been encumbered. We
do have $8 million going in
front of our board uh for
different proposals in a couple
of weeks, uh, assuming that they
approved that will be up to 72%
encumbered of that $50 million.
Uh
And expended, as you know, the
expenditures and development
process takes a while. So once
you make the award, and if
you're, uh, one example would be
building a multi-family
development that takes a couple
of years, uh, to build out 18 to
24 months, and we don't release
the money upfront at closing,
uh, we take the reimbursements
on a uh regular basis and then
they get fully funded at the
end, um.
With those funds that you've
entrusted entrusted us with,
we've been able to assist, uh,
4600 families. The funds have
gone to 51 different entities or
51 different awards covering 33
counties across the state, 32
different partners that have
been taken advantage of that,
um.
The need is great, as you can
tell from the, uh, having $122
million in the success that
we've had with the help of our
partners across the state, uh,
you know that there's a great
need out there when that money
goes out the door as quickly it
has, as it has been, um, this
year, uh, if we go to the next
page, uh,
We are requesting $500 million
for the housing trust fund
similar to what we requested
last year. It is Senate Bill 145
and Senator Gonzalez is
sponsoring that bill. You'll see
from that second page in the
table there, the projected
amount of money that we believe
and feel very comfortable in,
uh, being able to get out the
door, uh, in year one, that
would be $246 million assisting
5000 families, year two, another
$295 million in assisting
another 6000 families.
Uh, this bill is a little
different than what we've
proposed in the past, and this
is from an idea that we had from
some key staff members at the
city of Albuquerque was to have
a set aside for local
governments, um.
The local governments already
have the ability to uh request
funds and obtain funding from
the New Mexico Housing Trust
Fund, a couple of uh examples,
some of which have been
mentioned a little earlier, uh,
was Las Cruces obtained some
money directly here a few months
ago, uh, Ridoso and Silver City,
um, and we have many more
examples where all those local
governments have not obtained
monies directly from us or
funds, uh, that we've leveraged
our resources with some of
theirs to build some of the
developments, some
of which the city mentioned a
little earlier with Farolito and
Lumenaria. Uh, so those are just
some recent examples. Um,
The match does come with a
requirement, and this is uh part
of what the housing Trust Fund
has in legislation actually is
that there's a 3 to 1 a
requirement that is an overall
uh requirement on match, so we
were looking at the set aside
having that similar
requirements. We do realize that
there may be some smaller local
governments that may struggle
with that, and there are
options, uh, uh, to how to meet
that, uh, that requirement on
the match and we could uh sit
down with those local
governments and give them some
ideas on what other local
governments have done, um.
With that, uh, Mr. Chairman, I,
I think that uh there's
definitely a lot more
information, but I'll, I'll stop
there. I know uh we've gotten a
little long and uh definitely
available to take any questions
that you or the committee may
have a little later on. That's
great. Thank you for the uh
brief presentation. Thank you
for the excellent work and
obviously there's been a great
deal of new investment and
appreciate you all being very
strong stewards of that. What
I'd love to do now is sort of
invite folks back up.
As near as we can.
Looks like some people have
stolen some chairs out of HAFC
so there's
may have to.
Remedy that, um, no, uh, I'll do
it, so yeah, please stay close.
We, we're gonna go to members
now for questions, uh, and
again, appreciate everybody's
time so we're gonna start um uh
with Representative Vincent, Go
to represent Pettigrew and then
represent Silva, and we have
ranking member Chatfield also
when he returns. Soreent
Vincent, please kick us off.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
appreciate the uh
All the information that you've
given us, that was a lot. And I
appreciate your tenacity trying
to help people as well. One
thing that I wanted to know, Mr.
Chair, is
I keep hearing a lot about
government and not as much about
private investors.
If, why do we not have more
private investors want to invest
in affordable housing, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, um.
Uh, it's actually, uh, important
to understand the largest
funding source that the state
receives from the federal
government, the low-income
housing tax credit is 100%
funded by private equity. Uh,
it's a, it's a tax credit that's
allocated by the mortgage
Finance Authority, that money is
put out, um, uh, in a
competitive process, uh,
oftentimes it's nonprofit
developers who secure that, but
they can't use tax credits, and
so they actually sell the equity
in the project, and so, um,
there is a lot
leveraging private sector, um, I
think uh a lot of the single
family models in New Mexico, uh,
affordable homeownership using a
mixed market rate development
model to use a, say, part of the
project that's market rate to
pay for part of the project to
be, uh, below market rate. So I
think in general, there, there
is a lot of investment. I think
when we step out beyond
affordable housing, we see a lot
of housing capital flowing
around our state and going to
the states around us, and that's
a lot around regulatory.
frameworks, it's around
certainty, um, talking to some
of the bigger uh contractors in
the Albuquerque and Santa Fe
area, they'll tell you it can
take 2, 2.5 years to get a a
large uh housing investor
comfortable with investing in
New Mexico, there's a lot of
uncertainty. There's a lot of
subjective processes. Um, so
anything that we can do at the
state level to help make things
go quicker, be more
performative, less subjective
public hearings where we
Um, sometimes reverse course on
what's written in law around
land use. Um, those are all
things that help bring in more
investment and then regardless
of the type of housing we're
talking about, it's built by,
uh, mostly our our New Mexico
construction industry, so our
homebuilders are our commercial
contractors, so, um, they're a
big part of the solution, I
think for us, one of the ideas
with the $50 million for
homeownership development
subsidies is that anyone could
access that, not just a a
nonprofit affordable.
housing developer, but, you
know, say, uh, you know, a KT
Holmes in in Las Cruces or um a
homebuilder trying to get more
people into that space and
giving them the financial tools.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
appreciate that answer. What are
we gonna do to get our private
investors to feel good about
investing in New Mexico and
building thousands of houses
that were shorted short of, and
um just an idea.
Because one of the themes that
we're looking at this year is
trying to manage our forest and
trying to pull timber out of our
forest and stand up sawmills to
where we can get more
affordable.
Um, building construction and
you know, I would love to see.
I would love to see private
investors be able to come in
here and buy local products from
New Mexico right out of our
forest that's making us better.
We can get better insurance and
it's just gonna make for a
better place, Mr. Chair.
That
absolutely any representative, I
think those are all things that
we're proposing I'm working on
from our Office of Housing,
Planning and Production as a
core thing. I think you bring up
the two big issues, bringing
financial investment into New
Mexico. The first step is going
to be fixing some of our
regulatory frameworks, a lot of
our zoning in the urban areas is
not dense enough to support
housing development, and that
means that the investor has to
go through rede through a
rezoning process. So you're
saying already, this can take
years
uh, tens of thousands of dollars
and it's risk. It's about
reducing risk for investors and
developers to be able to build.
I think the other thing you
bring up is a really critical
one around material cost and
supply chains. I think we've
heard a lot of anecdotes about
this that in some cases we're
paying 2 and 3 times for
materials what people pay in
adjacent states, and part of
that is because we're a one-way
shipping destination. Most of
our, uh our shipping comes into
this state, uh, drop something
off in those.
sleeve empty rather than leaving
full. And that's one of the
reasons that we've got to look
at all kinds of different things
including using more local
materials, but also growing
two-way industry where we can
have a better uh supply chain to
bring down the cost, because
that's one of the hard things
we're fighting right now, the
hard cost to build a home has
just gone up so much in the last
few years, but those are the
system level things that right
now we're not, nobody is working
on. Nobody's eyes are on that.
And we hold within state
government a lot of the tools to
effect.
that whether it's economic
development or education, uh,
PED HEB workforce solutions in
the, in the construction
industry sectors, um, economic
development, these other uh
tools that we can bring to bear
on this if we have a strategy
and we have some goals.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, thank you
for the time. Thank you very
much Representative Vincent,
ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. You know,
when I drive away from here, and
I head for my little casita
across town that uh
I rent while I'm here at the
legislature.
And I see those people that have
the, all their worldly
belongings.
In a shopping cart.
I can promise you.
That the only
Saying wrong is not shortage of
housing, and I agree with you
that there is a shorting of a
shortage of housing. There's a
deep seated enormous problem in
our state that we need to stand
up and address. We need to
address it now. We need to
address it.
Uh
hard. We need to fight. We need
to deal with that issue.
I just came back from about a
year and a half, uh,
In Houston.
was back and forth to Houston
all the time.
I hear some rumors that we might
be looking at the
Houston model because I will
tell you that in Houston,
I did not see
Any homeless people. No, nobody.
They did something.
I don't know what it is.
But they did something.
And they solved that problem.
And if they can do it, we can do
it.
Uh, can you tell me a little bit
about what they did.
Thank you, Representative for
the question. Um,
I fully agree, housing isn't the
only thing that we need in the
system, I think my friend and
colleague from Albuquerque spoke
a little bit more about some of
the interventions that um
they're looking at and that will
be necessary to remedy some of
the issues that we're seeing.
Um, Houston, uh, didn't do this
overnight. It took about 30
years for them to get to where
they are today.
I know shocking. And I can, I
can read you my dissertation
some other time, but
but it, it started about 1994
and it started with
collaboration, and so like we
saw demonstrated tonight with
all of us here singing from the
same hymnbook. Um, this is what
brought them to the point where
then in 2011, um, there were
some other opportunities.
Unfortunately, there was a a
recession we might remember but
some federal funding uh came to
Houston that.
help them, uh, then make the
investments in affordable
housing, but the, the prework
was all uh the coordination and
the leadership that went into
creating that coordination at a
time. So I, with that in mind, I
think that we're in a promising
position today to start turning
that corner as well.
So Mr. Chair, I want to try
twice as hard as Houston. On a
look at what they did. I want to
do it faster, you know, it's
unsafe.
Where the people living there,
it's unsafe for those of us, uh,
you know, I've had my car broken
into, door tore up, the window
knocked out. I've been followed
down the street, you know,
people just wanting whatever you
have, uh, uh.
One of our biggest, uh,
In comes is tourism.
People don't want to come here
to, to be see like that.
One of our
Um, biggest issues is
homelessness, and it's, it's not
OK for those people. We need to
help them, but we need to put
them in a, in a program and we
did uh solve the underlying
problem. Uh, I, I think there's
a lot of us in here. You took
our car, you took our house, you
took our dog, you took
everything we had in a little
bit, we'd get it back because
we'd get out there and we'd
wouldn't find a job, we'd do
something, you know, there's an
underlying problem there.
It's bigger than no house, and
I'm all for building more
houses, support building more
houses, but we're gonna have to
Put that together with the
salvation solving of the problem
or for taking so much time, Mr.
Chair. Not at all. Thank you,
ranking member Chatfield. We're
gonna go next to Representative
Little.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you so much for your
presentation this evening, um,
uh, I very much appreciate it. I
have, uh, I'm gonna go back to
kind of very basics, um, cause
I've been wondering.
When I see homes being built in
Albuquerque. I see very large
homes, generally, and they're
talking about building
affordable homes and
And um in in neighborhoods, uh,
and infrastructure usually is a
big deal, a very, um,
challenging issue, and uh I
represent House District 68,
which is out in the northwest
side of, of Albuquerque.
So, uh, one of the things that
confuses me, uh, Mr. Chair, is
the, is the cost of a home, uh,
where I hear developers talking
about wanting to build
affordable homes. Well, if
you're building it for that
area.
What we see is still in the
$400,000 range. I can't afford
that.
And so, my question, Mr. Chair,
is what is the cost of a basic
home. Uh, I, I'll give you an
idea, uh, let's say 3 bedroom.
Uh, kitchen, living room, I'm
not even gonna include it in
maybe two bathrooms would be
good.
And uh not with stone, not with
all of the lovely little.
Nice things that you can, um,
that you work towards. What is
the cost of a basic home.
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
uh, Little. Uh, I think it's
going to vary by location, but
I'll, I'll tell you we did a a
little bit of uh uh research and
we just launched actually uh
late last week, uh, a program
called the Zip program, zero
interest home builder program.
So it's a 0% interest rate, uh,
construction loan for folks or
builders, whether they be for
profit, nonprofit, uh, to build
uh entry level homes, the way we
defined that.
is uh 2 to 3 bedroom, uh, 1 to 2
baths.
Uh, anywhere from 950 to 1500
square feet, uh, and we think
that can be done between 250,000
to 325,000 depending on the the
size and um also depending on
the location which has that
plays a big role in this, so
that would be an estimate uh my
partners here may have a little
bit different estimates, but uh
they're probably close to that
ballpark.
Thank you very much for that
estimate, and I, I completely
understand that it's gonna vary
by regions and the materials
that are available and the land
that it sits on. So then that
takes me to my next question is,
I understand that there are
plans, uh, rather than going out
to where there's areas of where
infrastructure is not available,
Mr. Chair, that um in until
Filling in the interiors of the
cities cause as I drive through
New Mexico, and I go all the way
from Taos all the way down to
Las Cruces and into Rioso and
other areas. And what I see, Mr.
Chair, are that there are uh
areas within
Townships, villages that are um
vacant or um deteriorating. So
I'm wondering maybe just with
respect to Albuquerque, what the
plans are for infilling, um,
To fill in those areas because
in my mind, Mr. Chair, it's
infrastructure exists in those
areas, and it seems that uh that
might also regenerate the
business industry that's in and
around those neighborhoods that
might be um re-established. So
thank you.
Present Mr. Chairman, my name is
Jose Montoya, and the deputy
director for HHH and um.
been involved in housing for a
few years as it might be. Um,
uh.
The city of Albuquerque actually
promotes infield development as
a matter of policy. In fact, all
of our programs, uh, that we
actually fund are within the
1960s boundaries of the city of
Albuquerque. We've just passed
legislation just recently, the
last few weeks to be able to
actually promote a lot more
development within film, both in
terms of our ability to do
comprehensive high density
zoning in the very in the uh in
the um areas by by which there
is not only transit but also
related services.
And so it is actually the
official policy of the city of
Albuquerque to be able to
promote infield density, and
we've actually resisted
expanding out as much, um.
Uh, in order to try to go higher
versus more vertical.
Thank you very much.
Thank you representative little,
we're gonna go to Representative
Silva, then Representative
Duncan.
Thank you chair. Thank you
everyone for your presentations.
Um, I spent the 1st 6 years of
my organizing career, organizing
around affordable housing in the
Bay Area, and
The, um, and then when I moved
back home to New Mexico, I sat
in people's living rooms in 2009
and 2010 because their houses
were empty after selling
everything so that they could
make a mortgage that ballooned
after their adjustable rate
mortgage just shot through the
roof, um, and basically crashed
our economy. Um, and then later
I lost my first home to a short
sale. Um, again, a victim of the
housing crisis in um the
2010s. And so affordable housing
is deeply personal to me. And
the amount of creativity that it
takes to build affordable
housing and, and the creativity
and imagination it requires is
amazing and, and I think this is
a good thing. It's one of the
best places and the most
imaginative places to do policy
work, in my opinion.
And so one, I really want to
applaud the technical assistance
for housing because it does take
creativity and imagination and
thinking beyond what we usually
do already, um, so I really
wanna, um, emphasize that
technical assistance help that
comes to local communities and,
um, and it's one of the few
places where, where you'll hear
me support deregulation of
certain things, so, um, so I'm
really glad for that.
Um, I'm wondering if you know or
or we as a state know how many
affordable housing units we lose
due to the lack of policies
around rent stabilization or no
fault evictions or private
equity sales of single family
homes, um, because when I
knocked on doors, um, and before
I came to Santa Fe, I, um, we
had a rally for uh 75 year old
renter who had leukemia, and she
got a letter saying she
needed to leave her home within
30 days and could not find a an
an accessible.
Place that she could afford, and
she's still looking for one, and
she most likely will get have an
eviction on her record, um,
because she can't find a new
place to go.
So, thank you, chair, um, and
thank you folks for coming
tonight.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Silva, uh, I don't have the, uh,
a full answer for your question
and how many, uh, affordable
units are lost. I, I can tell
you that from the portfolio that
we have, uh, mostly with, uh,
the subsidies that we give them
to include the low income tax
credits that Daniel mentioned a
little earlier. Uh, we have very
long term restrictions on there
from 30 to 40 years, and then
when they come to resyndicate,
you know, 1520 years later, uh,
and get some additional funding,
we ask that they waive their
ability.
to have a qualified contractor
to get out of the uh the
restrictions, so we lose very,
very little in New Mexico from
those that are affordable from
the beginning. Uh, I couldn't,
uh, really address the question
on how many homes get bought by
investors that would have been
affordable otherwise.
Mr. War, go ahead, chair, uh,
representative Silva, um.
I think, um.
I, I just want to reinforce what
Izzy said, we're actually, I
think you all implemented the
extended use periods in, in sort
of the mid 2000s, late 2000s,
and so we're actually out of the
window where we have to worry
about that. That was a very
forward thinking thing that MFA
did, um, to help protect our
affordable housing assets. Um,
on the issue of corporate
ownership, this is a trickier
thing and one of the reasons
that we think we need a
concerted office working on
housing data cause we just don't
have that data. Um, some of the
data
been able to find for
Albuquerque says about 7% of uh
the, the overall housing stock
is owned by corporations, um,
and that includes like a good
amount that are sort of small
operators of maybe 234 rental
units. Um, so it's not a big
problem yet, and that does,
that's not to say that we
shouldn't do things about it,
but at this point, it's not one
of the drivers of our health
problems. Um, so I think it's,
it's, you know, hard to, to
quantify, but I think in all
these areas we're sort of flying
blind because
We don't necessarily have timely
data about this stuff, or their
proprietary data sets that you
have to pay for to access. So, I
think really centralizing data
and giving us tools that then
can in turn be reported to LFC,
be provided to use legislators
to help guide policy and funding
decisions as a critical piece
of, of what we're proposing
right now.
That is excellent. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Uh, next we're
gonna go represent uh Duncan and
then Vice Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I'm a uh
Less government is better all
the way around.
Whoever created this document,
did a pretty good job on the
very bottom of it, it says
constrict constrictive
regulatory environment.
Until we get that out of the
mix, we're not gonna have, I'm
gonna answer uh re Harlan's
question, we're not gonna have
private investors jumping over
the state of uh line from
Arizona or Texas, either one.
fulfill what we need.
Now, in this, in this particular
thing, I'm gonna say we're
probably gonna have to work with
government.
In order to do that.
I talked with the builder in
Lubbock tonight as we were, and
I was texting, I talked to my
builder in Sholo, Arizona. I
talked to a builder in
Farmington.
Every one of these estimated
average per square foot.
It is a $100 almost $100 more
than they can build a home. Tell
me what the problem is.
Is it government in the way?
Because we're driving the same
Arizona to New Mexico to Texas.
We probably ought to ask for
less regulatory.
Concerns than $100 million.
We might get more than $100
million. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Any responses?
chair, uh, Representative
Duncan, um, I think that's one
of the primary things we want to
work on. I, I, you know, in the
research we've done, I recently
got to visit in, um, Virginia is
part of the uh national
Governors Association housing
Policy advisors meeting, uh, we,
uh, got to have some great
presentations from the folks in
Virginia and the, and the
governor in Virginia, uh, by
right-sizing their building
codes, they were able to reduce
the hard cost of building a
house on average 2.
$4000. Um, as I cited earlier,
the Santa Fe County housing plan
identifies the cost of
regulatory delays at around
$80,000 a unit. So right there
is the $100,000 you're talking
about. So I agree 100%. I think
that we can really right size a
lot of regulations to be more
effective and have our subsidy
dollars go further and have a
smaller group of people that
need subsidy because we have,
uh, a wider availability of
housing, and we have more people
working on the problem. So I
think that and
And really look at local land
use and zoning and anything
going back to Representative
Little's comment, you know, a
lot of our land is has outdated
zoning frameworks. It has low
density zoning frameworks. When
you're a builder, and you're
looking at a piece of land and
it's say you can build one house
per acre, you're incentive is to
build the biggest, most
expensive house possible. If
it's zoned 6 units per acre,
your incentives to build the
most units possible and those
become more naturally
affordable. They're smaller,
they're on smaller lots, and
that's the kind of thing we've
got to think about regulatory
frameworks like land.
and zoning, not just as ways
that we control aesthetics and
we make sure that people don't
build cement plants next to
elementary schools and that kind
of stuff. But it's actually how
we point the market, right? We
don't think about the regulatory
framework that way. But the
regulatory framework is how we
guide the market to solve our
problems. Homebuilders are no
more greedy than, um, grocery
store conglomerates, uh, they
will build what's easiest to
build, and we need to make
working class housing, the
easiest thing to build in New
Mexico and that's our goal.
Uh, thank you very much. We're
gonna, uh, come back to Vice
Chair Dixon. uh, we'll go now to
Representative Garrett.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. First of all,
I wanna just thank um Gateway
West to in my district, and it's
amazing what good flooring can
make a difference in a facility.
So I'm very grateful for the
city and the county for doing
those things that um it's not
just aesthetics, it creates a
spirit that's much higher and
healthier. But that brings me to
two points, um, inspired by
Representative Chat uh
Chatfield. I
picked up Houston and there's,
there's two things. The first we
talked about.
Um, everybody collaborating,
including not just the
government organizations, but
all the nonprofits, cause I
think of some of our cities,
there's all these nonprofits and
um I'm hoping that they're all
also collaborating with you. Is
that happening?
Chair Representative Garrett,
um, absolutely, I think, you
know, there's no way we are
successful if we don't include
our nonprofit partners, um,
however, I will say that the
state of our nonprofits post the
pandemic, everyone is taking
hits, right? Whether that's a
staff being a labor issue and or
ability to take more. Um, we've
seen solicitations for bids and
operations go unanswered. We've
seen specialized services, we've
tried to stand up and
unfortunately, there's no
responses. We've had to
unfortunately then push that out
to a national.
Solicitations and also opening
up to for profits. Um, this is
just the climate that we are in
to uh we recently transitioned
um our operator for our larger
shelter, and there was a moment
there where I literally was
like, our staff will be running
that shelter because we do not
have those solicitations. Um,
fortunately, we brought in a new
partner and transitioned that
out, um, but I can speak also to
like our medicals sobering
services. That's a very niche
type of service, and of course
we have a healthcare provider
shortage in that area, um, and
we have had.
To put that up multiple times to
be able to solicit an operator
for that. So without a doubt, we
are working but also realize the
limitations of our nonprofits in
which we don't want to push them
out of their capacity. And then
I always say this just as a
funder. We never wish to be the
driver of Mission drift for
these organizations, if what we
are asking them to do does not
align with their mission, they
should not apply for our
dollars, cause we will push them
in a direction that
unfortunately will derail. I
think their overall objective of
what they're trying to do in the
community, and so it's about
fitment too, um.
So we're in constant
communication with them and
actually revising a lot of our
um paperwork and monotonous
things they have to submit for
reimbursement, so uh I've taken
it as a priority for our team
and our department to be able to
say we want to contract with
you, and if your organization
can show us that you're a
healthy organization performing
well, um, that we can reduce the
burden of what it takes to
actually engage us as a provider
and contractor and then pay you,
um, a timely, right? And so
those are important pieces for
us. So I'd say yes, they're
vital.
need support warm hands, um, we
are not successful without them,
but um we are in constant um
communication with them. We're
launching our medical respite uh
facility. We've got our
certificate of occupancy for up
to 50 beds, if you're not
familiar with what that is, is
it unhoused individuals who go
to the hospital because of a
severe need. Um, we'll have a
surgery and they're discharged
where?
To the street.
And most likely are gonna be
back in the emergency room
within a few days because it's
infected. They didn't have a
place to heal, like most of us
here to go home and actually
take that time. Our respite
facility will not provide up to
90 days of a place in
partnership with our nonprofits,
uh, Albuquerque healthcare for
the Homeless and First Nations
to be able to provide the
medical care. There's no cost to
that. They will build their
entities, uh, Medicaid as um
federally qualified health
providers and all we are doing
is paying for the operator of
the facility, that's
collaboration to be able to
address the severe need.
Because these individuals are
being, honestly, they're healing
in shelters, which is not
appropriate, right?
Thank you very much.
It's, if you have anything to
add. Thank you, Mr. Chair, for
me, um, I'll just add to that.
I, you know, the situation you
described in Albuquerque is not
different than any situation
I've heard around the state, um,
there is a shortage of skilled
licensed practitioners, um, so
particularly, um, when we're
looking at things like, you
know, the loan forgiveness
program came up earlier today,
um, it's something that we can
work on here at the state level
is making sure that when we're
crafting rules for those
programs that we're at the table
to think about targeting some of
those professionals um that we.
Really need to recruit and
retain in the state of New
Mexico, um, but they are some of
the most underpaid uh licensed
practitioners that we have.
Thank you. And then my other
question is, in Houston, they um
they moved people basically
right off the street and housing
units, and at Gateway West, I
think there's what, about 250
people that actually live there
full time. Can people like that
be moved into kind of some
permanent housing, um, it seems
to have worked in Houston.
Is that something that's an
option for us here.
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, um, absolutely, our
goal is to again create housing
navigation centers, not
shelters, right? And so our goal
is to be able to move them into
housing. I, I mentioned a few uh
key aspects to that. One,
our budget took a hit this last
year, uh, because we infuse our
general fund dollars into
vouchers. Vouchers are so
crucial for the ability for them
to be able to be moved out, I
talked about roughly 12,000 to
$14,000 a year can get an
individual into permanent
supportive housing, which is a
good thing, but permanent
support of housing is, is.
long term, uh, they're gonna
require case management because
of some type of disability and
therefore if I get $8 billion to
allocate so many vouchers,
they're tied up in hell and I
need additional infusion of
dollars. The other thing is the
ability to have stock, which is
the affordable housing units
that we can place them into. Um,
we flipped our first hotel this
year in which we turned it into
affordable housing with
site-based vouchers. Um, it's
one of the first innovative
times that we've actually done
that and been successful. Um, it
does require funding to be able
to do that and move them out.
Um, and I will say also, um, I,
I get asked this all the time,
have you been to Houston and our
team has, and they've done some
phenomenal work and we've
learned so many lessons there.
Um, part of the regulations and,
you know, it took us a year to
get sheltering permitted at that
hospital because of a pills in a
court case. Um, we eventually
ended up getting it. Houston
does not have zoning regulation,
um, and so I will say that's a
major piece of being able to uh
build, construct, and place
individuals in your local area
and so I always want to say
I've been, I, I understand it. I
think Houston we've learned so
many lessons from their models,
restrictions we have is our zone
zoning and ordinances over it
for us to be able to either
create shelter, create housing
and replace things that we have
to go through those zoning
challenges.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative
Garrett. Uh, next, we're gonna
go to Representative Herndon.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you presenters, and
we've been talking a lot about
affordable housing, and I just
wanna make sure that we are
talking about the same diff uh
definition, Mr. Chan and
presenters. Are we still talking
about 30% of a person's income.
Madam Chair, Representative
Hernan, thank you for the
question. Yes, the goal is that
if you are exceeding 30% of your
income going to your housing is
not affordable, so our goal is
to maintain it at that end or
less, and that is how we define
it.
So thank you, Mr. Chan. Thank
you for. So as I look at, we are
moving toward $15 an hour for uh
maybe for the top rate of um of
maximum amount that people are
getting paid and, and if I look
at what they're getting paid
for, uh, uh, an entire um week,
it would be $600 or $2400 a
year, a month. And so 30% of
that for their housing would be
about $720 is what it's looking.
So my question to you is
the housing that you're
building, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Presenters are their housing
that people can pay $720 a month
for.
I'm gonna have my deputy
director out, Mr. Chair and
Representative Herndon, my
deputy directors, uh, come speak
to this as well, um, because it,
it's, it's complex in regards to
the 80% AMI average median
income, and then when you drop
down to 50% or 30% understanding
the income that individuals
actually bring in. And, and it's
crucial, right, to be able to
say it's affordable, so, uh, my
deputy director.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Madam
Representative Henderton, so
100% of the units that we build,
design, finance, engineer, um,
are, are for people, 80%
remaining income or less. And
then we actually tier that, uh,
tier those developments so that
a percentage, for instance, 50%
of the units are for people 50%
of median income, and then 30%
of the units are people of 30%
income. So there are tiered
issues. And so within that
tiering, there are different
rental, in this case rental,
we're not talking.
home ownership, um, prices for
the, for those particulars.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters. So, uh, Mr.
Hernandez, I have a question for
you. So at one point in time,
working at the mortgage finance
Authority, you were, I think you
had a program that was for
first-time home buyers that if
they stayed in the home for a
certain period of time, but but
they were forgiven for the down
payment. Is that program still
in place? Is that what you were
talking about with respect to
the zip program, Mr. Chair, Mr.
uh Hernandez. Mr. Chairman and
uh Representative Herndon, we,
uh, currently do have
first-time homebuyer program,
which is a below market interest
rate program. Currently we're
about uh 0.5% below the market
on the interest rate, and we do
have a down payment assistance
program.
Which includes 4% of the sales
price and then an additional
$10,000 so on a $300,000 home,
uh, you know, somebody could be
getting about $22,000 in down
payment assistance and to
address your previous question,
I, I have a little bit of stats
on our last year's worth of
production, um, our average uh
loan amount and we put about
2200 families into homes this
last year, uh, first time home
buyers. The average
loan amount was $234,000.
The average income was $71,000
and just as a comparison, the
100% of the area median income
in Bernoglio County is 86,400,
um Chas County, 65,000 Donana
65,800 here in Santa Fe, of
course, it's a higher, it's at
91.5, um, so we have programs
available, uh, the, the houses
that they're finding and the
loan amounts that they're
getting are within a reasonable
rate. I will tell you.
That the uh 30% of your income
is considered affordable. That's
the rule of thumb that's been
used for many years. Uh, I will
tell you now that uh evenUUD
under their FHA mortgages, uh,
and the secondary market with uh
Fannie Mae and Jenny Mae.
They're underwriting at uh north
of 40% of your income, in some
cases 50%. So the 30% is a
little dated and I think it's
just uh increased over the years
as the prices have gone up, uh,
but, uh, I, I don't know that
you're gonna find me.
People that are just using 30%
of their income towards housing.
Mr. Mr. Chip.
Go ahead, Ms. Cook, if you have
anything that. Yeah, no, I just
wanted to add, um, I think when
we're thinking about those
income levels too, and if we're
we're considering people exiting
the homeless services system,
um, we know that some of those
people are that are gonna need
the longest term supports are
gonna be people that are living
on a fixed income, so then we're
looking at an income level, um,
commiserate with Social Security
disability insurance, um, and so
for those folks, we know that
they're gonna need additional
support to, to achieve that 30%
or, or even 50% um of their
income on housing, um, and
that's where programs like the
states uh linkages vouchers
really come into play, um, and
I, I heard nothing but good
things about um people being
able to navigate those vouchers
and place them, so that's a,
that's a success.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I just
have 3 more quick questions if
you will permit me to do that.
So with respect to the um
individuals and you're trying to
move them off of the street and
into homes. One of my, my
question is, are you
collaborating with other
organizations to help make sure
people have jobs. Are you
working to make sure that they
can always have income so they
can pay for their homes. Can you
tell me who your partners are in
that regard.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon, yes, so we work with
the coalition and homelessness.
We have other entities heading
home. We have multiple nonprofit
providers who actually take that
on and incorporate case
management services. Part of
that case management services to
make sure that they have an
income that's coming in. Uh, we
work very closely, workforce
solutions to be able to make
sure that the job placement is
there and tracking their income,
um, that's so important because
a portion of their income is
still um uh their
responsibility, so the voucher
might offset a portion of the
rent, but the rest
is due for a payment through
them and so our entities and our
contracts that we have in place
allow for them to not only
administer the voucher and make
sure our portion is paid but
that are working with the client
to make sure that they're
sustaining their portion of the
rent that has to be there, um,
of course, there's always
challenge with that. There are
individuals who uh can lose
their housing, but oftentimes
we're finding our landlords are
willing to work with us because
they know a portion of the rent
is secured our vouchers and our
contracts that we have with
them.
So thank you and Mr. Chair and,
and uh Mr. Ramirez, my, my
question to you is, has with
respect to Albuquerque housing
and affordable housing program,
are we now making any
adjustments for people who have
been who have been previously
incarcerated and who are wanting
to live in your homes. I mean,
I'm talking specifically about a
woman who was a client of mine,
her husband had been in the
hospital, I mean in a jail 10
years have passed and so they're
still having problems with him
moving in. So they had to get a
divorce. So Mr.
Chair of Mr. Ramirez has that
process been changed at all?
Mr. Chair Representative
Herndon, so one of the biggest
challenges is that we don't set
the criteria for entry into some
of these affordable housing
units and or spaces, right? And
so we work very closely. I think
what we are doing is that we are
controlling the units we have in
regards to allowability of them
to be able to get in the
qualifiers unfortunately
continue to speed, and I think
it's a barrier. There's more
work to be done to encourage our
landlords, uh, to be able to say
what is the criteria? Can that
be overseen, they have
longevity, they have a job,
they're actually.
Reintegrating into society and
that shouldn't be a factor that
eliminates them from
consideration. Um, but that's
where the continued and ongoing
support and working with our
landlords is, is crucial. We
implement a program this last
year to be able to offset
damages and repairs and working
with landlords to be able to
recoup those costs, um, and then
we also know that sometimes when
they're attached to our federal
programs, they have to meet a
certain um qualifier, the HQS
inspections uh for the livable
units, right? And so as that
Criteria continues to increase
and adds cost to them to say you
have to have this many
detectors, etc. and it actually
pulls them away from saying, we
no longer want to be a voucher
because we don't have the
funding to actually bring those
up to par, so this pilot program
that we implemented uh through
our general fund dollars is
actually to incentivize our
landlords to say if your units
were damaged, you can apply for
an amount of funding to have
them repaired and also to get
them up to the standard they
need to be and utilize those
funds, uh, definitely we could
use more money in that because
that incentivies them to
actually take a.
and not turn a voucher away
because we understand properties
and units can get damaged as
well, um, but much more work to
be done in the area, I think in
regards to individuals with
their background, their
clearance and getting those
accepted, that has to be done
with our private partners too.
Chair, Madam Representative, I,
I would also add that, uh,
recent guidance from the federal
level has included additional
guidance around formerly
incarcerated in relation to fair
housing. Now, obviously that's
something that is uh highly uh
uncertain going forward and one
of the things that we're
proposing in the Office of
Housing, uh, planning and
production is to do proactive
work with local governments
around fair housing to be able
to sort of backstop any gaps at
the federal level, but there
were
Recent guidances um in the last
administration, uh, related to
formerly incarcerated and the
impacts of fair housing,
particularly around the
disparate impact, meaning that
if um the formerly incarcerated
population was being
discriminated against in
housing, and that had a a
specific greater impact on a
specific racial group that it
was illegal under Federal Fair
housing. And so that's an
opportunity where we at the
state could continue to promote
um smart policies around that
because we've dealt with that,
um, uh, having
formerly worked as someone who
managed affordable housing,
nonprofitable affordable housing
projects is something that you
struggle with, right? Where you
find the balance and, and what
is acceptable in terms of
previous criminal record in
housing because you also want to
create safe environments, but I
think that's one of the things
that we're focusing on sort of
what changes at the federal
level that we would focus on
fair housing, and that is a
piece of fair housing.
Thank, thank you for that
response. And my last question,
Mr. Chair and presenters. So as
we talk about uh
Affordable housing. One of the
things that we're known for here
in New Mexico is manufactured
housing, and if we don't call
them, um, if we call them just
that great manufactured housing
that be Jane Fonda has bought
one. She paid a million dollars
for it. So the question is, Mr.
Chair and Mr. Presenters, are we
using any aspect of manufactured
housing to create these homes
and and villages where people
can live.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Herndon, uh, we, uh, under our
programs, we definitely
financed, manufactured housing,
uh, this last year, 11.5% of our
production or the loans that we
made were to manufacture the
homes. We are currently uh
considering that will be taken
to our board in a couple of
weeks, uh, developer came in
wanting to build a mobile home
uh subdivision, if you will, uh,
and so we are taking that to a
board for, for approval here. So
we def those are just two
examples that I can give you,
but definitely.
We work with them. There's also
a modular homes that are being
built in the state. Uh, there's
a plant in Roswell called
Builtwise that uh is doing that,
so we're looking forward to
working with them some more and
definitely uh something that I,
I think could be very beneficial
to the state, help us increase
the production, the housing
stock, and in some cases that
may be the only avenue in some
of these rural areas where there
may not be some builders that
are available.
And chairs representative, I'd
also add that in our purposes in
the Office of Housing
Legislation, one of the things
we really want to work on is
promoting modular manufactured
housing. We need literally 10s
of thousands of housing units in
New Mexico. We just don't have
the bodies to build them and
stick built houses in place and
so we need to be growing that
industry. One of the things
we're looking at the governor is
the chair of the Western
Governors Association, um, and
part of her initiative, the
Brand West initiative, um, we've
been looking, uh, and talking to
other states.
about what they're doing with
modular manufactured housing,
and so we're exploring some
ideas about that that I hope we
can reveal soon, but I think in
our purpose, one of the big
parts would be to leverage all
the different resources, which
are, are regulatory frameworks,
our economic development
frameworks to support more
modular manufactured housing to
support these businesses
happening. I think another thing
folks don't know is that the the
manufactured housing rules at
the federal level, which are
managed by changed in recent
years. You can now do 2 and 3
unit manufactured house.
Clayton homes in Albuquerque's
building every one of their
mobile homes, Net Zero Energy
ready at about $50 a square
foot. So if you think about the
new construction in Santa Fe is
probably around 280, 300 a
square foot. It's literally 1/6
of the cost of what a sick built
home would be offering similar
quality in terms of construction
and energy efficiency. So
absolutely has to be part of the
framework, but we really need to
look at regulatory frameworks
where you can put them, how you
can put them, um, the economic
development piece
For how we grow these
industries, um, how we finance
them and the consumer side, so
we've really got to look at
every level to make sure this
stuff happens efficiently, um,
and I'm really excited there's,
let's keep, yeah, yeah, no, no,
it's OK.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you very much. We're gonna move
next to Representative
Pettigrew, then Representative
Lujan, Vice Chair Dixon, and
then I'll close it out. Go
ahead, Peter group.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you all for the presentation.
Uh, I honestly believe, chair,
that all of your hearts are in
the right place.
With that being said, I have a
few thoughts with respect to
this that um I sincerely do not
intend to come across in a
negative way at all.
More of a challenging way.
Chairman, I, I have a question
with respect because the
presentation came across from
With respect to Bernard Leo and
uh Albuquerque in the beginning.
What do you think, chairman,
and, and
Presenters
The percentage of of homes and
Albuquerque right now that are
uninhabited.
Taxes aren't being paid and
aren't being sold on the county
courthouse.
Uh, steps.
but currently we believe there's
about 16, um, 1600 units that
are either in default or being
mortgaged or abandoned or some
kind of that nature, so it's
about, I don't know the
percentage total of a unit so I
can't think that in my head
right now, but there's about
1600 units.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for that answer. So with
respect to that,
The percentage of those probably
in some level of dilapidation
and, and need repair.
Mr. Chairman, I, I go this way
because, you know, there was a
time when, when buying a home.
Um
Either in default from the bank
or on the courthouse shop, your
lawn, 10 years ago you could
walk away, you could do it in
such a way that 5000 in profit
was, was, was a good deal. You
could, you could clean it up.
You can fix the the small things
that needed to be fixed, made
it, made it good and do that.
That number was in the last
Let me go back, 5000, probably
20 years ago.
Um, within the last.
10 years
That number needed to be 10,000
plus.
T2.
Now that number is almost 2
times that.
So, you know, if you're not
making 20 to 25, you're not
covering your taxes, you know,
being able to to employ the
people that you need.
And to turn the property, but we
have 1600 just in, in, in
Albuquerque alone, and this is
where Chairman, I, I go with
this, you know, the statement
was made that it's gonna take
years to fix the regulatory
issues.
My comment on that is in the 4+
years that I've been here.
This legislative body has had no
problem, uh, pre-empting over
local government.
We've done it in so many
different ways it's not even
funny.
To identify those areas that we
need to preempt.
Because we're good at it. We're
really, really good at it.
So, um,
So that we can, we can identify
those things and, and then maybe
there's a solution that helps
reduce that, you know, the
regulatory side of what we have
to do from inspections and
everything else and, and
updating the home.
I
I'm extensive.
Time is money.
You know, I, I tell my clients
that, that, you know, if you
want to pay me in 30 days?
That's great.
After 30 days, the cost of money
is 8%.
My fee goes up 8%. Yeah, 99 now.
And so,
Mr. Chairman, uh, and presenters
talk a little bit about that and
and and not, I don't want every
possible solution, but you see
an avenue in which we can help.
Maybe
curb some of the appetite of
growing government and um.
Creating uh open doors instead
of closing doors.
Mr. Jam pretty good. I think he
came up across a very good issue
here. So one of the regulatory
frameworks that is extremely
complicated in New Mexico is
getting clear title.
To, uh, 2 units. And so that's
been one of the issues that
we've had in terms of being able
to acquire tier title in order
to be able to term to the
private sector or in some cases
being able to um uh rehab them
ourselves and then make them
affordable. And so, um, that is
a, a, a good area that we can uh
work with our colleagues in the
state to be able to look at in
terms of that particular
regulatory requirement that
would make it a lot easier for
us to be able to acquire the
units, rehab them. We do have a
home rehab.
Program, we could expand that
kind of rehab program to be able
to rehab those units, put them
back on the market, and make
them affordable.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for that answer. And that,
that, that is part of the
problem because, you know, you
look at a piece of property that
you want to buy, uh, taxes
haven't been paid and then you
start doing the research and,
you know,
some family in New York owns it.
And nobody wants to claim it
because the first thing they're
concerned about is loosen the
tax dollars.
And, and so there should be some
ways that we could curb, curb
some of that.
Um
You know, our regulations don't,
a regulatory issues don't only
just impact home builders.
And that statement was made
earlier, um, it impacts every
aspect of business. I think the
statement was not only greedy
home builders, but there's
greedy grocers and stuff like
that. I don't know that I would
use the word greedy, but I would
use the fact that we live in a
country where is built on a
castle capitalism.
And, you know, chairman and
gentlemen and our presenters.
Prior to 1909, there was no such
thing in the United States as a
corporate income tax.
Prior to 1913, there was nothing
as no such thing as a personal
income tax.
And you think about the growth
that happened from the 1870s to
uh the full implementation of
that. So let's just take it to
1920 on how much was built.
Harvard wouldn't exist.
Several other schools wouldn't
exist without the fact that we
didn't have corporate income
tax, and
First of all, with at that time,
that's how investments were made
back into the community.
The Companies would build into
that. And if you were starting
the company, and you didn't have
to pay the private income taxes
personal income tax at the time,
you were able to turn that and
reinvest it, and you're able to
hire more people and you were
able to continue on.
Now you've had from, from the
early 1900s to like 2025 when we
pyramided just about every tax
possible, not only in the state
of New Mexico, but from the
federal side.
I chair, I, I, I contend that
We got rid of that.
The amount of reinvestment back
into the state of New Mexico
would be huge.
Or if we reduced it
significantly.
The amount of reinvestment would
be huge, and we would need the
economic development department,
investing in a project in
Rosville to build small homes.
Because that company.
We'd be able to invest their own
money instead of paying taxes on
it.
In generating all the tax, all
the revenue that comes from
From, uh, um,
Being able to build.
earn being able to continue to
build.
And make people
Allow people the opportunity for
wealth generation.
It doesn't matter if you start
at the beginning, at the lower
end or at the upper end.
There's a great book out there
and
oh no keep going, we'll go back
to you just, uh, I know there's
a couple more folks who have
some questions.
So, I, I contend that if we
could find some ways to allow
our businesses and our, and
people that are wanting to start
small businesses.
To have the funds on their own,
they wouldn't have to come to
the state for it.
And so
Today, I don't really want that
answer, but I'd love to have
that conversation in my office
one of these days, just to kind
of talk through this, what can
we do? How can we stop, how, how
can we stop some of the
regulatory issues that grow
government instead of allowing.
business to do what we do. We
have become
And
A colleague of mine
said it this way,
government-driven policy
processes for both economic
development and building and
housing.
So, so how do we do that? What
are your solutions for that,
other than than growing.
Government.
How do we let business take
over. How do you say, you know,
hands off.
We're gonna watch from above.
We're gonna do what we don't do
with our own.
Throw money, we're actually
gonna give you guard, Ralph.
But hands I'd love to hear some,
some, and have some good debate
about that. We talked about land
use requirements. We have the
issues with NIB. We have the
issues with, no, I invested, I
have in time, I'm I'm entitled
to what I have.
But we, we need to get beyond
some of these not in my
backyards. We don't need a
concrete plant right next to the
school. Well, you know what, you
may need one there for 3 years,
if you want to reduce costs.
I've run concrete businesses, I
can do it with that note, I can
do it within a time frame. It
doesn't interrupt the school,
and I can do it that doesn't,
doesn't create an emission.
violates policies.
I think there are solutions that
don't all include.
Growing government, and I'd love
to hear your thoughts about
that. Thank you, Chairman.
A brief responses are welcome,
and then we'll go to the next
chair, Representative Pettigrew.
I'd, I'd say that's a big part
of what we're trying to figure
out is how do we fix our
regulatory frameworks around
housing, um, that is one of the
biggest cost drivers in New
Mexico. It's a risk factor for
developers. It's a risk factor
for capital, um, I think the
other thing you bring up, you
know, gross receipts tax is a
big is different than other
states. Um, now granted,
Those states have a lot higher
property taxes than we do,
right? So we choose to collect a
lot of tax on the front end, uh,
versus tax over time on the back
end, but those, that's a choice
of our structure, right? And we
can look at different
structures, but I think the big
thing is, is to land use reform
regulations, building codes are
the first place to start with
the best return, uh, in terms of
housing costs. Excellent. Thank
you. We're going to go now to
Representative Lujan, Vice Chair
Dixon, and then I'll have a
question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm losing
my voice, sorry,
um, thank you for the
presentation. Um, I just want to
first of all acknowledge that we
have, you know, folks here that
are staying with us, uh, from
all over the place. I think we
have city
uh city manager for Espinola and
city of Eo here I think we have.
Folks obviously from Berlio and
Santa Fe and we got a lot of
written information from
everybody, so I want to thank
you and acknowledge that you're
here and spending this time with
us.
Um
And really care about this
issue. Um, so my first question
goes to or I just wanna.
Try to shift us into maybe
having some more designated
vocabulary around affordable
housing and housing
affordability.
I think we need to distinguish
what we're talking about and and
maybe there's there are other
added uh words that we need to
really distinguish.
The the different components of
of what we're addressing. I
mean, is it affordable housing
those that really that that
needed the most to housing
affordability for those that
that can afford it, but need a
little assistant can almost
support it. Excuse me, need the
assistance and and then and then
uh and then um I moved from
there, um, I have a whole list,
Mr. Chair of all the things and
all the barriers and everything,
and of course we've all heard
them, but just from this session
right now, I mean,
I have a huge list. I've written
all over, uh, we know these
barriers and know what's going
on. My question goes into the
facilitative way of how we're
going to address this and
looking at this model from um
from Texas, right? And we know
that it's been working and we're
excited about this, we want to
get this going, but we also have
MFA um mortgage Finance
Authority, which is a
quasi-governmental entity, and
we're, we want to um address how
um the executive is putting
together the housing office and
how you're all.
Gonna come together and work
with our communities.
And
That's I think what we're trying
to achieve here right now, and
maybe if you can give us a
little guidance there, if not
tonight, if you can compar
compartmentalize that for us
because we need it all. All
hands on deck, Mister Chair, I
think that's the, the overall
message that we're I'm getting
here too, but you know, my big,
my big issues and I haven't
heard even some of these, um.
Issues I knew Daniel, Mr. Chair,
I've talked to you a lot about
gentrification.
It hasn't even been brought up
tonight. Um, I, I care about fee
in lieu of type of of uh
loopholes I call them, that are
written into contracts, and we
here in our, you know,
respecting our local government
in Santa Fe tried to.
To um really work with and, and
see how that would look in a, in
a certain area, but that was
that was voted down by my city
council. Um, these are real
struggles and issues. I know
that we are looking at the
zoning. I know that we are
looking at but it's moving very,
very slow and so I, I hear my
colleagues and I don't like to
step on our local government
from the state government.
That's not really our job. But
when things are moving so slow,
Mr. Chair, where are those where
we're gonna see if there is any
legislation out there that's
going to help us move things
faster, because this is, this
pace isn't working. We know that
we have a.
We have the manufacturing, um,
company that's that's pushing
out um modular housing here, um,
in New Mexico. How is that
going? Those are the things. How
are we going to invest in those
things, which side, you know,
who's going to do that work.
Because, quite honestly, Mr.
Chair, I, and I talked with Izzy
quite often, you know,
throughout the years that I've
been here and understanding
exactly what and what MFA does
and you guys, you're already
producing, you're already in,
you know, you're doing all these
things and everything. How is
this housing office going to
differentiate, if you will, but
also work with Mister Chair.
Mr. Wartor and then Mr.
Hernandez, if you want to add
anything. Great. uh,
Charesentative Lujan, um,
I think what I would say to this
is, um,
I have worked with MFA for years
and have uh a great experiences
and understanding of the things
they do, I think over the last
year and since last legislative
session and the direction of the
governor, we've been working
together with MFA over the last
year to really work on that. We
consulted extensively on the
Office of Housing Language and
duties to try and make sure that
those uh duties were clear and
non-overlapping. I think the big
thing from my point of view, um,
that's worth saying out loud. I
don't think the state should be
in the business of project-based
underwriting and subsidy
programs. That's something
that's done faster and more
efficiently outside of
government. I don't want to
duplicate that. So our funding
requests aren't necessarily
things we want to run. Those are
things that we see a need for
investment in, and that could be
run at MFA, um, so I think we
have a good sense and agreement
around the division of labor.
I'll defer to Izzy for, for his
perspective, but we've consulted
extensively to get where we are
today. Thank you, Mr. Hernandez.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Lujan.
I, I would agree with that,
Daniel, and I don't think it's
any secret that over the last
couple of years, we're very
concerned with the previous, uh,
Office of Housing Legislation
that had been introduced this
year, we have been in a lot of
consultation and I think the,
the division of labor here, uh,
if you will, is, uh, you know,
and Danielle mentioned it a
little earlier is uh working on
regulatory obstacles and
constraints that we have to try
to speed up the, the development
of housing and leave the
management and the running of
programs to, to housing New
Mexico.
where we have a, a great
infrastructure and a great
partners that help us do that,
some of them were in the room
today. So I, I think if we, we
keep that division, I, I think,
uh, we will definitely work well
together and uh put a lot more
units on the ground, uh, if we
can, uh, if we can keep that,
uh, that line drawn.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. We
really needed to hear that so we
can, you know, and codify uh a
new office too is is something I
think we're looking to do and
and why this conversation and
Everything just points to why we
need to be doing those sort of
things, but last names are, uh,
chair. I just wanna, you know,
um, we have, we have Los Amos
who is chimed in here. We have
Espinola who's um city bestpino
has chimed in here, Santa Fe,
and there, there are jobs. I
didn't hear enough on this.
Maybe you did the jobs in Los
Alamos, where there are
abundant.
But there's no, there.
There's not a lot of space to
grow there, so.
There's growth coming to Santa
Fe and there's growth going to
to Espino, how are we going to
help, um, Santae has a good tax
base, but Espinola does not.
How are we, is there any
conversation in how we address
what's going on there, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Chair Representative Liu Hun,
um, yeah, I think the, the big
thing that we're trying to
promote is regional strategies
that I've met with, uh, every
local government that you
reference, the five local
governments in the greater Santa
Fe area to talk about
homelessness issues to look at
regional strategies, um, so I
think the regionalism that we
proposed in the Office of
Housing Legislation is how we
address that.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. I do
appreciate that and no secret
Santa Fe is the highest places,
uh, to, uh, live and
We're doing a lot of work, um.
I think I will have more
conversations like we always do,
but what really struck me to and
you, and we touched on it was
the growing population of our
elderly that are um
On on house, what is the
strategy around there, Mr.
Chair.
Can anyone comment to that with
the model that we're looking at
from Texas and so on.
Yeah, I can take that. I, I
think one of the things that
excites me most about the
proposed Office of housing where
I'll be working very closely
with Daniel, um, is the
opportunity to plan with
communities about what they need
and think about that whole
continuum from uh affordable
housing at various income
levels.
Thinking about the homeless
services system and how that can
fit in when, when unfortunately
people do fall into homelessness
or need those services, and then
on the other side, how do we
reconnect those people with
affordable housing, um, and so
that, that really is the whole
package that can look in
different communities depending
on what their needs are, um, at
populations and income levels,
um, and a different kind of
services and opportunities that
might be available or that we
need to help create.
Thank you. Did you want to
answer?
Um.
The city of Albuquerque and
Bernal County together have
prioritized the development of
uh senior housing. So almost a
third of the total units that
we've created are specifically
for seniors, and so there's a
huge need. It's a growing need,
and we just need to be able to
create more units, um, because
you can have the services and
systems, you have to have the
units to have people in them,
especially for those seniors,
and there's a lot of them who
are on fixed incomes and can
only
afford to be a certain plants,
so we really need to provide
that, uh, dedicated for pounding
specific for seniors. I really
appreciate that answer. And
lastly, and, and you don't have
to answer this right now, but if
we can get some information the
committee on how um our local
governments are using their
opioid opioid funds, uh, the
settlement funds for housing for
different types of functions in
housing and get that back to us.
I'd really appreciate that.
Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
uh, Representative Lohan. Uh
committee thanks. I know it's
been a very, very long day. Uh,
we had a short day yesterday,
you all worked uh above and
beyond very, very hard, of
course, goes for our staff. A
few brief questions, mainly for
with the city of Albuquerque and
Burnley County, uh, and, and
county manager, if you could
come back up.
Um
And it's a great reminder as
folks are coming up, we'll make
sure and, and get some
refreshments for folks in the
future when we ask you to spend
a longer time like this. Uh, so,
The, uh
point in time count, which was
2700 last year. Is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair, that's correct.
OK, and um the list of projects
that we received.
Is, am I understanding it
correctly that there essentially
to combine the city and county
are proposing to house roughly
about 11,000 of those folks.
So let me, let me jump in and
then um Gilbert uh chime in. So
for
What our objective is, is with
the the number of housing units,
the number of developments that
we see being able to fund right
away, that's the aid projects
that we discussed. I think they
will, um,
They will house you may know the
answer.
The, the 8 main projects.
Marcos chime in here.
Mr. Marcos Gonzalez of Berlio
County. So we have about uh 20
over 2600 there would remain um,
in their in their number of
units that are at the rehab
piece and then over 2700, that
would be a new housing stock
units, um, from those pieces and
then we also have 8 current
projects that are under
construction, but are the
capital stack is short due to
um, infrastructure requirements
for other people.
pieces like that that are
they're gonna end up falling
short. Great. And thank you for
that and for those 8 projects,
which, am I right in assuming
that those 8 projects are sort
of, that's a year to a year and
a half time frame that's a much
more rapid time frame.
Um, how many, so I think what I
would love to, to understand
clearly is
As we all know, and there is a
sort of a common understanding,
the most unhoused folks in the
state of New Mexico or in
Albuquerque. I think the point
is increasingly clear that
Albuquerque houses unhoused
folks, New Mexicans who may have
grown up and hail from another
part of the state for whatever
reason, they're now in
Albuquerque.
I, if we're going to look at
funding and getting those folks
into the housing as ranking
member Chatfield and many others
have talked about, we need you
to give us some clear
Clear parameters to that so that
we can size an investment.
Based upon what the parameters,
you know, what you can deliver
at the end of the day.
Uh, I just want to be clear,
yes, the, the total amount of
units are around 1000 units that
could be produced with the
amount of sensor talking.
However, they are not all for
just homeless people, right? So
I just want to be clear, there
is not a 1 to 1 relationship. We
need to be able to increase the
amount of affordability in the
city of Albuquerque and Bert
County considerably in order to
lessen the amount of people that
are becoming homeless. So one of
our main issues that we're
finding that both uh just
recently is we're increasing the
amount of homeless people
because they are no longer
afford the market rate rents.
And so therefore, we really need
to stem that site to have less.
people becoming a uh uh
homeless. And then have enough
units available to be able to
decrease the amount of total
increase of rents, because as,
as you've heard both statewide
and New Mexico, and in
particular the city of
Albuquerque and County, the
amount of rental increases has
substantially increased, so we
need to be able to stem that
side. However, I do want to be
clear that not 100% of the
people that identified that are
currently homeless will be
identified in terms of going
into those units that that.
will not happen.
OK. Um, so then, uh, what we can
ask for and follow up with our
LFC is sizing our investment to
the folks who are it's serving.
And do you have a number sort of
unhoused folks, is there a
number that collectively you're
proposing with investment could
be moved from, you know,
unhoused into housing.
Do you have a number there?
Chairman Spo. Yeah, as we have
originally identified when we're
actually financing these
products, um, we really tried to
identify an underwriting way. So
one of the kitchens, as you may
realize, lower rents mean we
have to have more capital in
order to lower those rents,
right? So we need more money in
order to house lower income
people. So, however, as a rule
of thumb, what we've spoken
about before and I, I think a
good way to be able to start
that analysis.
Is that if 30% of our units are
going to people of 30% of
income, which is what we
identify people who are just on
Social Security and things of
that nature we're homeless, they
have some form of income, then
we can identify the number of
units that will be built. So
let's just off the top of her
head, I don't wanna, we can do
it in depth analysis, but a
third of those units will be
people specifically coming out
of situations with their either
precariously in house currently
unhoused right now.
Or, or, or maybe unhoused
because of rising rents. And let
me just follow up to say, um, I
think it's fair, it's a really
fair question to ask us, which
is, if we give you $100 million
how long will it take you to
house how many people at what
income level. And for some of
that, we, we know the answer
because we understand a lot more
about the financing package that
goes into each of those housing
units, so we'll know how many
people fit into these different
criteria. The other thing is, is
that we're looking both for the
100 million and
And then the 79 million and that
79 million is what's going to
allow us to remove more people
off the street, more quickly
into something transitional and
then to answer um representative
uh Garrett's question through
the chair.
One of the things we know is
that you that.
We have the ability to house
people who are homeless with
supportive services, even who
are seriously mental mentally
ill, and in California, where I
came from, our rate of keeping
people housed with the
appropriate services was 97%.
So, and that's where somebody
seriously mentally ill who on
the street would cost us.
Goodness only knows with all the
services that are getting
provided versus them being
housed. But I like the challenge
of being able to come back to
you and say, here's what we can
do with a specified amount of
money and what populations it
will impact.
Great, and I have a couple more
questions if there's anything,
Mr. Ramirez, that you want to
add, that's great too.
Mr. Chair, yeah, uh, on our end
at the city, we have a dedicated
budget that supports vouchers,
and I mentioned earlier, the
average cost of a voucher to
keep somebody has a per support
is $120 to $14,000 annually,
right? So our, our base budget
is at $8 million which houses
roughly 541 people, uh, and he
maintains them, and we typically
tend to do through our housing
navigation process to move
unhoused folks into those uh
affordable units with the
vouchers. Of course, I'm pushing
this here through our local
government to say we need to
increase that operational
investment up to 12 million.
Um, the more money I have in
that area, the more I can make
sure we guarantee we get them
into affordable units with the
supportive services that
actually have that long term
outcome. Um, so it is a bit of a
complex kind of navigational
piece, um, but it has to go
parallel. It's one preventing
the individuals from entering
into homelessness because they
lost their affordable units and
making sure we have enough stock
to continue to build that stock
to put individuals who are
unhoused into those units as
well. And then 3, the ever
growing population that we've
seen with our seniors who have a
fixed income and unfortunately
that's not gonna grow. And with
that, we need to create the unit
specific for those individuals
to say we will provide a rent
stable project for you to be
able to say your income will
sustain you there. So that's why
it's a bit of a challenge to
answer that question because
we're hitting all the areas in
regards to preventing folks from
entering into homelessness, um,
allowing folks to have
affordable living and then
moving our folks for our own
house into those units all at
the same time.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Ramirez. Uh, and I want to
welcome our speaker. Thank you,
Mr. Speaker, for coming up. I
also want to recognize
representative Parajon, who's
also here, uh, it's great to see
Mr. Speaker. Thank you for
taking time and you see folks
are working super hard, um.
One quick question on the county
side specifically, there's a
significant amount of money that
the county has collected over
the past number of years for
behavioral health.
Is the county in a position to
pledge some of that funding to
get folks uh who are, yeah, to
get folks off the street.
So yeah, I, Marcos is just
jumping in the answer
um, Mr. Chair, um, so our 6 and
Co project, which is just for
seniors that we're looking to do
in partnering with the state and
the city, that specifically has
an allocation from the
behavioral health fund as well.
Great and thank you for that.
Obviously, that's a, a
particularly concerning uh
segment of folks who are
unhoused. It's not everybody
who's unhoused. Can we work with
you all at the count. I mean, I
think.
And we're asking if we invest,
what can we do together? And so
it seems pretty fair to ask the
county to commit a sizable
amount of the behavioral health
funding to this effort. Is that
something that
Yeah, it seems like it's on the
table for Bernalillo County, so
I know I'm Doctor Wayne
Lindstrom is here with us also
and he's the head of our
behavioral health um department
and so I will just ask him if he
could answer that. Let me, let
me say broadly, um, both with
our opioid funding and our
behavioral health funding, we
recognize these are so
integrated that we are investing
resources from both of those
pots into this, um, fight to get
people off the street, but I'll
just see if Doctor Lindsster
wants to add anything.
Oh, Mister Chair, members of the
committee, um, if you'll note
the three projects that we have,
uh, for transitional housing,
all the operations of those
three projects would be funded
from our gross receipt tax for
behavioral health.
Great. Thank you. uh, and thank
you, uh, Mr. Lindstrom, and I
think
Well, we'll, um,
We haven't quite honed in,
although it seems like we're
closing in on a sort of the, the
number of folks who are unhoused
now.
With a sizable estate investment
that working together, the
county and the city can bring in
the housing. I think we have
heard and very much understand
that it's not just that
question, but that's the
question that gets asked sort of
every single day and
appropriately so and by no one,
so.
Can we work more closely to have
a very clear number there tied
to the request for state
funding. Absolutely. OK. That's
great. Um, uh, thank you and Mr.
Wawa, thank you very much from
the governor's office. I think
you're seeing a committee that's
very committed to reducing
regulation that is ready to
invest and I think is a
particularly appreciative that
you and Mr. Hernandez have been
able to work more closely
together.
Um,
Wall and Mr. Sali, director, if
we can ask you to work with
particularly the Berneo County
in the city of Albuquerque to
hone in on what this investment
could look like and what our
guardrails accountability
measures and support would look
like. I think it would be really
helpful.
OK, uh, members, thank you, um.
We were gonna go to public
comment. I understand that folks
have to step out. We're going to
limit it to 3 folks who are
here, 3 folks online, uh, go
ahead and do it at a minute
each. Open it up first in person
if anybody's in person and would
like to make public comment.
If folks are on Zoom, please go
ahead and raise your hands. Uh,
oh yes, please, Ms. Torres. Come
on up.
Mr. Chair, um, members of the
committee, I will just point out
some high-level things. There
are a number of things going on.
We need to emergency on an
emergency basis and use funding
into the system and a lot of it,
millions, tens of millions of
dollars is sitting and not
making it out, um, prevention is
absolutely key. We know the
pipelines, we know, yeah,
there's literally government
lists of a lot of the folks that
are that pipe that pipe into
homelessness.
And foster care may be one of
the number one indicator, the
city of Long Beach has found
that more so than the than being
formerly incarcerated. We also
need units for our extremely low
income, that's who is unhoused,
and that's who becomes homeless.
Those are the folks that nobody
builds for those folks. Um, also
legal aid is no longer taking
cases and has not taken and
housing case since last summer,
and we've got to figure out a
way to help people. We have one
of the shortest eviction
timelines.
in the nation. And there is a um
all of our surrounding states
have adopted community justice
worker model, and that is
something I think we should
pursue the Supreme Court
probably needs to lead that, but
that is something we can do and
um under a attorney supervision
we can do, but there are better
ways to do it as well. Um,
Also, I want to ensure that
there's a tech billionaire that
is um dabbling in housing now in
New Mexico and um there's no
place for that. And, um, here in
New Mexico. Also please go ahead
and finish your thought. OK. The
last thing is we have no fair
housing statute like that is
that it's a federal equivalent
to the legal test. And so we
don't get any federal fair
housing dollars. And so there is
really no enforcement of fair
housing. People talk about it,
but they're all
The nonprofits don't have
capacity to enforce it either.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
OK, come on up, ma'am, and then
we'll uh the woman behind you
and then Mr. Traynor.
Please come in.
And make sure the green light is
on. There you go. Good evening,
Representatives. Uh, my name is
Michelle Freer. I'm the director
of social services for the city
of Espanola, and I did have
quite some time to sit up here
today or back there and to
listen and by experience and
boots on the ground. I do see
every single day that
transitional housing is super
important. We can definitely
focus on affordable housing, but
we also have to understand that
it takes at least 2 years for an
individual that has been un.
House to successfully stay into
affordable housing, so mental
health, behavioral health is
super important. I did submit,
um, a project for supportive
housing or transitional housing
for the city of Espanola. Um, I
have been there for at least 7
months now, and I personally as
a department of one have come
across 180 clients, and these
are all clients that are youth
seniors, unhoused and housed in
the community, so I, I see that
day in and day out.
Please, in conclude your thought
if that you, I just.
think that we, uh, you know,
working together collaborations
are important. That's 11 way
that I have been able to make a
dent in the community is to work
with collaborators because if we
don't bring people down there,
then you know we don't really
know what we're working on.
Thank you very much. Thank you
for being here, Mr. Trayor, go
ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
really hadn't planned to speak,
but I couldn't missed the
opportunity. Um, my name is
Randy Traynor. I'm the
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Home Builders Association
and also the apartment
Association of New Mexico and
was recently appointed to uh be
on the board of directors for
Housing New Mexico and um this
is a very dear uh issue for me.
First off, I just want to thank
the legislature for all the
attention to housing. This has
been a long time coming, and I
I'm so excited that we're, we're
finally there and we're starting
to address these issues, and I
just wanted to note briefly
that, you know, we, we took a
survey of our builders across
the state and just trying to
identify what are our needs and
there are many, of course, but I
would say regulatory
infrastructure and workforce.
Um, those, those three areas we
think um if we could concentrate
on those things, we could really
make a significant difference in
um uh in the amount of homes
that are built, you know, I, I
see this as a supply problem,
and we just need to, please
finish with that. That's it.
Thank you very much. Thank you
very much for your, your.
OK, let's go online, uh, again,
we're gonna, I apologize, we'll
do a limit of 3. We'll just
start at the top, Nat Dean. Hi,
can you hear me? Uh,
I believe that.
Uh,
Nat.
This is Nat Dean. Have you
unmuted me?
Yep.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, members of the
committee. Thank you for your
heavy lift. Uh, one,
approximately 1 in 4 persons
have some kind of disability and
we all get there at some point.
As we age, or it may be from
prenatal to post grave, anywhere
in between. Uh, please, uh, take
a focus on one quarter of the
housing being accessible, and
that can be utilized, uh, sorry,
achieves through universal
design and building it.
from the front end is a lot less
expensive than building it on
the back end. And if a tenant
needs to modify a unit, they
need to do it at their cost, and
then they need to return it back
to its original state at their
cost. So let's do it from the
front end and I think that we'll
have much more success in
housing are difficult to house
populations. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, Madam Chair, members of
the committee.
Next, we're gonna go to Joanna
Ben Como.
Hi everyone, my name is Joanna
Bencomo prote for the city of
Las Cruces. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak with you
today. Las Cruces, like most
cities, have not been immune to
the housing crisis, but we are
neither hopeless nor powerless.
In Las Cruces, we have a plan.
What we need is funding. It's my
understanding that in front of
you is a list of our housing
projects totaling about $25
million. Projects that will
yield 631 new housing units.
Today we are asking for a $10
million investment into our
affordable housing trust fund.
We are only asking
for 10 million because we've
heard you loud and clear about
your desire for accountability
and the use of all
appropriations. We know $10
million will make a big impact
on our shovel ready projects. I
am proud to say that in Las
Cruces, we have invested time,
energy, and resources to build
strong infrastructure that is
ready to meet the moment. We
have staff, more developers than
ever who are interested in
multi-family housing, key
partnerships with experts and
designated key areas for
revitalization, and if it passes
on February 18th, we will have a
brand new land use.
Code designed specifically to
create new opportunities for
growth and increased flexibility
in land use and site design for
expanded housing opportunities
in diverse housing places. I say
all that so that you know you
have the trust in us to spend
this money efficiently and
wisely. Thank you so much and
appreciate your consideration.
Thank you very much. Uh, we're
gonna go ahead and skip Ms.
Green, and she's also from the
city of Las Cruces, and we just
heard from them, uh, Jane
McGegan, Jane.
Yes, good evening. This is Jamie
McGuigan. I'm a registered
lobbyist for the League of Women
Voters of New Mexico, and I
appreciate the opportunity to
make a brief statement. The
league is in strong support of
increased funding and planning
for affordable housing in New
Mexico through increasing
funding for the housing Trust
Fund, the state Office of
Housing Planning and Capital
outlay requests from the City
County partnership.
Um
Ensuring that affordable housing
options for people at all income
levels is crucial for a well
functioning economy.
So in closing, we support the
efforts of the entities and
there's uh legislative requests
for Senate Bill 145205 and the
capital outlay request, and
thank you for the opportunity to
share the league's housing
position and support.
Right. Thank you very much.
That'll conclude our public
comment. Members, thank you. Uh,
please have a great safe
evening, uh, a quick note, uh,
our Marty and our great staff
has reminded me any of the new
materials that you'd like to
keep today, so not the regular
materials in our briefing books,
please go ahead and take those
with you. We won't, there won't
be a space to keep them here. So
if you want those materials,
they'll be available online and
we'll work with Director Bri and
others to send them.
Um,
but if you want to take them,
