Could be you know six seven
percent Veterans Services with
the LFC recommendation.
And then the executive
recommendation was thirty five
thousand above the LFC and
contractual services and that
difference was slightly over
just for transportation services
as I noted earlier we had a
target compensation increase
Nailsea recommendations so
there's language in the LFC to
accomplish that that's not
included in the executive
recommendation.
The performance measures have
been reconciled and then if you
notice on page three you guys
have been going over the
non recurring budget slowly and
this is the difference between
nonrecurring between the
recommendations you guys did
have a hearing on this on
Saturdays so here I'm sure
you're aware of that eight
hundred thousand dollar
difference that the executive
recommended for expanding
outreach services and with that
I'll turn it over to DFA for any
additional comments.
Afternoon Mister chair of the
committee Kelly did a really
great job summarizing the
differences so I have nothing
further to add and will handed
over to step secretary colonel
content on this good afternoon
Mister chairman members of the
committee again I'm colonel can
Donna it is my distinct pleasure
to have the opportunity to
repent representative this
department and one portly to
represent a hundred and forty
five thousand New Mexico
veterans heroes and the refer
their families across our state
and as you can see in the
audience I'm also proud to be
able to work in partnership with
and collaborate with all our
great partners nonprofit
organizations and those folks
that are engaged in supporting
our veterans I often say that
supporting veterans does not
mean placing a wreath or flag on
their grave site every veterans
day and Memorial moralizing
folks but actually recognizing
and on and supporting them as
they live so with that I really
appreciate the the committee
members that have served
Representative Garcia
Representative Baca
Representative I hope I see your
name right Sari√±ana.
And as well as the other for
that are brought to the
legislature thank you for your
service I'm also pleased and
humbled to say that the
department is experiencing its
twenty year anniversary as a
cabinet secretary Department of
from the commission so we want
to build on all the success from
the previous cabinet secretaries
administrations and all the
things that we've been able to
accomplish in the work every
blade of moving forward I will
at this time elect interview our
staff because these are the
folks that are truly engaged
these are the folks on the front
lines these are the folks on the
ground so I'm gonna introduce or
division directors and some of
our key staffing folks so we
have first division director is
Diane morning brown she is our
division director for our health
care coordination division the
governor street and then is who
is with our state budget
robin Wilson could not be here
today Senator place we have of
the more.
Martinez
Very distinguished in the fact
that he's getting ready to
retire so I'm trying to forget
his name so that hopefully he
doesn't retire on me with that
we also have our chief financial
officer Mr Nellie Senator we
have our general counsel counsel
Gabby's Sanchez Santa we have or
H. R. Lori good terrace did you
miss any of the staff okay with
that I know if you're pressed
for time so we'll move on.
Next slide I just wanted to
highlight you know I think the
genesis of what we're talking
about today all started with the
two hundred seventy two were
Gettysburg address from
president Abraham Lincoln on
that day he recognized that we
have that a strive on to finish
the work we are in to care for
him who shall have borne the
battle and for his widow and his
orphan the only modification I
would amend that with this him
and her no as we nowadays have
better veterans of both sexes
and you know I think the
definition of a veteran can be
more explicit and
worthwhile there to say that a
veteran is a person who wrote a
blank check made payable to the
United States of America for
about up to and including their
life and we'll know of many
veterans that again that'll to
that sacrifice so with that I
think Kelly is Laurie did a
tremendous job in announcing the
differences with the
recommendation obviously the
bottom line up front cordially
and respectfully ask that you
support the executive budget
recommendations for the
department moving forward.
With that I just want to go to
highlight a key focal of key
things that we are focusing on.
One is on the extremely pro on
page six or slide six.
Staffing in person we've gone
from a vacancy rate of in
September of twenty twenty two
of a little less than eighteen
percent to a current vacancy
rate the little over nine
percent our our goal is to
strive to reach one hundred
percent fulfill as I led troops
in Afghanistan I would often
suggest to leadership you cannot
accomplish your mission if
you're not task organized
correctly you don't have the
right troops you can't get the
job done so I advocate that our
primary focus is to ensure we
have one hundred percent feel of
our positions that are there for
supporting the executive
recommendation we all recognize
that is of we live in a rural
state a lot of our veterans live
in these rural communities is
incumbent upon us to ensure that
we have one hundred percent
accessibility and support to all
our veterans across one hundred
percent of our counties in New
Mexico I'm pleased to say that
right now we have coverage about
eighty two percent of our
veterans density within the
state the additional funding
that we are seeking will get us
to a hundred percent so we
ensure we have one hundred
percent support across the state
and of course it we don't do
that alone nobody operates in a
vacuum again I'm very thankful
and pleased to be able to
maintain and preserve right
great relationships with our
nonprofit organizations that
support veterans as well as our
tribal communities as well as
our non profits and so forth.
Getting to us some of the rural
initiatives
the additional funding in
contractual services will allow
us to expand on the
transportation services
initiatives across the state
currently were funded by the
federal government through the
high rural transportation grant
for fifteen counties we have
received this fiscal year twenty
three fifty thousand special
appropriation that's going to
allow us to expand that with the
additional funding in the
executive budget we will be able
to expand into all thirty three
counties across New Mexico and
part of that is in support of
the veterans transportation and
community living initiative that
I'm pleased to say partnering
with our sister agencies such as
DOT.
Irvin of aging long term
services and other transit
agencies to not limit
transportation support to
veterans and active military
members and their families but
for work for health care for
education for other vital
services be able to provide a
transportation network that's
comprehensive and holistic these
funds will help us be able to
accomplish that as I mentioned
we have the high rural
transportation grant program
currently we have this year
hundred twenty six thousand.
Again thank you all for the
fifty thousand additional a high
priority for any purpose.
The one thing I advocate that
all veterans here.
Is that we don't want to be
forgotten our sacrifice or
service our dedication to our
country to our state for
communities to our families to
our love ones we don't want we
don't want that to be for done
in addition to that we don't we
want to ensure that we are very
to enter with the most dignity
and pride and respect in front
of our love ones so with that
I'm I'm pleased to say that the
just no funding will also
support our honor guard ensuring
that every veteran has the three
functions that are required for
the funeral of a veteran the
flag detail.
rifle team and a bugler the
place taps this will ensure that
we adequately can partner with
our nonprofit organizations to
ensure that they have the people
that can serve in this capacity
and we can compensate in
providing uniforms and equipment
as well as training so that they
do provide the most dignified
service in addition to that I
would encourage you all to take
a visit to one of our state
veterans cemeteries that are
tremendously beautiful what a
great west resting place for
distinguished veterans and their
loved ones but one that is still
in a pending is our Carlsbad
cemetery and we're waiting for
the six million dollars that we
have requested through the
federal program once we receive
the six million dollars that
will complete our round of state
senators and you can see I
mentioned on the slide the other
thing I would really highlight
is we would be remiss.
I wouldn't take a menopause to
recognize that we have eleven
percent of our veterans are
women.
So shout out to all the women
veterans in the state of New
Mexico we have one of the
highest percentage of women
veterans in the state of New
Mexico in the in the country so
with that we need funding to
ensure that are out research
efforts are tailored and geared
towards supporting women
veterans and whether partnering
with women veteran organizations
and so forth you see on there
United military women of the
southwest Mr chairman this goes
from here part of the state
great organization so the fund
you providers will allow us to
continue that opportunity I will
share with you more of our
special forces in our military
have lost their life as a result
of suicide versus being killed
in action.
That that is disheartening at
all levels and the challenges
that veterans face when they
come home is extremely
challenging so we are obligated
to these as the two hundred and
seventy two were Gettysburg
address says to be able to
provide the care they need so
the funding you're providing us
will establish suicide
prevention programs and
resources and being part of that
network so that we can mitigate
as much as possible the law of
the loss of life as a result of
suicides in addition to that
this want to mention to the to
federally funded programs that
we have within the department or
veterans business outreach
center very pleased to say that
Mister Richard Kauffman is a
tremendous director could be
with us today but he's doing a
tremendous job in ensuring that
we increase the six percent of
federally owned businesses in
the state of New Mexico but more
importantly or just as
importantly not only do we want
to establish businesses with
veteran the owned but we also
want to provide employment for
veterans through these better
and business on businesses and
lastly our venture veteran
education I can tell you I
capitalized on the program which
was the veteran education
assistance program allowed me to
go to the best school in the
state of New Mexico New Mexico
State University go ahead please
but not not anything to do with
the gentleman comes from from
that land but
The card was registered with so
with that Mr chairman of thank
you for your time more poorly
thank you for the recognition of
the importance of this
department to the state of New
Mexico formally again request
your support of our executive
budget as well as the special
appropriations with that I I
stand for questions thank you
very much Secretary can time
thanks to your team and thanks
to all who are here today who
are part of your and our
incredible work we're gonna go
straight to questions first
we're gonna go to representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator
cantata.
First of all I'd like to start
by welcome all the veterans
welcome home.
No you could not forget would
you have done for our country.
It would have been done under
yes souls all over we're we
would be useful rentals for Mr
Chairman representative Garcia
excellent question you know we
all recognize that the yes so is
the catalyst is that bridge to
ensure veterans get the the
access to all the help health
programs and and benefits are
eligible for I do want to just
give a little disclaimer here
for all of those veterans
through New Mexico that have had
the opportunity to seek benefits
either through the VA or the
state earn an average a hundred
and sixty four dollars a day
verses of non veteran that earns
a hundred dollars a day by
participating in the budget in
the pension that is provided by
these programs veterans bring in
I heard thirty million dollars
to the economy in the state of
New Mexico but with that being
said we currently have twenty
six yes of course out of our
seventy four FTEs with that we
have to one designated to
support state budget and the
other twenty four over
throughout the state at large
through our efforts this year we
are realigning and making sure
that compensation is is
accordingly we are working with
the state personnel office to
ensure that they are classified
correctly so that we can ensure
that we can compensate
incorrectly addition to that
we're also partnering with the
VA so that we don't have of the
VA taking our staff we are
training our staff in the VA is
been flow begin our staff off so
we are working in collaboration
to ensure that we need to have a
unified system particular point
Mr chair of representative
Garcia the additional funding
will ensure that we not only
have a hundred percent coverage
of the state of New Mexico with
this so but we have redundancy
in the system to ensure that
veterans when they reach out to
our office they will be able to
talk to a live person.
Thank you from state durian Mr
chairman.
Like I said earlier you know
recognizing abuse so not putting
the flag is very.
You know and there I think
everybody in this room knows
better and for related to
Veterans somehow or another and
and
Part one is that for the need
for me it bugs me that you have
the.
About ninety nine percent.
This folder Veterans correct yes
that is correct Mr Chairman
representative Garcia although
not a requirement I think we all
recognize that it is conducive
and there's a lot to be
garnished in regards to budget
by the fact that if you are a
veteran you consume show some
empathy and some sympathy and
understanding of what the
veteran is going through and
sometimes it is difficult for a
veteran to speak and there are
several veterans in the state of
New Mexico that have not asked
for federal of for any
assistance because of the
difficulty of the challenge of
saying I didn't serve to be
rewarded with benefits I serve
because I truly wanted to
honorably served this country so
having that that experience is
tremendously advantageous
Mr Secretary Mr Chairman use it
though right ahead you know I'm
a Vietnam veteran records that
are in and you know I can not
relate to a person that is not a
better you know and and.
I actually people are your tell
you exactly the same thing in
only what I what I want to win
Vietnam forty Arnold.
And and another visit but non
veteran is trying to help me out
is going to be very difficult to
get to for one when we need to
be you know I I want to Mr
chairman I want to export of
digital but and the gentleman
told me that a veteran to
complexity.
Noted what he said he couldn't
get all and that comes down to
the lack of useful in our state
we really need to up what we're
doing for veterans in the state
in New Mexico collaterals Mr
Chairman and Mr secretary I feel
that the state fielder Veterans.
You know.
It's come a long way but we have
a long way to go because of not
you know will be more veterans
thank you said Michigan done on
I'm sick of him said Mr chairman
of.
We have a hundred forty thousand
veterans out there.
For soul and we're gonna get
more veterans some of the
veterans are getting up in age
and it is tough the public I to
live it over and over so.
I commend you for what you're
doing I'm glad room board and
together we can do a lot of
things people are falling apart
and nobody nobody gets in health
you know look around look at the
veterans are behind you I know a
couple of minutes.
Jake right behind you he's a
Vietnam veteran and then he but
I can't wait to him because we
were both in the in the.
And and not only Vietnam
veterans in all all our veterans
suffer the same thing you are
where women veterans are being
left behind also we really
really need to address those
issues and like I said Mr
chairman.
Secretary we work together we
get to thank you thank you
chairman representative I just I
I want to mention this because I
was remiss in not mentioning it
we also have a designated person
for native American tribal
liaison we definitely want to
partner with them we want to
collaborate we want to
coordinate we want to make sure
that we are supporting our
native American population as we
all know that anybody that is a
veteran that is served we all
are either green purple or blue
right if your army or green of
airforce you're blue in if
you're make sure you're
comfortable
I'm not sure what other marines
are but
But with that being said I just
want to express that one of the
things I did mention is we are
getting ready to launch the
building of the miniature wall
Vietnam wall up in angel fire
and we will have that completed
shortly and it's going to be an
honor to have that and opening
to fire no moralizing the
sacrifices and the dedication
the service from our Vietnam
veterans I would also be remiss
if I didn't acknowledge the fact
that over fifty one percent of
our veterans are sixty five
plus.
Of Mr Chairman and Mr secretary
on the Vietnam memorial wall of
the building a new fire Jake
Wheatley.
I want to recognize the
gentleman because I've been
working with them for about four
five years on this wall and it's
been a struggle because the pin
number a lot of fund raisers to
get funding for it and not just
thank you Jake thank you.
This hold on there's a lot of
people involved.
No planning these projects in
the top line was stopped and
Maybe a couple to much but you
know better to write your.
Thank you thank you Mr thank you
very much representative Garcia
and we're gonna come back at the
end to representative Garcia for
the motion on our budget next
we're going to go to
Representative Sanchez.
Thank you Mr chair I want a job
dot com the yes so
Representative Garcia brought up
I know a.
He then myself brought up this
issue several years ago and him
and I had to ask the then
secretary to of money to our
budget which is kind of order.
But
Right now you said you have
twenty six yes those what did
you have two years ago I'm
wondering what the how the
numbers increased since that Mr
Chairman were a Representative
Sweetser I I wouldn't know
exactly but I can tell you that
if you look at the slide that
depicts the staff being the
slide six you can see in the
last ninety days we've gained
six new positions in the
majority of those are the Bach
are yes so I'm sorry yes
positions so our priority to
feel is are being conditions and
we're making every effort to
fill those positions as quickly
as we can thank you Mr chair and
I think this resulted because
myself and R. F. Garcia we
actually call the phone number
to a yes so and there was a
message that said they're too
busy to take any calls and I
think that's what drove us to
start asking these questions
what's going on there people are
saying there is up to a six
month wait to get a hold of one
or something crazy so I Mr
Chairman us are you seeing that
you're after this will be fully
staffed and there will not be a
wheat Mr Chairman representative
Sanchez no like I said we will
we will be at about eighty two
percent of density within the
state geographical service area
with the additional funding that
submitted through the executive
budget recommendations coupled
with the eight hundred thousand
special appropriation we will
get there but in addition to
that we are taking some of our
contractual dollars in hiring
temp staff to be able to we can
so we can ensure that we answer
the phone call so rather than
have to for employees we want to
have actual classified employees
and have them filled but our
goal is to ensure that every
veteran every dependent speech
to a live person it doesn't get
a recording we're working on
that system thank you Mr
chairman I guess I would like to
ask that we seriously consider
adding this there's two
departments that I think we
should always look at fully
funding it's our senior citizens
and our veterans and our I think
a lot of these other
departments.
Good part work for those should
be our top priority
More question Mr chair
Where we are with the town's
cemetery I know you gave an
update awhile back that was on
the call real quick how is that
looking Mr Chairman
representative senses that's a
great question there I can tell
you we're having a lot of
dialogue and a lot of discovery
conversations with the the
national folks there state folks
some of the county folks and
taking a real look at a
comprehensive approach to how we
address the cemetery needs
across the state we all of of
recognize that this state City
of Santa fe's national cemetery
is going to be full in the next
five eight years they're gonna
Max capacity it will only
support secondary of various
interments so looking across is
there an opportunity either for
the national folks to take over
the jobs coming secretary is a
more conducive for the state
there's a more responsible for
the county so we're having those
conversations doing the
analytics taking a look at the
metrics on you know the number
of veterans in those areas but I
will tell you that I am really
pleased to say there's a lot of
good dialogue on how we would
make recommendations for no for
filling that thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much
Representative sorry Mr Chairman
representative all of us and
just one last thing on that is
of Taos county is requested
through the cover only process
the three point two million I
believe to complete the
cemetery with that it'll put it
in a great position to be either
over some or seen by the
national for the state or the
county.
Mr chair of quick as their
appetite for the governor to
help fund the I'm I'm gonna put
some of my money towards the.
I would just say Mr Chairman
reprieve senses the governor
sports records thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much
Representative Sweetser
listening Representative
Pettigrew.
Okay sorry will go next
Representative agrees.
Thank you Mr chairman sector can
Donna.
Can you talk a little bit about
the our rural transportation for
disabled veterans.
This Mr Chairman representative
bill Cruz
so right now the the majority of
the funding is coming through
what I refer to as the high role
transportation grant that is a
federal program through the
veterans administration that
supports transportation of
veterans to their medical of
appointments and so forth but
that's formula based so the
eligible counties are dictated
by the federal government based
on the density of how many
people per mile things to that
nature so what we're advocating
for is let's not rely solely on
the federal government to
provide that service as
Representative Garcia alluded to
to our veterans let's take a
role in that as a state of by
funding this program so that we
adequately can work with those
transportation providers and
more importantly as I mentioned
earlier really partner with our
sister agencies department of
transportation and a long term
aging so that we really can
maximize resources the needs in
our rural communities are
veterans and seniors as
Representative Sanchez mentioned
so we have an opportunity to
develop a network a
comprehensive system that really
recognizes a transportation need
out our rural communities.
Thank you Mr chairman
so are there are no state
dollars allocated for this
effort for veteran
transportation at this time.
Mr Chairman representative go
through so right now we this
current fiscal year fiscal year
twenty three operating budget we
did receive fifty thousand in a
special appropriation for that
purpose.
Thank you Mr chairman it it
appears that the state has been
a bit remiss in helping to fund
this is not only for rural
veterans Mr chairman I can tell
you that this past summer I had
at least two phone calls from a
disabled veterans in my district
saw valley center of the cell
valley in Albuquerque that had
did not have transportation
could I get to the VA hospital
on Gibson and we're asking me if
there was any way I tried to
connect them Mr chairman with
the City of Albuquerque senior
fares and anybody that I could
and it was a very difficult
situation I I really really
think it's time that that the
state steps up and not only
helps are are very needy
disabled veterans in rural areas
but also in urban areas as well
thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much Representative Cruz
listening Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr chairman
Thank you it's good to see you
out there and
In this position as.
One of our better one of our
veteran so thank you for for
taking this on and really
looking to have to to do more
for this office really
appreciate that
so I'm really struck on your.
You suicide prevention projects.
and I'm looking over the budget
here and Mr chair I mean I'm I'm
looking at the expansion portion
here there's nothing under the
expansion but you're talking
about growing and developing
adding FTEs can queue explained
some of that in regards to
building up the programs
especially that of you mentioned
the suicide prevention subject
to the chairman of
Representative Lujan excellent
point of we were successful
importer in the department of
health in ascertaining a hundred
thousand dollar grant from
department of health to support
suicide prevention program so
that's just an opportunity of
leveraging resources but in
addition to that currently are
women's of veteran liaison or
advocate is also serving as our
suicide prevention program
manager and you know at this
point we're just not to the
point where we know exactly what
resources we need moving forward
but I can tell you hold that
thought let me put you on pause
so that next year will come to
you and say this is what the
additional resources we need for
the program so we are
establishing the program
ensuring that we have adequate
performance measures to measure
our success Senator bowls and
for a ject is again next year we
will clearly identify more
resources beyond a hundred
thousand that we have as of
today thank you Mr chair I think
that that is just a very
responsible a place to to start
from and and just as you're
diving into this and related to
the budget so I see that I see I
guess I see the funding here of
as in from out of state can tell
me secretary under the base the
hundred
Thousand it's there on the.
Mr Chairman representative alone
are you referred to the fund
balance.
I'm not sure I'm asking the
question of bills and look at
their budget pager difference
worksheet.
Kelly please it is excuse me it
is a fund balance thank you and
that so that from bounces are
going to be a used towards the
suicide prevention I guess is my
Mr Chairman Representative Lujan
no.
Okay.
Mr chairman so in the LFC wreck
it is not included in there
because it was not passed of the
LFC in the record in requests so
we were never able to make a
recommendation or analyze that.
The fund amounts comes from
license plate fees and so it and
has enough in the fund balance
to keep that recurring great
thank you so this is just the
extra funds and I I also so
Mister chair that you referenced
EDD H. U. D. D. O. H. S. S. D.
as in your presentation and how
are you working with all those
other agencies like you did with
U H. two two to really work
together to see how we can get
how you can.
Get some of those those of
funding for the services that
you need for veterans Mr chair
Mr Chairman representative along
just make sure apologize to our
LFC analyst that the question
was directed to me but with that
yeah I think it's it's through
discovery it's through
recognizing what are the needs
and the challenges in rural New
Mexico for veterans for seniors
and for some of the general
population in regards to
services and what is the
existing network and how can we
leverage organizations and staff
and equipment resources so that
we can meet that need working
collectively folks in rural New
Mexico should be able to have an
opportunity to receive those are
services and not going to be
seamless they don't necessarily
need to know where the funding
is coming from they just need to
know that that services
available thank you that is
absolutely true thank you and
Kelly wanted to say something Mr
chair briefly I'm sure if if you
do take the executive
recommendation you could make a
slight adjustment move that
hundred thousand dollars in
addition to the executive and
target that point is that
perfect the committee members.
Thank you very much.
Any further questions of snow Mr
chair thank you great thank you
very much okay
so I don't see any other
questions let's go to
Representative Garcia for the
motion.
Thank you Mr chairman thirty
degree done you know
unfortunately the motion always
for the list of the two in in
this case is the.
LFC but I want to make a motion
to accept the executive today Mr
chairman Dr and then
Representative Garcia would you
accept moving that one hundred
thousand dollars in fund balance
to suicide prevention is that
what.
Okay that's been moved by
Representative Garcia seconded
by Representative Sarinana thank
thank you both for your service
Mr secretary thank you
is there any opposition to
adopting the executive
recommendation within the.
Saying none we've adopted that
today thank you very much.
Thank you so much.
Just a quick note we we we are
doing public comment we were
doing those after the entirety
of the the HSD hearings working
obviously to be efficient with
our agencies and if you're able
to stay we would love to hear
from folks next we're going to
go to HSD six twenty four as
secretary hope from Lopez to
come on up and again members
this is gonna be agency code six
twenty fourth.
All right will ask everybody who
as we will get started Kelly can
you could this out from the LFC
please great to see you madam
secretary.
Thank you Mr chair will serve
with the a high level which is
page one of your packet and so
this is general fund differences
for a hot for the high level and
so it overall the executive was
about eight point four million
dollars above the LFC and that
sounds like a lot but it's
mostly in a just like three line
items and so you can see in line
twelve the executive
recommendation included five
million dollars of that eight
million for a new program called
New Mexico air which would
basically be a reimbursement for
family members to take care of
families in their network that
are aging.
the next big difference you can
see is online seventeen the
agent network money to increase
the a local
The local networks the LFC was
four point five million while
the executive was almost a four
million so that's a four hundred
five hundred forty four thousand
dollar difference for direct
grants to the networks and then
the other major differences are
online nineteen the executive
recommended two million for
volunteer program all the LFC
included five hundred thousand.
And then the other large
difference can be seen online
twenty five reviews act included
two million for transportation
services.
So with that we'll turn to the
general
different sheets on page two you
can see the general fund
difference of that eight point
four million a majority of that
will be in contractual services
and other costs for those two
major programs transportation in
New Mexico air and AG Network
very small difference in person
services only fifty nine point
eight thousand.
performance measures have been
reconciled the executive
recommendation included seven
point two million expansions for
those two programs
and so that some major the
difference on the overall with
that I'll turn it over to Missy
aka for program support.
Okay so we're looking at.
Work P. five nine one.
LFC recommendations supported
the part requests for general
fund what with the FY twenty
three operating budget for the
executive recommended a
reduction of two hundred seventy
five point nine thousand
dollars.
In the base the executive
recommendation reduce the
funding and personnel to align
with the requested reduction to
E. resulting in the two hundred
seventy eight point nine
thousand dollar difference
independent agency rate of
ninety five percent.
The executive recommended three
thousand about the LFC for
miscellaneous contracts.
Performance measures target
differences have been reconciled
and are noted on performance
measures.
And with that I'll hand it back
to Kelly.
So in consumer elder rights
there was no difference olds
move on to the next program
quickly which is the adult
protective services program and
with that that that five million
dollar general fund difference
for the New Mexico program and
you can see that's all contained
in the contractual services
category that's the only
difference
without turnover back to Misia.
Okay and we I will be doing
aging network P. five nine four
this is the last one.
The executive general fund
revenue recommendation was three
point seven million dollars of
of the LFC mostly for expansions
requested by the department and
the base the LFC recommendation
included an increase of four
point five million for the aging
network providers well the
executive recommendation was
slightly under four million.
The executive recommendation
included an increase of two
million dollars for volunteer
programs for the LFC
recommendation included five
hundred thousand dollars.
The executive recommendation
included nine hundred ninety six
thousand dollars for adult day
care will the LFC included five
hundred thousand dollars.
Performance measures target
differences have been reconciled
and are noted on the performance
measures some measures summary
and for expansions the executive
recommendation included two
hundred forty seven point three
thousand dollars an expansion
for three F. T. and two million
dollars for transportation
services.
The lady have anything you would
like to add not to that Mr
chairman if we could just look
at specials supplementals just
quickly also you know you can
see that they the executive
included five million more for
your The New Mexico care and
special supplemental
and then there's a forty million
dollars recommended by the LFC
for the keys that they for
dignity Fund not one of the LFC
recommendation requires
legislation that would make that
a investible fund to kick off
distributions for the aging
network for not the network for
the departments to be
appropriated by the legislature
in the future will the executive
recommendation included twenty
million without that caught the
eye of the investment
legislation so that's the
difference in the specials but
not in your reoccurring any
floor you want to say anything
else on special Mr chair
Representative no I do not think
okay with that will turn it over
to the secretary for COVID.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name's Katrina
how term up has and the cabinet
secretary for aging and long
term services it's always a
privilege to talk about seniors
and what we want to do and what
the needs are here in New Mexico
so but just for a moment I'd
like to thank my staff please
stand up and they'll be help
helping me to answer questions
as we go along through this we
have adult protective services
the ombudsman program I. T. in
New HSD here with me today so
just a few things we we have
really been working very hard on
how we set the landscape for for
aging and long term services so
one of the things when I got
into this position figured out
that there was that that that
resources that we once had had
been depleted or minimized
significantly from previous
administrations so as we're
building and we need a few
things we need a little bit of
infrastructure because we lost
over sixty positions at the time
of the Martinez administration
and where we don't expect sixty
positions back but we do need a
little bit of infrastructure as
we try to create the roadmap for
aging aging is not just in long
term care facilities and it's
not just in senior centers those
are the ones that we will assist
we will help and those who are
in critical need or vulnerable
to abuse neglect or exploitation
but this also does not act
address the whole thing aging
that we need to put in place for
people who don't want to say
that they're old and go to a
senior center we still need
services and we need to make
sure that they're taken care of
we also have the opportunity and
and typically I'll state the the
responsibility to assist family
members who are struggling and
deciding whether they have to go
to work or in our care giver
Crisis which were in today if
they can stay home and take care
of their loved one and not have.
To make these difficult
decisions I've heard many people
ask me expression here at the
roundhouse why are you asking
for so much money are you
investing leveraging and you're
gonna hear yes we are leveraging
what we can't but the reality is
in with Medicaid and with our
senior population once a person
hits the age where they can have
Medicare Medicaid becomes.
Pretty much non existent for the
majority of our population we
have eighteen percent that
qualify for Medicaid and so when
we ask about what services are
provided and most people here
talk about the realm of Medicaid
we should be leveraging case
management services we should be
leveraging adult day services
what about personal care option
services well.
Most seniors only eighteen
percent of our seniors qualify
for that yes there is another
high huge chunk of our
population that is above
qualifying for that Medicaid hi
but can barely make ends meet
prices are going higher thank
you all to the legislature for
for supporting and actually
passing the social security
reduction tax rate or
elimination tax except is huge
that's huge for seniors but now
it's not enough and what you're
seeing fall off the cliff good
for volunteer programs because
people can't afford to spend
their own money on gas anymore
so more volunteer programs which
have been crippled during COVID
nineteen now people don't have
the money to even continue their
volunteer service we're looking
at the the the gap in in
nutrition and food services and
I'll tell you what's in what's
in the recommendations on either
side is not enough seven point
five million brings us to where
we need to be just nutritionally
to help our senior centers out
today and then another probably
hundred fifty to a hundred
seventy thousand just to address
the waiting lists and the late
waiting list will continue to go
up so we have a choice here
right do I tell you how much
it's going to be every year so
that we can increase and serve a
very vulnerable population or do
I do we keep coming back and
asking for you know one time
funding for for a little bit and
pieces to get something going
and moving for seniors and our
seniors have been through a lot.
Not just comment that but the
rebound and and of COVID affects
the isolation the onset the
earlier onset of Alzheimer's and
dementia the nutritional risks
that they're in the lack of
visitation that they have now
transportation and other
economic factors limit the the
ability for seniors to be out in
the community in the way that
they want to be so I'm urging us
to really take a look at this
budget and fund at least the
aging network portion of
nutrition for our seniors but if
we don't continue to make
strides and efforts and put
invest in our seniors today
we're going to be paying for it
in health care costs in long
term care facility costs in
social determinants of health
from for from here and tell you
know twenty thirty when we're
expected to be at the fourth
highest level populated for our
for seniors sixty five and over
in New Mexico and that's what
we're facing.
And so I I appreciate this
budget I appreciate what Kelly
has done what Laurie is done and
and you all listening here today
about what the needs and the
struggles are with aging and
what we need to put together to
get ahead of this and actually
have confidence with our senior
center seniors to us that they
can come to us and tell us what
the needs are that they have a
voice that we champion what
their needs are and what their
expressed needs are and we know
it's in the areas of
transportation care giving
nutrition programs volunteers
social engagement and of course
the key piece of Bajor Fund and
finally I'm just going to kick
it off again for New Mexico here
some of you have asked can we
have one time dollars come out
of the key piece of Bajor funds
to fund New Mexico why would we
do that when we know people are
hurting today why would we do
that when we know that our care
giver shortage might be getting
worse and we need to stabilize
our senior so they don't have to
go into a long term care
facility now we're asking for
five million dollar pilot and
that's really for prevention
preventing folks from from D. D.
compensating to the point that
the only thing that they can
have as long term care services
so I thank you for your time I
thank you for listening to us
and at this point we'll turn it
back over.
Thank you very much madam
secretary we're going to go
straight to questions we're
going to go first Representative
Chatfield then the
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman of madam
secretary you know one of the
things Mr that that's important
to me one of the things that I
think government should do.
Is take care of our senior
citizens Mr chair there's many
things that I don't
Support putting government money
into taking care of our senior
citizens I think is the number
one job is that we ought to be
doing taking care of those
people that can't take care of
themselves so madam chair Mr
chair madam secretary can you
tell me what you're doing for
the seniors in remote areas are
you taking care of the needs of
seniors in remote areas thank
you for that question Mr
Chairman representative
Chatfield we have been really
working with remote in rural
areas because that's where a lot
of our seniors are not only want
to live and live out the
remainder of their life but they
want to have services in their
community and so just going
around the state I have been
everywhere I haven't been
everywhere but we've been going
around to particularly remote
areas because what we've heard
not only from you but for
families is that you can't get
hospice up there you can't get
physical therapy or occupational
therapy up there or in in any
sort of remote area and that we
know that poverty is higher in
these remote areas expressly
with our vulnerable seniors and
yet we have a high senior
population and so we've gone out
and we've looked and and and try
to address some of the needs one
is that they need access to
government they need to know
where we are that we care about
them and their area that we'll
sign them up for for services
and benefits and that we will
offer them to them number two we
need transportation number three
they need services that come to
them and so one of the things or
some of the things that we're
doing and looking at is how do
we it takes some of that key
piece of age or fund and see
what works with that so for
example if somebody signed up
for Medicare and they're they're
they're entitled to physical
therapy services why would I
with that company try to to get
both kids and adults in line
with that that provider get them
to.
you know the remote area once to
twice a week and I will pay
added to keep his venture fund
the windshield time for them to
get there and provide the
services to that community
whether you're a child or an
adult but will pay their that
going there and coming back so
that we have an opportunity to
serve people in the remote areas
of New Mexico we're also trying
to address food desert's by
getting contracts and we're
we're piece Mealing this
together we found a contractor
who is willing to fill grocery
needs in one county in order to
deliver them to certain spots
into senior centers into another
county so that we can make sure
our seniors have fresh fruits
vegetables and meals so we are
we need to be creative on that
local front and make sure that
we're serving the remote areas
meeting them where they are
figuring out what services that
they have already listening to
what their priorities are from
the senior perspective and then
helping them figure out how we
can have a short term and long
term effect so we are paying
attention it and we're doing
gaps in needs analysis across
rural and and and and and
probably some of the prep
published and tribes so that we
understand what the issues are
and we can work with each
community to start addressing
them Mr chair so many times I
have passed I with the the
family and the younger
generations noted the parents
into a car and ship them to a
folks home in Albuquerque never
cry and yeah they were leaving
their family they were leaving
their friends they were leaving
their homes a place to date that
they like to be the place they
feel comfortable one of the keys
to not having to do that is for
them to be able to you to
embrace modern technology
computers and stuff that so what
are you doing to help to educate
them about our technology.
And to educate them in the
various things that can help
them stay in their home so Mr
chair and representative
Chatfield so one of the things
that we're doing of course
there's there's
intergenerational programs that
we just try to start up and try
to get folks connected I'll tell
you some of the most remote
areas some of them are not
interested in technology and so
it's we have an obligation to
stop pushing that on our seniors
and our senior veterans we have
the obligation to go out and
sign you up for Medicaid sign
you up for services and we have
found actually through this
process is usually the family
member who's making those calls
who is trying to figure out how
to set up the services and so
we're now starting marketing
campaigns that are are tailored
towards adults you know type of
children who are adults and who
are taking care of their family
members because we need to do
that but we have an obligation
to do to fix somebody wants to
understand what the the computer
is we need we have an obligation
to teach you that and so it eats
the senior center has could
computer sort of program some
are stronger than others and
others are we're implementing
sort of that intergenerational
approach but more often than not
when families are calling
they're calling in crisis we
need to be filling out those
forms for them to make that
relief pitcher without a thank
the secretary answered my last
question is which is what are
you doing to engages people in
the programs that are available
to them like Medicaid Medicare
X. cetera so I think she got a
test on that and then I just
hope this committee would would
think about given a as much as
we can to to our senior so I
mean the those are the people
that we need to take care of
thank you Mr thank you very much
for so Chatfield we have six
additional members first to
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
It's really nice to hear your
presentation you know
I think
I
did a study about Hispanic
families families and get to.
Parents to to the long term care
facilities.
And families are not okay and
and.
And the minority families keep
them but the dilemma is that
there's a
of triple a or.
Senior center.
Hello.
It is and.
In order for there was never
enough.
Right down there's never a
quicker turnaround time Mr
chair.
Replaceable.
Folks for volunteering to chop
wood and bring it in for a new
focusing on those kinds of
things that and I graduated.
It just breaks my heart that we
see the thing that we can nickel
and dime this program then I
reckon.
Should get their fair share and
truly believe as of
Representative Chatfield senior
communities has paid its dues.
And I believe the.
Jeff.
Schori that should folks who
have given us
our our lives thank you for
because it is.
Paxon and they should have to
suffer.
I would get paid seven.
And the.
You differences.
The amounts they're looking
at everything.
The.
Justification for shortages of
these programs.
But I don't.
A sufficient.
We have so much money.
In fact this is.
You know save more money for.
What the future that.
I see this is to really for
me.
To try to figure out the best
way to address the needs and
concerns of our elders and give
somebody that the thank you Mr
chair thank you very much for
Representative then secretary
just sort of looking ahead and
Kelly I'd love to
if you can find the capital
outlay unspent capital outlay
dollars.
and also madam secretary we see
a funded vacancy of two point
one million dollars this was a
snapshot from from last year
if we can start no press you can
know with your staff and we'll
have some questions about that
funded they could see thank you
very much Representative
Trujillo for your questions
we're gonna go now to
Representative Sanchez then
ranking member Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chair I just want
to echo what I said earlier for
gonna pop money into departments
it should be veterans and senior
citizens so I just wanna.
say agree with Representative
Chatfield enough Christine
Trujillo Representative Trujillo
I think we we definitely got to
look at
Hello where we come up with this
department thank you.
Remember options thank you Mr
chairman and thank you thank you
for answering the phone.
When we call when we have issues
for seniors.
I'm trying not to get emotional.
I live in a district.
No mojo no home healthcare and
hospice and who comes to save us
it's this agency.
So thank you.
One of the questions I have for
you madam secretary is do you
have do you have current staff
capacity to continue to expand.
Your initiatives.
Mr Chairman representative
Armstrong the flat answer to
that is now we we we lost around
sixty to sixty five positions
during the Martinez
administration and so we've been
struggling to to rebuild to not
only internally but to make sure
that we don't drop the ball in
the community and so some of our
worries you know where are
things like you know I I have
One of the largest to budgets in
one of my division's which is
our aging network division that
doesn't have a W. you know so
looking at some of these crisis
that would that we're having now
such as you know who's providing
food and and activities at our
senior centers and are we doing
the nutritional pieces and how
can we really help grandparents
raising grandchildren we don't
necessarily have the
infrastructure and we just keep
taking more and more on we're
asking for a few positions
yesterday it during the all it
was Alzheimer's day and we're
proud partners both with a A. R.
P. and the as Alzheimer's
association but there's an
estimated forty two thousand
individuals here in New Mexico
with Alzheimer's and we have a
great plan that's well thought
out that is actually we have
requests for it because they
thought it was a great idea that
incorporates clinics and and and
navigators that help families
get the services that they need
but I have one person in that
office and so to to to launch
and re launch a huge plan like
that is is going to be more than
one person can take and so I
don't think that we're over
asking for some positions but as
we continue to grow and build
the services for seniors or can
I just need a few positions to
stabilize us and I'll tell you
you guys were wonderful last
year in approving the four
positions for I. E. a and R.
triple AA and that was
incredible and I'll tell you we
have had a lot of positive
feedback from our seniors and
and and those staff with that
are working in pueblos and
tribes and and it's been
remarkable that turn around and
the engagement that we've had
and so a few more staff will
help us make sure that we're not
dropping some of these projects
that are so critical in our time
of really crisis that's what
we're in thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that you know I I
agree with.
Some of the others that are
saying you know our our our most
important most vulnerable people
in the state are our seniors.
Our veterans and our children in
my opinion so thank you for that
and one more question Mr
chairman and madam secretary
what is the state's role in
monitoring and enforcing a not
non compliant providers.
That's a great question Mr chair
representative Armstrong we have
our area agencies on aging I
think we've got non metro back
here thank you and they had they
serve every every area of the
state with the exception of
metro the Albuquerque area and
and and pueblos and tribes and
so we give the money to them
plus some dollars that are
included in order to manage
contracts our biggest issue at
this is so there's sort of that
first line of defense but our
our issue is rebuilding that and
getting positions and people to
to want to be engaged in the in
the in the triple A.'s but our
job then is to do not only you
know an additional sort of
quality assurance check to make
sure that that happens but to
set the direction for the state
and to make sure that not only
nutritional guidelines are
adhered to and the kitchen's
clean but what are we doing to
offer great services and not
just meal services to our our
seniors and so we we set the
policy and they implement the
direction okay thank you Mr
chairman thank you for that
answer I I know it's that that's
kind of a big us that's a kind
of a big monster but I would I
really appreciate that you're
trying to work on that and the
and the trickle down and
directed because of it seems
sometimes there's a few stairs
in there so I appreciate that
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much for you
member Armstrong next we're
gonna go to it's for the order
is going to be Representative
Lujan Representative Herndon
Representative Cruz and
representative Garcia
Representative Lujan first.
Thank you Mr chair
Secretary I hear your passion
and you love what you do and it
comes through and and just
everything you're doing
and I love just the ideas and
everything that's coming out of
your office I think that.
It's.
It's strikingly just incredible
I think that this is I love
seeing this this sort of thing
so I I feel like we you know we
all here want to support you I
just have a couple of questions
You mentioned in your volunteer
program is something that's
listed here Mister chair line
line nineteen the volunteer
program development.
the executive has two million
and we're looking at five
hundred thousand.
And your you've been talking a
lot about that what.
What is it you said that this is
a deterrent I think that that I
saw here that you lost two
hundred and fifty volunteers out
of how many Mr chair
Mr Chairman Representative Lujan
I will get to those in the
number of of actually how many
we had on and then how many we
have now but we lost around two
hundred and fifty and that's
through everything from foster
grandparent program to the
ombudsman program to our call
center we you know we deal a lot
with prescription drugs
ironically and we do have a
quorum of volunteers to watch
out for senior chair fraud and
they also watch out and called a
prescription or the actual
pharmaceuticals manufacturers of
prescription drugs in order for
seniors to get the best discount
that they could have at this
point we've done a you know at
this sort of an ad hoc survey
what would it take for you to
come back and volunteer for us
right what how do we re engage
you and the there were two top
answers number one comment that
people are worried still worried
about that our seniors because
most of our volunteers are
seniors but even if we get past
that many of them are telling us
that they love that volunteer
opportunity but no longer can
afford the gas and things in
order to go into long term care
facilities or even to a central
location in order to do their
advocacy and so one of the
things that we are highly
recommending is that we infuse
these dollars so that we can
maximize that through our our as
VP programs and have additional
stations so that we can actually
give senior stipend and
reimbursed for their their gas
and that sort of stuff in and
sometimes that even keep pace
for a meal and our seniors need
that and we need that type of re
engagement in addition to that
we would love to be able to do
to look at new opportunities
transportation is a major issue
is you're hearing in the remote
area.
Is of New Mexico it is a
challenge everywhere.
Representative but in these
remote and and even rural areas
you can't call over and you
can't call left for right and so
why can't we engage a volunteer
program that we pay for stipends
in these communities in order to
get them to do the sorts of
things or can we figure out a
way to you know offset the cost
of a vehicle or work with a
nonprofit to do it so that we
can get them stipends and we can
provide the services that are
needed thank you Mr chair
appreciate that answer and some
of the detail but how many home
visiting programs do we have in
place and we're and.
As I'm looking at the everything
in the us where is the extension
or ask for additional funding
for those programs so that's a
great question Mr chair or madam
chair and Representative Lujan a
couple of issues that were that
are hidden we have we've got to
we we we don't not only our home
meal delivery programs which
also do you know just sites in
how's it going a lot of times
they go in there and talk to the
senior sort of see the condition
of the home we also have some
home visiting for adult
protective services but if we
leave them out and we've got the
ombudsman program plus
our senior gosh I'm gonna forget
the name but it's a senior
companion program and so we've
got him kind of hidden in
different pockets
the only one that's really paid
for it is through the adult
protective services of the rest
are largely through a volunteer
program that we need to make
sure that if you have a home
delivered meal why aren't we
getting you a companion or buddy
to be there and check on you and
actually work on that
socialization aspect of things
and that is what we really have
to build back that and then
being in long term care
facilities such as nursing homes
and assisted livings where we
have over three hundred across
the state of New Mexico and we
have about thirty six volunteers
today so we cannot increase on
our visit and less we increase
the volunteer programs and the
only way I can really see to do
it besides being really creative
in getting community health
workers in which we have a
project that we're working on
with the health department to do
that but largely we need our
volunteers back in because
seniors trust seniors and that's
what we have to do thank you so
much
Please check I think that that
kind of just release a really
gives a deeper dive of how
important it is to have this
volunteer
Service employees especially at
that level of the outreach that
you're able to do it and it's
it's essential because I hate to
say like a bang for the Buck but
we have these are the out these
are measureable outcomes that we
have been having this this
program in place and I think
that this is really a measure
that you've paid close attention
to and have been
try to build back and I'm just
I'm really sorry I just have
said sorry that we lost that
many volunteers I'm certain you
could add a comment if you would
also goes back to the previous
administration and and and the
funding of of this agency
and I was here I was working in
the Senate at the time when I
saw these things happen so I I
just I commend you and I I love
your spirit and and I just want
to say we're very lucky to have
you thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Lujan next we're
gonna go drops of Herndon the
roofs of the the cruise.
Madam secretary.
Yes
Representative.
Thank you I.
Of course.
One.
That is active.
Texas that.
we also yes.
about sixty seven percent of
our.
So your.
The case with your department.
Able to share with their lack of
ability to see a doctor.
Mr chair Representative Herndon
the answer is yes access to
health care and affordable
health care is you know it's
it's awful for our seniors and
it and it's across the country
so I know that we're not the
only ones affected by this
however what's contacted with
this is when you meet your time
and you can actually you too can
you have a Medicare benefits
a lot of times you don't qualify
for Medicaid benefits right and
so we only have eighteen percent
of our population that sixty
five and older that qualify for
Medicaid so I just want to make
sure that you understand that
some was flipped we think about
the regular population and we're
the opposite of that and so
access to health care whether
you're on Medicaid or Medicare
is not only a significant
challenge but I've bear here
when you're in rural and remote
New Mexico and so may want to
make sure one of the things that
we are are working on
is we've been out in these
remote areas you see all these
Medicare advantage plans that
are saying Hey we're going to
find X. Y. and Z. to you and
we'll put money back in your
pocket over the time expressly
of COVID
we were talking with the
hospitals and the department of
health about how to get the
chair expressly advantage data
to show what access looks like
or what hospitalizations look
like and how many times you're
being approved or denied if you
need skilled care at a nursing
facility or an acute care
facility chair did not did not
seem just said that they don't
track those numbers and so we're
actually going to be working
with the hospitals and we want
to know by the county which
provider you have and how much
service are providing we hope to
have that up by next year B. for
Medicare enrollment so that we
can further educate our state.
Seniors on the best plan that
would fit their community and
what things have to offer what
they have to offer but yes
access huge problem.
Thank you the things that.
the great question Mr chair
Representative Herndon we've got
several waiting lists but the
waiting list that we want to
dress the first in the one I was
talking about so thank you so
much for asking is just on meal
service only is nutrition
service only that would take
about a hundred and seventy
additional thousand dollars
because we just found out about
the waiting list to remove that
however we also have waiting
lists for chore Services.
and then in home care which is
is provided like light
housekeeping and and you know
basic some basic care giving and
those are waiting lists that we
know that we need to address and
that's going to take a little
longer to fill because of that
manpower issues but we want to
make sure that we can tackle
nutrition issues immediately.
Just a reminder Representative
through the check.
Thank.
The staff the.
Mr chair Representative Hernan I
cannot give you the overall real
quick and then I'm gonna turn it
over to are HSD director Valerie
so so basically you'll see that
our highest reversion isn't
volunteers because we can't get
them even though they have a bit
of a stipend it may not be
enough schools were closed in
our some of our volunteers got
sick and so they have we haven't
seen those numbers especially
during time of COVID even though
schools were opening up seniors
didn't feel like it was safe to
do that foster grandparent
program and that's just one of
the bigger areas that we had
those reversions and you're
gonna see another area reversion
with the Navajo Nation but then
we met that new president
last week and he is enlighten us
is over next week to talk about
those challenges and how we we
make sure that they draw down on
that that those dollars but I'm
gonna send it over to that way.
Mr chair representative.
I believe the number you guys
have is like saying it is eight
eight million it's really two
point nine million that we we
were added I'm not sure where
the numbers but that's not based
on our audit so that's the
lowest version that we've ever
had in the last five years I
think that comes out to like
four percent of our budget so
like like secretary said she
gave you what the reversion was
on but it's it's a lot lower
than what you have.
This is here the number that I.
Yeah I
was looking at the wrong one
her to see a full list a little
more it does look at the one
below look at it with a four
point three.
Four point three is what you
have Mr chair and representative
turned in but we had our our
audit finding from an outside
auditor which show the two
percent or two to two point one
million.
Two point nine I keep right
thank you for that thank you
would you mind providing that to
the committee is and through LFC
is a follow up absolutely Mr.
Are very.
Alright thanks to the.
Mr chair Representative Herndon
we don't have issues with bars
some of the the issues that we
do have is the blending of of
federal funding verses the state
funding and how we you know we
we have some federal obligations
that need or that require state
match and so sometimes we're not
able to bar dollars over because
of the federal side of things
but we don't see an issue at
this point.
Thank you thank you
Representative Fajardo excellent
questions next we're gonna go to
Representative bila Cruz than
representative Garcia thank you
Mr chairman.
Secretary of hope from this
I think it's a little bit
confusing for for most people
and it is at least to me how
you're able to leverage
Medicaid.
And at the same time for a
variety of activities and and
I'll mention a couple you may
have more that you might want to
be able to talk about such as
case management of the old day
care transportation things that
we've heard a bit of so how does
that ability to leverage those
dollars federal dollars.
coincide or reconcile with your
current budget is now and what
you're asking for because you're
clearly asking for an increase
could you spend a little time on
that thank you Mr chairman thank
you Mr chairman Representative
Ardila Cruz great question we
get this all the time we hear
most senators or representatives
say you're not leveraging
Medicaid but we are in only tell
you sort what I got on we are
now one of only thirteen states
that leverage and administrative
match on Medicaid for our adult
protective services one of
thirteen so we're we gotten that
done approximately you know
fifteen to twenty percent of our
adult protective services since
they're individuals eighteen
years old and older qualify for
Medicaid and we are maximizing
that on the administrative end
we do that too with are aging
network division but it when it
comes to individual senior
reimbursement I I've said that
you know a couple of times and
it's hard to translate the sand
but we only have not eighteen
percent of my population
receiving services eighteen
percent of seniors sixty five
and older can qualify for that
Medicaid component as well as
the chair so the majority of our
seniors don't qualify and why is
that important because Medicare
doesn't pay for case management
Medicare doesn't pay for that
you know a lot of the
nutritional services they don't
pay for adult daycare they don't
pay for the majority of the
transportation that is needed
outside of a medical appointment
and so these are things that
simply cannot be leveraged
overall by Medicaid which is why
we ask for an increase in our
general fund request.
This gentleman I I appreciate
that answer our.
Maybe that's something to
highlight in the future in your
power point only because.
I think it's a natural
assumption Mr chairman at the
dollars are available thank you
Sir thank you Representative
Cruz and Kelly if there's
anything that you want to add in
this area we can take it up but
we'll do it during the call
during my questions okay.
Okay thank you very much
Representative Cruz we're gonna
go next to representative Garcia
thank you Mr chairman and madam
secretary I'm sorry I've just
about we have to we do the same
time but and the question might
have been asked my concern is
the big difference between one
to another of eight million
dollar difference and that's
really concerning to me because
Mr chairman we had conversations
prior to this and you have a
waiting list of people trying to
get on the program and yet here
we are eight million dollar
apart from each other what we're
trying to do the needful.
To get they million is going to
be hard Mr chairman of madam
secretary maybe we should
revisit this funding.
What why are we so far off from
one to another and I continue to
four hundred thousand a million
but eight million dollar
difference it's a lot madam
secretary and Mr chairman of.
You mentioned earlier.
Not one of the quality.
That's what we need to providers
use with the quality of care you
know we can put all kinds of
money invest money into anything
we want to but yet if you don't
have the quality we don't have
an.
The that's one of the concerns.
All of the COVID issues
transportation for you they
might have already asked you but
I would usual Mr chair
representative Garcia it's we're
in crisis.
You know in terms of the
transportation that's not being
provided yet the need that is
out there we've got more seniors
that cannot drive themselves
anymore and I'll tell you during
COVID we at we're trying to get
the percentage of this but many
of the supports that seniors
have in rural and remote areas
have moved and so they no longer
have those natural supports to
take them places that they need
to go and so we're seeing an
increase in requests of
transportations to grocery
stores or to pharmacy
appointments and and also
medical appointments if they
didn't happen to call forty
eight hours in advance and get a
hold of somebody to make sure
that they were going to show up
to pick them up for their
appointment so we're in crisis
I'll tell you we've got to have
a lot of different strategies to
try to tackle this you know
volunteer strategies
leveraging what our veteran
programs have as well as the
department of transportation and
and then our investment of three
million dollars I'm not just
going to make sure that it's
parsed out to every senior
center that provides
transportation we have to have a
plan from getting people to the
remote the most remote areas of
New Mexico into their
appointments and back again and
so that three million investment
will be in pilots to make sure
that we're getting that done and
that the use of our dollars are
leverage with other services and
programs that are out there.
Thank the the future you Mr
chairman if your membership
materials we were care she.
A couple months back issue
sitter there and what was really
disheartening to me was.
You do not have the means of
transportation to deliver food
to these people yet so people
walking to get their lunches
will run on bicycle trying to
get to their food and you know
that's not.
It's not a right good deal with
a really bad deal to see some of
the seniors get into that so
what happens if you win you
could not get.
Mr chair representative Garcia
well I'll tell you when we found
out that it provider wasn't
providing that service as of
last week they were put on
notice that we would take either
money from their program or
there's going to be some
disciplinary action or
corrective actions because that
is not tolerable it's just not
and so but I'll tell you what we
have to do is do a better job at
identifying who really needs a
home service because it was the
same question when when we were
there in tears say so if this
could then couldn't ride a bike.
How do we get on food and and
there were several as people
walking up to get their meals
and and who probably qualified
for home delivered services and
so we change the assessments but
I'll tell you I think that
there's probably more waiting
lists and we really know about
because you have providers
trying to figure out how to
provide that service or provide
food or something but I think
our transportation and making
sure that we're serving the most
critical it need the home bound
for the homeless seniors which
is also a factor into your C. is
happening and and we've got to
infuse money into it so we can
do better.
Madam secretary and Mr chairman
on on that point you know even
in my community and requests.
I don't think the provider was
not providing the service I
think the problem might have
been a little bit Miss Mister
chairman is the equipment that
they have a solo dated for many
miles of you just can't do it
anymore
and so if they can do it we
competition policy people
because they don't have.
The equipment and will with and
that come from us we need to go
up well we're going to get these
providers better equipment to
travel in like in my community
is full blast you know we serve
a global Nakamoto Center felt
rural all of them and it the
vendor to have have to four
thousand miles on the the county
the city live with anymore let's
just a big issue and we need to
address and
Mr chairman and I'll leave it at
that and at the end of what just
the last thing is we really need
to look at these numbers Mr
Chairman is a they are so far
off the start real thank you
madam secretary thank you thank
you representative Garcia an
extra Representative Garrett and
I have some questions thank you
thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam secretary thank you for
having allowed voices afternoon
ever getting sleepy.
One question does the state have
any multi agency multi
generation multiservice like R.
V. things the travel around and
they do medical and they do this
is there anything like that in
our state.
Mr chair Representative Garrett
yes but is it comprehensive and
cohesive now and are we trying
to get their we're working
really closely with the
department of health even in
terms of their prevention
programs fall prevention
nutrition programs we leverage
those into our senior centers
we've also talked about mobile
clinics I think staffing has
been an issue most recently as
of yesterday I had a
conversation with that that that
we might be doing a partnering
in starting a pilot in von New
Mexico perhaps even out there
there gosh what is it school
based health program and so you
know you have that there than
what we do to leverage make sure
that transportation is there so
I think we're getting better at
and we do a pretty good job with
the veterans but I by hearing or
testimony today there's a few
more things that we can do to
make sure phone calls are
answered people's needs are met
so we are willing and we've got
great partners willing to work
with us and we need to
coordinate some of those better
to meet the needs of the
individual communities and what
will work for them.
You very much thank you thank
you very much Representative
Garrett thank you very much
madam secretary thanks members
for great questions and great
point madam secretary first
Kelly I I just for the the
unspent capital do we have that
balance and madam secretary
if you are of course invite you
always to sort of for any
feedback but Kelly for the
unspent capital balance please
yes Mr chairman on your volume
to document on page two sixty
six so as of this point two
point one million of unspent
balances if you authorize the
twenty twenty three bond
question that would add an
additional seventy two projects
in another twenty four million
for almost seventy million
dollars a projects that needed
to go forward to fifty four
funds spent twenty four of New
Mexico thank you very much madam
secretary obviously we can go
through sort of each and
everyone of those projects but
suffice to say some of those
capital dollars are sort of
priorities that we've talked
about here today what's do you
sort of the.
Do we see that that was of that
those are going to those dollars
are going to get used are they
sort of stranded and unusable
for any feedback on the capital
piece Mr Chairman those are
great questions we actually did
a power point four Senate
finance who was asking these
questions as well we will get
that to the entire committee the
upshot is yeah we haven't spent
all the money the the major sort
of crisis at this point like
what we're supposed to spend in
this year is primarily due to to
to to the unspent dollars and on
Navajo Nation we're really
working with them in order to
try to get that done but Valerie
does have more details to tell
you store those pots of money
and I don't want to take to up
the thank you madam secretary
that'll be great to see the see
the feedback and thank you for
preparing that and would be
great for us to see it madam
secretary last year I think
there was roughly it was a
twelve or thirteen percent
increase in the budget Kelly
what was the what was the
recurring increase last year.
Mr chair at to go back and look
at.
The.
Over actuals okay.
Twenty three over okay thank you
very much Mr Abbey so it's an
eight million dollar infusion
that we saw last year
we we Representative Herndon
address some of the the
reversions we look forward to
follow up there's a difference
of central difference between
four point three or two point
nine and madam secretary your
testimony is been the line sure
that is connected to sort of the
Navajo Nation
it's still a substantial amount
and it be great to drill in
there more also madam secretary
in the the last page of our hand
out.
We're shown roughly I think it
was two point one.
yes two point one million
dollars and funded vacancies.
Do you have a sense of that's
again this is a snapshot taken
last year this number higher
lower or sort of similar Mr
Chairman and we're at less than
an eight percent vacancy now I
want to just think this
committee as well for the
infusion of adult protective
service dollars were asking for
that same thing for our our call
center in in to bring those
salaries up so that we can
continue to fill those positions
because right now we almost
almost run at four vacant
positions for our call center
and that's our first line of
defense at any given time and
it's the salaries that are
really doing that so we're
asking for that increase but you
know thank you to the infusion
of dollars that we had last year
and your support we were able to
get our vacancies down and an
adult protective services
actually where you would fuse
the dollars actually has our
lowest is our lowest vacancy
rate division now they met do
you know what that vacancy rate
is currently are vacancy rate
totally or for dell protective
services and adult protective
service Mr chair I've got
Esperanza it appears you can
tell us what that.
The staff.
It'll be great it no worries
great great to follow up just
say we're shown a fourteen point
four percent funded vacancy rate
it sounds like you're telling us
that it's lower now it'll be
great to see what that is
That it does I mean we're
looking at at least four million
if not more recurring dollars
sort of either reverted or
unspent from last year.
From.
But
thank you madam secretary
we'll see what the funded
vacancy the the current funded
vacancy dollars are we're
showing two point one sounds
like it's changed and sort of
decreased a little bit back to
Representative Herndon's
question about the ability to
transfer to to utilize your
personal services funds in
different and creative ways.
Is it fair to say they're still
a little bit more capacity to do
that Mr Chairman there might be
a little more capacity what we
face a get up against is we
actually have not only do we
deliver money so that people can
find our service but we actually
do some direct service which is
adult protective services and
the ombudsman program plus we
have a veterans program as well
taking out dollars and
you know too early or not
finding that right balance means
that I can't hire another social
worker in an area that we might
see a spike in and so the even
though there might be a little
more to do I don't know I don't
think that that is enough to
offset some of the costs here
because we need to continue to
fill these positions I think
right now we need to bring them
up to where people actually want
to work with us
and then you know we're going to
see less and less of that they
can see savings they thank you
madam secretary and and this
year again as you've noted the
LFC increase recommendation is
eleven percent which is fairly
aggressive amongst many
different agencies it's one of
the I think the higher proposals
of those committee members have
noted it's a difference between
what the executive is proposing
this is still a pretty
aggressive number that the
committee is come in with madam
secretary the aging networks
seem like sort of the core
programmatic way for aging and
long term services to work with
seniors around the state I know
aging networks are very
important down in my part of the
area.
Which is that do you agree with
that
so Mister chairman if if really
what the question is did you
know it are they the ones that
need them the most the most
money in the fusion now that is
we need to make sure that we get
direct services out to folks
thank you madam secretary at I
super appreciate that actually
because I think it is is that
lines up with the experience and
constituents from my talk with
coming from back home it also
lines where really the.
I guess the only place that the
LFC recommendation is higher by
slightly over a half million
dollars it in in terms of the
two recommendations that were
given here the the LFC
recommendations sort of put a
put a significant amount more
into the aging network
The madam secretary I want to go
briefly to Kelly
We thank you very much for the
conversation around Medicaid
sent then secretary you're
sharing with us that drugs were
being overly ambitious with what
Medicaid can actually sort of me
when it comes to our senior
population I'd like to go to
Kelly those briefly to talk
about how some of the proposed
rate increases that we're
looking at statewide
might be filling some of these
gaps that we're talking about
today.
Thank you Mr chair so first I
want to address the first part
of the federal match ability I
think there is still some more
work we can do to bring in
Medicaid for that eighteen
percent of eligible seniors
especially at the local level we
know that there's a pilot with
the non metro is actually who's
working to bill Medicaid for
adult day care services which is
really innovative and big for
that not and there's should be a
roll out we think in metro to
also do that and bring this
federal funds and as well so
while it may not be the total
population there's definitely
some growth to be had to get
those federal dollars in to pay
for the services.
secondly the LFC recommendation
for the aging network was
slightly above half million
before and if you look at the
narrative in volume two.
On page two sixty six as well
that gives you the break out of
what the LFC recommendation
would you overall the.
The most of this would go to
wages for the direct service
providers a lot of that has been
a study recently put out by the
networks to increase their
direct service because they were
able to bring in direct staff
for kitchen staff for drivers
for center staff and so they'll
see highlighted and prioritised
aging network to make sure that
we fill those up to you so we
can actually deliver the direct
service to where the
aging population is showing up
every day thank you very much in
madam secretary one of my
experiences a senior living just
north of the city of Los crucis
they've been in communication
with the county and with the
service provider the service
provider said the contracts are
not sufficient for us to provide
the services and so there's
there's been a you know this is.
Five six miles north of Los
crucis and the service private
providers it has greatly scale
back what they're doing and that
is why I the aging network
really seems like such a key an
initial focus
it which you acknowledge and
thank miss madam secretary
okay so I think we I don't see
any other questions members
there's clearly a need to
continue work with with aging
and long term services I want to
ask Representative Herndon
Representative Chatfield and
and I think all be part of this
to work with hearing very
clearly from the committee that
even an eleven percent
recommendation perhaps might be
low I think we very much need to
prioritize madam secretary
ensure that there are reversions
when we come back here next year
that we minimize the funded
vacancies and so with that we'll
go to vice chair Dixon for the
recommendation.
Thank you Mr chair of move the
LFC recommendations.
The great in second by
Representative Chatfield we look
forward to more work and again
hearing members very clearly
that there is need in this area
is there objection to adopting
the LFC recommendation thing and
madam secretary to you too thank
you very much thank you.
Okay now we're gonna ask agency
five to one.
The energy minerals and natural
resources department.
Madam secretary it's great to
see you Mr Sanchez great to see
you.
We're.
On both sides of the LOC we're
go have secretary thank you
again for being here Mister
senses if you could kick us off
with agency five to one energy
minerals and natural resources
also just as I apologize as a
reminder we will do public
comment following the conclusion
of today's hearing Nancy Mr
Sanchez.
Members of the committee thank
you my name is Scott Sanches on
the LFC analysts for natural
resources from a buy cabinet
secretaries are are problems for
part of energy mineral natural
resources we working agency code
five to one also to our left is
a franchise my counterpart DFA
and to my right is miss amount
of our of the administrative
services division director
budget director for a and.
The Energy mineral and natural
resources department was
question if you could just as
loudly yeah yes sorry and the
requested an increase of seventy
five point three million dollars
or ninety three percent over the
FY twenty three operating budget
again as the total budget number
the so budget represents a
ninety eight point ninety eight
percent increase over FY twenty
two actual expenditures largely
accounted for because of the
huge amounts of federal funding
to the agencies received
the general fund increase that
would be agency requests was ten
point eight million or thirty
seven percent over FY twenty two
the LFC recommendation increases
the agency's overall budget by
sixty seven point four million
dollars or eighty three point
nine percent while the executive
budget recommendation increases
the agency's budget by eighty
four point five percent you can
see the difference she for this
on page two four section.
Again a large portion of the
overall increase in both
recommendations is made up of
federal funds projects to
increase significantly in state
parks will conservation in the
state our revisions to the
infrastructure investment and
jobs act and the inflation
reduction act well both budget
recommendations supported
portions of the agency's
expansion requests the LFC
recommendation includes a higher
general fund revenue in state
forestry where is the executive
recommendation includes higher
general fund revenue in state
parks handed to my counterpart
prime Mr chair members of the
committee Brian Chavis executive
analyst for Pico seven forty.
both the LFC Executive
recommendations ball support
expansion request for two
positions in the sustainable
building tax credit processing
team however the LFC
recommendation includes an
additional forty four point two
thousand in personal services
employee benefits not included
in the executive recommendation.
With that I'll pass it over to
Mister Sanchez.
thank you the state forestry
division requested eighty six
new FTE including three hot shot
crews thirteen wildfire response
coordinators and seven positions
to create a burned area response
team state forest risotto
request represented an increase
of thirteen point eight million
dollars or ninety six percent
over FY twenty three the LFC
recommendation supports the
addition of one hotshot crew and
a general fund increase of two
point two million dollars or
forty four point nine percent
increase over the previous year
this one's one hot shot crew and
six additional positions for the
interagency fire management team
and a couple of positions in the
burned area response
coordination.
On Mr chair members of the
committee on things to know on
the executive recommendation in
in
because seven forty one on the
executive all recommends to hot
shot crews increasing their
general fund by over one point
five million dollars.
On an adding additional ten F.
T. E. R. to support of fire
prevention efforts.
All moving on to the P. code
seven forty three the mine
reclamation program the LFC
recommendation supports
increasing general fund revenue
to one million and decreasing
other revenue by ninety four
point four thousand as the
agency requests the committee
recommended recommendation also
supported the requested increase
in federal funds of three point
eight million two budget funding
from the infrastructure
investment and jobs act of the
executive recommendation did
fund to additional I. T.
positions which the LFC
recommendation did not include.
And in the oil conservation
division the budget request
triple the operating budget for
FY twenty three representing a
increase of forty four million
dollars the request included
expansion of twenty new FTE for
compliance officers patrolling
specialist environmental
specialist as well as legal and
IT staff the executive
recommendation increase the
division's overall budget by
forty two point three million
dollars or as the LFC
recommendation came in a million
under that and finally in the
program support division the LFC
recommendation exceeds the
budget recommendations by about
thirty seven thousand dollars in
general fund which it targets
for vacancy rate reduction.
And overall the LFC and DFA
reach consensus all performance
measures so with that one
hundred to madam secretary.
Thank you very much processes
secretary.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is there a
call for drugs and the secretary
of energy minerals and natural
resources department on there's
a presentation in front of you
for from me that I'm gonna go
through to help translate what
are two excellent analysts just
presented to you at a high level
and as you can see from the
first slide the expected growth
is significant most of that
growth is in federal and other
revenues DFA supports a total of
sixty seven a new FTEs agency
wide LFC support the total of
thirty FTEs agency wide and a
large portion of those
differences in the number of hot
shot crews in the forestry
division although there's also a
difference in the OCD's.
On slide a slide to our.
Directive in FY twenty four
across the board is to build
capacity in support of these
five goals firefighting and
natural resource protection
industry oversight for oil and
gas and mining visitors
experiences in state parks solar
green building tax credit
certifications for New Mexicans
and program support which is the
heart of the agency and and as
mentioned we are have the
opportunity for a large amount
of formula dollars from the the
federal I I J. and Irene but
also some competitive grants
that we're seeking.
On slide three I wanted to start
right up front explain some
numbers that you may be
scratching our heads about in
your packets regarding
reversions from for EMNRD and
the way it's it's it looks on
the books sort of makes it look
a lot worse than it is I want to
explain the three categories
that are included in that twelve
million dollar issue number
the H. B. two section for is our
operating budget reversion this
is the only reversion it's it's
seven hundred eighty one
thousand dollars and change this
is the only part of the rivers
in that we had authority to
spend in the first place so I'm
not spread across all the
divisions it's broken down on
the slide and you know I think
compared our whole budget it's
it's not it's not too bad we
always wanted to be close to
zero but our effort in that
direction the other pieces that
show up at that look like
reversions and because we are
turning over money to the
general fund include penalties
collected by the oil
conservation division and
deposited to the general fund
these are under budgeted this is
never EMNRD's money this is the
state's money were collecting
and that's how the statutes
written so that was one million
twenty nine thousand dollars
last fiscal year.
and then the biggest piece has
to do with wildland firefighting
we are kind of service the bank
agency for all of those
executive orders that pay for
wildland firefighting across the
state this totaled ten million
eight hundred eighty seven
thousand nine hundred twelve
dollars that we that we
collected that was never ours
this is reimbursement from the
federal government from other
states and from local
governments for for firefighting
so it's money in money out but
it kind of comes through under
to looks like a reversions I
wanted to make that clear and
happy to answer any questions
later if you have them on those
numbers.
turning to the the different
divisions on five four state
forestry as you heard we are
trying to that are are
firefighting capacity with the
addition of hopefully to hot
shot crews across the state
these are specialized Cruz and
they would be also coupled with
ten FTEs for fire resource
management and post fire
response this would increase our
initial attack passivity and
seasonal fire engine bosses if
each of our districts and then
and then out the hot start
cruise on the expected outcomes
are to keep pace with initial
attack me if that means putting
fires out when they start
staffing extended attack
wildfires those it goes go on
for days and weeks contain costs
and retain trained firefighters
with opportunities for career
advancement in the state we also
want to provide more local
firefighter training and support
because we rely on these
partners throughout the year and
we are are trying to up our game
so to speak on post fire water
said recovery huge need that you
heard a lot about in the wake of
the hermits calf fires but this
is the need every single year in
our state and we want to help
with response and recovery
capacity to address the burned
area damage which includes
flooding and debris flows and
improve forestry water set of
fire management support to
tribes public's and nations so
the expected outcomes from that
or that communities would
mitigate for post fire damaged
burned areas would be reforested
tribes publications would manage
forest under their jurisdiction
and in areas of significant for
them the F. T. E. requests for
FY twenty four are expected to
legislative overall cost savings
to New Mexico over time I
appreciate that that's not true
in the very first year but when
you have hot shot crews you can
send them out of state when
they're not fighting fires in
New Mexico you can send them to
other states and they pay us for
our crews and when they're not
fighting fire anywhere they can
help with for.
Spending and things that can
help prevent firefighters fire
fires in the long run
catastrophic fires a long run so
just for reference in the spring
of twenty twenty two the cost to
bring it out of state wildfire
response crews and engines to
provide an additional could
attack capacity was two point
five million dollars a week a
lot of money okay moving on and
I'm just sort Committee Mr chair
on slide slide I the oil
conservation division
as as noted by the analysts the
DFA the recommendation the
governor's recommendation
supports expansion of OCD by ten
FTEs increasing General Fund by
one point one million dollars
for the but over the FY twenty
two out but the supports
increase in federal revenue as
well we're getting a ton of
twenty five million dollars to
do orphan well plugging and we
are administering not that all
money in money out to we're not
keeping any for administration
it's going to local contractors
who are doing the work around
the state and and the the LFC
rec did not include that
expansion for OCD and I'm hoping
that that's the area where we
might be able to reach a
compromise that as this this
process goes forward and we know
that production of oil and gas
has doubled in the last few
years and our staffing has not
kept pace with that growth the
record production in September
of twenty two twenty two is
approximately fifty million
barrels of oil produced which is
just more than one point six
million a day low funding and
low staffing levels OCD have
combined to contribute to some
pretty significant backlogs in
the processing of permits and
applications and that increased
from a total of seventy five
hundred at the end of FY twenty
two to fourteen thousand four
hundred forty today is the work
of falling behind and we need to
we need to keep up and that's
what we propose to deal with the
executive.
On slide six a state parks
division in state parks we're
just trying to increase our
staffing levels of parks we're
not asking for new FTEs but
we're trying to reduce the
unfunded vacancy rate I'm here
and I would note that in the
simply Syrian Bayern it on state
parks has a lot of exposure to
rising prices for goods and
services and so that's something
that we're concerned about and
trying to reconcile as we go
into FY twenty four and so we
want to want to serve New
Mexicans better by having
friendly faces in the parks
keeping people safe.
On slide seven hundred energy
conservation and management
division here not a ton of
difference between the two
recommendations every everybody
understands we need to have the
capacity to do a better job
particularly hoping process tax
credits the solar market
development tax credit and the
sustainable buildings tax credit
were expanded significantly by
the legislature last year
without providing additional
staffing to us to oversee that
and to help people with their
applications so we got behind
with those thousands of permits
and certificates that were
requests and returning phone
calls and emails we always
return them but it's not as fast
as we want so we're asking for
some support here but with
federal funding actually to to
do to do what people and you
expect us to do from these
programs.
Fund flied slide eight I realize
that this committee heard
specials on Saturday I didn't
get up and talk to them but I
just wanted to flag one item now
we have one special
appropriation requests for the
department it is a request of
one point eight million dollars
to provide matching requirements
for federal funds the slide
enumerates each one of those
programs exactly how much match
we need and how much federal we
would get the LFC wreck was for
a million dollars which we
appreciate but that would leave
a lot of money on the table
somewhere between four and five
million dollars and some
programs we just wouldn't be
able to participate in and also
we're hoping that that's another
area with one time special
funding that you could support
us so that we can
work on everything from grid
modernization to energy
efficiency for our constituents.
And then on slide nine the
mining of minerals division the
DFA or the governor's budget
supports the expansion of to
FTEs for water data act
implementation which is a law
that was passed a couple years
ago
the LFC record does not does not
support that that's the main
difference to to highlight
their.
and then finally Mr chair on
slide ten programs support is
where all of our Policy lawyers
I. T. and administrative staff
our our house and in my office
or house and do both both
recommendations are are pretty
similar in terms of what kind of
staffing they'd be able to
support
so thank you very much for your
time and I look forward to your
questions.
Excellent thank you very much
madam secretary thanks to your
team is here we're gonna go
straight to questions first this
process seven Jana
Representative Armstrong.
Senator.
Thank you for all you do thank
you you have such a busy and and
important department and so.
Thank you so I'm gonna try to
make this as painless as
possible so in in in had an
energy committee we keep hearing
we don't have the capacity to do
what we don't have the capacity
to do what we already have to do
and now we're trying to bring in
more things energy storage all
these different things.
So well this.
This will make you whole this
won't even though this I guess I
I worry that we give you so we
ask you to do so much with our
our bills and but you don't have
the funding it and we've use
excuse me under fund EMNRD NET
we've been doing that but we
can't do that anymore we need to
fund you so that you can be
an effective department and help
the state in everything we do my
my one concern is well there's
several concern but one is
inspection of wells committee
wells other do we have to
inspect you can tell me.
Tens of thousands of all sixty
five thousand as it having to we
get inspected.
Annually not include for that Mr
chair.
So we have to just a reminder to
go to Paris sorry we have Mr
chair we have to fund them and
the committee with me we have to
provide you with the right we
need to to get these done MHM I
know it's getting person that we
don't pay enough so we're trying
to work with so to get them the
right rate pay band but.
I'm hoping we can find you at
the level we need because I
believe climate change is real
and I believe you know we have
we have inspections of wells we
have all these things that are
causing climate change and we're
not helping to fix it but we're
we're we're we're having to
bring in more firefighters and
things because of climate change
it because of we don't have
enough people to fix it there's
just so much it's just like a
chicken and egg where do we
start what we do how do we do it
in and I just think we as a we
as a legislature are are funding
you nearly what you need
Do what you need and if if if
and I was thinking one thing you
said we.
You have one one time funding
for
One of your division's and if we
could use junior money to help
you with that help which one of
part I just remember you saying
that.
Is junior money available I mean
is that something we could use
to help your department.
Mr chair representative Sarinana
thank you for the your comments
in your question I think you
know in some cases the answer is
yes son junior bill particularly
for contracting things that we
can sort of knock out one time
for contracting
but some of the needs that that
we've outlined particularly for
the oil conservation division
those you know in all honesty
those are recurring operating
budget needs for staffing so so
happy to work with you on
understanding the complexities
there the energy conservation
and management division is here
your point about health energy
committee
what we've put forward for the
executive recommendation would
allow us to meet the needs of
the laws ahead as best we can we
think you know the laws of the
currently passed when we are
talking about new laws or things
that we haven't built and we're
happy to help legislators you
know in advance understand like
what would it take with it and
and we're not going to flee that
you would take one FTE would
take a half FTE with the two
that kind of thing but it does
because a little bit of panic in
the division we see a lot of
these bills that require us to
certify things because it it is
it is a lot of work we take it
seriously and we want to do a
good job if you give us the
assignment.
Thank you Mr chair.
Mr chairman I guess.
What I'm asking is really are we
going to fund them at the level
they need to do the job that
we're asking and that's that's
the big thing because I feel
like it's been our fault and we
haven't given you.
Thank you very much for cents on
the on a regular romps.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for the first presentation
I'm interested in the the
Post fire watershed recovery in
the firefighting training
with this work with or against
the Four service bids that are
put out in the for service for
the for service for fitting is
it what you're firefighters I I
heard you say Mr chairman
that.
In the downtime they would help
to do some of those projects can
you explain a little more about
that.
Mr chair representative
Armstrong yes as so forestry
division we work incredibly
closely with the US Forest
Service and we have a shared
stewardship plan that identifies
highest priority acres around
the state regardless of land
ownership type and we work off
of that to prioritize we we both
work off of that to prioritize
spending projects and in some
cases we administer federal
funding from the for service to
do projects on the ground for
the state for Sir would correct
me if I'm getting a lot of the
details wrong but I think the
most important thing to
understand is that the
collaboration is there the
prioritization is there there is
a lot of funding both especially
from the fed's for it and I
think and we are not even
keeping tracks got me even how
the numbers were not.
The rate that we're doing
spending right now it would take
us hundreds of years to catch up
to what we have identified as
they need we need to increase
the rate with more teams on the
ground and so that's part of
what the hot shot crews could do
in the offseason and help us do
that and they.
Amos salary anyway we might as
well be getting that incredible
products.
Thank thank you Mr chairman and
thank you for that
So.
In my area we have companies
that are like almost to go out
of business because that's what
they do for a living.
They thin forests for a living
and but the the problem the
biggest problem is is that the
the the US for service doesn't
put it out to bid their smaller
groups they never really know
where the next time they're
gonna fit is and so I would just
encourage
to utilize.
Not state dollars for that I
mean of course helping them but
but I think there's businesses
out there that do this and so I
really really want to encourage
you to make sure that we're
promoting business in New Mexico
and not using state dollars to
to use do the thinning of course
in an emergency and watershed I
know it's not always able to do
that and and there's certain
issues about that but one of
them is the nepa process and so
you know I've I've heard from my
constituents Mr chairman that
they can better job get the job
start the job in thirty days in
Arizona and that's not true in
New Mexico so if we could.
If there's any way that we could
improve that process that would
be lifesaving to a lot of people
in New Mexico literally for
their businesses and their homes
and their infrastructure one
thing that I wanted to ask one
last question Mr chairman is
about your reversion
I've it looks like it's twelve
and a half million.
And.
Mr chair representative I'm
sorry yes I two thirty two point
one is that we are careful not
to compete with industry on the
fitting and we have a price
agreement in place to work for
it with contractors to do
Boenning and if there any
specific questions from your
constituents are districts happy
to work with them on what's
going on there so so on that on
the reversions on my hand out on
slide
slide to three
you talk about the reversions so
really of the our operating
budget the the monies that were
appropriated to under to spend
it was seven hundred eighty one
thousand dollars
ten million eight hundred eighty
seven thousand nine hundred and
twelve dollars were firefighting
funds were the state was
reimbursed for the Feds from
other states from local
government and we deposit that
straight back into the general
fund and then the similarly with
penalties that we collect
through the oil conservation
division we heard statute that
note those are never are dollars
that the states dollars to go
back in the general fund so they
would appear like a reversion
explanation thank you Mr
chairman thank you thank you
very much for in member
Armstrong next Representative
Hotmail.
Mr chair secretary.
I had the opportunity to meet at
a very unhappy group of
individuals of friends of the
lake so I'm talking about
elephant Butte so
For those of you who may not
know elephant Butte has the five
five thousand of people that
live there and it swells to
community of almost a million in
the summer and so I thought I
would take the opportunity to
ask their questions they told me
that the income that comes to
the state parks is is equally
dispersed amongst all of the the
state parks not necessarily by
the number of people who visit
or the size is that correct.
Mr chair representative harm you
state parks is an energy fund
enterprise agencies so yes you
know about however I will say
the revenue that we charge we
are fees have been increased in
twenty years five dollars a day
you know five dollars for a day
pass and it goes into the fund
none of that is sufficient to
support state parks writ large
elephant Butte is one of our
larger parks and most popular
parks it's number two and
visitation in the state behind
Navajo lake state park so yes
that is statutorily how that
works.
So it actually looks on this
list like it's number one but
but with that being said
friends of the lakes have.
Is the Mr chair representative
ahead please the parks director
Health.
The.
I'm not a yes Sir.
Representative L. for me like
state park is number one
visitation levels like is number
two cover level it is the most
efficient in the station revenue
averaging almost a dollar per
person.
Sir before it and and Mr chair
before you can you explain what
you mean by it most efficient
dollars Navajo lake.
Chairman and representative that
revenue from visitors so but all
our presenters is the market of
where we are we as a division
manage in our performance
measures up to up to generate
revenue per visitor so that one
dollar is usually attained
purpose are at and I will while
the overhead costs at parks like
helping you and others don't
necessarily allow that pressure
to get mad but helping you get
loose from from year to year.
Mr chair can you explain to me
why they don't have the same
dollar for dollar comparison the
difference you chairman and and
Representative is the fact that
the overhead costs for opioid
use much higher than that
available are primarily because
of the state of the
infrastructure that's in there
as well as the much larger staff
both FTE and seasonal that we
have to fund to maintain health
and beauty is quite what is much
larger than that Natalie.
Mr chair and representative of
words overview is more expensive
to run
Mr chair and and secretary so I
understand that and some of
their concerns are that the
dumping centers are an operable
that the kiosks are unmanned at
times in New Mexico or the way
that you collect the money and
they've requested kiosks
it can you tell me about that Mr
chair and madam secretary is
there a problem with that the
dumping stations.
Mr chair and and representative
in terms of our our staffing.
park.
Has at a pretty high unfunded
vacancy rate so we have a lot of
T. is on the books but we
haven't been authorized to
funding to fill the vacancies so
we are triaging across the
system and some parks are being
run on a real shoe string to be
honest with you that's why I
think both recommendations or
seeking to reduce that unfunded
vacancy rate to some degree as
far as the specific
Conversation dumping stations I
I don't have an update on that
but can certainly follow up with
you.
Offline on that.
Thank you glad to do thank you
Mr chair.
Excellent thank you very much
for percent economy next we're
going to go to Representative
Lujan and then off to a friend.
Excuse me chair thank you
thank you secretary thank you
Everybody on the panel today and
answering our questions seven
days to go to all there's a
couple places but I'm gonna look
at our lines of under the
expansion forty four through
forty seven.
And looking at your FTE ease
that you're asking for for that
funding specifically on nine
forty six Mr Mr chair and
secretary.
That is asking for that six
hundred thousand for for F. two
and I mean I think I get a
gathering these are all under
your oil conservation division
on your presentation page I.
Correct.
Sir Mr chair Representative
Lujan I think you're referring
to the high level it the end the
risk Mr Sanchez on page one
members for high level refer
into the lines forty four
through the first sorry thank
all the staff make that
distinction in the future thank
you.
Mr chair representative of what
the question was at the lines at
the end of FY twenty three
expansion lines forty five forty
six forty seven with those FTEs
I'm just trying to match that
with your presentation that
you're asking for the oil
conservation division
ten FTEs there that you're
asking for is that we're.
Batching that information.
If you can expand orders are at
Mr chairman and representative
I'm happy to expand on what we
have in mind there in terms of
which which FTEs we would
we we request I would have
To in engineering projects are
this is where our largest
backlogs are right now I'm once
drive address that could that
could better support other
initiatives were also advocating
for position and and
environmental bureau for
incidents this is our second
biggest backlog in an area
receiving lots of stakeholder
attention we are asking for a
one F. T. E. for I. T. capacity
to help with technology
initiatives were going paperless
in the division which is been a
multi year project that's great
for transparency and and but
does take take IT support we are
asking for two FTE ease in
engineering bureau for
compliance officers these are
inspectors to augment our field
inspection capacity
and then.
Also wanted to meet in
environmental bureau for project
this is a new group and it's
necessary
so we're we're building that up
on some of our infrastructure
work asking for financial
position support all the things
including the federal grant that
we're getting
engineering at I think this is
too much at the this would be a
compliance officer supervisor
this would initially be in our
teas area and we go into the
field to increase inspections
another environmental permitting
position to work on the the
volume of discharge permits and
things like that
and then I think we the other
positions we we dropped that was
yesterday thank you yep I thank
you for getting going to the
extent of of
Identifying those FTEs as it is
it is it shows that we have
where we put a lot of mandates
on this on this agency to K. and
you are being you're just
demonstrating the needs of the
FTEs in order for for you the
the basic function from what I
can tell of of what we need to
do to do to
kind of to the point of
representatives are seven Jana
and I'm just.
You know we're you mentioned
earlier to madam chair Mr chair
and secretary and just the
amount of money that can be left
on the table when we're looking
at the special appropriation one
time for the matching funds the
federal matching funds and so to
us I think you said two FTE ease
their and that's that's maybe a
minimum there is that correct Mr
chair representative Lujan
actually the the special
appropriation is just one time
funding and that's just matching
for matching funds so right but
it is in the same division
you're correct and I I see where
you're going with that the
energy conservation management
division we are asking for two
FTE ease to work on the tax
credit programs yes Mr chair
there's a lot of connection a
lot of a lot of work that is to
be done from this agency and and
moving us into this this place
we wanted to go with them
climate change and and like I
said the mandates that we're
we're putting upon you for.
Additional rules of methane and
everything else that that you
have to well I think that goes
another division but all the
other things that you're doing
here I would just say Mr chair
that you know I would.
I would suggest that we move
some of these findings for these
FTEs from the executive into
Today out LFC infant for those
recommendations to be pushed
forward and I think yes my last
question is.
What what would it be workforce
in the consequences that we're
looking at for example when we
don't have.
We have people on the ground in
oil and gas with The OCD beans
so understaffed as it is if we
don't staff these positions on
the others that I'm mentioning
I'm trying to be the same thing
I'm doing a bad job that but
what does it mean or the
consequences that were to happen
we don't have these positions
filled Mr chair.
Zurcher Representative Lujan
they're they're they're brought
I mean less less we fall behind
less inspections we frustrate
the it industry that we're
regulating because we can't keep
up with them we frustrate the
public because we're not doing
the inspections are you know
putting things online or we're
doing the the the methane
oversight work that they expect
from us I mean I I'm I'm not
saying Mr chair that we were
doing a bad job but it is really
triage all the time and our
staff for credible they work
really hard and I'm very proud
of them if you could do a lot on
a shoestring but we are not
staffed comparable to other oil
and gas producing states that
produce less The New Mexico does
so we're really just we've we've
done I think everything little
bit of ringing efficiency out of
the system we've reorganized the
division's we've hired smart
we've actually everything that
you have authorize us to spend
we brought that figure see right
down right up to the EDD's of
our ten percent unfunded vacancy
rate in the oil conservation
division which was not the case
four years ago and I understand
there was some hesitation to
give us more money if they said
you know you have a fifty
percent make it the right we've
we've we've actually hired
people have really good people
so I think we proved the that
the division can perform in that
way and so we're asking for that
more run ways to expand the work
that we're doing thank you thank
you Mr I really appreciate the
we're doing it and here you are
being.
Imaginative and and for filling
with with what we we we mandate
with you and I want to I'd say
how much I appreciate you would
all of our state workers here
that they're doing the work and
really going above and beyond
specially and some of the things
that we have been doing thank
you Mr thank you Representative
next we're gonna go to I think
very much of some of the hunt
next we're gonna go to
Representative turned.
Thank.
The second.
Fans with.
The.
With.
It was the.
I.
Mr chair representative didn't I
believe at the end it was just a
balancing act and you know again
we we this make a scenario in
presented but we have a number
that we need to hit and it was
came down to do we want to fund
hot shot crews in the state
forestry division would we want
to try and put these FTEs into
the Watergate Act and you know
given last year we we definitely
understand the need for you know
additional.
Scientists and as water you know
staff but if you look at the
budget recommendations for NMED
and the US the state engineer
that we did that in other places
but for and released in the LFC
wrecked that was you know how we
accomplish some of these other
increases was to sacrifice that.
Thank you chair.
Obviously.
Levels.
This.
Six six.
Then as the day that I.
Thank you Representative heard
we're gonna go next
Representative Garrett than
Representative Brown than vice
chair Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
very much for continuing to
serve.
my pride to questions of madam
secretary in the the post fire
water should response is the
forestry division working
closely with the O. T. because I
know that with the culverts
cleaning the culverts is that
part of the membership response
communication among multiple
agencies is that happening
deeply and widely enough.
Mr chair representative Garrett
yes you know we have a great
working relationship with the O.
T. and department of homeland
security and management on how
we triage and I think we we have
a couple of of of forestry bills
that we are that we're
advocating the session that
helpful clarify it are under
jurisdiction because no one
seems to have that sort of slope
stabilisation post fire
jurisdiction and it's work that
we've been kind of doing but it
would be helpful for the
legislature to really take a
look at that and hopefully
authorize us clearly to do it
and then find the funding
through this committee to to to
do that work it's incredibly
important as we've seen this
year thank you and my second
question and the question is
many of our large agencies have
really wanted FTEs for working
on federal grants and other
requests how is your agency
position to grant writing to get
all the federal funds that are
out there.
Mr chair representative Garrett
on the you know we're we're
plugging along on we've we've in
some cases really worked closely
with the delegation on writing
the laws in the first place for
example on the orphan well work
and then now working with the
department of the interior on
how those programs are rolled
out and administered and what
the rules of the road are and
they they work for New Mexico
because of that and using
dialogue you know other other
programs are so many of them I
thought possible to do that on
all the fronts but you do we
alone US department of energy
has given dozens and dozens of
new programs and funding but
we're I think you know we're we
have formula funding coming we
have great processes in place to
to take advantage of that many
of those are existing programs
is they just get Mr chair and
increased and then other others
you know we we we will have to
make some choices on which
competitive grants to go for but
it it hasn't been maybe as a cue
to some of the my colleagues.
Thank you very much the
representative the next we have
Representative Brown please.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
secretary and thank you all for
the presentations I have a
question on the first page of
our packets and this at one
seventeen this is about the hot
shot crew and there's a proposed
expansion for FY twenty three
the dollar amounts for the
executive recommendation of the
LFC recommendation are the same
one point six nine three.
Million dollars but the number
of FTEs is very different one of
the executive rexes you out of
that amount of money you can get
forty four FTEs.
Yes the LFC record same amount
of money would be twenty two FTE
ease I'm just curious why the
difference Mr chair madam
secretary.
More.
The census yes Mr chair
Representative Brown again I
believe the the biggest
difference and I'm I'm looking
at my sheet now is it is is is
the hot shot crews largely we
funded with general fund but if
you look at the difference on I
think it would be page seven of
your packet it's actually the
break out of the overall budget
where is that first page is just
the general fund you know again
we we underfunded the general
fund number overall for that
program yeah I mean I would say
under funded we we came in lower
than the executive records and
that that's the difference in
October we recommended one
hijacker twenty two positions
the exact rate was forty four
positions for two.
So Mister chairman madam
secretary and and service are
you saying that
this high level sheet is only
general fund but other funding
is in this other correct on this
other page okay thank you and
then Mr chairman of secretarial
so the question on the flip side
of this first page.
Looking at the base budget the
federal revenue category the FY
twenty three operating is about
twenty six point four million
and then the base
In the next column over is
almost sixty six million dollars
what accounts for that that vast
difference for federal revenue
Mr chair madam secretary.
Mr chair representative brown on
federal funding I mean we have a
it received quite a bit of money
to you know for OCD for orphan
well plugging for abandoned mine
land reclamation that program
similarly has been serve
supersized by the the Feds for
the with the infrastructure
dollars I think those are the
two biggest chunk so far that
we're trying to account for and
authorize you.
Okay thank you thanks Richard
thank you very much for the
ground next we're gonna go to
Representative de la Cruz we're
gonna go to a person thank you
Mr chairman brief question who
handles Water they have a little
bit confused about the state
engineer dealt with water now
granted you would deal with
lakes and parks but
Representative Kernan was
talking about some kind of
management of water what is your
role in that capacity Mr
chairman thank you.
Mr chair representative a dealer
Cruz yes I'm so and so EMNRD's
one of the agencies under the
water data act and so we handle
water data in a couple of ways
one is through the oil
conservation division and one of
our rules recently put in place
a tracking for the oil and gas
industry how much freshwater is
the industry using and fracking
and things like that versus
produced water and that's being
tracked and publicly reported on
and so collecting that having
the I. T. system all those
things that that that's one
example from the oil
conservation division of of kind
of water due to the EMNRD is the
owner of that data needs to get
it into the the the UNM system
also through the mining division
mining and metals Division mines
use water and so we have data
related to water what are used
to treatment there and so we
have we do our part on reporting
it.
She gentleman side of of
gathering the data if you have
any regulatory capacity.
And Mr chair representative dela
Cruz I'm under the the produced
water act a few years ago and
EMNRD regulates the use of water
produced water of not the you
know the state engineer always
of the quantity piece but we
authorized the use of produced
water in the oil and gas Pat
anything beyond those boundaries
is the environment department's
jurisdiction under that act
Representative small of the
funds are you probably knows
better than I do thank you Mr
thank you very much
Representative a cruise next
representative Allison and vice
chair to.
Thank you Mr chair this also is
in line with the question that
Representative Herndon Ascham
the one that of Representative
bila Cruz just ask my question
is on the Indian Water Rights
settlement fund with your agency
be responsible for
appropriations for that.
Mr chair representative Allison
no.
If you would be the right agency
to question the.
Mr chair I believe that would be
the state into offices to.
Okay thank you for that we'll
see them tomorrow.
Thank you thank you very much
Representative Allison vice
chair Dixon please.
Thank you Mr chair good
afternoon secretary thanks for
joining us couple quick
questions the first relates to
the spending at the state parks
the twenty million dollars in
federal are both funds just
wondering if that money has
started to move
it seems like it was moving a
little slowly at first.
Mr chairman and vice chair yes
we we are grateful for that and
use in of our funds and the on
state parks we've Spence roughly
about six million about six
million dollars to date of the
twenty we do have a detailed
plans for the rest of that
funding and it precisely which
projects in which parks we
anticipated it it just it does
take a minute to kind of get
through the different phases of
the project and that money was
authorized for a few years we're
grateful for that one way thank
you right thank you Mr chair
secretary
Pretty straightforward does the
executive budget recommendations
a request sorry with that fully
fund your agency to be able to
accomplish the needs in that are
currently delegated to your
agency.
In statutes Mr chair
representative Dixon you the the
executive recommended says you
know gets us much closer and and
all of respects you heard the
the response from from our our
often able if god of nine not
knocking Scott he's he's
terrific but you know we had had
to make some choices and the
allocation of dollars and so
we're that fell short within the
OCD in particular and and the
very of the special
appropriation and intent okay
and Mr chair and secretary so
the executive recommendation
gets you.
Very close or as close as
possible to feeling like you
would be able to run your agency
The best capacity Mr Mr chairman
miss madam vice chair yes you
know for sure the governor's
budget last year supported
twenty FTEs here we got about
four for those CD this year you
were coming and saying okay if
we can do ten let's knock that
out and see how we see how we do
with that and we are we also
have some space constraints in
some of our offices that use the
practicalities that affect what
the recommendation is but
yes I I feel really good about
the the governor's budget of
course and appreciate the
support across all of the
division for them or.
Mr chair and secretary last sort
of question and this has come up
with some of the other agencies
you know this is the sixty day
session and there are a lot of
bills that are being discussed
introduced and debated do you
have a sense of sort of of the
bills that have been introduced
thus far what sort of additional
funding your agency would need.
Mr chairman racer it I think it
will be a longer conversation
but I think for example
particularly the energy
conservation and management
division into anything that is
sort of new tax credits
requiring certification that has
it means that are engineers and
staff take a look at every
single one of those make sure
that the that technical details
whether the solar project or
energy storage or whatever like
get matched up entered our taxes
that the state is comfortable
spending that money on the tax
credit and the tax the roads can
issue a certificate so it's one
of those is just additional
workload on on the what is
really a very small division
right now and but very important
division so.
Lots of us across all of our
divisions of course everything
from state park three past
status to in the oil
conservation division lots of
oil and gas acting is being
proposed so it it it is a lot we
try to be accurate more of fires
Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Secretary and thank you Scott
brand for the and everyone for
that great analysis I would
certainly be interested in
following up specifically on the
myriad of requests because I do
have concerns just about some of
the unfunded mandates that
potentially occur when we don't
align things well so thank you
thank you very much faster Dixon
Representative capital.
Mr just want to say a little
something about the Watergate
Act whenever you get a project
there's a variety of.
Data the need for the gas G. I.
S. they were ownership
for data
of those have a page.
But for by the state and they
you can just go there and you
can download these years on your
view of get back to playing our
water data has been stored for
many years in a variety
of different data for format to
different format.
We have a variety of different
agencies and they were it was
really hard to access this
information we have regional I.
We have state engineer data we
have a few medals Mexico
resources data.
Studies by the universities
or data recorder AJ
All of in the end they might or
might not be compatible format
so we wanted to share that with
the can't by the state of New
Mexico the pool all this
information together in one
place for you to get on your
computer we'll get those plans
you get.
So for.
So it is thought that these guys
public doing studies creating
information is.
Thank you Representative
Chatfield thank you madam
secretary.
Continue after that big thanks
ranking member Armstrong
Representative Chatfield
another's course now
congressman Ali Stansbury for
getting it passed
at the state level it sounds
like there's a lot of Canadian
support for really looking at
how we make those investments
and that support to have the
data available.
Madam secretary so that's great
madam secretary you went through
it
Oil kinds of the differences
that sort of remain oil
conservation division is really
the cord main difference between
the two recommendations that
exists right now.
Mr chair that the the the
largest gap the the the main
and.
To echo your point madam
secretary and something I think
we're very well aware of we are
our production levels are
supporting opportunities in the
state there and historic levels
and rising month over month the
oil conservation division
investments in the way that
under your leadership they have
been
you know you fill positions you
found ways to make things work
even on even in challenging
circumstances I I I really echo
a number of things that have
been brought up to date
Be really interested to learn a
little bit more offline with our
analysts to Representative
brown's point the the sort of
the healthy forest we actually
the LFC has a larger expansion
recommendation there the the FTE
difference Representative Brown
that you noted I think there's a
little bit more for us to dig
into on that part
But I think with that we're
gonna ask for the LFC
recommendation I think we see
again with oil conservation
division particularly in print
in other places potentially I
need to make things make a
little bit more closely
with that Mr Nixon.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
the LFC recommendations.
Secretary there's a second from
Representative treat Trujillo
we're gonna staff to work
closely and to bring back an
updated scenario that includes
the focus on the oil
conservation division and some
of the other is that members
have brought up.
Is there any opposition to
adopting the LFC the show
Representative Pettigrew in
opposition thank you all madam
secretary thank you to you and
your team you're doing
extraordinary work thank you
thank you Mr chair members.
Okay.
We're now.
Thank you for.
In the next meeting.
The next meeting that we're.
Thank.
Okay members we're gonna ask
we're now on our
the Indian Affairs Department
HSD code six zero nine.
Good to see you Secretary
designate.
And we're gonna ask please feel
free to stay in the room but
we're going to need to move
quickly great thank you Mr Saini
a please start us off I miss
more members of the committee
again my name is Eric Shinya of
the LFC analyst.
for the Indian Affairs
Department and sitting next to
me happy to introduce I think
you're just appointed a few days
ago maybe on Thursday or Friday
the secretary designate James
mountain.
And sitting next to him is our
executive analyst nickel
Misia's.
And Mr chairman I
The differences on this one are
very minimal this is pretty
straightforward budget
He recommended a two point three
percent increase and executive
recommended four point six
percent increase general fund
revenue.
and that total increase on both
of those recommendations the one
hundred thousand verses under
thousand increase went into the
personal services category
and with that and were there
were performance measures
differences the analysts reach
consensus as indicated in the
back there with that Mr chair
I'll pass it over to Mr Misia's
for further comment thank you Mr
Shinya
Give me it's been a long day.
Mr chair members of the
committee and the call to see if
the DFA analyst and I just want
to mention one other point on
the different sheets you'll see
that the executive left the FTE
count flat at twenty three F. T.
E. and the LESC reduce the FTE
count by one other than that
that was pretty much all I
wanted to highlight and thank
you and I'll pass it on over to
the cabinet secretary designate
thank you have those governor's
secretary cabinet secretary
designate great to see you here
thank you for being here today
please feel free to go through
your presentation and introduce
members of your team.
Thank you Mr chair.
Are all members of the committee
hi I'm James mountain and I am
the cabinet secretary designate
of the six you Affairs
Department Mexico in Affairs
Department I I appreciate this
time and I want to introduce and
recognize our staff that I have
here with me and us
we have Monica my Estes are.
chief financial officer we also
have Sherri can act director of
communications our we keep so is
a tipping capital outlay chair
and we also have large John tiff
in capital outlay administrator.
Elia and Gina our account
auditors
and I believe that is all our
staff present today and and
support of me being here and to
come before the honorable
Committee.
Thank you for that if you all
this motion and that you've been
Presented with our our slide
presentation.
and if you'll go to slide number
two I would appreciate that
that is a look at our
organization chart.
And as you will see
what that looks like in their
regards to the the cabinet as a
whole and how that feels twenty
three positions that we are here
presenting for our budget for FY
twenty four.
Slide number three.
Of.
Mr chair and committee members
members.
The executive recommendation
supports in impairs department's
request for two hundred thousand
dollar increase in the two
hundred category.
This six count for the
legislation classification
increases that will take into
effect in FY twenty two in FY
twenty three.
As well as increased to retain
high quality and employees for
the department serving our
tribal nations in the state.
The budget request for the
Indian Affairs Department
maintains twenty three full time
employees.
The legislative finance
committee recommendation would
eliminate a one position on FTA
and knocks down to twenty two.
Our budget request includes as
you will see and not the bullet
point here IAD's budget request
included two hundred forty nine
thousand and transfer funds for
the tobacco settlement fund for
tobacco cessation initiatives.
The same level as FY twenty
three.
with that being said Mr chair
committee members
Want to point out that the FY
twenty four budget priorities
maintains our salary and benefit
categories therefore that's a
two hundred thousand dollar
increase we we we asked you all
to
considered and approved as as
presented.
in order to continue our our
vital serving tribal nations and
that the the amazing.
Relationship that the state of
New Mexico has with our our
tribes published in nations the
twenty three recognized tribes
here in New Mexico it's it's
quite a.
A a task that not only serves
directly with tribal communities
but it also serves across the
cabinets of of the state and in
coordination with you all as
lawmakers and in those in those
roles is not just on
straight out of the Indian
Affairs Department it takes a
unique and special type of
individual which has been
staffed at the affairs
department and we have a
tremendous
staff that is the core and the
backbone of the department that
I have been fortunate enough to
have been appointed as the
designate and inherit from the
honorable my predecessors former
secretary Lynn Trujillo her
foresight and propose in this
budget that that.
I have the honor of improvement
presenting today I definitely
cannot disagree with any of
what's being presented so I ask
you all to consider that as well
all right now we are currently
at five employees on the
administrative services division
portion and seven hundred out of
the office of the secretary.
Our priority hires I want to
explain a little bit more about
the department's priorities
compared to other departments
wait we do have a small staff
and as I laid out the mission
and and who we serve in those
tribal communities as well as
partnering in fully supporting
the initiatives of all of the
cabinets across as well as our
legislators and what you all
institute through the the
lawmaking process.
This helps to meet the demand
again at four tribes and the
communities and to support those
individuals that we all serve in
those tribal communities as I
was appointed on Friday and my
comments I did make a point and
I have all I've been saying this
for quite a long time even
outside of this capacity in
coming in as a stronger tribal
communities means a stronger
state of New Mexico.
We do have the budget to fill
these positions and again we
have we do have a a real need to
fill this capacity and that is
my commitment and mission to get
this in place so that we can
deliver those services and
continue this work that has been
established.
I thank you all for allowing me
the time to present at today and
I again ask for your support and
consideration and the
recommendation of the executive.
And I stand for questions along
with my team here and ask you to
please bear with me if if I can
answer that question but our
team is prepared as well with me
great thank you very much
Secretary designate mountain
it's great to see you and thank
you for having your team here
we're gonna go first
Representative sciences thank
you Mr chair I just want to
welcome my friend governor James
montages the former governor
Sonny to fund so not
congratulations on your
appointment.
Thank you.
Okay
of going to vice chair Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair.
thank you Representative Allison
please.
Okay Representative
Representative Allison and
Representative thank you Mr
chair and.
Welcome so secretary designate
mountain.
Of I have worked with your crew
they have come out to my
district to train some of the
people that have or that we're
having problems with their
capital outlay.
They are some of the very few
people that come up to our
nation to train the people to
get things done right some of.
I congratulate you for your new
position and your new leadership
and I hope to continue the good
communication cooperation and
cool off collaboration with our
crew so I would like to ask my
constituents to.
Of.
Look at what if we gave them the
lower amount what it would do
that would be to reduce one
person and also we need to
retain high quality staff so I
would recommend the of the
executive recommendation Mr
chair Sir.
You very much for south and
we're going to Mexico
Representative friend thank you
Mr chair and and congratulations
again on your new position I
only have two questions
one and this is with regard to a
follow up to what
a thousand stated because of the
reduction of your your FTEs
that's what happened in the last
year the last thirty days
session we passed Senate bill
twenty which is to look at
missing and murdered indigenous
women at a native I'm sorry
relatives and women and I I'm
concerned about the loss of that
position and how that would
relate to its work with the
attorney general's office and in
carrying out the provisions of
Senate bill twenty so
Representative message Mr chair
and Mr and Mrs secretary I just
need to please look at that I'm
also advocating the executive to
look at that because I think
it's incredibly important also I
I would like to
just go to the Indian Affairs
Department table to performance
measures and just just for
clarification there and if I
look at the explained it the
explanation regarding the number
of infrastructure capital
improvement plan.
The top five capital outlay
projects funded by the
legislature and is this in a Mr
chair have we not given any
capital outlay money for plans
please could you explain what
that.
Chair and Mr analyst.
Mr chair and representative
heard and so this is an
explanatory magic measure
explanatory measures don't have
a target and so that's why you
see the NA there this is also a
new measure new ash measure and
so there hasn't been enough time
passed by yet to actually report
out on that if you actually look
in the LFC
document volume two there's
quite a bit in there about the
capital outlay projects
appropriations and and what they
do I also just wanted to address
well I can years earlier comment
on the FTP if we look at the
The PS calculate back the in the
back of the budget there there's
a
in the back of the pack at their
there's a forty seven point two
percent funded vacancy rate so
they've got the Indian Affairs
Department has close to the
fifty percent vacancy rate and
forty seven almost all of those
are funded so that's that's
I just wanted to point that out
so that
Thank you yeah thank you very
much for the.
Right next we're gonna go to
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you and welcome secretary
designate a mountain.
Hi
Piggybacking Representative
Herndon's question you know I'd
like to see that you that you
need that two hundred thousand
dollars because the drop in the
bucket but I do have a concern
with what
Mr should be a has talked about.
Mr cities that that that if we
look at the page you told us
about that there are.
Vacancies and I just want to
know how we tried to fill them
what is going on that we that
there are vacant Mr Chairman.
Yes.
Mr chair and Representative
Trujillo members the committee
if I may.
This Madam been here for five
days but I have been contract
within inter department for the
last two years in from an
outside perspective I fully
understand the responsibility of
this department and I fully
understand what those services
means there for those comments
were
not only just my prepare
statements by my incredible
staff the state's incredible
staff but also just a very.
Act perspective of understanding
the department.
And in response directly to that
we do have a forty seven percent
vacancy rate at this time and I
wanted you all to hear that
directly for me there is a
reason for that you know we we
had a deputy former deputy
secretary Nadeem Padilla of the
the department last summer that
was followed by general counsel
as well as former secretary
Trujillo and so there has with
that turnover in the leadership
and this amount of time
without me a any excuses the
truth of the matter is is that
there's not there's there's been
a a a a time where things have
come to a halt and aposs.
Not to say that the work and the
dedication thank serving the
communities and the the tribes
and the leadership that has not
ceased they have gone above and
beyond and I've done put in the
work don't time so that's the
reason why and it is my full
commitment to get those
positions filled.
With the quality individuals as
well as I want to also point out
that we manage a three hundred
approximate three million dollar
capital outlay budget we also
are part of the the the tiff
it's my understanding and I knew
this but I said is the chair of
the the tiff board.
There's another sixty seven
million that we also will be
charged with in working
throughout the state with you
all and of course with our
tribal nation partners pueblos
and so I wanted to point those
things out and it does.
Part of the mission the I
understand that that I think is
really important also that I ask
you all to consider is that it's
it's it's a specialized ability
to go into these.
Tribes nations and pueblos and
have these conversations and
help to educate them and thank
you Representative Allison for
pointing that out because our
staff does remain committed to
providing those services the
technical expertise that many
tribes do not have and I
apologize for the long answer in
response but I just want to make
it very clear that that my
familiarity with the department
and understanding and just
asking for a two hundred
thousand dollar increase with
the budget that actually is true
please consider not reducing
what we do direly need is those
three positions and in fairness
I I do understand where the LFC
the LESC recommendations coming
from but from our perspective
and with the executive
recommendation that's the answer
in short I hope thank you for
the question thank you thank you
Mr chairman and thank right Mr
chairman I agree with.
Representative Allison it's a
brand new administration two
hundred thousand dollars is not
a law and recognizing that
concedes that still need to be
filled.
And only four days on the job he
should be given the benefit of
the doubt to get his move his
work moving forward thank you
thank thank you very much for
century okay
the so yeah great questions from
the committee secretary
designate this is a great
opportunity for us to sort of
visit right at the beginning of
your appointment
Mr secretaries you sorta noted
at there are the only
differences of one hundred
thousand dollars slightly less
there's only one hundred
thousand dollars less in the LFC
recommendation and there's not
the it dition on full time
employee that is part of the
executive recommendation
Mr secretary we've noted sort of
the the what you're.
If what you're coming into which
is this forty seven percent
funded vacancy one quick
question the the full time
employee you might've explained
it what what was that employees
that you are that the executive
is looking to create and perhaps
services if you want to
I thank you Mr chair so that F.
T. is just one activity that
would be up for you now for the
agency to decide at this point
usually typically it's a it's a
vacant position that's
that's usually taking off that
the books for the pool so
and it's really up to the agency
to side.
Got okay.
Mr chair committee members
I'd also like to add to that and
and thank for the agency Misia's
for that clarification but I
also like to add and and come
back to Representative Herndon's
concern about the and then my W.
R. task force
Not to say business necessarily.
Is going to be into that
position but in the in in the
four days that I've been here
it has been a very heavy
discussion about.
Supporting that initiative right
now we do have it funded at one
full time position and there is
an idea to continue that effort
again these positions it truly
is a team effort at the Indian
Affairs Department and I hope
that that you all can will
consider that and know that that
is our commitment and taking
away this could affect that in
some roundabout way and we do
have a consideration also that
in this this position we're
talking about that it lands that
support to that initiative as
well and and and that's I'm not
making that up and that's a
discussion we actually had just
this morning and how important
that is they thank you very much
Secretary those in a is very
helpful
we're gonna go to Representative
Sanchez for the motion.
The LFC is increasing here and I
think we a there's sounds like a
very strong willingness from the
committee to look at some
additional support I think the
committee would need to see that
what is so far the highest
funded vacancy that we've seen
we would have to see that come
down to sort of meet that meet
that marker or meet that balance
but thank you very much thank
you to eighteen percent census
thank you thank you Mr chairman
of the LFC like you mentioned
potentially revisiting that
thank you.
Second grade it's been moved by
Representative Sanchez for a
second by Representative
Trujillo is their opposition to
that motion.
Six.
Please show representative
Allison in opposition.
Thank you very much.
Kate.
We're gonna ask committee.
Thanks.
Madam secretary it's great to
see you here we're really
excited and members we've talked
a little bit about Legisla- that
is we're kind of going through
things
Mr secretary there is an
extraordinarily data driven sort
of
executive and I think there's
going to be a lot of opportunity
for us to really dig in when it
comes to our workforce issues
anyway if you could give us
started.
All right Mr chairman members of
the committee
sitting with next to me here's a
secretary designate cerita Neier
and sitting next to her is a
Sicilian member Matt yes.
Executive budget analyst before
I start going through the
different sheets as you
mentioned this is the latest Act
agency.
during the inner with LFC if
you're not LFC member if you
were that some of those meetings
let's just at is a is a new type
of hearing that we see kind of
rolled out of over the last
couple of years where we do
deeper dives into
Specific policy areas
in the case of workforce
solutions we dived it we dove
into the labor force
participation rate New Mexico
has a pretty low labor force
participation rate compared to
other states in the nation
and so we kind of wanted to you
know we dove in and
to try to get to the bottom of
what can we do as a state what
can the department do
to improve the labor force
participation rate we're you
know to reach the national
average of the labor force
participation the state would
have to add about close to a
hundred thousand more workers
and so that that was kind of
that discussion and if you guys
wanted and the committee wants
to take a look at that in the
back of the packet there is the
Legisla- at brief from back in
November and then there's also
included a the table just
showing their the current
labor force participation rate
for New Mexico in the United
States as a whole and that's
that's just additional
information for you there.
So back to the different seats
in back to the budget
LFC recommended a three point
five percent executive
recommended a ten percent
increase in revenue from the
general fund.
LFC recommended increasing other
transfers revenue by four point
four percent while the executive
increased other transfers
revenue fourteen percent.
LFC maintain federal revenues
commensurate with the FY twenty
three operating budget well the
executive reduce federal
revenues two point nine percent.
In total LFC recommended a one
percent and executive
recommended a point nine percent
increase in spending.
there were no differences
between the LFC and exec wreck
on language and were there were
performance measures target
differences the analyst reach
consensus as indicated that the
expansions will be discussed by
program one thing I just want to
mention just from a overall
perspective if you look at the
differences in spending they're
pretty pretty minimal
the differences were primarily
and revenue LFC recommended
maintaining the federal indirect
cost rate cost share while the
executive kind of.
reduced it a little bit and
replace that with other
transfers revenue so.
and that's that's really the
biggest difference in the
department as a whole.
And moving on to the
unemployment insurance I think
miss madam matches will take
the.
Unemployment insurance there
were no differences the LFC and
exec
so we can move on to labor
relations this is where we are
going to see our first different
next piece seven seven six.
The executive recommends sixty
percent increase in revenue from
the employment security fund
well LFC recommendation maintain
revenues with this clear twenty
three operating budget in the
base there was no differences
between the two recommendations
and the executive did expansion
into FTEs to ensure with
compliance child labour Act
factors six to eighteen years in
the film industry.
And if you want to
hear that
Madam chair Mister chair of.
In the work force technology
program.
The LFC recommendation was a six
point eight percent and
executive recommendation was
nine point seven percent
increase in general fund revenue
by LFC maintain other transfers
and federal revenue commensurate
with FY twenty three.
And is the executive recommended
a thirty one percent increase in
other transfers from the
employment security department
fund.
the LFC recommendation increased
allocations for personnel costs
of by three hundred sixty six
point nine thousand and there
and then pass it back to miss
never meant this employment
services and for employment
services and madam chair.
Differences between
recommendations you know.
And did you go ahead okay for P.
seven seven nine programs
support the LFC recommended and
maintaining revenues with this
clear twenty three operating
budget well the executive
recommended an increase of five
hundred twenty one twenty four
point one excuse me I'm increase
the executive recommendation did
increase revenue from the
employment security fund by
seventy percent and decrease the
federal revenues three point
three percent but there were no
differences in the spending
there was just a projected
higher ending balance for that
Fund where's the executive order
was fifteen his those funds with
that.
fact but I just want to point
out on page nine there we've got
the differences in the
nonrecurring spending that's
that was the only thing I want
to do that right now we can pass
it on to the the secretary
ninety.
Thank you.
Madam vice chair members of the
committee my name is to read and
I are I am the secretary
designate of workforce solutions
and next week will be my six
month anniversary so it's been
an excellent time learning the
department I also wanted to
thank the LFC staff for being so
helpful in my rookie year they
told me to keep it quick so
minute do that I have three
slots and then a couple of bonus
slides if we have questions but
at I just really want to make
the case FY it would be helpful
to have more nonfederal dollars
in our department and I'm
specifically state not federal
dollars because it doesn't
necessarily have to come from
the general fund now is you know
our department is about ninety
percent funded from federal
funds and are requests for more
federal funds in the original
budget packet was to reduce
administrative support and
technology A. S. and T. it's
another word for indirect
overhead for the purpose today
that are charged to programs for
certain positions so if you
think of the federal funds as a
hi there's a chance that comes
out for indirect overhead and
over time the indirect overhead
shot has gone from about twenty
seven percent to over forty
percent of each programs federal
funds budget and so you know we
in order to compensate for that
we hold positions vacant we
don't get rid of them because
it's very difficult to ever
getting back but we hold them
Bacon there basically unfunded
vacancies and so when you look
at the little chart I have on
that second slide you'll see
that it employment services
division carries a twenty
percent unfunded FTEs and that
is the the section of our
department that puts people back
to work which I know is the
number one priority for pretty
much everyone I talked to in the
state.
I also fail to mention money and
introduce my staff when I
started when we do that now I
have my W. secretary Marcos
Martinez twenty six year
department employee great expert
on all things employment and
then my CFO Joanne chances in my
budget officer Steve rigs and
they're all fantastic so I'll
get back to my point here we'd
really love to get some more
nonfederal fund so that we don't
have to hold so many positions
vacant the non federal funds
moving on to my next slide also
do help us absorb raises so
we're very grateful anytime that
the legislature the executive
gives us the opportunity to to
compensate our employees more it
helps us retain it helps us
motivate our employees however
we do not get matching federal
funds when there's a raise and
so that just call it causes a
greater another chunk of that
pie to be used to absorb those
raises and you can see that in
FY twenty three we had to cross
the border raises but we had a
number of other targeted raises
the came across the total budget
deficit to our federal partners
as a result of those races was
three point four million dollars
and the potential impact of the
proposed FY twenty four races
the four percent and executive
budget would be one point one
million the five percent in the
LFC budget would be one point
seven million so again this is
our budget and it costs us to
hold positions they get moving
on to my third and final slide
the difference in the two
budgets is really where that
extra nonfederal money comes
from so yes the executive did
recommends a more general fund
but they also recommended
allowing us to use money from
our penalties and interest fund
which does have a healthy
balance and could definitely
absorb that one point six
million dollars and also from
our labor enforcement fund which
would be a two hundred and
thirty eight thousand dollar
under the executive
recommendation to help us fund
those additional child labor
positions so I'll stop there in.
Take questions and my other two
slides relate to you know the
performance measures and some of
the they audit results if the
committee is interested in
coming up to current on those
like the happy to discuss this
as well thank you.
Thank you Secretary for the very
brief but wonderful
presentations and do we have
some questions.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair I just
have one quick question think of
the presentation
show you to have a I will other
financial one of the I.
Madam vice chair Representative
Garcia yes we had I audit
findings in FY twenty two on it
now enlighten my CFO appear to
give you a little more detail
on.
Thank you madam chair and you
know we tried to get into detail
the we can do it offline if you
wanted this to committee wants
to find out what the funds are
no.
Let us.
Thank you Representative and
secretary if it's if you happen
to know the information at the
tip of your fingers that would
be wonderful otherwise we could
certainly just have a follow up
via email sure and madam vice
chair representative Garcia I do
have been right in front of me
but I'm happy to also share them
with you later in offline but I
think what's really exciting is
that we eliminated all material
weaknesses which having been at
the auditor that was a tough one
we also filed a report on times
or FY twenty one audit was filed
in last April and then we hit
the November deadline for FY
twenty two on it so really want
to thank my staff for working so
hard to turn our audits around
Madam chair of in presenter what
just one last question do you
have any prior other funding
from other years other than the
five that we have for this year.
And madam vice chair
representative Garcia we cleared
up our products are prior on the
planet finding so we resolved of
four of them and we have a
couple remaining on the books
but we're almost through the
years working on the right Madam
chair representative Garcia
absolutely well we'll do offline
and it can feel we are what
those are thank you madam chair.
Thank you a representative
Allison followed by
Representative Garrett.
Thank you madam vice chair of
madam secretary good afternoon.
I just have one question
pertaining to the funds that was
set aside in the energy
transition act.
Where is it now and how much of
it is left and what are we going
to do with.
Madam chair representative
Allison thank you for bringing
that up so just for everyone's
background energy transition act
in twenty nineteen set up three
funds one of them is in the
department of workforce
solutions and was specifically
designated to assist displaced
workers in the affected areas as
a result of the closure of the
San Juan generating center and
the Westmoreland money and any
associated businesses it late
last summer we received about
twelve million dollars which was
our share of the total overall
twenty million dollars was paid
from PNM into that fund of the
community advisory committee
still has one more public
meaning that it needs to hold I
think the last time I spoke to
LESC they were just about to
help pull their second one there
three required by statute but I
actually have emails trying to
schedule those right now the and
the desire is to really use that
for direct assistance to workers
there's money in the economic
development department and in
the Indian Affairs Department to
do other types of projects but
we're really focused on direct
assistance to workers as a as a
result of the last hearing and
we're also working on
potentially some legislation to
expand the the scope of workers
who are allowed to be covered by
the by the bill I think last
time we had a conversation about
there's only a one year look
back period under the energy
transition act and just the way
the timing happen there's
actually been laid off since
twenty twenty so we're we're
working on a fix that that would
likely come all you so that we
can help more workers with that
money okay thank you for that
madam secretary and chair of.
I still have constituents
calling me saying we're and then
am I going to get it and a lot
of people have been laid off
almost all of them have been
laid off now and they're still
waiting for some kind of this
person that's that's the reason
for my question madam secretary
thank you madam chair.
Representative Garrett thank you
madam chair a quick question the
executive recommended expansion
of two FTE ease to ensure
compliance with the child labor
act for after six weeks to
eighteen years old how many kids
is that do we know.
Madam chair representative
garret did you leave I have
numbers here but it has
increased so significantly over
the past few years as a result
of the here we go okay as a
result of the expansion of the
film industry so over the last
fiscal year we had eight hundred
and six permits issued we had
four thousand three hundred
sixty nine email and phone call
phone contact eleven complaints
and seventy seven compliance
visit so and at that time it was
just the one person so it's a
lot of work we are cognisant
that the film industry house in
receives money and if it's and
so are presentation to the LFC
in the interim was give us a
year to fund these positions and
let us look at me fees to offset
some of those costs so that
they're not necessarily always
coming from the general fund
thank you so madam madam chair
that actually is a significant
growth of that category thank
you very much.
Thank you Representative Lujan.
Thank you madam chair sorry I
wasn't here madam chair
secretary for many years your
presentation but what really
caught my eye and and some of
what Representative Allison was
talking about in the transition
the TA in transition workers
there is some legislation from
Representative Rubio this
addressing that this the session
I don't know if you're watching
I don't have it with that affect
your office manager.
Madam chair representative Lujan
I believe the way that
Representative reviews bill is
structured creates an office of
trust transition or economic
transition within the department
of economic development but also
requires that department in that
office to work closely with us
on a lot of the things that we
already do such as three
employments and training for
folks in and we have been doing
that in the four corners areas I
spoke quite a bit about that
last LFC hearing but you know
we've been in contact with all
the the folks who lost their
jobs in the past eight months as
a result of the layoffs and
we're connected with them on
their unemployment benefits and
opportunities for retraining
that's a lot of what's covered
in the act and so I think that
the idea which is that we would
continue to do that but be able
to coordinate more closely with
the other departments working on
transition thank you ventures a
what is the percentage of those
that were laid off they're
looking to transition to the
work I mean how are you
measuring that mentor.
Madam chair representative Hon
that's it interesting question
it's it's difficult we did some
bridge programs basically did
some outreach to all of the
folks who were laid off after
those one on one visits and we
said here's a little simpler
program that we did New Mexico
cooperation with San Juan
college in here the
opportunities for retraining and
hear some basic skills in here
some ways to think about how you
might recover but is often very
substantial
income lost we only got
participation from about ten
percent thirty some of the
people who were laid off and in
our you know sort of our staff
tells us that a lot of people
are are just still in shock to
be honest nobody actually
believed I think until the
moment it happened that those
the plan that money we're going
to actually close and so we are
just going to continue to reach
out to those folks and make sure
that they know that the
opportunities for training for
stipends for apprenticeships
that the all those opportunities
continue to exist so that when
folks are ready to think about
their next career move we're
still there for them so madam
chair Mr chair back are they are
they receiving benefits right
now and that's what why there
are not quite ready to make
those decisions Mr chair
representative will high and yes
so we have about three hundred
and forty some folks who are on
unemployment currently and then
a significant number of those
who lost their jobs received a
full pension we've heard twenty
five percent to to maybe even
thirty percent and so those
folks are sort of doing okay and
then the PNM employees have
already received their severance
payments so some of them may be
waiting until there's more need
before they re enter the labor
force the Westmoreland money
folks their pension are there's
there severance payments are.
Education I have not received
those yet.
Thank you madam chair thank for
that scope of information it
just gives us it gives us the
information of of.
Who we have in the work force
and was ready to get back in
some of that some of the issues
that you're working with and how
tell your dressing and I really
appreciate
the tools permission and I'd
like to talk off line with you
thank you Mr project.
Thank you Representative Lujan
apologies from enough and
secretary we're gonna go to vice
chair Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair and secretary
I just had a question for you it
wondering if you could give us
an update on the be pro be proud
efforts that I believe your
department is working on.
Mr chair at Medivation cherry
thank you that's a good
opportunity for me to plug the
probably proud program so for
those who haven't heard a
presentation before this is a at
basically a semi trailer tricked
out with a virtual reality
stations to help young people
sort of meet them where they are
and teach them about different
occupations some of them are
trades you know here's what it's
like to go up in the big scoop
and work on a power line and
some of them are other types of
occupations were in various
stages of procurement and
outreach for that of but that
should be on board so we're now
in February for the next school
year and then we the
accompanying program for that
fifteen career counselors who
are employed by D. W. S. but
they're invented in school
districts across the state we
work very closely with PED and
their work based learning
program to make sure that we
were putting those folks where
there are good opportunities for
work based learning and be happy
to share that list with the
committee if they're interested
in the idea is we engage with
these folks in their schools and
they'll be regionally activated
and then the truck comes through
they get to have these
experiences and we stick with
them through that career
counselor to place them in
trying to ships or training for
businesses so that we're not
just it's not just a one pop
with the track.
Thank you madam secretary thank
you madam chair I think that's
wonderful and I think it really
complements a lot of the I'm
efforts that members on this
committee have had in supporting
CTP and different apprenticeship
program so really pleased to
hear of that progress
Mr chair to a commotion.
The Victor I I have a quick
question
Very.
Last year prior to your
appointment the legislature made
a significant investment in
apprenticeships working with
workforce solutions can you give
us sort of an update on that and
sort of a sense of things to
come in that area please.
This Mr chair is happy to so at
the there were two to five
million dollars appropriations
want it HB to in the last
legislative session the one that
was focused on pre
apprenticeships apprenticeships
we've acted convening a working
group with both private industry
and labor unions and part of
that effort is the career
counselors because we need to
connect people to that pre
apprenticeship and then we're
working closely with some of the
unions that already have sort of
plug and play pre apprenticeship
programs and remote following
those out to the schools again
we'll start the groundwork in
the summer and hopefully they'll
everything will be live in the
fall and then you know we're at
a record number of apprentices
over two thousand now in the
state and we're very grateful to
Representative care
Representative Herndon and
everyone else who's put in for
additional money this year our
this is one of our strong focus
is at the department.
Thank thank you madam secretary
and is going back to this is the
the Energy transitioned Act
funds the to administer it the
the support for apprenticeships
is specifically under the
jurisdiction of workforce
solutions correct Mr chair that
okay so as we
we've seen that in some other
agencies course or three
different funds three different
agencies we need to make sure
that we're supporting you and
that we're hearing from those
communities how those are
working
The had another question madam
secretary
Thing I've lost that question.
The.
okay what will come back I thank
you very much for for the yes
to.
Mr chair I would move the LFC
recommendation.
Hey there's been a motion and
second to adopt the OC
recommendations there any
opposition to that
recommendation.
Saying thank you very much madam
secretary thanks to your team.
Okay members we're gonna
transition right in the public
comment.
And.
Again for members of the public
this is for agencies and issues
that we've heard today
please feel free to come up to
the Mike we limit the comments
to two minutes
And
This will give a little bit of
time to physically.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Monica fee to the executive
director of the north central
New Mexico economic development
district I think that's about my
two minutes right there
and we are the parent agency for
the area of the non metro area
agency on aging so I wanted to
find a few comments on behalf of
the aging and long term services
department budget first of all
that we stand in full support
with the agency with their
budget request but I also just
wanted to give you a little bit
of information about the aging
network since it generated so
much discussion today so you all
had a slide in your presentation
that shows how the budget
request which was seven point
five million and the the LFC
rack was four point five breaks
down between the metro triple a
the non metro triple a we
represent thirty two counties of
the state and fifty six
providers in the state and then
the India trip away so basically
in our network as I said we have
fifty six providers so the four
point five million that the of
of the portion of the request
which is sixty percent we divide
up among those fifty six
providers some of them have nine
senior centers I senior centers
to just kind of wanted to
emphasize while this may seem
like a lot of money when it gets
distributed out throughout the
state to all the providers it
gets divided up into a pretty
small portion so thank you for
your support of this this is the
direct service that's going out
on to the senior centers and to
the seniors through the
providers of one also let you
know that we are trying to
expand the funding sources for
this program through the
Medicaid pilot that that is
client brought up and through
other innovative services that
we might be able to offer in the
future through Medicare we
realize that there is kind of a
limited pool of funding here
between federal and state
sources so we are working hard
to expand our the funding
available we're going.
Gonna have to expand into other
areas and really do things
differently in the future to
make this work for growing
senior population thank you for
the time appreciate it thank you
very much for service.
Good evening
Care small and vice chair Dixon
in the entire committee thank
you both so much for the
opportunity to provide a public
comment employer riser and the
navy veteran I'm sure the
military the veterans military
families caucus three hundred
forty five thousand veterans in
New Mexico who depend on
services provided by the state
and the secretary can Tana made
a very good point about where
they are with funding and what
they're trying to do I just want
to reiterate why it matters.
healthcare transportation
education housing assistant in
constituent services play such a
critical role in our well being
and that of our families in
devious is that advocate for us
veterans going to the VA they're
veterans service officers are on
the frontlines located behind
throughout the state providing
vital assistance to veterans
especially in rural communities
we often hear from veterans how
these case workers have made
such a difference getting them
into counseling and treatment
that is literally save their
lives.
But we need more yes those.
That gets to resourcing.
We research spending per veteran
and compared New Mexico with
other states veterans make up
nine point one percent of New
Mexico's population so we rank
eleventh from the top.
The average spending per veteran
in all fifty states plus DC is
two hundred sixteen dollars and
fifty cents New Mexico spends.
Twenty four dollars.
And we're ranked forty six of
the fifty one in ten states with
similar similar populations the
average is a hundred and forty
five dollars ranking New Mexico
second from the bottom.
So it's not just about money but
money really does matter and so
does leadership.
And current can Tana has the
experience in logistics finance
and leadership that will really
make a difference in a meeting
with him last week he laid out
his vision strategy and goals
for devious we also talked about
accountability efficiency the
measures of effectiveness and I
think that if adequately
resource secretary can Tana is
going to succeed in meeting your
expectations the executive
expectations and most
importantly that of the veterans
of New Mexico so I ask you to
consider providing a budget they
can raise New Mexico of the
lowest ranks.
And thank you very much for your
time thank you very much Mr
president.
Hi everybody.
So with a long afternoon for us
I can't imagine what for you
guys
thank you Mr chairman of the
committee my name is lily Act
SCO and the deputy director with
kagu which stands for climate
advocates both as a need us
after a hundred years of burning
fossil fuels are children
communities and cultural
traditions are suffering they
were many of the much of our
culture was burned to the ground
in the spring of twenty twenty
and some of the biggest most
dangerous wildfires the state
has ever seen.
The New Mexicans deal with
widespread health issues caused
by the sister extraction
prolonged drought increase heat
and wildfire are threatening our
air land water wildlife and very
live.
Of these realities underscore
the need for leaders to open new
doors for thriving resilient
climate and economy for all New
Mexicans and that requires that
we fund our critical state
agencies and the critical roles
that they play first and for for
first and fully particularly
this year when we have a once in
a
The.
EMNRD and NMED are two critical
agencies that protect our air
land and water and lack of
funding directly affects
people's health and environment
we need new Mexico the New
Mexico legislature and the
governor to meet the climate
crisis moment that we are in and
fully fund our state agencies we
have had boom and bust and we
want stable and resilient
specifically we want to see the
federal funding match at the one
point eight million dollar level
that unlocks close to seventeen
million in federal matching
funds in addition to the
increased full time full of fees
that oil conservation division
thank you so much thank you very
much discussed.
Thank you chairman and committee
Committee representatives yeah
my name is Wendy at city and I
work with New Mexico native of I
am a representative from a
community on the ground in San
Juan basin I'm here to provide
support for the suggested
appropriations for oil and gas
conservation division to add
more staff for the regulated oil
operations that also help
protect are helping communities
on the ground.
We need regulations that can
actually be enforced as we have
around thirty six thousand and
Bandhan in current oil and gas
wells industry in San Juan
County we had tribal families
that live within half mile of an
oil and gas wells we need more
staff to implement the rules to
ensure safety and health for
families and the environment the
service roads are in need of
concert years and they are sure
the rural and school communities
there is differences offenses
that I see from videos in the
state that I see high chain
fences as we have a link to our
that will keep livestock point
out in closing increase staff to
help better protect the health
and safety of our communities on
the ground and supervising force
or only gas industry thank you
thank you very much process.
The organizer with the small
grassroots I I it's advocacy
group in southeast New Mexico
called citizens carry for the
for the future sorry I just ran
for my car.
Okay to my knowledge we are the
only group of our kind in the
Permian basin as I see me
although the permanent the most
active oil field in the country
yeah we have thousands of wells
in the region with new ones
springing up constantly it would
take a small army to properly
enforce state regulation in the
Permian and yet the legislature
continues to chronically under
five the environmental agencies
such as the oil conservation
division that are tasked with
overseeing the industry that is
responsible for the budget
surpluses our state is seen
today this is unacceptable and
directly harms the health of my
community.
For example state regulations
such as the OCD it methane waste
rule is simply not being a
parent whatsoever in the Permian
just two weeks ago I had a young
community member reach out to me
with the video of two massive
years knew her hope for help
this committee member is aware
that retain the temporary get
supposedly banned in New Mexico
I unfortunately had to tell her
that even even bothering to
report the site would be a waste
of our time because agencies
simply can't follow up with any
kind of action such as simply
confirming that the site is
still with the compliance.
Sorry with the site can they
can't follow up and simply
confirm that if I is in
compliance with its a great
compliance order that enables
the flaring.
It is not dating to have to tell
you have percent there is
nothing they can do even if
their family and themselves
suffer from health issues the
same to read seem to be directly
related to having a site right
next to their house.
Not only are young people in the
Permian having their futures to
limit climate change but they're
also having their health the
health of their loved ones and
the health of their buyer
insulin from what I've heard the
most underfunded agency is the
OCD which is still lacking ten
FTEs please properly for the
state agencies so that people.
anywhere to turn thank you thank
you very much Mr.
I'm a policy fellow working on
behalf and in need of vote and
I'm here to provide support for
the suggested appropriations of
the oil and gas conservation
division is asking for I believe
it is extremely critical that we
have dedicated staff to oversee
oil field operations considering
the massive oil boom in the
Permian and north west regions
All oil majors are selling off
lower producing wells to
companies like hill court who
are among the largest methane
producers in the United States
they produce more methane
emissions and their actual
stored natural gas given the
fact that the oil and gas
conservation division are the
ones who oversee methane
regulations enforcement and
considering that there are
thousands of families whose
health is impacted every day by
living in both of these regions
where oil and gas extraction
occurs we need proper funding
for the ten FTEs to
comprehensively oversee those
regions thank you for listening
to what I have to say today.
Thank you very much.
Support for the comment of my
colleagues who are asking you to
properly provide the energy
minerals and natural resources
department
It is our mission at CNM as long
as well as the broader climate
coalition to implement bald and
effective climate policy that
will help us achieve our climate
goals set forth in governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham's climb
executive order from twenty
nineteen.
This is a monumental task and
we're not gonna be able to
accomplish if you don't properly
find
this department so that they can
hire highly qualified and
knowledgeable experts to carry
out the task.
Secretary culture props and her
staff have laid out exactly what
they're budgetary needs are and
we strongly urge that you
support the request thank you
thank you very much Mr.
Thank.
Thank you Mr chair and all of
the members of the committee for
your service and doing this
volunteer budget making for all
of us New Mexicans my name is
Camilla I am and I'm the
director of the Rio Grande
chapter of the Sierra Club I
want to echo my colleagues in
calling for the most fully
funded budget possible for EMNRD
and colleague environmental
agencies the LFC budget isn't
enough the governor's budget
isn't enough we need to agencies
that can fully oversee the
reality of oil production in New
Mexico and that is booming
production at levels unseen
president I mean does it at the
state and flagged that Exxon
Mobil had made in one quarter
what it had made in the entire
history of its entire existence
so that is the scale of industry
that has to be scaled up when it
comes to oversight states like
Wyoming have significantly
higher ratios of inspectors to
wells The New Mexico does with a
much lower production level.
On that you see in the front for
EMNRD tax credits that are meant
to fund the transition away from
extraction that's harming our
communities and our families
need staff to be implemented so
that every family can transition
in little ways that keep us safe
and save us money at home by
bringing us more efficient
appliances we also need to fully
fund the state's matching needs
when it comes to federal money
coming into the state it makes
no sense to give a million and
matching when we need one point
eight million and matching to
unlock eighteen million dollars
of benefits and then I'll just
quickly turned to the Department
of works for solutions just two
observations for the committee
and displays finishes that.
Insurer that the three E. TA
funds from the three agencies
are appropriated in this session
we agree with expanding the
service area for workers and
then we'd like to see department
of workforce solutions actually
report out on the increasing
percent is of apprenticeships
required for all new energy in
New Mexico and making sure that
that piece is complied with and
thank you for signing up thank
you very much.
Absolutely thank you so much.
Okay
I think that's going to conclude
public comment the day members
again deeply appreciate your the
great questions and
participation now if you members
moved back and forth what some
updates tomorrow on Thursday
which will be an important day
for us as we sort of finish up
some of our workgroup in other
words but for today thank you
all very much enjoy the snow
that's outside thank you to our
