Micaela we're gonna start with
you and we're ready to fire up.
Thank you madam chair good
afternoon members of the House
Appropriations Committee it's
good to be here with you yes I'm
sure mentioned you can see a
whole host of college presidents
and senior faculty here with us
today which is great we also got
secretary Stephanie Rodriguez
from the higher education
department.
IDSA counterpart Nicol S. yes
over there high coal.
So I will start with a
presentation will start with
additional context and
background about where we're at.
Then I'll move on to the LFC
budget recommendations for both
the department institutions.
All can do the same after the
second side of the budget so.
You guys should all have a
packet in front of you members
of twenty thirty some pages will
go through and I'll share my
screen.
Okay alright so we can go over
it together.
Before I do that I want to
recognize the work of the
legislative finance committee
subcommittee on higher education
is co chaired by Representative
small Senator.
You know there's a really
excellent hearings in learning
that when one that I think that
the finance committee to better
understand the context reality
is a higher education in New
Mexico and hopefully you know
soon post pandemic world.
This committee did that in part
through a new legislative
process in which they started to
focus on a few key performance
areas in the higher education
sector through on going monthly
discussions between the
subcommittee and the secretary
of higher education.
Many of those key performance
measures are listed on the first
page of the bullets of your
packet
is that college going rate the
number of our high school
graduates are heading into
college after graduation is
dropping you know we're doing
better at getting kids to high
school graduation but fewer and
fewer of them heading into
college after that and that's of
concern not only for the
potential future earnings of
those eighteen year old but it's
a real impact to the enrollment
tuition revenue at our colleges.
You can see here I'll share my
screen for the first time now.
Right here on the first page of
your let you know enrollments
down.
Cross the board in our colleges
and down twenty seven percent of
the last ten years eighteen
percent of that's just in our
last five years that chart here
on page one real concern here is
where something different is
happening in New Mexico than in
the rest of the country and then
there are four year universities
can see her in the redline
community college enrollments
down across the nation and in
New Mexico.
The nation wide enrollment is
actually up for your
universities like relying
various national that's not so
in New Mexico you can see here
and the line.
Really following are for your
schools and that number is you
know that trend is for two
reasons part of it is that
you've got less of our high
school graduates are going to
college but also you know even
if those kids do not the college
the likelihood that the state
and rolled to their second year
is only about one in four right
now they won't stay in world so
the retention rate is only about
seventy five percent.
Thousand students that are for
universities increasing every
year yes plain old non
retention.
And of course the point of going
to college to get a degree or
credential despite general tour
dual credit offerings we have a
lot of students coming in with
enough credits to take care of
some if not all of their
freshman year we're still not
seeing them get to a bachelor's
degree in the marble for your
time span in fact only about
thirty percent of our freshman
get that bachelor's four years
our research universities about
half that comprehensive.
But you know the point of the
legislative process is well on
these trends that we don't like
but instead to have a meaningful
in regular conversation between
the legislature and the higher
education department about what
plans the department has
traversed those trying.
Regular updates from the
department on but they're doing
it for us it's a type of.
Really focus really in depth
hearing with the cabinet agency
that the legislature I don't
think just has enough time or
band with four office but with
higher education the LFC made it
a priority I really see the
results of that prioritization
of the style of C. budget
recommendations.
And one thing I should know
about the work of the higher at
some committee is that the
legislature was certainly not
the only topic that the
subcommittee covered under some
really great hearings about
meeting pressing workforce needs
for nurses teachers and social
workers particularly there was
also lots of coverage about the
need for better advising and
other support services for
students that they'd be more
likely to stable finished as
degrees for stopping out.
And all of this you'll see in
the LFC budget recommendations
bond the detail on that you can
turn into the page five of your
packet will share my screen to
that.
Which is the high level
For higher education.
So this table of the general
fund hi high level general fund
at the executive and LFC
recommendations it shows the
side by side for the whole Aaron
hire its sector institutions
here on top departments here.
On the bottom after this cream
money.
on the bottom line sixty five
here.
The LFC recommend FY twenty
three the LFC recommended
increasing recurring general
signing by opus forty one
million dollars for the whole
higher and secretary that's a
four point six percent increase
from FY twenty two the executive
recommended almost double that.
About seventy five point five
million dollars more and the
main difference between the LFC
and exec the funding for the
opportunity scholarship which is
there at nine fifty nine.
Thank you.
The LFC recommended adding five
million recurring to the base
for the opportunity scholarships
that they'd be twelve million
dollars recurring funding
opportunity scholarship well the
executive recommended adding
over eighty five million dollars
recurring to that scholarship
allied.
Another difference you're the
top.
The LFC is recommending three
percent new instruction in
general formula funding that's
online three four and five here
at the top.
About nineteen million dollars
in new funding there in the LFC
reckon the executive director
two percent new funding which is
about thirteen million.
The LFC and executive agreed on
giving each he's already to hold
back a portion of that new money
until each college and
university prepared and shared
their plan to help increase
their enrollment LFC recommended
AGD be able to hold back six
point four million dollars
that's here at nine thirty.
Well the executive recommended
about half of that is also back.
Our special schools military
institute the school for the
blind in the school for the deaf
your online forty of the issue
here.
LFC recommended a six percent
increase in instruction in
general funding for the military
to the school for the deaf
the LFC recommended a bigger
increase for the school for the
blind and that was to help bring
their appropriations closer to
parity with at the school for
the deaf for many years they
received much lower level of
state support.
One part of the LFC budget
recommendations and funding do
you categorical initiatives at
the colleges and universities
that align with those needs that
were covered in the LFC
subcommittee so you can turn to
the institutional detail not on
page eleven of the report here.
Details.
For each college and university
main campus name you're going to
see a new recommended
categorical appropriation for
student support services I'm
here in line eight on page
eleven for you and.
Many schools also have similar
new categorical appropriations
for tribal education in teacher
pipeline initiative there's nine
point four million dollars
altogether if you categorical
appropriations across all
institutions the intent was to
give the colleges flexible
funding to support their efforts
in growing wraparound services
for students I'm responding to
the Martinez Yazzie lawsuit in
the case of the tribal education
initiative line items in the
support their education
preparation.
This detail one of the reserves
of public service projects of
the LFC is recommending
increases in funding for which
is on line.
US sixty five on page twelve.
Right here.
Thanks for nurse practitioners
and physicians' assistants at
the UNM health sciences center I
LFC is recommending growing that
appropriation by one point seven
million dollars because it's an
area of extreme need our state
the best practice nurses really
helpful health care gaps in
areas of the state otherwise
tracked.
No position so between that.
The million dollars to
appropriated for nursing
programs the last special
session and another thirty five
million dollars that's included
in this LFC budget
recommendations for nursing
faculty endowments you're well
on your way to grow the size of
our nursing programs our state
which is pretty exciting.
Next I.
I want to move on to the
Department
Institutions so that's on page
six in your packet or.
We have a general fund detail
here on page six and they're at
the bottom of the yellow.
You can see that the LFC
recommended up forty six point
three million in recurring
general fund funding for the
higher education department.
Much higher at a hundred and
thirty seven point six million
of course most of that's driven
Carolina budget by the
opportunity scholarship
difference just again there.
The differences include a pretty
significant difference in line
thirty two here.
The executive recommended you
can see ten million dollars for
current funding to support dual
credit programming in that line
LFC recommended four million
dollars but in the nonrecurring
section of the bill for the same
purpose.
Hello at the health professional
loan repayment program here in
line thirty three.
Negative recommended growing
that program to a level where
they can find loan repayment all
qualified applicants at two
point five million dollars a
year in the LFC recommended or
what is two hundred fifty
thousand dollar increase.
If you're looking for we do have
the traditional different sheets
for the department of the back
your packet on their own pages
twenty one three twenty three
those don't have all the details
about the individual initiatives
nancial aid programs which is
like why am going over this page
six but I'm happy to go over the
different she's helpful to.
I want to point out that
starting on page twenty four.
Skipping around a little.
The different shades.
We have all the house bill two
performance measures that DFA
analysts have come to consensus
on there are six identical
measures for each of the four
year institutions and six
identical measures for the two
year institutions and so
hopefully that'll help us do a
little better job of tracking
performance across the different
institution types going.
I
want to go over some of that.
Nonrecurring funding you know
usually we do not occur during
special funding and a different
hearing but it's such a big part
of the higher education
recommendation this year but I
thought it's worth going over
some of the items now when I see
so much more and then the LFC
recommendations are here in the
green columns executives are
here in the purple and LFC is
recommending three hundred and
fifty six million more in just
nonrecurring general fund for
higher education a few of these
to know our we've got a hundred
and thirty five billion dollars
total funding for faculty
endowments for teachers nursing
and social work faculty those
items I seventeen and eighteen
year.
We have twenty million dollars
more.
Here for teacher affordability
scholarship here in item six.
A hundred and fifty million for
the lottery scholarship fund
forty three million for the
opportunity scholarship fund.
You're in line thirteen
important team.
Fifteen.
And they're at the top here.
This final page fifty million
dollars for research in tact
element closing funded a
research institutions and
together is not occurring
destination sure that no student
should need to pay for tuition
college in New Mexico for at
least the next several years if
you're going full time.
If you're going to become a
teacher if you're from low
income families there's not
flexible eight hearing LFC
budget recommendation even
support your cost of living
while you're in college it's
really incredible.
I'm gonna stop sharing for a
moment I want to mention
something that's not in your
packet that's compensation you
likely know the LFC recommended
funding for compensation
increases for higher education
the same as all state employees
giving them a three percent
increase in the last quarter of
fiscal year twenty to and then
another four percent on top of
that in fiscal year twenty three
for functionally a seven percent
increase in average pay.
Executive is recommending just
four percent in FY twenty three
so it's about a twenty six point
six billion dollar difference
for higher education.
the LFC is also providing
eighteen point seven million
dollars institutions to cover a
one percent increase in here
because contributions it just
contingent on a bill passing
that's going to require those
increases which we expect to
happen.
I just want to mention to other
reference documents that you
have in your packet the first is
on page eighteen which shows all
the federal stimulus funding
that the institutions have
received from the cares Act the
two other federal stimulus
packages sure just really quick
just so you can see.
This page right here it says for
the pandemic stimulus funding
for the higher education
institutions unlike the public
at eight thank you for own
conscious of money from those
federal there is another and any
other Carissa stimulus fund they
were required to give away about
half of that to students in the
form of financial aid so you can
see over the three bills are
institutions that keep about two
hundred and thirteen point two
million and they gave out about
fifty eight point four million
students in the form of
financial aid.
There's been a lot of discussion
about financially generally
This page in here which is from
the council university
presidents annual report this
year it's a it's a really
telling graph I think that shows
average tuition and fees across
the four years and the
comprehensive that the reserves
in the average award that their
undergraduate your.
And you can see even back to
fall twenty seventeen lottery
wasn't covering you know full
tuition that we still had enough
financial aid on average to
cover the tuition and fees needs
for students are for your
schools which is a really great
thing and I wanted to make sure
that.
With that madam chair I'll take
a pause and.
Pass it over to the whole effect
your pleasure.
Ready Nicole would you like to
make a sum comments yes thank
you madam chair I will just
touch on the very high risk high
points of the executive budget I
know that thank you I did an
excellent job of kind of
breaking the whole committee but
I will just touch on a couple of
points that she messed just
reiterating again for the
executive recommendation the
executive recommended to present
new money and zero point five
percent as a workload adjustment
as previously mentioned
the executive also included
funding for nursing programs an
increase of about one point
three million dental programs at
a hundred and fifteen point four
education programs at about a
five hundred thousand dollar
increase for the centers of
excellence I just wanted to make
a mention on page three of your
packet the bioscience center at
the university of New Mexico
that was originally at UNM HSC
it's not new it's just a
transfer of agencies from the
main campus over to HSC that was
a recommendation by the
executive and then we also
included two new centers of
excellence and not one of them
is that western New Mexico
university for the center of
excellence in early education
early childhood education and
care the second is for the New
Mexico highlands university for
the center of excellence and
social work mental and
behavioral health five hundred
thousand there were a few
increases for state agencies at
the institutions a couple of
them that I mentioned are the
for the office of the medical
investigator the executive
provided a one million dollar
increase was in control center
we provided a five hundred
thousand dollar increase
department of ag we provided a
one million dollar increase
your of mine safety at thirty
eight point one thousand dollar
increase and bureau of mines two
hundred and fifty thousand the.
Executive also provided three
percent increase brain need for
all the special schools I will
now transition over to that
department.
high points again the executive
did find and eighty five point
five million dollar increase for
the opportunity scholarship the
Schemel secretary Rodriguez will
provide additional details on
that in her presentation as well
as the executive provided one
point eight million dollars for
very see increases for other
financial programs which are
also in that detail packet sheet
that you got
We the executive also provided
one point two million dollars
for the students and I've
requests and then two point five
million dollar increase for and
it for the adult basic education
program
for the department we also of
the executive also recommended
funding for four new positions
two of them will be designated
for adult the adult education
division and that's a split of
federal and general fund and
then two additional FTE to
provide support for that New
Mexico longitudinal data system
Again we we over the course of
the entrance during the aging
process we had a really great
time working with institutions
on their performance measures
thanks again to the staff LFC
for working together with us and
they come to consensus on that
that concludes my remarks madam
chair I will now turn it back
over to you.
All right eight thank you very
much
We have the cabinet secretary
issue are you ready.
I am ready madam chair once
again trying to get everything
situated here okay we'll just
turn it over to you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee good afternoon I
appreciate the opportunity to be
here today to discuss the New
Mexico higher education
department and higher education
institutions executive
recommendation for you today but
before I want to dive into this
I want to reiterate what Micaela
said I appreciate the higher
education subcommittee and all
of the convening that we did
over the spring summer and fall
to really discuss higher
education and make sure that we
understand the ins and outs of
it what is happening what is the
current landscape and how can we
address those issues are going
forward so thank you madam chair
and thank you to the members
that are here that were part of
that subcommittee.
You'll see a breakdown of the
recommendations before you today
that agency budget accounts for
less than two percent of the
general fund higher education as
a whole is nearly twelve percent
of the state's general fund at
approximately eight billion
dollars in addition to managing
and navigating that million
dollar that billion dollar
budget on the right side you
will notice that our agency also
administers state financial aid
programs two hundred million
dollars in capital in ten
million dollars in federal
grants which fifty FTE.
I'll discuss IT a bit further if
we look at F. T. E. numbers
compared to others education
agencies have nearly three
hundred employees at PED and
ECECD our agency oversees twenty
nine public and tribal colleges
and three special schools and we
break this down a little further
thirty six point I have T. E. R.
supported with state funds when
I presented this to you last
year your concern we had a
thirty twenty three point five
vacancy rate but we have been
diligently working hard to fill
staff at our agency with at
fourteen percent vacancy rate at
this time and we're working hard
to also revamped the data and
research shop and make sure that
they're fully staffed and we can
continue to provide you
information data and reports
moving forward for fiscal year
twenty three we're looking to
hire fourteen members to support
the all the doll Education
Division and the state's
longitudinal data system which
is a partnership with the three
education agencies and the
department of workforce
solutions.
As we continue our work to
provide data driven policy
solutions to enrollment declines
we also need to understand that
students that we can recruit
right here in New Mexico and the
challenges they face accessing
higher education a college
degree according to the
legislative finance committee
report an educational attainment
published in twenty nineteen
about twenty four percent of New
Mexicans who attended college
did not attain a degree and half
of all New Mexicans have not
attained education beyond beyond
a high school diploma or
credential additionally the
average age of the New Mexico
college students twenty six
years old with that what's the
good news now with more students
eligible for the opportunity
scholarship last year in the
lottery scholarship building at
one hundred percent of tuition
nearly eighteen thousand
students benefited from these
programs but there is still a
significant unmet need to
address the eighty five point
five million dollar request
before you is an investment that
is only one percent the state
budget we proposed a
comprehensive free college
package to create simple access
and administration the state
scholarships and allow for
broader eligibility for more New
Mexicans coming into our higher
education system.
Now let's talk about adult
education we have twenty six
local dot education providers
across the state twenty which
are you're colleges and
universities that you're
districts we expanded our
programming with newcomers from
why do I am working for now
charter school in considering
the access for parents to high
school Quincy programs is an
indicator called out in the kids
count report card it's critical
that we restore adult education
and increase adult literacy
findings so that we can continue
these programs for New Mexicans
including our parents with more
financial support in adult
education spending we estimate
that we can increase enrollment
by four thousand students and
how to our workforce pathway
programs and investment in adult
literacy is also critical
because twenty nine percent of
adults at the lowest level of
literacy in our state with an
additional seventy thousand
dollar investment getting us to
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars we estimate that we can
increase enrollment literacy
programs by ten percent.
Slide six you will see that we
are also asking for ten million
dollars to support the dual
credit programming makayla
touched on this a little bit so
it is important because students
success is evident when our
students continue on to college
from this program and it's key
to addressing our enrollment
challenges here in New Mexico
our colleges and universities
with over nine million dollars
in tuition and fees per the
statute to administer adulthood
after schools with this
investment we're hoping to
support higher education
institutions to by providing
targeted academic and college
advisement to high school
students instructor compensation
for our faculty additional
courses that are better align to
a high school student schedule
and covering fees outside of
general fees for FTE courses.
Before
diving into slide seven I want
to thank committee members for
supporting the teacher loan
repayment program during the
second specials this chest
session this past December we
broke a record this year with
the fifty six percent increase
of six hundred and four
warranties and your two million
dollar investment from the
special session will allow us to
continue to administer the
program at the level we need to
in order to support New Mexico
teachers beyond compensation
with that being said the first
see this program will continue
to grow in our outreach efforts
will only strengthen and
continue with our partnerships
with the teachers unions
therefore we are requesting five
million dollars in fiscal year
twenty twenty three.
You hear me talk about this a
lot the longitudinal data system
will help educators in you the
policy makers identify student
challenges early on make
targeted interventions and
investments and determine what
actually works when it comes to
education policy and funding
that Dr student success can get
New Mexicans into the work force
we have made significant
progress even
Selected under this year
therefore we are requesting
seven point five million dollars
to begin our implementation work
so we can have the system go
live in the spring of twenty
twenty three we have done our
homework and we've also secured
federal funding hoping that the
congressionally directed at your
us spending package for your
marks this past with two million
dollars coming to New Mexico
we're waiting on that final
though and as a reminder we are
requesting she dedicated F. T.
so we can make sure this project
is on time so that we can start
to use that data and start to
see those programs that work.
The next slide we broke down the
general fund recommendations for
higher education institutions
most of these dollars are
administered through the I.
Angie are funding formula and
we're recommending more than one
hundred fifty million dollars in
reserves and public service
projects.
Let's touch on instruction in
general funding first.
In December madam chair we have
instituted to adjustments for
this year's recommendation which
include student credit workload
and internal institutional
improvement measure first our
workload the agency will hold
back the percentage of new money
until institution submits the
strategic enrollment management
plan to the agency second point
institutional improvement
measures what purpose does the
start well not all colleges are
created equal and is it fair for
rural schools to compete with
our urban epicenters therefore
this adjustment is a measure in
which an institution will have
to improve upon itself over time
in relation to awards and
student credit hours we are
dedicated to addressing other
topics in the in term with the
same members of that committee
that we can be from the summer
and fall to address our
definition of at risk transfer
and how we better collect that
data dual credit in the words
for areas of workforce needs in
the state.
Eleven you'll see our
recommendations for the
distribution of the funding
formula that we recommended no
based redistribution for the
upcoming fiscal year we're also
recommending two percent new
money at twelve point seven
million dollars in half that
percent would be held back until
we see the strategic enrollment
management plans and they are to
the level that we need to really
ensure that we are drawing
increasing remote enrollment
recruitment and retention at our
institutions.
I will.
To mention this but you've heard
me talk about enrollment
declines in show that data to
you in my presentation in New
Mexico and statewide enrollment
has decreased that isn't new
however in our research we have
that we shared with you there's
one sector seen as significant
increase and that is the
historically black colleges and
universities our public colleges
and universities they are
minority serving institutions
and H. B. C. use provide
aspiration models of how New
Mexico can recruit retain and
empower our students and higher
education we'll be looking for
relevant strategies and the
strategic enrollment plans non
the right when you have a chance
you'll be able to see examples
of strategies that are higher
education institutions are
already deploying at their
schools across the state.
Thirteen we have our reserves
and public service projects our
recommendation prioritize the
following areas health care
workforce mental and behavioral
health education and early
childhood in other state
agencies another area of
prioritization as Michael
mentioned are the existing
centers of excellence and
expansions to early childhood in
social work critical needs in
our state on this pie chart
healthcare workforce programs in
nursing expansions was just
received nineteen percent of the
overall funding in addition to
I. Angie funds that already
support students services we
have requested six million
dollars in the S. R. P. S. P.
recommendation stem programming
and research will receive eight
point six million dollars and
some of the higher education
institutions as many of you know
house state entities so that
funding was restored an increase
from PED pandemic levels such as
the office of the medical
investigator and lastly before I
move on to capital we do not
accept any increase to athletics
at any of our sectors the
recommendation.
Twenty nineteen legislative
session a couple years back New
Mexico higher education
institutions submitted a funding
request for fifteen million
dollars to address preventive
maintenance and normal repairs
of existing plan assets and to
assist with deferred maintenance
needs have gone and funded for
far too long this issue is
referred to building renewal and
replacement for B. R. in our our
colleges and universities have
made a concerted effort to
continue the transfer up yarn
are in the funding formula from
their I. Angie allocation each
year however the need outweighs
the available funding therefore
the agency's recommendation
which is different from LFC
asked for two point five percent
of the FY twenty two I. Angie
appropriation for all higher
education institutions in the
state this recommendation would
provide additional funding to
schools about what they are
currently transferring in their
annual I NG to address these
critical needs this
recommendation is not meant to
replace the current fund
transfer they still have to do
that to receive this plan but it
is meant to supplement the
transfer with an additional
seventeen point four million
dollars totaling forty seven
million in funding to address
the are and are statewide.
I just like fifteen since I
presented on this last month but
I want to note that the agency
is requesting five million
dollars to the higher education
down and once again we reviewed
twenty seven applications from
across all higher education
institutions and past proposals
include doctors Ishant and
science and research based
fields in stem H. and special
education this initiative is an
easy one to support because our
institutions have to provide
matching funds for the state
funding.
Sixteen you'll see a summary of
all that we have requested in
Micaela and Nicole talked about
today in the differences between
our state presentations.
And I'd be remiss if I didn't do
we integrate the emissions that
have been driven by the higher
education institutions this
agency your leadership and the
governor so thank you for all
that you have done to help us
the accomplishments that we have
had this past year.
And I am sorry I'm getting a
little happy here.
We conclude our presentation
madam chair I leave you with
this image of accidents from the
New Mexico State University
program one in three college
students experience hunger which
is why the New Mexico higher
education department as part of
the food farm hunger initiative
at twelve HSD food system
collaboration with a million
dollars appropriation to address
this issue on college campuses
and with that thank you for
allowing me to be here today and
I will get the floor back to you
madam chair.
Already thank you madam
secretary what I like to do is
ask that you take take down the
presentation and then we're
going to go to questions but
before I start with the
committee I do want to I wanted
to ask you of madam secretary
all these are role meant plans
that you have the suggested in
your presentation.
Where and where those
potentially be do in other words
a for holding funding back and
they would have to go through
some kind of a process when with
those actually be do you know
madam chair thank you for the
question we've been talking
about this we would actually
want them do you at the end of
FY twenty two before we get into
FY twenty three so we can
adequately review those us
institutions to do revisions
that they need to and get that
on board for you all okay and
then I did want to I did also
want to mention and certainly
think Representative small in
the interim subcommittee the LFC
subcommittee on higher ed I
thought it was a very good
process and of course we're
going to continue that next
general with the LESC committee
to continue the higher read
subcommittee work you know at
the end of the day
by next next year at this time
it's our and we're anticipated
to have a a funding formula that
we can all work with I mean
that's the final bold for the
committee as a higher education
of funding formula is expected
and I did have a quick question
for David I
asked.
David Abbey.
In our last higher rates of
report and what we had the group
in front of us.
Last year I asked specifically
that there be a center for
excellence on teaching to be set
into the budget where is that.
Mr chair can add to that it's a
dental issue I believe Micaela
can help.
Right thank you to the exact
page you look in your packet P.
twelve.
Line eighty nine The New Mexico
teacher education consortium
wouldn't name it is a center of
excellence but functionally what
it is we want Mexico state
operate.
Mexicans operated for the
nursing programs across the
state court making sure that.
Answer standardized and you know
that we're doing the best we can
to get teachers graduated in
passing licensure.
Okay because what I had asked
for when iris was part of LFC is
that this be a pilot and that it
not just be at one school so I
want you all to think about that
let's keep the note on that
let's go to let's go to the
committee
let's start with the
Representative Hochman Vigil.
I just have a couple questions
you backing on the secretaries
presentation especially with
regards to expansion the
opportunity scholarship and the
executive recommendation about
madam secretary if let's say if
we were to consider this full
expansion of the scholarship do
we have any sort of guaranteed
that the great expansion are
availability of free college is
going to actually be effective
in stating our at our drop out
rates.
Madam chair representative thank
you for that question we have
seen that when there are
promised programs in other
states of the nation at their
enrollment typically will
increase an average of two point
five percent now something
that's unique to the bill that
would be bringing for Teo is a
memorandum of understanding with
the institution that has two
things it talks about guidance
for tuition and fees but it also
talks about what services are in
place at your institution that
are student centered and student
focused to allow them to succeed
such as an advisement creator
counselling programs on campus
that are to be dedicated to
student services and student.
Thanks very much I think madam
secretary I I that's why I
wanted to hear I I don't think
we should just dump of a lot of
money and free college tuition
without also making additional
investments and wraparound
services to make sure our kids
are students stay in school
otherwise it's a the Los
investment for the state I'm
going back to the changes in the
funding formula madam chair and
and forgive me this is mostly
for my own edification but once
we come up with these changes in
the funding formula art will
they be change internally or do
they have to be to have to
codified in statute or
memorialized provided
legislatively in some way.
I'm sorry madam chair I was
going to say that but that's
actually in place for the higher
education department to go ahead
and put that recommendations
forward and will continue to do
that.
Okay.
You that was what generally what
happens is that I will be
looking to our subcommittee on
recommendations of what I'm
going formula will look like
kinds of input from the
department as well as the
institutions hi I know that'll
happen because we need some
guidance as a as an
appropriating body would like to
be fair we want to make sure
that the guidance is correct and
that were were thanks for thanks
for we say results so we will be
working on that it statutorily
inside the cabinet secretaries
responsibility though.
Side her responsibility but we
do the budget at the end of the
day we built the budget and
course we want to work
collaborative collaborative Lee
with her.
Thank you madam chair that kind
of piggy backs also additional
eight towards that the question
that you ask which is with these
additional reporting
requirements and the enrollments
are plans that were asking
higher education to come up with
are these going to be
incorporated into LFC is
performance measures are how are
we going to how are we going to
ensure there is accountability
once these plans are in place.
makayla you want to talk about
performance measures generally
what would happen is they'd be
adopted by the subcommittee and
then we would build them into
the budget but go ahead Micaela.
Thanks for going Representative
Hochman Vigil for the question
for the role accountability
plans the the way that we at the
LFC is recommended forcing that
is writing into language that
the institutions not only share
those plans with the department
but with your LFC staff as well
so we'll get to see those as
well and there are performance
measures are ready that have
been adopted targets we have
concerts assignment DFA for
having them up they're relevant
numbers over time so we get
quarterly reporting the
institutions.
Okay thank you very much and I
just one last comment madam
chair I was really glad to see
some of these are non recurring
investments specially for the
college of nursing they're
working really hard to help us
graduate nurses everyone knows
in the middle of the public
pandemic that some of our
frontline workers including
nurses really need these once in
a and a lifetime investment some
very excited the LFC had
recommended that this
nonrecurring appropriation go
through thank you madam chair.
All right thank you let's go
Representative Trujillo.
Your muted Representative.
Can you hear me now.
Thank you madam chair I texted
you a concern that I had with
project echo at UNM.
When we presented this summer
when they presented this summer
at in the committee that I
chaired for Legislative Health
and Human Services
After much conversation and
exchange of information.
Committee which is a large
committee.
Very concerned of that is that
the requests by project echo
needed to be fully.
We funded and with a look on
that page that I shared with you
from.
About
senator told me.
Well blue line seventy nine.
Project echo we have requested
an additional four million and
what ended up happening is we
ended up with the one point five
million that we really needed
the four million in addition to
what existed there and I'm
advocating for us to reconsider
this then
are structured committees for
catch up and clean up and I hope
that you all are considerate and
Mr madam chair David Abbey is on
line and I know that he was
there at some of the meetings in
the new the extent of our
concerns that I don't know if
you want to share any
information if I'm putting them
on the spot or not but maybe you
could share
madam chair my only comment
would be that's about a seventy
percent increase over the FY
twenty two base it's
significant I is mainly targeted
at the medical activities of the
health sciences centre they had
a significant significant
request to expanded education
which I'm sure you've had a lot
per lot about by comparison the
executive recommendation was
flat so those are my comments
thank you madam chair
Representative.
Thank you madam chair I hope
that we reconsider that that
committee no David shaking his
head so I'm hoping that we can
go back to that this area of
concern is an adult it I know
that.
Secretary
My goodness.
What.
was concerned about the increase
in funding at all levels and I
know she presented a very
comprehensive
But.
You you and I know that a few
years ago especially in the area
of adult that.
the funding was cut from for K.
twelve remember that we were
signing it up adult dedicate
twelve and that was cut and so
we have our level of students
that were not being served and
what I I would like to do is
make sure that there is a level
of concern in terms of money
interjected in there so that we
can address the needs of those
adult learners that are floating
in cyberspace so to speak so I'd
like that considered at specials
and supplementals as well and
then my final one madam chair is
the health professionals loan
repayment
two six two two hundred thousand
David or.
Two hundred thousand it really
needs a lot more in order to to
ensure that we keep health
professionals in the state right
now it's it's I don't think it's
significant and again that's
another area that I'd like for
us to reconsider madam chair
thank you so much.
Already Micaela did you have
your hand up on that or was it
something else Madam chair she
she got it right.
Okay let's go ahead
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair and I just
have one minor thing also on
page twelve line ninety six the
department of agriculture it's
always funny that we have a
state department that's folded
in under higher ed but I know
they're going to have a lot of
increased costs with cannabis
they they are the inspection
line for cannabis and also they
have to have a chem lab updated
and I know that that we have up
their budget some but it is
still short of what they ask for
so it was just another one that
I would like to flag so that
they don't have to take money
from traditional add to cover
this additional cannabis
responsibilities that they're
having thank you madam chair.
All right representatives of
small.
And madam chair thank you Mr
chair thank you Secretary
Rodriguez
brief the the madam chair miss
Fisher I've heard positive
feedback from higher education
institutions
the the LFC budget
recommendations is that
something that that's been
shared with you also.
Madam chair representative so
yes that's true.
If for no other reason that that
the com difference and the
higher range in number.
Cool thank you madam chair thank
you Mr and those are certainly
important pieces and and clearly
the I. N. G. and the
compensation go directly to
are are appropriate for
recruitment and also retention
and we've heard that essentially
some of the the our institutions
are are very much working to
hold on to and get the very best
folks possible in their program
areas
Madam chair at miss Fisher
The group it's.
The I I'm really just trying
also want to commend secretary
Rodriguez for and her team for
being part of all of the
subcommittee meetings over the
summer thank you madam chair for
creating this subcommittee and
the.
Reemphasize that the
subcommittee recommendations and
what we heard from families from
institutions from employers
really is reflected in both
budgets and especially in the
LFC budget with its emphasis on
wraparound services support for
institutions really the only
area the building retrofits and
renovations is the one area
that isn't as it seems like as
fully addressed and finally
madam chair Mister chair the LFC
approach does put a considerable
amount of New one time money
into the opportunity scholarship
can you explain that and give us
a sense of how long that should.
Both the current and maybe
future funding levels support
for utilization for all New
Mexicans who are interested.
Certainly thanks madam chair
representative also the LFC
recommendation the opportunity
scholarship has a total of
twelve million dollars recurring
funding for that program that
scholarship program which is a
five million dollar increase
from last year LFC is also
recommending.
Using that fund with forty three
million dollars a nonrecurring
funding the hope is that the
funding is mostly from our but
it's to be spent soon hope is
that the department will use
that nonrecurring funding up
here for the next five years
until it expires let that
recurring funding bill that
balances enough that it'll you
know.
Sure that program for the long
term if not the next ten years
maybe longer on the lottery side
something similar is happening
there we don't have a recurring
appropriation for that you just.
We're going to recommend using a
hundred and fifty million
dollars to the funds that will
cover a hundred percent to
mission at least through fiscal
year twenty seven by my
calculations if there isn't a
lot of change.
enrollments and the level of if
you know tuition doesn't change
institutions drastically.
Okay thank you very much.
Mention to do with it sorry no
money just mention one little
thing about.
Representative Hochman Vigil
talked about the importance
wraparound services you know
need their watery or the
opportunity scholarship is a
structured now cover what's
called cost of attendance really
only cover tuition.
What are your tuition fees in
the case the opportunity
scholarship and what we see
fairly often is that the costs
for attending colleges you know
tuition and fees are part of it
but it's not the majority and so
what we have in the LFC budget
to help counteract that is this
categorical appropriations under
each institutions for support
services so that they can help
students you know deal with
those extra costs they have
provide other financial.
Keep them and roll into their
graduation points out that's
what I just mentioned thanks
madam chair.
We.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you Mr chair for an
excellent job thank you madam
yeah.
And thank you Representative
small for chairing the
subcommittee and to volunteer to
continue tearing up some thank
you let's go down Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair
Richard received a couple of
messages regarding the adult
literacy program.
And I noticed on page five of
the executive handout the funds
eight programs around the state
including some rural programs
and and the communications I
received were for rural
communities I know some page six
of the LFC handout item two is
the adult literacy and there's a
very small difference between
the amounts of funding so what
if we might be able to fly down
to look at it clean up catch up.
That's all just a comment madam
chair already thank you
Representative Crowder
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair of I just
want to compliment.
Okay well to get your arms
around the higher it is they're
doing a great job of explaining
this to to members I appreciate
you.
on the front page we're going
over sort of the background I I
I think it's good that we track
and finances on retention and on
time graduation those two
components make good sense to
me.
I'm not so convinced about
enrollment though and the reason
why I say that is because I'm
afraid that might put undue
pressure on universities to to
to have this pushchair except
kids who may or may not be
qualified and I think there's a
moral obligation that
universities have to students to
make sure that they in fact are
qualified before they're
admitted because we're charging
them money and so in in my view
my anyways I wonder maybe a
better metric as a percentage of
New Mexico high school kids
choosing out of state college I
think that's important but then
also what percentage of of kids
in New Mexico colleges are
transferring to out of state
colleges.
I think enrollment fine but but
in tracking that by putting
pressure on that.
Requests I do have a question on
page six of the handout.
One twenty seven madam chair.
Wartime veteran scholarship I
noticed there's a difference
there between exact LC is that
just as simple as as.
There's there's not enough for
those of a need for those
scholarships so we don't need to
fund what the the executive
request is.
Give me a second I can look up
what the balances and then maybe
the secretary can talk about
this one off hand we kept it
flat you can see in that.
I could have asked for two
hundred some dollars hundred
thousand dollar increase along
with many of the other programs
and financial aid program madam
secretary.
Madam chair representative the
reason why we did do an increase
for time that because of the
that military service members
that are returning to the United
States from deployment as you
know the administration did
bring back a lot of our service
members and we have to
accommodate them in the higher
education around as well so that
is why there is an increase in
that kind.
Thank you thank you madam
secretary manager I just I raise
that because this one make sure
if there's a bigger depend on
what we have the money in that
fund I think it's important that
in my final thing madam chair
would be requested just just
like a very minor minor item for
ketchup cleanup page fifteen
line two seventy is a center for
excellence for renewable energy
at San Juan college we know this
is one of the governor's
priorities the San Juan basin is
is particularly situated to be a
leader in renewables because
everything that that is up in
that area so madam chair just
request that we flag that one
for catch a claim that's
everything I have.
Already thank you let's go now
to Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair
A couple of items
And I believe this question
would be for us secretary
Rodriguez I was wondering why
there's no I didn't see funding
and the executive recommendation
for the bioscience Authority.
Madam chair representative there
is funding for bioscience it has
been moved to the main campus
because the intent of the center
of excellence for bioscience is
to do you innovative creative
things where I. P. and more
research so we believe that can
be accomplished with the whole
entire University of New Mexico
system versus just investing in
one entity which is the biocides
Authority we want to see those
dollars leveraged across call
bioscience of profession
expertise and research in New
Mexico in the state so therefore
that is why it's new to me
campus so that they can spend
that and line of main campus
efforts and health sciences
efforts.
Thank you madam chair and
secretary so the bioscience
Authority though itself will
continue it's just being moved.
As part of a larger effort madam
chair the funding is being moved
to meet science main campus the
bioscience will continue to
exist at health sciences center.
Thank you.
Madam chair and
Miss Fisher I wanted to
highlight the delineations that
you have put in the LFC
recommendation for student
support money and are the
teacher pipeline initiatives one
of the things that we've sort of
heard over and over again is how
difficult it is for some of our
students to take the time off.
From their other
responsibilities and complete
their degrees and so I think
that's a really a worthwhile
investment and I I wanted to
flag that.
madam chair
and this maybe for miss Fisher
as well I realize you address to
this a little bit earlier but
could you point me to where the
funding for project echo would
be found.
Chair representative Dick of
course it's on page twelve your
package provide seventy nine.
I'm thank you thank you so much
for
Flagging that for me I
appreciate it
Sorry I'm and madam chair at
those are the only questions
that I have at this moment thank
you.
Radios Representative Sarinana
go ahead.
Thank you madam chair quick
question on the on page twelve
eighty nine that The New Mexico
teacher education consortium is
that where the money is for R.
T. R. residency president
teachers and the alternative
licensure in our with your
teachers that we're looking at.
Reporting the teacher
residencies bill that we have
this year the session.
So madam chair and
representative Sarinana no these
are these are additional
appropriations to help support
the educator prep programs
within the colleges David
correct me if I'm wrong but I
believe the teacher residency
funding is in the PED budget yes
he's given me at.
Thank you thank you that's all I
have.
All righty let's go to
Representative Castellano.
Thank you madam chair yes
might be for makayla I'm lying.
One twenty eight research and
public services I see the
executive.
For five hundred thousand for.
Hi thanks for the center of if
students in social work and
mental behavioral health
issue another one for a research
and public sources and western
we got to fifty one no I get the
two fifty.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair and secretary and
she wants to these new center of
excellence is where request from
the executive and I don't
believe they had one for Linux
community college.
Madam chair representative thank
you for that question so we
focus the center of excellence
efforts on institutions that
have established programs and
early childhood and social work
and one of them is highlands and
social work was not considered
at this time but that doesn't
mean that we could have a center
of excellence
us in the future.
Thank you madam chair I'm sorry
it was New Mexico highlands
in students from colleges and
again
I apologize about that.
All right I'm gonna ask you
Representative Castellano to
repeat your question are you are
you finished.
Jeff so why did Titans
University on the research and
public service get Torren fifty
thousand for their center of
excellence in social work mental
and behavioral health was my
question chair thank you.
Madam chair the executive budget
recommendation is a half a
million for highlands.
Madam chair Representative
Castellano so the REC the LFC
recommended two hundred and
fifty for the early childhood
center of excellence at western
because it was an existing
center of excellence and we
actually I think it came in
junior maybe but we recommend
that level the center for
excellence in social work at
highlands is a new request and
so rather than sending a bunch
New R. PS piece we decided the
LFC rack focuses on funding
those categorical appropriations
that are a little more broad and
flexible for the university's
board initiatives and I think
David wants to type and what the
deal would you talk about the
recommendation for dentures for
social work so well I am.
One on page one eighty eight
fifty million dollars right can
you that they are currently in
your packet in front of you it's
on page nine yes wine seventeen
the second to last item so the
LFC is recommending fifty
million dollars nonrecurring
funding to help support faculty
and social work programs so that
they can grow the number of
faculty and grow the number of
students are educating and so
both Luna and.
sorry just highlands would be
able to benefit from that well
as western anybody who has a
bachelor's or master's degree in
social work.
And more customers to get in on
this.
Market you have a comment on
this issue.
Yes thank you madam chair no I.
Actually I think Micaela David
M. state they answered it very
well so thank you madam chair I
just I was trying to correct it
it's not lunettes its New Mexico
highlands university so that's
all thank you madam chair.
All righty do we have any other.
Okay do we have any other
questions from the committee
members on what's been presented
this morning or this afternoon.
I don't see any other hands so
with that being said we're on
the higher education department
at this point agency code nine
fifty.
Representative small thank you
madam chair for HSD code five
fifty for the higher education
department I would move the LFC
recommendation.
Okay for HSD code nine fifty we
have a motion for the LFC is our
second.
I'll second madam chair thank
you a motion and a second is
there any opposition to that
motion we have taken some of the
notes here that have been raised
by the committee members.
All righty Garcia no opposition
so we'll take the LFC on that.
All right thank you very much
madam secretary would like you
to stay with us as we go through
all of this afternoon's hearings
in case there's a question back
to back to you for the
department.
Okay let's go ahead and start
now with agency code nine fifty
two nine seventy six so my
question is are we going to hear
from each of them are we going
to do this by designated area in
other words the comprehensive so
independence the branches are we
going to have these broken out
or what's the plan.
Micaela.
Share my understanding was that
It would be the institutions
associations would just share
for questions although I'm happy
to go over just the the broad
strokes of paint institutional
recommendation as well that's
helpful I would like you to do
that and that if we could just
go ahead and break those down
we don't have to get into the
nap I grow on it but we do need
to have a of an overview between
you and the DFA analyst and then
I would like to have the the
various categories available to
answer questions.
Madam chair so I'll refer and
the committee back to page five
which is the high level.
Just reiterate for
For the the normal schools that
the reserves comprehensive and
community colleges the schools
that I have is funding new
funding runs to the performance
based funding formula the LFC is
recommending three percent new
construction and general funding
about nineteen million dollars
both the LFC and executive
agreed to not to any what's
called based redistribution
which is run past funding
through the performance based
funding formula and we're
putting that on hold this year
since we subcommittee LCS
committees can address the
formula next year the executive
recommended two percent new
money which is about thirteen
million dollars
and in the end that left us with
I. N. G. funding formula let me
at six hundred and fifty five
point two million dollars for
the LFC arms.
Sixty six hundred six hundred
and fifty five point two million
for the LESC six hundred and
forty nine point one million for
the executive.
Both the LFC and executive
recommendation I need funding
for the New Mexico health
sciences center.
And for the special schools the
executive recommended three
percent new money for six point
nine million and Judy funding
for the special schools the LFC
recommended more than that six
percent from the New Mexico
school for the task dashing
military institute twenty
percent new I need money for the
school for the blind again to
help bring into parity with that
of the school for the deaf.
But again the workload
withholding LFC is recommending
that you need to be empowered to
hold back one percent that new
funding so that's about six
point four million nineteen
billion dollars in new funding
the executive recommendation
that the HEP operator hold back
half a percent of that new money
that's half and three point two
million dollars.
Far as categorical funding the
LFC is but the LFC and exec are
recommending holding athletic
from the flat at seventeen point
two million dollars.
We've got some differences in
our P. S. P.'s although they're
not you
the executive added a little bit
more in health care workforce in
the
LFC focused in on those new
categorical initiatives.
Eight point four million dollars
in total six and that is for the
student support services.
One point six million of it is
for.
Your pipeline initiative.
A little more than two billion
is for tribal education
initiative.
So you know.
Broad strokes the LFC
recommended a little bit more
funding and section for
operational funding for the
colleges and the executive to
and that's.
That's I think the things I
wanted to cover Nicole do you
have anything else you'd like to
say that the institutions
you madam chair thank you
makayla members of the committee
I just want to kind of highlight
the the page I you'll see on
line fifty two was those
differences for the AGI is at
the bottom the LFC recommended
about a hundred and eighty nine
point one
billion.
Sorry excuse me.
Million and then the executive
eight hundred and seventy five
point seven million so that's
that's the difference there
and she covered everything thank
you.
Okay well I have a few questions
and then I'm going to turn to
the committee first is I'd like
to ask if there is a spokesman
for the research universities it
might might want to make a
couple comments before we as I'm
gonna ask the same for
comprehensive and community
colleges is there a spokesman
for the research universities.
Madam chair members the
committee I I I I the vice chair
of the council of university
presidents and that would be
willing to be that spokesperson
as miss all righty Sir we will
allow you we're all years if you
give us a few comments.
You're you're needed Dr Mason
I'm sorry if you miss a.
Just that at first of all thank
the the the sure the and and the
committee for all the great work
that's already been done I think
we're very very pleased with
without both the rec center
coming around I think are are
are actually very responsive to
what we believe in I have made
in terms of our
A request relative to the
research and cooperation and to
specifically research programs
and research university let me
just say that one of the primary
things that we were focused on
is the reserves closing fund and
of the very much I think
anxious to see that pass
primarily because we expect
there's going to be some
significant federal money that's
already allocated to the federal
agencies that we can compete
more and and then the least of
which is the the the hydrogen
how the programs at the
department of energy is person
is sensually soliciting and we
think New Mexico has a great
chance to win one of those Hobbs
it will require cost share in
this closing fund will be
extremely important in terms of
how we ultimately can get to
the.
The the compelling a proposal
that we need to have in order to
be successful in that
competition so that is the the
the the one of the biggest at
areas of I think of interest for
the research universities
additionally and compensation
for faculty is clearly an issue
that has has been around for a
long time and we think an
opportunity to take to get to
you know the the maximum we can
there is really helpful so I'll
stop their lives to my primary
ones Mexico madam chair and also
the of the things I think are
important are all support to the
other institutions as well with
that specific to Research
University.
Ready to help out a spokesman
for the comprehensive answer
institutions chair thank you for
longest beyond Joe shepherd here
no present western New Mexico
university also chair of the
council universe presents Madam
chair I know you're going to go
to community colleges next but
if I can build you suicide rate
that into the branch campus
community colleges in the
independent committee colleges I
think that the helpful to those
two groups that being said from
the comprehensive side like the
research we're actually very
supportive and appreciative of
the fifty million dollars in a
research fund they'll actually
in many ways benefit
comprehensive universities I've
seen that occur in my past and
other and in another state when
they did that and it rises all
ships on that time so thank you
for the for side of that also
want to thank you for setting up
the committee I need to meet in
small and his colleagues on the
committee have done an amazing
job my tenure here this is the
strongest higher education
budget that I have seen and I'm
I'm greatly appreciative for
that faculty and staff of course
we already noted the the seven
percent is that something needed
we have faculty members going
elsewhere simply because the pay
is better I'll swear and often
times it's taken tire labs with
them and so I'm appreciative of
of that as well I think there's
still some work to be done there
we have to be sensitive about
you know all the all the other
things that that are are
happening in terms of
compression and minimum wage and
in those cases but I think that
can be worked out an element
that of course was mentioning I
by
Representative small was was B.
R. in our building replacement
we know we we hope that the
committee will give some some
thought to that because that's
dearly needed at our
institutions particularly the
comprehensive we do not get
local tax that are where we get
our money from is from
appropriations and tuition
that's pretty much it and so
there's at peace the final piece
that I hope that this committee
will take a look at some point
is athletics analytics is more
than just a bunch of people
getting on the field implying
sense of longing its sense of
community builds it build
opportunity for students for for
state and in order to be
competitive we continue to rank
last in the funding in that
particular category so on the R.
P. S. B. side that would be
something that said I also want
to thank for the wraparound
services very very important
schools like mine and of many of
our schools we have impoverished
students students who are who
are first generation all the
need that extra supporting hand
but madam chair I want to thank
you for your leadership
what you have done here in the
in the last year or so
particularly with the LFC and
and the chair chairmanship there
is really put a focus on higher
education and that has not gone
unnoticed and it's greatly
appreciated thank you so much
for letting me speak all righty
thank you our doc shepherd I
would like to hear a spokesman
from the independence and then
we'll go to the branches.
spokesman yes thank you madam
chair my name is Becky rally on
present at Santa Fe community
college and I am the chair for
MICC and I'd like to start by
just thanking you for the
opportunity to say a few words
and for your continued support
for higher ed over the years as
my predecessors of said both of
these budget recommendations are
very generous to higher
education and so you know we we
would do well with either one we
are especially interested though
in the compensation increase and
so as much as much as we can
receive in that area we would be
grateful for like our
counterparts we also struggle
with trying to attract and
retain high quality staff and
also technical workers that are
in very student services areas
we are very grateful for the
funds for dual credit dual
credit is particularly important
to community colleges and then a
couple the comprehensive is but
we do serving all of us serve a
lot of students this way and
even though there are some
retention issues that we're
continuing to work on down the
road as noted dual credit does
get more students into college
on and right in the door and it
also the retention efforts for
students who have taken a
significant amount of general
education bill credit is
substantially higher than for.
Students we are very grateful
for the recognition of the
importance of wraparound
services this is incredibly
important community college
students are students typically
are older their parents there
part time and they struggle and
so we have to spend a large
percentage of our funding on
trying to find programs to
support that all of those
particular issues that they
bring to the table
also I want to mention the
increases in financial aid we
see we are supportive of any
kind of increases in financial
aid that will assist our
students it is a critical thing
we have surveyed our students we
know that that money is the
single but the biggest barrier
that they face and so we are
we're supportive of all of the
increases I'm in financial aid
that have been proposed and
finally I just want to mention
for the independent community
colleges we are supportive of
the chess project that has been
the recommendation is fifteen
million dollars from the higher
education department five
million dollars from the LFC I
will just address straight on I
know there's concern that there
are only five colleges are
involved in that right now
we can only have the four
colleges are starting
implementation phase right now
because the complexity of the
technical implementation and the
governance structure of that as
of as of now all of our colleges
are supportive of the project
and two more are scheduled to
undergo the assessment that will
allow them to join and other
colleges that in the past have
been somewhat reserved are now
looking into the project and
looking to join us too so it's
an opportunity for our students
to it's an opportunity for us to
simplify a very difficult system
is assumed it's difficult for us
but as you know many of you have
talked about how difficult the
higher education is for students
to navigate I will not argue
with that or deny that at all
and so we're we're.
King to make that simpler and
more effective so I appreciate
the opportunity says few words
and thanks for your help over
the years.
Already have a the spokesman for
the branches please.
Gentleman on Dr Chantal
presentation Leicester
university or as well and also
president of the in the C. C.
appreciate the opportunity to
speak today.
I want to echo the comments from
our other colleagues to drive
these are Dr shepherd Dr Ali
regarding compensation and the
need for wraparound services I
thank you doctor Ali laid out
exactly what's happening is
committee colleges we have
primarily nontraditional
students in terms of our
enrollment the majority of them
are part time and so they come
as parents stay calm as
professionals were on the work
force already trying to improve
their skills and there are job
opportunities we are all
community colleges that are
comprehensive in nature we work
to provide transfer
opportunities.
And also to me critical
workforce needs we appreciate
the committee's work this past
summer we also appreciate the
support in terms of scholarships
for our students this particular
those scholarships that can be
driven toward cost of attendance
I think the other piece madam
chair is just understand that we
are all working to meet student
and community needs are various
areas and appreciate the support
of the committee I'd stop.
All right I want to thank you
and I I do have another question
and that gets back to of the
health Science Center I see
doctor Stokes is is here with
us.
I wanted to ask just point blank
during the special session there
is a request from the Senate
finance or new public health
program as well as a new
facility.
So I'm gonna ask you doctor
Stokes is that a priority for
you and if it is.
In early the building than what
comes out of your current list.
Thank you for for that question
I know that's been of concern
you know to to I will say that
for the University of New Mexico
that the talk about our
expansion of our to have a state
and twelve program of public
health has been an ongoing
conversation and we have been
actively working on plans for
expanding our current college
population health so that we can
better serve that the
prevention needs for the health
problems and New Mexico I had to
take it back just a little bit
I'll you know I came to New
Mexico and recognized that given
the need to to really deal with
the health issues in the state
and the school of public health
was something that I thought
could make a huge difference
here and one of the factors in
deciding to hire Dr drivers yet
down just as the executive vice
president was that he had in
fact been are the leader in
creating secretary school at
university of California San
Diego and so we have the
opportunity over the last year
he's been in place a little over
a year to begin those plans now
in conversations with Senator
Hickey I and doctors the NMAA
they began talking about you
know what in this year when
there is so much available
funding what could have a real
impact in New Mexico and so they
began their talks about you know
the bill that was I think first
introduced a special session now
we have the Senate bill that's
been presented I'm from our
perspective it out a school of
public health can make a huge
difference in New Mexico we see
that I'm high priority.
It's really the expansion of the
operations and faculty so that
we can in fact have that twelve
school and began to compete I
and produce a lot more public
health employees for the state
the building is something that
we do see the need for I'm we
have done they have you know we
have plans for a school of
public health building I'm but I
will say that in terms of timing
if if funding is available this
is something that it will be a
priority for the institution
but it is really the
operations and the support for
expansion but I would say was
the higher priority.
The building would be great.
Well I need to yes what what you
know
Is that we do have a process and
in that process.
Trying not to make it more
difficult by having projects
that are inserted outside of
that process process I think
when you open the floodgate one
university then you need to do
it for everybody.
We had a couple of members ask
gosh what about project echo is
that or is that not a priority
or is it this public health
issue that a program that's that
priority.
So I am very interested in
understanding point blank what
the priorities are because that
matter what the Senate doesn't
we don't agree with that.
And don't matter what those
programs are we don't agree with
it.
So I would strongly encourage
you have to go through the
process just like everybody else
house to.
Particularly when it comes to
new facilities
as you know we have to have a
facilities plan done we have to
understand I was going to be
paid for.
What that space requirement is
going to be what space is not
currently being used in
particular because of the
declining enrollment.
So my feeling about this is is
that we need to know what the
priorities are we need to stick
with our own process because I
don't think it's fair to the
rest of the institutions that we
do and and run and I'm just
gonna put that out there.
I appreciate your your response.
And that appreciate everybody's
presentations today of the
analysts subcommittee's work.
Take a motion on the on the what
we've just presented and then
we're going to go to the special
schools nine seventy eight nine
seventy nine and nineteen eighty
nineteen in motion
Representative small thank you I
would move madam chair the LFC
recommendation.
All right we have a motion to we
have a second for the LFC
recommendation managers is all
right we do have a second use
lost the general fund.
That would be Representative day
Hochman Vigil by the second I
heard the.
I heard the representative
Anderson I'm I'm not sure that
we were supposed to hear.
Anyway with that being said is
there any opposition to that
motion saying that we have the
LFC recommendation.
If we could let's go ahead and
move on to the New Mexico
military institute will start
with the analysts.
Thank you madam chair so on page
seventeen of your packet you've
got a side by side of the LFC
and exec rack full sources and
uses for the three special
schools
just to reiterate that the LFC
is recommending six percent I NG
increases for the school for
the.
and military institute and a
twenty percent increase for the
school for blind and visually
impaired all three of these
schools our large beneficiaries
of bank records come in the way
that our institutions are not
and so they will benefit from
extra distributions from its
permanent funds just as our
schools have to about five
percent lower projecting.
And with that I can turn it over
to local she's got anything
staff.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee I don't have any
other additional comments for
the special schools thank you.
All right let's go to we have
the commander here Sir did you
wanna Jerry did you want to make
a couple comments.
Thank you madam chair of the
very brief back in November when
I met with the LFC before I had
handed out two sheets I have
mailed them to the legislature
maybe they have been received
now as reminders and we
appreciate the six percent
increase thank you and the
committee for that there were
two things we had asked for
additional help one was in the
area of transportation we we do
not own our own fleet for two
principal reasons the cost of
maintenance and the liability of
owning your own fleet and then
the this increasing cost and
fuel and maintenance and so
we've just for increase of five
hundred thousand dollars in our
maintenance budget to help fund
our overall transportation costs
for the corps of cadets and that
includes the athletics the
activities of the court the band
when they travel X. cetera the
second one was for an additional
two hundred fifty thousand for
the nose scholarship programs
that is such an important
program to us we're very proud
of the fact sheet that I
included the corps cadets now is
represented by forty two percent
New Mexico cadets two hundred of
those are on the nose
scholarship and without that
assistance and the assistance of
the lucky relative opportunity
scholarship you help this was a
few years ago we would not have
been able to do that when I
first came here thirteen years
ago the percentage of New Mexico
students was only about eighteen
percent and so with your help
we've been able to do that this
additional amount of money will
allow us to continue to ensure
that each of the recipients
receive a four year scholarship
equal with fifty percent of the
cost so again we very much
appreciate the six percent we
would ask for these two
additional amounts and madam
chair a couple of quick comments
when we met in November ask for
your help on the general
obligation bond issue and thank
you again some member.
Of the LFC staff call the very
next week we reconcile that a
project and then just the this
we actually Friday I met with
secretary Steinhaus the
secretary rod Regus on the
textbook issue on behalf all
three.
Schools and we resolve that
issue in fact secretary finals
called me well this at the zoom
conference was going on to
confirm that we have fixed that
problem it is a very simple
problem there used to be a
single line item in the PED
budget for instructional
materials it got rolled into the
overall funding line and then
that is distributed in the
funding formula and just simply
didn't get picked up on the fact
that three special schools are
not part of that funding formula
so we were able to fix that
thank you again for your help
their final Madam chair where
several of the institutions on
this call are part of Senate
bill seventy seven we signed
that mutual M. O. U. about seven
schools very happy to tell you
that progress is going extremely
well the seven schools now are
working with the ENMU to St not
only are Gen ed requirements but
our associate's to bachelor's
programs and create that pathway
for our New Mexico students so
ma'am thank you for the time
today and thank you for the
support that you give not only
internet my but the special
schools.
all right with that being said
I'm going to turn the hearing
over just a few minutes to
Representative Sweetser so she
can and continue Cherry I've got
a just jump all for just one
second so if you want to
Representative Sweetser.
Of course madam chair do we have
a representative from the New
Mexico school for the blind and
visually impaired who would like
to say a few words.
Yes madam chair and members of
the committee this is Patricia
Beecher on the superintendent of
the New Mexico school for the
blind and visually impaired I'm
pleased to report that we served
over thirteen hundred students
in the state last year we
performed over three hundred
forty screenings of of babies
through twenty two year old and
we supplied twenty five hundred
adapted supplies and books books
even braille legos across the
state we do employ a specialized
teachers we have teachers of the
students visual impairments
orientation and mobility
specialists and then we have
specially trained speech
therapists occupational
therapists physical therapists
and educational assistance.
And I'm advocating the I is
aware that that there are there
is legislation to increase
salaries for educators in K.
through twelve throughout the
state.
All of our educators are
licensed through an MPD and so
in order to remain
competitive with other public
school systems we would observe
those those recommended races as
well which can be which could be
actually quite significance in
recurring costs depending on the
level but upwards of one point
three million dollars for us and
recurring costs.
We are very grateful for the
support that the state had
continues to provide us and we
would like the committee to
consider the higher LFC
recommendation a budget
recommendations at this time
and I stand for any questions
thank you so much for your time.
Thank you Patricia and finally
do we have a representative from
the New Mexico school for the
deaf who would like to say a few
words to our committee this
afternoon.
Hello hi yes and Dr Jenner for
her bold in speaking to you
through sign language
interpreter right now I just
have a few words I want to keep
it short first I'd like to give
a shout out to the dual credit
programs our students are direct
beneficiaries to those programs
and our students and parents are
so proud of the parents
particularly of their children
taking college level classes
during high school and a you
know we may have a baby that
could be daft they have no idea
what might happen to their child
as a deaf person when they grow
up but now to know that they're
taking college level classes in
high school it makes a very
happy so I would like to see you
continue and expand on those we
have services to about six
hundred ninety students last
year a little bit lower than we
tend to serve and mostly because
of the pandemic and some
families with babies didn't want
to have their children receiving
services at this time we we did
see growth this year we
anticipate that we we are
working with students.
In senators throughout the
state.
We have a infants screening
programs in Gallup we expanded
that and in the south we have
expanded screening for new
babies at this time and we have
so much we won and cobbler's
last year our budget was healthy
in fact because a look a large
portion of our budget is related
to travel and salaries.
And we were not able to fill a
lot of positions this year
because of the pandemic and also
travel was reduced as a result
of the pandemic so we have
concerns about inflation and gas
prices prices you know if we're
able to provide good services to
our students will throughout the
state we need to be there in
person.
And yes we are doing more remote
work but you can't work with
young children and babies in the
same way you need to be there in
person so travel is affected by
gas prices and also we serve
three meals a day to our
students and that is not fully
compensated by the federal
appropriations so we do struggle
to find staff as well and last
week we had to close for one
week because we had to find
substitutes for our substitutes
and we were unable to and
finally you know
you know we raise the red flag
and we closed for one week and
we had to say that you know when
we announce the closure I have
never seen so many middle school
and high school students cried
they were so upset about the
school closures because they
want to be here in person and it
was really sad to see we
promised them that wouldn't be
permanent we would reopen
quickly and you know we did the
best we could with remote
teaching last year but it was
really a challenge.
Last year
we we appreciate the six percent
increase proposed because we
want to get our salaries up to
minimum wages we have a seven
percent increase would like to
see that pass and a fifteen
dollar possible minimum wage.
Four the state budget there are
so many things that could pass
we realize for the teachers some
could get a fifteen percent
increase with that anymore and.
You know all of our students
unlike other schools are license
to PED through the state and we
will have a shortfall.
I have you know and the six
percent and five percent to
proposed increases will help
that.
We would like to see that you're
B. contribution increased and
it.
Nancy as well has a cap of.
You know employees have to pay
eighty to twenty percent for the
employees and for all of those
if all of that passes we're
going to be a little bit of
trouble with some of the the
proposals but we'll see what
happens we would like to see the
increase in salaries absolutely
in the minimums which will help
us with recruitment help us to
find the staff that we need to
cover all the positions that we
need to cover and I would like
to thank the legislative
committees for your support and
really appreciate you.
All right thank you doctor her
that was very
very targeted and helpful and
make we may sometimes forget
that you're experiencing the
same things that all of our
schools are including staff
shortages which is unfortunate
and I and I
at the site and doctor Beecham
is featured also not in on the
transportation and staffing and
some of the other issues as well
I'm gonna go to committee now do
we have any questions for anyone
from our special schools.
I'll go to Representative Dixon
first.
I'm thank you madam chair I
actually just had a couple of
comments and then I if there are
no other questions would make a
motion but I wanted to first
superintendent or commander
grizzle I just wanted to let you
know that one of my constituents
as a very poised young woman and
she is attending the military
institute serenity oaks and I
was very impressed when I met
her and know that you guys are
doing wonderful work.
Training our future leaders and
then it's also nice to see
superintendent Beecher I had the
pleasure of visiting the school
for the blind and visually
impaired as it's right my
district so I just wanted to
give those shout outs and should
I make a motion now are there
other questions.
I'm I'm gonna go one more time
to the committee to see if we do
have any other questions or
comments Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair thank you very much
and this is also directed to
general Chris let New Mexico
military institute
Representative Ezzell you're
very soft if you can speak up
just a little.
Madam chair is this better yes
thank you with all the problems
I've had my computer this is the
best we can do I guess for today
madam chair members of the
committee this.
Comment is made to general
grizzle at New Mexico military
institute.
Of I also want to point out.
Along with the no scholarship
this is also an opportunity for
these young people that might
have been awarded.
A congressional.
Scholarship if they are able to
get into their school at that
time that they compressed there
at New Mexico military institute
and I think it's an excellent
opportunity for men and women to
further excel and what they're
going on with their life.
General grizzle I do have a
question of all the nose
scholarships that are worded.
You said that there was forty
two percent in your screen right
now is that correct.
Madam chair it.
Representative Ezzell forty two
percent of the total court is
from New Mexico show of about
eight hundred and fifty students
forty two percent are from New
Mexico and two hundred of them
are on the nose okay and that
was my question and I know that
some of the scholarships were
for your high school program and
then also for the junior college
aspect of it and.
Of I appreciate everything that
you're doing at that school I
know that the enrollment has.
Rebounded greatly and that the
the protocols the teller
following as far as the COVID
issue goes as an outstanding so
I do appreciate that thank you
very much.
Representative thank you the we
were fortunate we average ninety
five percent Roman for ten
consecutive years the COVID
drops down last year to eighty
five this year a thank you for
recognizing that we return to
ninety one so and I said
increased and working very hard
to continue to bring that up to
that old level of ninety five
percent plus the and the what
you brought up about the prep
program is very true yes the
young man or young woman who has
an aspiration to go to the
service academy it doesn't get
that appointment we are the
number one prep school in the
nation for all five service
academies we annually have fifty
to seventy five young people
here who are chasing that dream
and we have a ninety five
percent success rate at getting
them into a service academy if
they will come here and work
with our service coordinator who
has a great relationship with
all five of the service
academies thank you for that and
madam chair from my state one
thing I'd like to echo what
present shippers said about
athletics I probably be in
trouble I didn't point out the
fact that we had two teams
playing for national
championships this year within
thirty days of each other the
volleyball team brought back the
runner up trophy and the
football team on December
seventeenth brought on the
national championship it does
make it can spend considerable
different I can tell you my
athletic director tells me that
the walk on that we're having
rules for this semester we will
only be limited by space and the
amount of equipment we have to
offer them the right to walk on
to be part of our sports
programs here what makes a
tremendous difference ma'am
thank you for that opportunity.
Madam chair I make continued
General Chris Cortez just stole
my thunder because I was fixing
to recognize the volleyball team
and the football team and it was
very exciting to be able to out
of the listening in on
everything that was happening
and it was wonderful so I do
have to commend the athletic
program at New Mexico military
institute madam chair that's all
thank you very much thank you
Representative Representative
Sarinana.
Thank you madam chair I I also
need to brag a little bit I have
to students I give the
scholarship to from Montana high
school who are at the at the New
Mexico military institute and
thank you for that because one
of them keeps I can't remember
his name but he keeps in touch
with me all the time and he he
was made for that school he's
perfect I had a so it was a
female and one was a male
they're both juniors now and I
hope they're doing well so thank
you for that.
All right thank you
Representative are there any
other comments from committee.
If not I will go to
Representative Dixon for motion.
I thank you madam chair I would
move the LFC.
Budget recommendations.
Thank you the LFC budget
recommendation has been moved I
have a second.
Madam chair also commemorate
Commission but we think second.
Can I say something real quick
before we no not just.
Yet to make a lot of also want
to commend the management is
institute for winning the
championship and tomorrow we
will be doing a memorial for
them here on the house floor.
Chair congratulations thank.
Thank you Representative
Castellano for the second out so
we have the LFC proper motion
and second do we have anyone who
disagrees with that motion.
Seeing none that motion passes
our committee we thank you all
very much I think as as I serve
these last few years one of the
things I'm most proud of our
special schools they are they
they really are special they are
something that I'm just doing
incredibly proud of the New
Mexico all of you so thank you
so much.
All right I'm Mikayla I'm gonna
look to you for guidance of the
chairwoman is stepped away and
I'm not sure what else is on our
agenda for this afternoon.
I'm back Representative thank
you thank you madam chair thank
you thanks for covering for me
hi I think that concludes today
isn't that correct to me we
actually get out early today
let's all do I have.
Everybody's happy about that so
I want to thank you and will be
back tomorrow at one thirty
thanks committee and thank you
all for being here today thanks.
All right bye bye.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
