full committee hearing. We're
going to be hearing the general
fund estimate, um, and, uh, we
have, uh, folks, uh, our
secretary here, uh, Sergeant
Clark, our chief economist, Mr.
Ismael Torres.
And then, um,
I, I guess you all are handling
from uh DFA who will be.
Presenting
Mr. Chairman and members, good
afternoon. I'm not sure if the
secretary is going to join us in
a minute or, and if he's not
here, I'll handle it and we'll
just see how it goes. OK, that,
that sounds great. So, uh,
members, we're gonna do that,
then we're gonna, uh, go to the
uh LFC, the legislative and the
executive recommendations. Thank
you, Director Sale, uh, Deputy
Director Courtney. Members will
get to meet all of the
incredible LFC staff uh at that
part of the presentation, um,
and then we'll conclude, we'll
have
committee training and
orientation, there will be no
votes, uh, no policy discussed
during that, that's purely for
committee orientation, and that
will follow, uh, the
presentation from the LLC and
executive.
With that, uh, Madam Secretary,
we'll turn it over to you and go
from there. OK. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, for any new members
that I haven't met to this
point. I look forward to meeting
you over the course of the
session, but I'm Stephanie
Chardon Clark and the secretary
of the Taxation and revenue
Department, where I've been
serving since 2019. And with me
today is Dr. Leo Delgado, who's
the chief economist from DFA and
also we have the chief economist
of Thaksin Rev, Lucindacito in
in the audience and they
they're uh critical along with
Mr. Torres and others um in
producing the general fund
consensus revenue outlook.
So, um, I'll go ahead and and
kick us off and take us through
most of the executive slides
before turning it over to my
colleagues from DFA.
And um I apologize to members
who already heard this in the
interim at LFC or potentially at
Restep. It'll be a repeat of
that presentation, but I
realized we have new members and
want to make sure everybody is
starting on the same page. All
right. So, um, the format of
this presentation um is similar.
We deliver, we start delivering
this at the December LFC meeting
and Madam, just to, so members,
of course, we have it up here on
the screens. You'll also have a
packet here of slides if
however you want to follow.
Thank you. Um, so every year the
consensus revenue estimating
group produces a general fund
consensus revenue estimate, we
deliver one to the LFC in August
and another update in December
and the December estimate is
probably the most important
because it is the one that the
budget is sized off of. So a big
picture, what we're looking here
is what's going on in the US and
the New Mexico and the global
economies at a macro level, and
how is that then trickling down
into the revenue that New Mexico
expects to
receive in the next 3 to 5 years
based on that revenue estimate,
both the executive and the
legislative branches go forward
in crafting their budget
recommendations that balance the
budget with a certain reserve
requirement, a certain reserve
target based on the revenue. So
this is the starting point for
for where we go in the budget.
So I'll cover first the
macroeconomic outlook. I'll give
some recent data on our largest
revenue sources, um, and then
turn it over to DFA.
So slide 3, just provides a
reminder of who makes up the
consensus revenue estimating
group, um, their economists,
professional economists from 4
different state agencies that
get together to do the economic
forecast. They are made up of
economists from the Department
of Finance and Administration,
taxation and revenue Department,
the Department of Transportation
and the Legislative Finance
Committee.
On slide 4, I'll provide an
overview of some of the baseline
forecasts that that group uses
to inform their updated
forecast. We subscribe to
forecast from Moody's as well as
S&P Global and locally we
subscribe to a forecast that's
produced by UNM's Bureau of
Business and Economic Research,
and so, um, basically what we're
looking at in the forecast,
there's a lot more detail here
on slide 4, but both nationally
and in the New Mexico economy,
we're we're looking at an
upcoming period.
Of positive but moderate
economic growth. We're expecting
inflation to continue to trend
downwards towards the 2% target
of the Federal Reserve, and
we're expected inflation to ease
and reach the Federal Reserve's
target of 2% here in 2025. Uh,
we're not expecting a recession
on the on in the forecast period
and again for GDP and and other
uh employment and other factors
we're looking at just moderate
economic growth in the coming
years.
On the next slide, slide 5, we
have a little more detail on
what's been going on with US GDP
growth and what is expected, um,
on each of these macroeconomic
slides, we kind of look at where
the forecast was when it was in
the last estimate, which would
have been August 2024 and where
it is now. So you can see on
slide 5 that the December
forecast had a slight upward
revision to what's expected for
US real GDP growth, uh, but
again, we're expecting just
moderate positive growth. We're
looking
that
A forecast of 2.2% in calendar
year 25 and 2% in calendar year
26.
And now looking at similar data,
but for the state of New Mexico,
we look at real estate gross
product growth, and there was a
larger upward revision, um,
what's leading to that, um, some
of the contributors to growth
are wholesale trade finance and
insurance, manufacturing, and
the arts and entertainment
sectors performing well. Um, and
again, we're looking at moderate
growth in the out years,
calendar year 24 averaged 0.8%,
um, I'm sorry.
And, and we're looking at 2.3%
in the out years.
Then, uh, turning on slide 7 to
the national labor market. There
is almost no change from August
to December in the forecast for
jobs in the United States, um,
just a very, very slight upward
revision. You've probably seen
headlines that each month when
labor statistics are released,
you know, the headline is
usually that the US labor market
is performing a little stronger
than expected and that we
revised upward the last month,
um, and so we continue to see
stronger um labor market in the
US than expected, and that's why
we very
slightly up, saw an upward
revision to that forecast, but
it is moderating and flattening.
And then over to employment data
on slide 8 for New Mexico, very
similar story, not a lot of
change in the forecast between
August and December, um, growth
averaged 844 jobs per month in
employment in New Mexico in
calendar year 24, growing by 2.
2.74% in calendar year 23, uh
but then growth in employment is
expected to slow, uh, is
expected to have been 1.5% in
calendar year 24 and just 0.8%
in calendar year 25 is what's
expected.
Um, slide 9 provides a little
bit more data on change in
employment by sector in New
Mexico. You can see that across
all sectors, we added 1.4% of
jobs, uh, from October 22 to
October 23. Uh, I'm sorry,
that's October 23 to October 24,
and some of the most notable
gains were in financial
activities, state government,
leisure and hospitality,
education, um, and there were
only a couple of sectors that uh
that um contracted.
Retail trade contracted, but I
think what we're seeing there is
a leveling out of the intense uh
rebound that happened after
COVID.
So that's uh returning to more
normal levels of retail
employment.
Onto the next slide, slide 10,
uh, we can look at unemployment
for both New Mexico and the
United States, and we should not
take for granted that right now
New Mexico is about equal to the
national unemployment rate, um,
as of the time of this forecast,
New Mexico is at 4.3%, and the
US was at 4.1%, and I really say
we shouldn't take that for
granted because although we'd,
of course, like to be doing
better than the national rate,
um, we really outperformed the
recovery.
After COVID, um, compared to the
US economy, we recovered our
jobs more quickly, um, and that
is really different than after
the Great Recession that started
in 2008, New Mexico took much
longer than most states to
recover after the Great
Recession.
Turning to slide 11, we'll look
a little bit at inflation and
interest rates on the left, you
can see um consumer price index,
which is the main indicator of
inflation that we look to, and
it is expected to trend down to
about 2.2%. A lot of the factors
that have been leading to
inflation really have eased off,
namely energy and uh food, but
shelter continues to be a
difficult um contributor to
inflation, and that's both in
New Mexico and nationally.
The Federal funds rate, which is
of course an important interest
rate that's underpinning a lot
of other rates in the market has
been trending downward and is
expected to continue to be cut,
um, a couple, a couple quarters
every year by the Fed trending
down to about uh 3
2.7%.
OK, so now we'll turn our
attention on slide 13 to um
what's happening in oil and
natural gas markets. This is, of
course, the single, probably
biggest contributor to revenue
in New Mexico and revenue
volatility in New Mexico, but
I'll talk later about how we've
done a really good job of sort
of insulating the general fund
and the appropriation needs of
the state from that oil
volatility. So a big um story in
this revenue estimate is the
change in the forecast price for
oil. Um, you can see on
on the table and slide on slide
13 that the price for oil is
expected to have come down $6
for fiscal year 25 and a little
bit less but down each year in
the out years.
And as a rule of thumb, each $1
change in the price of oil
probably reduces revenue in New
Mexico by about $50 million so
you can see how a $6 change in
the current year really adds up.
In the old days, uh, it, it
would have been that we'd
present this to the
appropriating body in December,
and you would have potentially
had to scramble to figure out
how to close a several $100
million budget gap, but because
of statutory changes made in the
last decade and and even more
recent.
Um,
this windfall oil revenue that
is more than we really can
sustainable sustainably spend is
already being taken off the top
and not being budgeted. We've
been deliberately underspending
our recurring budget for the
last several years, and so
instead of that, say 300 or more
revenue, um, shock coming out of
the expense of the general fund
or leading to tax increases or
something like that. We're just
seeing less go into these
reserve and endowment transfers
that have been set up.
For the future. So it's a really
great um headline from this
forecast.
OK, on slide 14, I've got a
little bit of data here about
oil production. You know, we
talked about oil price. The
other factor is how much volume
of oil is being produced in New
Mexico, and we are producing at
a record high level oil
production.
Sorry. Increased by 10 million
barrels for FO 25 and was, uh,
the forecast was decreased by 10
million barrels for FY 26, so a
little bit of up and down, but
New Mexico and FY 24 reached a
record high of 710 million
barrels. So the, the growth
there in the Permian Basin has
been significant, and we're
leading the nation in, in growth
of oil production.
The rig count has been hovering
above 100 rigs, and that's
important because the rig
activity is generally what leads
to grocery receipts tax revenue.
The production itself leads to
severance taxes and and other um
energy related revenues, but we
looked to the rig activity to
influence the GRT.
And according to Restead Energy,
which is one of the uh forecasts
that we rely upon, um, we're
entering what they call shale
4.0 production in the Permian.
This is characterized by
companies focusing on large
scale operations, long term
planning and consolidation
through acquisitions. So we're
just basically seeing maturity
of the industry, especially in
the Permian.
I'll, I'll turn next on flight
15 to oil, uh rather than oil,
we'll look at natural gas, and
in New Mexico right now, natural
gas production is very much tied
to oil when oil gets produced,
natural gasses is naturally
coming up with it and some of
the factors that we see
influencing and have to do with
pipeline constraints to
basically bring that natural gas
away from the wellhead in
somewhere that it can be
produced and refined, um, but we
are seeing um an increase in the
volume expectation.
for natural gas to 30,570 BCF
for FY 24, and that was expected
to average $3.16 per MCF and um
along with uh the upward
revision in oil production, we
also have increased the
expectation for natural gas
production. Those two are very
linked.
Next, uh, we'll turn to slide 17
and the grocery receipts tax.
Thank you.
Um,
Uh, so the grocery seats tax is
the single largest revenue
source in the general fund
currently, and the, the forecast
for GRT has been increased by 73
million in the current forecast
compared to what we estimated in
August, and then FY 26 and 27
are also uh revised upward by
114 and $103 million
respectively. So basically
we're, we're seeing stronger
than expected underlying
economic growth, the natural gas
and oil industry continues to.
to perform well and then as
you'll see later on when I talk
about income tax, wage and
salary growth is also very
strong. So all of that trickles
into consumption and the GRT,
um, for the out years, we're
looking at 3 to 4% growth in
GRT.
And flight 18, we have a little
bit of information about the
change in GRT growth in GRT by
industry, um, some of the, the
strongest sector, um, in the
last year was construction,
growing 7.3%. You can see also
many other sectors perform very
well, um,
I won't go through all the
detail on that.
On the next slide 19, we provide
a little bit more of a drill
down into what's going on in the
grocery receipts tax base in the
Permian Basin and Edding Lee
On the next slide 19, we provide
a little bit more of a drill
down into what's going on in the
grocery receipts tax base in the
Permian Basin and Eddingle
On the next slide 19, we provide
a little bit more of a drill
down into what's going on in the
grocery receipts tax base in the
Permian Basin and Edding Lee
counties. Um, you can see
basically on the, the chart on
the right-hand side, you can
sort of see the relative scale
of the GRT based in those
counties, seeing that mining and
oil and gas extraction is is by
far the largest and it's also
been growing very robustly, um,
as have trade, transportation
and utilities, which there is
also linked to oil and gas.
Production, but we, we saw
moderated growth from FY 23 to
24, and we expect that to
moderate in the next year.
Going on to slide 21. I have
some data on the personal income
tax, another very large revenue
source for the general fund.
Uh, in the personal income tax
outlook for FY 24, um, we, we
saw a 12% contraction in
personal income tax revenue, but
I want to stress again that that
doesn't reflect underlying uh
weakness in the income tax base
that's reflecting a deliberate
um legislative policy to reduce
taxes. So about, and there's
also an accounting change
causing part of that, um, 190
million is being accounted for
in corporate income tax instead
of personal income tax.
Whereas we're part of that is,
is Pit being down, you'll see
sit pop up by the same amount,
but really that's, that's just
again want to stress that's not
showing underlying weakness in
the, the income tax base. It's
just, um, accounting and
legislative changes for FY 25,
we also saw a decline in in that
year of 8%. Um, but again, that
was due to legislative
adjustments and the full year
phase in of how we're accounting
for pass through entity tax
instead under the corporate
income tax. Uh, for the out
years.
Which is probably the most
important, we're looking at 3.9%
growth in pit 3.8% in FY 27.
And uh it it pretty closely
tracks the growth that um UNM's
Bieber is forecasting in wage
and salary growth.
Onto slide 22, um, we've
provided some data on uh
withholding that's coming in a
recorder withholding is an
important leading indicator of
what's going on because we get
withholding remittances from
employers long before we get
personal income tax returns from
uh individuals and so you can
see um continued strength year
over year in in withholding for
FO 25, where we had one month of
data, there is solid growth over
FY 24 for the first quarter. The
next slide, um, we've detailed
for you some
of those legislative adjustments
that have been made in recent
sessions that I I mentioned a
while ago, some of the most
important ones and and we're
very proud also to have
partnered with the legislature
to make this a reality, um, you
can see the child income tax
credit, which paid out $131
million to New Mexico families
in its first year on the books
is 37% of these adjustments that
I'm talking about. Um, pit
bracket changes that were
enacted in House Bill 252, the
tax package last session.
35% of the total adjustments.
Again, those pit bracket, um,
reforms benefit every single
taxpayer in New Mexico but are
really well targeted to lower
and moderate income New
Mexicans. And then, of course,
there's the relatively new
Social Security exemption, about
85% of individuals who uh
receive Social Security benefits
fall under the income threshold.
So we've exempted about 85% of
Social Security benefits. And
then as one revenue raiser you
can see in the purple line.
We've last session narrowed the
capital gains deduction. Uh,
basically, we've, we've capped
the capital gains deduction on
passive income like an
investments, but kept it pretty
robust if you've, uh, for
example, if you've sold in New
Mexico business. Maybe your
whole life's work was to operate
and run a New Mexico business,
and when you retire, you have a
capital gain on that that will
still be subject to a pretty
hefty capital gains deduction.
Right, um, I'll move to slide 25
and talk a little bit about
severance taxes and rents and
royalties. I spoke uh earlier in
the presentation about, you
know, the changes we've made
statutorily to move windfall
revenue immediately out of the
general fund and um into
endowments so that we can really
save for tomorrow, and this is a
great example of, you know, how
we can see that at work, um, you
can see the oil and gas school
tax in blue on the left is the
amount that's going into the
general fund and it's now
capped.
FY 24 level, 1.145 billion to
the general fund each year, but
then there's an amount of that
that instead of going to the
general fund and leading to
volatility there is either being
transferred to the severance tax
permanent fund, where it can be
invested and lead to compound
investment earnings for
basically the future and then
also we've got transfers being
made to the early childhood
education trust fund and the tax
stabilization reserve. So when I
said earlier that we revised
downward.
The estimate for oil by $6 per
barrel instead of the general
fund taking that hit, we've
revised slightly downward what's
expected to go into these future
endowments, and then you can see
the same sort of information on
the right for federal mineral
leasing revenue, which has a, a
similar story.
And I'll turn it over to
Secretary Props
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee. Uh my name is Wayne
Props. I'm the secretary of the
Department of Finance and
Administration.
First of all, Mr. Chairman,
sorry for running a little bit
late.
It's the story of your life
during the session and the story
of my life as well being
expected to be in several places
at one time, but it's good to
see you, uh, good to see the
committee and thank you for the
opportunity to be with you
today.
I'll start off on a slide 27,
I'm not going to spend a lot of
time on this because Secretary
Chardon Clark covered a number
of these items on this, a
particular slide in her part of
this presentation. I will draw
your attention to the graph at
the uh at the bottom of the left
hand, um, bottom part of the
slide that shows uh revenue,
general fund recurring revenue
percentage growth.
Uh, as you know, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee, we
have seen remarkable revenue
growth over the last several
years in the state of New
Mexico.
Uh, but we also know that uh
that revenue growth is
moderating and returning to more
historic levels, and that's
what's demonstrated by the graph
on the bottom left hand side of
the slide you'll know for, for
example, in FY 26, uh, we're
projecting revenue growth to be
at 2.6%.
And then moving up to table one
above that, I just kind of want
to reiterate uh what Secretary
Chardon Clark covered in the in
the previous slide, which I
frankly think is the most
important slide.
That you'll have in front of you
today, I want to focus on again
the investment income, uh, and
what some of the actions by the
legislature over the last
several years and taking uh the
revenue growth that we've seen,
uh, making smart investments in
healthcare and education and the
environment, but also making
smart investments in the future
and setting aside some of that
money for future generations,
you'll see under the investment
income.
uh for FY 24 investment income
grew by 41% and an FY 25, we're
expecting it to grow by 11.3%,
and that really is a remarkable
accomplishment for the
legislature again and setting
aside some of the revenue growth
that we are experiencing today
for the future.
On slide 28.
This chairman, as we reported in
December to the Legislative
Finance Committee. Uh, we are
expecting the total new general
fund revenue that will be
available to you in this session
to appropriate for FY 25 to be
$892.3 million. Uh, that's a
little bracket there at the top
of FY 26.
Uh, we express that as total new
money, another way of expressing
that is how, how much is a pie
grown over FY 25, and we are
projecting uh that that pie has
grown by 800 again, $892.3
million generally, we consider
that uh revenue that can be
appropriated for recurring
expenses, but it doesn't have to
be, uh, it can be appropriated
for non-recurring expenses as
well, or again.
could be set aside, uh, but $892
million in new total new money
for FY 26.
You'll see below that, uh, Mr.
Chairman.
That the consensus revenue
forecast forecasters are also
projecting now that we will have
Almost approximately $2.5
billion in one time,
non-recurring revenue that is
available for appropriation by
the legislature for FY 26.
Slide 29, uh.
Again repeating some of what
you've already heard, so I'm not
going to spend much time on the
FY 26 uh box, but I do want to
note that in FY 24, General Fund
reserves, uh, estimated to be
$3.16 billion.
Or 33% of recurring
appropriations.
for FY 25, we're projecting
revenues uh um reserves to be at
approximately almost $4 billion
or 38.4%, uh, but as a note, uh,
below those boxes indicate
that's, of course, before you
began your appropriations for FY
26.
Um, Mr. Chairman, a strong
reserve levels for the state of
New Mexico. I'm gonna talk a
little bit more about that in a
slide or two, but that is uh
something that we've been able
to do now.
Certainly for the last several
years, while making those
important investments, also
ensuring that the state has
strong, strong reserves.
or slide 30 shows uh.
Some of these general fund
financial summary uh in millions
of dollars, and again, at the
bottom of the slide indicates
the general fund reserves
projections for both FY 24, uh,
and, uh, FY 25.
31, Mr. Chairman of the
consensus revenue forecast and
the consultants that we use to.
A lot of um
Testing of our projections, uh,
we test both the downside
scenarios and upside uh
scenarios.
And slide 31,
lays out some of the risks that
the consensus revenue
forecasters.
Uh, indicated for um
New Mexico and the projections
that are included in our
consensus revenue forecast.
Mr. Chairman, I normally don't
spend a lot of time on the
slide.
Uh, because, quite frankly, if
you look at the both the upside
and downside risks.
Neither you nor I have much
control over them.
I don't control inflation.
I wish I could control the price
of a gallon of gas, but I really
don't.
Many of these, um,
Both upside and downside risks
are out of our control.
But I do want to spend a little
bit of time, Mr. Chairman, from
my perspective on what some of
the downside risks are to um
What we've been able to
accomplish.
Over the last several years that
that are within our controls.
One of them, Mr. Chairman, is if
we don't maintain those strong
levels of reserve.
That would be a downside risk
from my perspective.
Another downside risk, Mr.
Chairman, and this is been
indicated by the rating agencies
that look at our, our finances.
As you heard from the governor
yesterday, the outlook for New
Mexico.
Moody's has been upgraded from
stable uh to positive.
Or what I can tell the first
time in the history of the
state.
one that's one of the risks that
they noted to um that
projection.
Is the reforms that we've made
to our pension plans over the
last
few years.
And so if we saw the beginning
of a walk back to those reforms.
I would see that as a downside
risk to our forecast.
And then finally, this chairman,
another factor in Moody's
upgrade of our outlook.
Some of the work that you've
done, uh, again over the last
several years.
To set aside money.
in funds that generate income to
fund programs for the state of
New Mexico, and again, set aside
money for the future.
I think Mr. Chairman, if we
began to
Looked at some of those funds
for other purposes, uh, for
other than what they were
appropriated for.
Uh, I would consider that a
downside risk as well.
Those are all things within our
control, Mr. Chairman, again,
from my perspective, uh, we have
a lot of upside, uh, potential,
uh, for the state of New Mexico.
I still think we have some
really good days ahead of us. We
expect to continue to see
perhaps modest, but continue to
expect to see revenue growth,
uh, not only for FY 26 but FY 27
and beyond.
Uh, but Mr. Chairman, I did want
to note that uh there are some
risks that are within our
control, uh, as you begin your
work in the session.
On slide.
20 or 32.
Uh, some stress testing similar
to the risks that were outlined
by the consensus revenue
forecasters on the previous
slide, we do stress testing of
our forecasts.
We do an upside, uh, stress
test, we do a, a moderate
recession, uh, stress test, and
then we do a low oil price
stress test, uh, as well.
The story from side 70 or 32 is
actually quite remarkable, Mr.
Chairman, because you'll see
that the worst case scenario
that we model is the dotted red
line, um.
Uh, at the top of the bar graph
there.
Uh, and you'll see that even
under that worst case scenario,
Mr. Chairman, we are still able
to maintain current levels of
spending.
We could possibly even see very
modest growth in recurring
spending, we would likely need
to cut back in some of the
non-recurring
spending that uh we would be
able to make, um, if we were, if
the consensus revenue forecast
holds, um, but Mr. Chairman,
this is, and I've been around
now for a few years, a few years
more than I like to admit. Uh, I
do remember, Mr. Chairman, as an
LLC analyst many years ago.
Uh, having to go to agencies and
do what's called sanding of
budgets.
Look under cushions and desks
for extra pennies.
Uh, to fund state government.
and this slide demonstrates that
at least under the worst case
scenario that we model.
We don't have to worry about
doing that, and that's a
tremendous.
A testament that I'll say for
the 3rd or 4th time in this
presentation to the work that
you've done over the last uh few
years.
to not only make those important
investments, but to use
Some of the revenue that we've
seen and set it aside for future
uses.
Slide 33 is a uh
I
Replication of the previous
slide, uh, again, under low oil
price scenario for FY 25
recurring appropriations.
Remained well below the negative
impact of an oil shock, and
that's something that
Uh, we haven't been able to say,
uh, in recent history for the
state of New Mexico.
Finally, uh, Mr. Chairman,
before I turn it over to Izzy on
slide, a 34 and Secretary Shadon
Clark alluded to this as well.
All of the measures that have
been taken, uh, Senate Bill 26,
House Bill 253, Senate Bill 78,
and many others over the last 7
years.
have resulted in a
Um
What you see on this graph,
which is when these lines, uh,
the blue line and the black line
are farther apart.
That's revenue volatility.
When they're closer together,
and that means we have less
volatility in our outlook, uh,
and in our economy. Uh, we want
these lines to be as close
together as possible, and you'll
see in the 10 year trend at the
very end, they're almost
touching, and that is, that's
exactly where, uh, you want
them.
To be, um,
We've talked about this over the
interim many times, Mr.
Chairman, but in a not too
distant future, because of the
investments that have been made
in the severance tax permanent
funds and other, other funds,
uh, within, again, a few, a few
years.
The largest source of revenue
growth for the state of New
Mexico will no longer be oil and
gas.
It will be investment earnings
on the funds that have been set
aside and invested for the
future.
And that's, uh, that's frankly,
Mr. Chairman, almost
unbelievable, but it's true.
Uh, so thank you, Mr. Chairman,
I appreciate your time uh this
afternoon and happy to answer
any questions.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Ismael Torres, and I'm
the chief economist for you all
at the Legislative Finance
Committee, and I'll be speaking
to this brief. I hope you all
have in front of you, Money
Matters, it's in blue.
Maybe we can get it on the
screen.
Well, Mr. Chair, maybe I'll get
started well, oh, there it goes.
Great. Um,
Uh, I'm gonna move through this
quickly because both secretaries
did a great job covering all the
information and, and this is the
legislative finance Committee
narrative that goes along with
the consensus forecast. So, of
course, I'm sure you all will
have a lot to read this, this
session if you'd really like to,
you can dig in into further
detail on on a lot of these
issues in this brief. Um, but I
do want to highlight the table
at the top of this page here.
This is the bottom line of the
revenue estimate, that
highlighted in sort of beige
color, $13.6 billion is the
revenue estimate.
for FY 26, which is really the
primary budget year in question
for you all during this
legislative session.
And
Uh, as Secretary Props pointed
out, you can see the annual
percent change there at the
bottom of that table. We've had
really record setting revenue
growth in FY 22, FY 23, we saw
that growth go from 20% scale
down to about 12% in FY 24.
We're seeing it notched down
again in FY 25 as tax cuts take
effect, but return and resume
towards a normal, uh, historical
rate of growth of a little under
4%. So if you look at the chart
at the bottom of page one,
there's the recurring
growth charted out for you.
There you can see that, that
peak, those records setting
years, and then it comes back
down as tax cuts take effect in
the economy returns to normal,
but then you can see those out
years of revenue growth are
actually anticipated to be
slightly below the historical
growth rate of again about 4%.
So that's a little bit of a
headwind to the state in terms
of revenue growth into the
future and um I can get into
that here a little bit shortly.
I would like to spend some time
on the chart in the middle of
the page. Uh, this is a
graphical representation of what
secretary props mentioned with
regard to new money. So, uh,
for, for all of us who need a
refresher, which includes
myself, new money is the future
year's revenues minus the
current year's spending.
And so that difference, that
remainder is something of a
surplus. And so that's what we
identify as new money that can
be appropriated during the
session or or grown from our
current spending levels.
And the secret of props
mentioned, that number is $892
million for the upcoming year.
But what I want to point out,
or, or help maybe think forward
another year.
New money in the next year will
of course be determined by the
revenues in that year minus the
recurring spending, which you
all are growing in this session.
So, for example, $892 million in
new money this year. If there
was no revenue growth,
And we spent the exact same as
we did currently, that would
mean $892 million in the future
here.
Luckily, we expect revenue
growth of about $200 million. So
you can expect that new money
might be $1.1 billion.
Now, of course, you all don't
plan to keep spending completely
flat. The LFC recommendation
includes 5.7% increase in
recurring spending, that's about
$580 million. So you can expect
if no additional spending.
was added on top of LFC, new
money in the future year might
be $400 million plus the $200
million in growth, $600 million.
But you can see how quickly
additional spending or tax cuts
without a pay for can eat into
the new money in the future
year, and you could quickly find
yourself in a point where you
might have 0 new money, or if
you spend more than that, 600
million on top of the LFC
recommendation, for example, you
might be in a position to pull
back some of that non-recurring
spending, which would of course
be the first item before you
went.
to recurring studying.
Sure that's clear as mud, but
ultimately, the point is that
new money in the next year,
which you all will have to
appropriate in the next session
is very dependent on the
spending in this session.
OK, moving on to page 2.
The chart at the top of the page
on the left here represents what
the revenue growth is coming
from. Where is the state
deriving its its revenue growth.
You can see a large portion of
it coming from the gross
receipts tax, or uh uh some
additional context, the gross
receipts tax is our largest
source of revenue in the general
fund represents about 1/3 of our
total revenues, income taxes, as
we see those income tax cuts
take effect. You can see it's
actually a drag on our general
fund revenue growth, $90 million
reduction year over year there.
That represents about
22% of our total general fund.
Severance taxes represents about
20% of our total general fund, a
little bit of a drag there.
We're seeing prices come down.
Uh, it's not actually related to
significant declines in
production, um, but it has more
to do with the mechanisms that
you all have put into place to
cap some revenues and then the
price declines on the revenues
that are not capped.
Interest earnings as Secretary
Props mentioned is quickly
becoming one of our larger
revenue sources. It's currently
about a 7th or 8th, 14% of the
general fund coming from
interest earning or investment
accounts that are distributing
funds to the general fund.
That's the largest source of
growth that we're seeing
currently as Secretary Props
mentioned for the total growth
year over year, you can see of
$200 million.
The table in the middle here is
an abbreviated version of the
general fund financial summary,
as you all know, there's a
constitutional requirement for
the state to pass a balanced
budget every year. And so this
is the way that we make sure
and, and hopefully help you all
make sure that you're passing a,
a sustainable budget that does
not unconstitutionally
overspend. And as you can see on
this balance sheet here, we have
revenues at the top, spending in
the middle, how much that nets
out to, and what your ending
reserve balances are, and we
actually
ending reserve balances in FY 24
of 33% or $3.1 billion. FY 25 is
not yet complete, as you all
will do some additional spending
in the in in the coming days. So
currently sitting at 38%, but we
expect that number to come down
as you all make non-recurring
appropriations.
OK. Moving on to the economic
forecast. Let's see how far I
can skip ahead here.
Um, if you, you could turn to
page 4, please.
You just really enjoy these
charts because I think they
speak to the magnitude of which
New Mexico has experienced oil
production growth or a boom, uh,
you can see a few short years
ago, less than 10 years ago, we
were quite a ways below North
Dakota, which was at the time
the 2nd largest oil producer in
the country. We've since
skyrocketed past North Dakota to
become the 2nd largest oil
producer in the country, uh,
maybe about heading towards
about half of what Texas
produces each year. And if you
look a little further down on
page 4, you can see
that growth represents and how
far we deviate from the national
averages when it comes to oil
production growth there. And of
course that translates into
Severance taxes, gross receipts
taxes, personal income taxes in
New Mexico, which has helped to
fuel that, um, record-breaking
revenue growth in the last few
years.
If you turn to page 5, you can
see what our forecast looks like
for oil and natural gas on the
right here. You can see how that
really rapid growth that's
almost vertical growth in
production has begun to level
out, and we expect to continue
to level out in the coming
years. It's another form of
cooling that we're seeing along
with the rest of the economy,
employment cooling, inflation
cooling, and also oil production
for New Mexico is cooling.
Um
If we, and, and as you can see
on the screen here, the middle
table reflects our expectation
for prices and production growth
if you're interested in digging
in a little deeper there. Um,
moving on to the gross receipts
tax, the, the pie chart at the
bottom here reflects the
importance or the reliance, I
should say, of the gross
receipts tax on the oil and gas
industry. Um, the
Red piece here reflects the
amount of gross receipts tax
coming from Eddie and Lee
Counties, approaching a third of
the total gross receipts tax,
which is highly dependent on the
oil and gas industry. That's now
well over a billion dollars. So,
should we have an oil um decline
and oil decline in production
and or prices, we can quickly
see a lot of that gross receipts
tax disappear as well.
Moving on to page 6, secretary
Trenton Clark did a great job
covering this, uh, our mining,
uh, activity in the gross
receipts tax is slowing along
with our production. We're now
seeing construction lead the
way, followed by professional
scientific and technical
services. Um, if you turn to
page 7, maybe another way of, of
thinking about or looking at the
recent changes that you all have
implemented to start investing
more of the windfall oil and gas
revenues into the permanent
funds is to look at the sum of
these bars, so
The blue bars reflect the amount
of severance or royalty
revenues, both oil and gas
related dollars go to the
general fund in blue.
Orange reflects the amount going
to the early childhood trust
fund, and green reflects the
amount going to the severance
tax permanent fund. So the sum
of those bars are total revenues
collected, and you can see that
we had a really high price here
in FY 23 where revenues
exploded, and in the subsequent
years, of course, as prices have
declined despite production
increasing, our revenues have
actually declined from these
sources. They declined by over
$200 million from 23 to 25 in
severance, and 1.1 billion in
royalties. So if these measures
had
not been put into place, the
general fund could have declined
maybe $1.3 billion over that
time period. So, uh, something
about crisis averted there, as
you all were able to continue
moderate um spending growth or
continuing your spending growth
without having to worry about um
budget cuts.
Moving on to page 8, the chart
at the top here reflects
Just how much more the
investment earnings in the
general fund are growing faster
than other revenues in the
general fund. That's represented
in green there as Secretary pros
mentioned, we expect a little
over 10% in FY 25, but we expect
it to continue to be the leading
growth in the general fund in
the years to come. And this is
our actually most sustainable or
stable, I should say, most
stable, least volatile revenue
source in the general fund. So
to see it leading the way in
growth.
It is really encouraging for us
as your economists. Um, that
being said, there are new forms,
new sources of volatility in the
general fund that keep us up at
night. One of those are the
state treasurer's office
distributions, their investment
earnings in the general fund,
they have uh 100% exposure to
market, um, pricing. So if we
see really large fluctuations in
the bond market, we can see
really large fluctuations in the
general fund. So this chart in
the middle here reflect
how much volatility there is in
that revenue source, and these
are sort of the things we're
identifying this is a new source
of volatility, um, corporate
income taxes are a new source of
volatility, no longer or we're
shifting away from oil and gas.
OK. Um, if you'll turn to me for
me uh to page 9.
The chart at the top here is
another way to look at the
charts that Secretary Chardon
Clark presented, this reflects
the personal income tax and
corporate income tax collections
in orange, what would have been
collected had tax changes not
been put into effect, and then
the blue represents what we're
actually collecting after those
tax cuts, and you can see that
24 to 25 declining as Secretary
Chaon Clark mentioned in blue,
but in reality, the economic
activity is strong and would
have actually grown if you look
at that in orange. So, just,
just
Differentiating between economic
activity versus fiscal policy.
Um, if you'll turn to page 10.
Uh, another source of volatility
for the general fund comes from
agency reversions when agencies
don't spend the full amount
appropriated that ends back in
the general fund, and it can be
a source of volatility for us.
What we're seeing, as you can
see in the charts at the top and
in the middle here, that the
recurring budget is not the
source of volatility for
reversions. We're seeing, as
demonstrated in the chart at the
bottom, that recurring
appropriations reverted remain
around the historical average of
about 1%. What we
do see volatility coming from
our large reversions from
non-recurring appropriations in
the chart at the top,
demonstrated by the orange bars,
and you can see how those have
moved over the last 5 years, um,
from very significant to very
little to very significant, and
that's a source of volatility
for us in the general fund.
Um, OK, you'll turn to
Page 13.
We'll skip ahead here to the
stress test.
As secretary props mentioned,
uh, we are in the very fortunate
position that we see these
stress tests where we, um, see
how far our revenues could fall
in the event of an emergency,
and we see that even in the
worst case emergency represented
by the red lines there. We don't
see it cutting below recurring
spending, which is represented
by the blue.
It does cut into non-recurring
appropriations, which could, of
course, mean that in the event
of one of these scenarios, some
of those appropriations have to
be pulled back, but that is
certainly easier to do than the
than the recurring
appropriations, but of course,
the amount that is is cut into,
the difference between how far,
how far revenues can fall, and
how far below the bars it falls
represents what you all might
consider for reserves, because,
you know, if revenues fall below
the
amount that has been spent will
need some cash reserves to cover
up, shore up, and, and allow
those appropriations to continue
to be made or or those
distributions continue to be
sent out. And so we have
calculated that for you all on
the next page.
support team. So this is the
difference between how much
appropriations above the worst
case scenario, and you can see
in FY 25, it's about maybe $700
million maybe 1.4 million $1.4
billion in FY 26, the sum of
those is about $2.1 billion. So
from our perspective, this
stress test would recommend
about 2.1 billion in reserves to
be able to continue covering
existing appropriations in the
event of uh of one of these
scenarios, one of these revenue.
shortfalls, whether it be oil
and gas price declines or a
recession.
Now, I think it's important to
remember that additional
spending uh above current
spending would add to the amount
needed to cover this amount. So
any additional amount would be
added to the 2.1 billion.
Um, with
That I I'll I'll end on this
trend analysis here on page 14
as Secretary Props mentioned,
uh, a trend analysis is a good
tool, helpful tool to identify
when revenues might be at risk
of collapse when we see revenues
above the trend, we worry that
they could come crashing far
below the trend, but we're
seeing good news here.
We are slowly and, and carefully
creeping back towards the trend,
which gives us confidence in the
stability of of the revenues um
in this forecast.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I
think we're ready for questions.
Outstanding, uh, secretaries,
thank you very much, Chief
economist, thank you,
remarkable, uh, information you
all summarized it, I think
quickly, but also with detail.
So we're gonna jump right into
questions. First, we're gonna go
to ranking and Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have 2
questions and uh I'm gonna ask
them all at once and
So if um
Revenue projections hold true to
current projections.
How much revenue will be
deferred.
To revenue endowments.
And
Second question is,
How much revenue will be
deferred to the permanent tax.
E.
The separate tax permit fund.
I'm sorry.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Chatfield, you
can find the answer to that on
page 7.
And I think we have done the
math for you. Um, it looks like
we are currently estimating 3
billion in school tax and 4
billion in royalties.
to reach the severance tax
permanent fund over this
forecast period. So that would
be $7 billion over maybe is that
a 12345 year period.
And that would be the sum of the
green bars on page 7 for the
severance tax permanent fund,
and you could do the same for
the early childhood trust fund
in Orange, which would be to
your point, the only other um
distribution to a savings
account. And I'm seeing 1.3
billion plus 2 billion, that's
about $3 billion to the Early
Childhood Trust fund over the
next 5 years. So total amount to
all.
Uh, endowments, including the
service tax. That's about $10
billion.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. uh, we're
gonna go next to Lujan, then
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the presentation again, um.
I'm gonna take us back and kind
of.
And I, I just think the
representative Chatfield's
question is really good, um.
So, um, page 13 on the um the
first presentation.
Um, we're talking about the
global oil supply exceeding
global oil demand and bringing
in OPEC and how they do the
pricing and how the, the input
that they're they're gonna have
and and putting that uh together
with the delay of their um
reporting.
When are
There, am I reading that
correctly?
Mr. Chair
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Wuhan, um,
Uh, the OPEC recently met and
chose to delay uh reducing their
production cuts, so they're
continuing their production
cuts, I guess they're delaying
any changes in production
outlook. Um, to, I I believe it
might be March or April.
Thank you for that
clarification. I was, I didn't
understand that, OK, um, so.
With that, um.
Can you for our new members, can
you explain a little bit about
how OPEC does how that happens.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK, Mr. Chair and uh
Representative Lujan, I'm not
sure which one of us will answer
that best, but I would love for
um Mr. Torres to jump in if I
miss anything, but, um, big
picture, you know, the, the text
on slide 13 does, I think, a
nice job of sort of reminding us
all how many factors impacting
oil price and production are
completely out of our hands. Our
uh New Mexico oil is produced
and sold and traded on a global
market and so things like that's
why we talk about on here.
You know, the global demand for
oil and the global supply of oil
just like any, you know,
economics 101 charter gonna
affect that supply and demand
graph and change the price. So
OPEC and OPEC Plus is
particularly important in that
they, the members together can
do things to control the supply
of oil and therefore impact the
price of oil. And so what we're
saying here is, is, yeah, that
um that group recently delayed.
Until about March, um, a change
to factors that they can control
impacting the supply, which then
um has impacts on our price.
I hope I answered your question.
Yeah, thank you. I just, Mr.
Chair, I appreciate that. I just
wanna say that that was one of
the things that I needed to
really get it conceptualized and
how all this gets put together
and affects our budget, um, and
with that, so there is going to
be, there is a decline and we
have an overproduction of oil,
um.
And that's, that's what's stated
here too. What, um, and we have
a new administration, a federal
administration who is committed
to trying to increase or, uh,
you know, or use the demand, you
know.
Strengthen the demand, if you
will, um, have you heard, is
there any, any kind of feedback
or anything that we could.
That that we have any kind of
clarification at this point on
from the federal government. I,
I, again, it's to the market. I
understand that, but there will
also be policy changes and when
we're looking at energy sources
that and, you know, um, that
affect our revenues.
Is there any any more input you
have to talk to us about at this
time, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Luhan, um.
What
To, to take a step back, um, to
Secretary Shadon Clark's point.
Really, when we're talking about
supply and and prices, um, it,
it is different for OPEC
countries and and the US
production. Uh, of course, in
those OPEC countries, there
might be a greater share of
state control over supply. Um,
that's not the case here. So
when the federal government, um,
should they choose, as we've
heard, to, um, accelerate
production, oil production in
the US, um, it may not actually
come to fruition.
depending upon those individual
companies choosing to do so. And
from our understanding, the
industry is, is currently in a
very, um, a much more stable
position than they have been in
in previous years where they are
expected, they, they have a
current capital expenditure
program with certain
expectations on how much supply
they're going to provide or
produce over the next many
years, maybe regardless of
permitting timelines, for
example, or regulatory, um, um,
restrictions being loosened, so
I
I think for all of that to say
that we're not seeing a large
change in our expectations for
oil production or price, um, in
this current forecast from
changes in federal policy.
Appreciate that. Thank you. And
would renewable energy, um, and
investments in renewable energy
and other sources of energy. I
have any reflection on the, the
decline of usage of of oil in
the production we have right
now, the surplus we have, Mr.
Chair.
Um, Mr. Chen and Representative
Wuhan.
You know, what, what we're
seeing in our, from our
forecast advising agencies and
and in our own forecasts is that
the long term decline in oil
production, um, is absolutely
affected by uh a global
transition to renewable or other
energies, but in addition to
that, uh,
Oil production in New Mexico is
also dependent on the
He of acreage, the profitability
of acreage, and we certainly
have a lot of it, um, but
depending on how prices.
Move forward in the global
environment. For example, if we,
if prices climb extremely high,
production can continue to grow,
but if prices remain at this
level, uh, production may not,
you know, that's, that's when we
expect production could decline
in over the next 10 to 15 years.
Appreciate that, I appreciate
the time to talk and, and I have
so many, I have other questions,
but I'm so others can have a
time to talk, I'm gonna refrain.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, next, we're gonna
go to Representative Duncan, and
Representative Doll.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I, I, I hope you'll indulge me
for a minute, not being on this
committee before. I'm gonna ask
a couple of questions that um
just help me out. Um, I'm gonna
do one for each of you if that's
all right. Uh clerk.
This one doesn't have much to do
with anything except, uh, I'd
like the definition of this on
page 18.
top of other services, we're
talking about tax base by
industry, except public
administration. Can you tell me?
How we grew and what percentage
we grew in public
administration.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Duncan, looking throughout this.
So when we talk about other
services, we're saying other
because we've
ahead of that broken out
different types of services like
professional scientific,
technical, um, information and
things like that. It's other
meaning it's sort of a catch
all, but you mean except public
administration, um, that public
administration line is carved
out down below. It's the 2nd.
Red bar at -11.2. Do you see
that one?
So these are just basically Nick
codes that are established by
the federal government and I
hope that helps. Yeah, it did.
Thank you. Thank you. Appreciate
that. Um,
Thank you Mr. Chair, um,
Secretary Probes on page 28 and
and we just heard this and since
I've not been on this committee,
and we've been hearing that
there's 3.6 billion 35 billion
new money.
And now we're talking about $800
million of new money?
What happened to the other
money.
I mean, I, I, I did probably do
very well in math, but I'm not,
I'm not even gonna get that far
apart. So, could, in a brief
way, could you please explain
that to me?
We'll try, I'll try to be brief,
Mr. Chairman, um.
Yeah, we, we, part of it is that
as we've mentioned over the last
3 or 4 years, revenues just grew
at a
Unprecedented rate.
And I don't think how we talked
about that growth, uh, caught up
with what
Real true new money is until,
frankly, the LFC hearing in
August in Riidoso.
Where we took a look at how, how
we're talking about new money
and said that that 3 point, that
3 point some billion dollar.
New money really was kind of
misleading because it's not
really new money. And again, if
you go back to, if you, as you
pointed out, Mr. Chairman and
Representative on slide 28.
Total new money is the amount of
money that we anticipate having
or FY 26 above.
Uh, the money that, um,
was appropriated for FY 25.
And that's $893 million. The
$2.5 billion before that, we had
sort of been lumping that in
with new money, but it's not new
money, because you'll see that
same amount of money was
available in FY 25. So it's not
truly new money, and I think
lumping those two things
together, I frankly was
misleading and people thought,
oh, we have all, you know,
billions of dollars in new money
were really the, the, as I
mentioned, Mr. Chairman and
Representative.
The pie is really only grown
over the last fiscal year by
roughly $900 million so I think
this is a more accurate way to
reflect what is truly new money
that will be available to be
appropriated, and I consider the
2.5 billion, which again, we, we
think of as non-recurring uh
general fund money that's
available to the appropriation
appropriated really isn't new
money. It was there last year,
same amount of money is there
this year. I hope that I hope
that helps. OK. Thank you, Mr.
T.
Yes sir, that did, um, Mr.
Torres, last question for you,
sir. On page 8.
We're, we're talking about on
yours, um.
get to the right. We're talking
about the um
The uh interest rate interest
that we're making in a in a
serious downturn.
Did the stress test take that
into into consideration when
we're saying that we could
downturn a whole bunch of money.
Did it take that in
consideration as well.
Mr. Chair, um,
Yes, part of the benefit of the
investment accounts.
Which is really primarily
represented in the chart at the
top of this page is that they
distribute based on a 5-year
average balance. So luckily,
there isn't a large impact from
that source in the event of a
recession, for example, uh,
because the, it sort of averages
out with the years prior to it
before the decline. So that's a
real benefit of those permanent
funds. They're a very stable
source of revenue. OK, so that,
that did figure it in and we're
gonna be fine.
Mr. Chair.
There's always a risk. Thank,
thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Appreciate that. Thank you,
Representative Duncan.
Representative Doo, and then
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you guys for the
presentation. I, I uh
Representative Duncan asked the
same question I had, so I just
have a follow-up question for
Secretary Probes.
So
Is the spending from 2025 that
difference is that now
considered reoccurring?
Mr Chairman members of the
committee and representatives,
it can be. We, we look at that
as a pot of money that you could
appropriate for FY 26 as
recurring. Uh, but you don't
have to, uh, both the executive
recommendation and the LFC
recommendation recurring
expenditure recommendations for
FY 26 are below $892 million of
executive is about 700 million,
I think as Izzy mentioned the
LLC is about 530 million.
So neither of the, neither the
executive or the legislative
recommendations for FY 26 are at
that $892 million so you could,
the rest of it, you could
appropriate as non-recurring if
you wanted to, you could send it
to the severance tax permanent
fund if you wanted to.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you,
Secretary, because that, that, I
mean, it's my first committee
Mary and there's a new
definition of at least the
definition that I didn't have
had not heard before, and I
think you've alluded to what you
thought was wrong with the old
definition that it.
The one time spending.
Even though it was
non-reoccurring should not be
considered new money, but it
really blurs the line between
what is reoccurring and
non-reoccurring. For me, it
does, but I think I'm
understanding what you're
saying. Um,
But I think it was in your
presentation, Ishmael, that you
said that the most borrowed
money is a non-reoccurring that
we're not counting.
As new money, but that we should
be cautious about further tax
cuts, because that could create
volatility, but in my mind,
there's 2.5.
billion dollars.
That we could use for tax reform
if we chose to do so. Mr. Chair,
Ishmael, did I get that wrong?
Mr. Chair and and
representative, um, I'm totally
following what you're what
you're describing. I'm not sure
I'm following what I'm Chair,
but I'm, I'm trying to
You're on it. You're on it. I, I
think maybe uh a missing piece
here is that the non-recurring
spending will also reach into
the future year. And so as that
non-recurring spending reaches
into the future year, it may not
be available for, for tax cuts
because it could put your
revenues below total spending,
and that would be the problem.
Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
and thank you for that. And I, I
remember our freshman year,
actually chairman and I came in
together uh when there was a
bipartisan bill for
comprehensive tax reform, and it
was the.
same year that we were, um,
sanding all the budgets and
reverting funds and clearing
out. I mean, it was, it was
pretty tight and um we're really
far away from that year's
budget. I don't remember what
the budget was in 16, but it's
more than double what it was.
I'm just wondering when we, when
you think it would be safe to do
comprehensive tax reforms to put
us competitive with other
states.
Mr. Charan and and
Representative Doo, um, that's
certainly up to you all and on
when you think that that uh
timing is appropriate. I think
the point I was hoping to make
is simply that you all consider
all of the spending and make
sure that the spending, uh, and
with any revenue reductions is
isn't in an unsustainable,
doesn't put the state in an
unsustainable position or or
even in a deficit. OK. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. And my next
question is on page 9, just if
you could help me understand if
I'm just curious that
Seems like a lot of new jobs and
leisure leisure and hospitality.
Is that slow recovery from
COVID.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Dao, um.
So yes, on slide 9.
Looking for a leisure and
hospitality, yes, added 2400
jobs, which it is a fairly large
sector, so it grew at 2.4%. Um,
it's right kind of in the middle
of the pack and growth, um, but
yes, there, there could still be
some COVID recovery, but we'd
have to look back at the trend
with it, but 2.4% growth.
isn't incredibly strong. It's
kind of in the middle of the
pack, OK, thank you for the
clarification. I have 2 more
questions on page.
Mr. Chairman, on page 18, um,
I, on this page, would you
include space industry on
professional scientific and
technical services, or would
those be in those other.
Where does space industry fall?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Dao. I want to
make sure we get you the right
information. So I'll, I'll check
on that. We'll follow up with
the committee on space industry,
thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and on the same page,
um, finance and insurance, a 20%
growth. Is that because of our
climbing cost of insurance in
the state of New Mexico.
20.1%. Um
And it's a relatively small
amount still contributing. So it
could be that it's there's.
It could be that there's
something sort of anomalous
happening that's causing a big
percentage growth, but it's a
relatively small dollar amount,
but again, I want to make sure
we get you good information
representative, so Mr. Chairman
will follow up with the
committee on both those
questions. OK. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. And my last question is
on page 25.
Mr. Chair and members of the
commit of the panel is, is, is
it at the discretion of this
committee to to decide to give
more money to the severance tax
fund and what would be the
long-term benefits of doing so.
Mr. Chair, uh, representative,
you could certainly appropriate
or distribute, choose to send
more to the severance tax
permanent fund, and uh of
course, the rate of return is
compounded, so it depends on the
time frame you're looking at,
but about you, you, you're
earning, uh, the, the target.
Return rate is about 7%, and
then the distribution of the
general funds is about 5% of the
balance. So, uh, depending on
how you want to look at it, we
could, we could run that
analysis for you or
Mr. Chair, I'm just wondering,
that's where we have more
discretion versus the other ones
that are allocated certain
beneficiaries, so the more we
put there, the more long term we
have savings for discretionary
funds in the future, and I, I'm
not, I'm really feel like I'm
drinking from a fire hose from
your presentation, so I'm just
hoping I'm asking the right kind
of, the right question, Mr.
Chair, I think that's right,
yeah, the more you distribute
today would give you more
flexibility and OK.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Uh, and next we're gonna go to
represent Pettigrew, then
represent Silva.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you
Secretary Chaon Clark, Secretary
of Protestant and Mr. Torres. I
have
Hope, one.
For years, we talked about new
money and a very specific uh
definition.
Mr. Chairman,
Secretaries.
Mr. Torres, director.
Please lead me to
The legislative bill that gave
Our staff, the ability to define
new money.
Or the rulemaking.
That led to the new definition
of new money. Where did that
come from?
Where did the legislative body
make that?
Low
Or where was the rulemaking?
It was publicized.
made that new definition.
Uh, then, uh, thank you,
Representative, uh, I'll
appreciate any feedback from the
panel. I think, uh, sort of
sharing a perception or a
thought from my end, this
ultimately the LFC um members,
so us as members have voted on
the LFC budget that sets sort of
the new recurring budget target.
I look at the breakdown of funds
in the sort of basic.
the more detail that we're
getting from our panelists.
Now we've got especially this
past summer, more is different
and more nuanced ways to see the
revenue. And so they're giving
us sort of an all-in, um,
New money
Looked at in different ways and
beginning to account for our
non-recurring spending, and the
fact that we've invested more in
non-recurring. So my short
answer, go back to the panel and
go to you. This is not sort of a
staff-driven determination. It's
more staff nuanced information.
It's been provided to us as the
legislature as we work to
understand the revenue that's
coming into the state.
Chairman, I appreciate your
response and, and before we get
an answer from, from uh the
presenters.
How was that
All of the LLC meetings up until
August.
This conversation didn't take
place in the prior meetings.
Wouldn't voted on, wouldn't
voted on in the August meeting.
All of a sudden we were given,
we came in with 3+ billion
dollars and all of a sudden we
were down to 659.3 billion or
million.
I still got the paperwork from
that one.
So, but there was no vote for
LFC members.
I was there the whole day or the
whole week, the whole time that
we were there.
So I'm, I'm just really confused
and in my opinion, it
Changes things for the
perspective as we define stuff
to our constituents.
We're walking in with $3 billion
in new money.
And all of a sudden, I'm just
getting text messages from
everybody. I did, how did the
state lose $3 billion down to
$659. I can answer those
questions with the way the
definition is.
But it's
Not very transparent.
There is no directive from the
legislative body.
There was no rulemaking.
There is nothing out there where
there was public comment that
sat there for people to be able
to have an understanding of why
this is done, and with the way
that changes happened with the
grow money last year, uh,
opportunity mons with 3-year
projects with no benchmarks, no
guard rails, all of these
different things to where we can
look non-reoccurring.
3 years out.
Not one year out.
So
Help me
Help me defend the decision.
I, I've heard the answers and in
parts of them, I understand
parts of them I don't.
But at some point in time,
The legislative body.
To be making the rules, not the
agent and what say you represent
and uh wool distribute for the
members, the budget guidelines
voted on by the LFC members, I
believe at the August meeting,
if I recall correctly. So the,
the budget guidelines do reflect
a more nuanced understanding and
sort of digging into greater
detail. Um,
So we'll, we'll get those budget
guidelines, uh, and distribute
those to the committee by the,
when we leave today, those
budget guidelines do reflect.
A more nuanced understanding and
what we're um,
Yeah, and what we're doing here
today is being able to look at
from as many different angles.
Where we've come from fiscally,
where we are, and then when,
where we're going.
Thank you, Chairman. I think
We're good with respect to that,
and I understand what the budget
guidelines say, and you're, and
I agree with you, it's a nuance.
It doesn't come out and say it.
So it doesn't talk about how we
define new money. It gives the
nuances with how we're gonna
look at money.
But it doesn't say we're
changing the way the state of
New Mexico defines money.
We're stashing it away in
different funds.
For
Some of that I agree with, some
of that I don't agree with.
But at the end of the day,
They were
We have 23 counties to feed the
majority of the fund.
We all know how much we put in.
the fund.
Every year it gets reduced, 2
years ago it got reduced by
Senate House Bill 2, Senate Bill
26, Senate Bill 378. So it
didn't look.
Like, we were performing at the
level that we can sit here and
we can all look at the numbers
and, and we can dive deep into
it.
But at the end of the day,
that's not what the message that
we're sending to our
constituents back home.
Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you. Uh, and next, we're
gonna go to representative
Silva, then represent Brown.
Thank you, chair. Uh, thank you
presenters, uh, for the
presentation and the
information. I'm also new, so,
um, gonna be asking a lot of
different questions. Um, my
first question is, um, if the
personal income tax is being
replaced by the corporate income
tax, and that's one of the most
volatile resource sources of
revenue, is there um a
recommendation for stabilizing
that revenue source.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Silva, I just want to clarify, I
think you're talking about the
accounting policy change that I
mentioned shifting 1 190
million. It's not so much that
we're replacing one or the
other. It's that
New Mexico, like most states, is
having to deal with pass through
entity taxation and so we have a
new type of uh taxpayer coming
in and it's, it's a type of
income tax on pass through
entities and um all we've really
done is, is change the
accounting, uh, and it's really
a form issue so that they're
paying on the corporate income
tax form and it's being lumped
with that revenue, but the
underlying taxation hasn't
changed. So therefore, the
underlying volatility hasn't
changed. I hope that answers it.
I think so, um, and I'm on page
12 of um Mr. Torres's
presentation.
Uh, so,
Then what you're saying is this,
um,
Red line.
is an accounting.
Change
Is that?
Mr. Chair and, and
Representative Silva, thank you
for the question. I, I, I think
you might have been referring to
comments that I made about the
corporate income tax growing in
volatility is a new source of
volatility. Um,
really the driver of that
volatility is coming from also
the oil and gas industry.
Uh
A large proportion, a majority
of our corporate income tax
comes from that industry, which
comes with a significant amount
of volatility based on prices
and production. Um, and the
personal income tax is actually
a very stable form of tax uh for
us. I might have misspoken. The
corporate income tax and the
state treasurer's office
earnings are replacing oil and
gas as new sources of volatility
in the general fund, because
there have been strategies put
into place to reduce volatility
in oil and gas revenues. So
there are strategies that, that
are available to you all, um,
other states do things like
apply a trend and anything above
that trend goes for
non-recurring use. Um, you could
certainly decide to um.
Create caps like you have with
oil and gas. There's a number of
options and happy to to speak
with you more about any of those
if you're interested. OK,
excellent. Thank you. And then,
um, I'm assuming, but I don't
wanna assume anything also is,
um, I saw the, the stress test
on um the different economic
outcomes and
The risk for another economic
bubble looks low, um, and I'm
also wondering if the
investments, um, both in the,
um, the severance tax permanent
funds, and others are those
investments relatively are in
relatively stable markets.
Mr. Silva, I'm, I'm so excited
you're diving into this. We
actually produce a an investment
report card every month. We do
see our investments are less
volatile than the overall
market, so a little more
stability there, um, but that,
that certainly doesn't mean that
they're entirely insulated from
volatility in the markets, but
they are more stable in general.
OK, great. Uh, one more question
about volatility because uh I'm
a Taurus and I love stability,
um, so on page 15 of the um
of Secretary um Chardon Clark,
uh, your presentation.
The New Mexico natural gas
prices and production, um, that
blue line looks really all over
the place. Is there a reason why
natural gas is so erratic in its
pricing.
Um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Silva, I'm also a
tourist, thank you
but I don't let it define me.
Um, yes, so the
I talked earlier about oil being
very much governed by global
factors that are outside of our
uh control, natural gas is much
more of a regional market and so
some of the fluctuations you'll
see will be related to a
particularly bad winter storm in
a region or a particularly bad
or hot heating season and so
really there's weather impacts,
and then, you know, over time
there will be pipeline
constraints and things like that
that affect the trend, when you
see a big spike, it's probably.
weather related or maybe natural
disaster related. Anything else?
And I think Mr. Chair, the large
peaks you're seeing here are
actually related to the Russian
invasion of Ukraine, which
severed European access to
natural gas or threatened, I
should say. And so that created
a huge demand spiking prices.
OK, excellent. And then my last
question, um, I'm in the uh
policy and performance analysis
on
Uh, page 12, um, it says that,
um, New Mexico's oil prices
averaged 7850 per barrel and
fiscal year 24 and projected to
average 70, uh, with 50 cents in
fiscal year 25.
Um, which, uh, New Mexico oil
prices will likely remain
slightly below the West Texas
Intermediate benchmarks. Do you
know why?
Mr. Chair, uh, Representatives,
excellent question and excited
that you're reading our volumes.
I don't know, you might be the
only one.
the, the difference it can be
for many factors, but, uh,
supply also is a huge role or
plays a huge role. So especially
if in our case, we have extreme
increases in in production
volumes, it could be difficult
to get it to market. And so our
producers may be having to sell
at a slight discount in order to
move their product off the shelf
and out of the pipeline quickly.
enough to meet, meet the supply
that they're currently
experiencing.
Excellent. Thank you. I think
that, uh, those are my
questions. Thank you, chair.
Thank you, uh, next, uh, we have
Representative Brown and Vice
Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you to the presenters
today, um, in a very
informative, uh, afternoon for
us. Uh, my question, Mr.
Chairman is regarding Social
Security taxation.
Couple years ago, the
legislature decided and the
governor agreed that we should
stop taxing Social Security
income. It didn't apply to all
recipients of Social Security.
Uh, so, um, I think you may
remember the cutoff point where
we said if you get a $1 over,
say, your joint fileler or you
have $50,000 in income, uh, if
you're
Below that, uh, no state tax on,
on that income. Um, if, and
there's, there's a movement
afoot once again to uh the piece
of legislation to exempt uh
Social Security from
Any and all taxpayers.
Uh, from the state tax, and
there's also a move at the
federal level to exempt the
federal tax or to to remove the
federal tax.
Um, if this legislation were to
pass in New Mexico, what would
be the reduction in revenue to
the general fund, just a
ballpark figure, please, Mr.
Chair.
Um, and to clarify, Mr. Chairman
and Representative Brown, are
you saying if the federal
legislation were to pass or if
the state.
No, that was just kind of a
gratuitous footnote, uh, put in
the middle of what I said, but
um, no, it's the state, the
state landscape, Mr. Chair and
Representative Brown, um, yeah,
so in terms of numbers of
taxpayers, the Social Security
exemption applies to about 83 or
85%, and of course, because our
thresholds that you're talking
about aren't yet or aren't
inflation indexed uh over time
if that stays like that more and
more that's the 85% rural
gradually creep down.
word. Um, I know that we did an
analysis on that bill last year
to get rid of the thresholds
completely, and I don't remember
off the top of my head what the
fiscal impact was, we, we can
pull that up and we can update
it, uh, you know, the cost will
have grown slightly. I'm sure
from one year to the next, but
I'll get that to you.
Yeah, um, Mr. Chairman and, and
secretary, so there were a
couple pieces of legislation,
they were, they were cousins,
uh, want to eliminate completely
the other to index for inflation
and neither made it, made it uh
pro uh that effort, but just a
ballpark figure, if you, if you
have it, what, what kind of
revenue would the state not get
if
State taxation were removed
completely on Social Security,
just.
Representative and chairman, I
don't want to give you bad
information. I, I have that
probably on my phone in last
year's FIR, but I don't want to
wager a ballpark without
looking. OK, well, um, I think I
have that FIR as well. I could
also look it up, but I'm just
curious. Um, and so the next
question follows from that when
um the state, uh, Mr. Chairman
gives um a tax cut, I believe
it's considered a quote.
Tax expenditure, unquote. Is
that correct?
correct, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Brown at tax
expenditure is basically any
area in the tax code where we
carve out a certain activity and
don't tax it or where we give
preferential tax rate, things
like that.
OK. Mr. Chairman and secretary,
then, so if
The state of New Mexico stops
taxing Social Security across
the board.
When do you start?
Not calling it a tax. Mr. Chair,
I'm not and Representative
Brown. I'm not sure I understand
the question that it would
remain a tax expenditure if it's
an exemption or deduction from
tax from the rest of the general
personal income tax, it would
remain one.
Hm. OK. Um,
I, I think that bears a little
bit further evaluation uh if
it's just a chapter.
The book gets closed. I don't
know why we'd want to consider,
keep it on the spreadsheets as a
tax. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you. Thank you very much,
Representative Brown. Uh, next,
we're gonna, we actually have
representative Verera represent
Baca, Representative Hernandez,
and then Vice Chair Dixon. So
representative Herrera, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you, panel. Uh, always
kind of an overwhelming
presentation, but when the I
enjoy, first of all, I would
like to thank uh uh Secretary
Pro, uh,
DFA handled that bill that we
did last year on the um uh the
the the fund, the match fund for
federal grants, and I just want
to say,
I think when people from my
district called into DFA. They
had that done within a week.
It was rather amazing. I know we
worked hard to create that
funding was 75 million. I think
we could go a little higher this
year. I'd I'd be interested in
knowing how much kind we spend
out of that fun, but that fun,
these are just the ones, you
know, nobody always tells you
the good news. I hear the bad
news, but I don't always hear
the good news, but we got 8
million in just district 41, uh,
for different water projects out
of that map, so I'm very
appreciative, but I'm mostly
appreciative of how fast your
department turned it around, so
I just wanted to let you know.
know that. Do you know how much
we spent of that fund.
Um, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee and representative, I
believe it's all been expended.
Uh, we do, however, continue to
take applications in in the
hopes that they'll be more money
available after the session for
the match fund and that we can
spend that just as quickly. Oh,
that's great news. And uh uh um
secretary Chardon Clark, I
always want to thank you
because, uh, just so you know,
folks, I'm sorry, but I do call
on her and if the it could be a
very big question or very small
question and.
She always respects both, and
I'm very much appreciate that
help. So now to go on to my
questions, um, number one in
page uh 29, we're talking about
recurring appropriations and
reserves, reserves of 38.4%.
What I would like to know is,
are, are any other states in
this kind of situation where,
where we have this huge amount
of money and we have these
monies and reserves and I'm
looking for, that sounds to me
like a high amount when we have
so many people that are
That are really living in
poverty. I just want to know, is
there, is there kind of a have
you looked at other states and
how they're doing this and what
they're, what their reserves
are.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and Representative
head it up. We have, um, we are
the lowest of the energy states.
So most energy states do have a
high reserve target. Uh, last I
checked, North Dakota was north
of 50%. Alaska is in a similar
position, so we are lower than
them and, and we've actually
seen our reserves decrease over
the last maybe 5 years, we were,
we were certainly higher than we
are now, um, but it is pretty
typical to have high reserves in
an energy dependent. OK, thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. My
next question is on the next
page and.
uh
downsides, uh,
What I, I looked at all these
downsides and I think, I think
the biggest downside is that
there really is no snow on the
mountains right now.
Um, and I just wanted to know,
do you forecast?
Uh
Do you forecast downsides with
climate change in mind. I, I'm
looking at the LA fires, we all
are.
Uh, we're, we're ready to bust
here. Um, and I just wonder how
we even
How you would even call for
that, or how would you even look
for that? So I'm just curious
how you, how you look at climate
change as a as a downside and,
and I, I know no one could have
predicted that LA fires, but I'm
just curious if you look at
those things.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Hana, we're still sharpening our
pencils on the budget stress
test. So what we're really
demonstrating for you all here
is a revenue stress test. And I
think to your point, there may
be additional demands on the
budget to respond to, prepare
for, prevent, um, natural
disasters or, or climate change
caused disasters, and uh that's
something we still need to beef
up.
And, and get to, uh, you know,
along with additional spending
that might be required in
Medicaid or or in education. So
that's something that we're
working towards and and on our
radar.
Well, thank you for that and
thank you, Mr. Chair. I really
I really think that's gonna be
huge for the for the future and
um
I, I don't know how we as
legislators.
put in prevention money to to um
help communities uh get ready
for these issues, but uh I'm
looking at
And our representative from
Riodoso and um
You know, even when you try to
do the legislation and try to do
it right, then it takes another
year to go back and change it
and get it right and and so we,
we have a lot of problems in
responding to emergencies, which
I think we're trying to take
care of, but I think it's
something that we as a
legislature really need to uh
think about and learn from
representative Vincent and and
others who have who have
struggled with these issues, uh,
because it's a huge hit on every
level in our economy. I guess my
last question is uh.
Oh yeah.
Going over to um
Isma.
Um, page 9.
I want to talk a little bit
about the corporate income tax
and the film tax credit, OK?
In general, I want to read this,
uh, film tax credits are a risk
to the CIT forecasts,
particularly if the state
attracts new film partners not
subject to the cap, resulting in
new large payouts from the
general fund. Can you go over
that because I am very worried
that.
We gave too much there, you
know, and, and, and I think we
really need to look at this
again. I'm not on tax and
revenue, but I think it's a huge
issue in the state. Could you
talk about that,
Mr. Chan, yeah, absolutely, of
the chart on the right here is
Secretary Chan Clark pulled up,
uh, represents what we expect in
total corporate income tax
collections represented by the
sum of the bars and the
reduction in that represented by
the orange, so the actual net to
the general fund in blue and you
can see the bite taken out of it
from the film tax credit there.
Um, the film tax credit is
primarily is paid out of the
corporate income tax from the
general fund, um, and
Uh
What are defined as film
production partners. So those
with a at least a 10 year lease
in New Mexico for producing
films are exempt from any form
of cap. So, uh, there is a cap
for non-film partners. So if
you're just coming here to do
one TV show or one movie, you
are subject to a cap unless
you're producing those under a
film partnership, in which case
you're not subject to the cap.
So, so the cap protects the
general fund, um, only insofar
as those productions are not
occurring under a film
partnership if the state is
successful in
attracting new partners to make
those 10 year commitments and
investments. Those are not
subject to the cap, and, and
that in that way represent a
risk to this forecast and to the
general fund.
And Mr. Chair and um,
Any of you who can answer this,
how much, how much money goes
out of state.
From this, from this fun.
Mr. Chair and Representative had
it, I don't think we've done
that analysis, um, but I can
circle back with you and see if.
You know, I, I know that film
industry is really a my chair
really down in LA right now and
has been for a couple of years,
and the fires in aren't gonna
help it. Um, so,
So if we're spending a lot of
this money to out of state
producers, uh, or people who,
you know, own production
companies.
And
I, I really would like to know
how much is out of state and and
then from the unemployment, you
know, if you're a, if you're a,
um, if you're a guy at a stage
here, you know, and the
stagehand union.
Here's what will happen. I mean,
you know, they'll call you and
you'll get a good job for about
a month at a very high wage,
right? And then you'll go off
per month.
And then you get a job a month
later, and then, and then you
get another job. I think they
count. I would like to know
this. I think they count every
job is one job when it's really
one person who maybe has 6 jobs
in the stagehand industry over
the course of the year. So I
would really like to know how we
pay out unemployment, uh, to
people in the film industry,
because I think one person gets
Different salaries, different
contracts over the course of the
year.
Uh, maybe work 6 months, but
then goes on unemployment, we
probably pay at the highest
rate, so that's what I'm curious
about. I, I have not been able
to figure it out, but just
talking to people in the union
industry.
In film.
Um, I think that's pretty much
how it works, and now what
you're seeing is more Cruz from
California coming out with the
whole crew because it's easier.
To have the crew you have and
come out to New Mexico.
Rather than hire a local crew.
So those are all my questions
and you can answer them later. I
realize you probably don't know
that now, but it's a concern
that I have. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Well, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative Pereira, I want
to just sort of say that
probably the executive branch
department that's that's best
equipped to have that
conversation with you as the
economic development department,
but I do want to remind that to
be eligible for the film tax
credit and expenditure of the
production company has to be
subject to tax in New Mexico, so
that means that if it's wages,
it's subject to New Mexico
income tax if it's goods or
services, it's subject to the
GRT.
So, um, and then, uh, hear what
you're saying about disruption
of uh filming in Los Angeles and
potentially, you know, movement
out of there, but you have to be
a New Mexico resident to have
your wages count towards that
credit.
And we do audit that. Thank you
very much. Thank you,
Representative Verera. Next,
we're gonna go to representative
Baca, then represent Hernandez,
and then conclude with Vice Cha
Dixon.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
Um, looking around, I'm actually
kind of surprised. I'm actually
one of the more senior members
on here, having served for a few
years um.
So I, I do commend Mr. Chairman
and the work that's been done.
Of making taking today's money
and making it for tomorrow in
the investment, so my question
as chairman is very out of the
$2.4 million or billion dollars
that we're talking about.
What percentage or what amount
of money has been used for that
purpose of creating
stability to the fund and also
for future um spending.
Mr. Cherry, I can try to do some
quick math for you here on that
page it was,
yeah. Cha is if you, if you do
need, I mean, quick math is
fine. It doesn't need to be
exact, but.
We can also follow up with you.
You can also follow up, OK, um.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman. My,
my other question is my, I guess
my concern and my, my reason
for, it's not a concern. I just
Encourage our committee to make
sure that when we're talking
about it, to make sure that we
have
Non-recurring monies that also
become reoccurring and so Mr.
Chairman, we're talking about
and we heard the other day that
we have
several agencies that are
overspending their budgets.
Some by $120 million or
something like that. Is that
money subtracted, or is that
included in the 2.4 billion, or
is that gonna come off the top
of the $892 million that we must
fund. So that's kind of a hard
one, but
Mr. Chair and Representative
Baca, it certainly depends on
how you all choose to approach
that issue, you can use the
non-recurring, the 2.5 billion,
um, and I would, I would guess
that that is the path that you
all might be um leaning towards
for in the event of a
deficiency, it sounds like. But,
uh, of course, if you all choose
to uh raise the recurring.
Budget to make up for that in
the future, that would come out
of an 892 million.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you and one of the, one of
the concerns and one of the
things that I, I think about is
that.
When we're talking about
overspending of a budget.
And we to this amount. I think
we've got to be very cautious
and be very easy to say, hey,
we're going to reward that by
increasing the budget.
But when we look at some of the
agency report cards, which we've
been looking at, it's very hard
for, for me and for many of us
to sit down and say, hey, we're
going to increase your budget.
Yet we're having all of these,
um, as far as report cards and
my last question, Mr. Chairman,
is really about the, you talked
about, I don't know what pages
2.6% growth as far as revenue.
One of the questions is, with
the increase in spending that
were proposed by
Uh, recommendations would impact
is that going to have or will it
have on our reserves or in
future, um,
Stability of our budget.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Baca, um, any additional
spending
Uh, in some way or another, will
reduce reserves, either through
what reserves could have been in
future years, and what reserves
currently are, if you're making
the spending now or in reducing
or increasing the denominator,
which is the recurring
appropriation. So, all spending
in some way reduces reserves.
It's about balancing to make
sure you hit the reserve target
you want, based on the spending
that you all decide on. Um, and,
and in terms of future
stability, the, the, I think
that goes back to my very first
point in the presentation, which
is.
recurring spending reduces
future new money, um.
And, and to the extent that
that new money is available in
the future is, is up to you all
based on the recurring
commitments you, you make in
this in this session.
I have other questions. I'll
defer to my colleagues here, but
I do want to make sure that as
we as we approach this, it's
very
I won't say tempted to raise
you, but when we're making these
investments, we need, we need to
also consider what's going to be
the long term impact. We things
are going very well, but in the
projections that we've had and
we've heard through LFC that
we're actually going to see a
plateau in the oil and gas
industry somewhere around 2000
or 2028, 2029, gonna kind of
level.
And then we may see, so we, we
just got to be very cognizant
about it because we don't want
to be looking under seat
cushions. We don't want to be
doing kind of clawbacks or
sanding, as you guys said, we
just want to make sure that
we're taking these things into
account. So thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you very much,
Representative Baca. Uh, next we
have Representative Hernandez
and then Vier Dix.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
Have a, before I ask my
question, I, I do have a comment
I, I wanna mention to, uh, the
secretaries. Thank you for being
here. Um, especially coming up
to uh up to my community in
Shiprock, uh, for the governor's
cabinet in, in your community.
It was a really meaningful
visit, um, to, uh, the, the
people in, in, in Northwestern
New Mexico.
Um
I also want to mention that, um,
Before I, I traveled down here.
I did visit with numerous uh
Navajo chapter houses that are
in my district and one thing
that they did mention to me was
that they watch your YouTube
videos. So please continue to uh
uh put content on there because,
uh, one unique thing, uh, you
know, is that with the YouTube
platform is that we could
download those videos.
at the chapter house where
there's really strong internet,
and we could take it to our
homes and not have to worry
about the Internet connectivity
because it's already downloaded,
so that's a, a, a unique aspect
that, um, a lot of people in in
my community, uh, uh, you, so I
just wanna make, make that, that
down to my question, um, looking
at the, uh, uh, um, oil
production and oil prices, um,
Page 4
Um
Uh, the, uh, forecast for, for
the New Mexico oil prices are
estimated to fall below, uh,
West Texas Intermediate prices
by about $40 per barrel.
Um
And in San Juan County, you
know, it's just the, the, the
price of, of what we pay for
gasoline.
Is, is just something that my
constituents ask me all the
time. And that's something that
I'm trying to understand is why
is it that we, you know, we pay
such a high price, uh, when, you
know, the price does come down
throughout the state, and I'm
not too sure what the price is,
uh, and other portions of the
state, but I could tell you, uh,
there's a lot of frustration,
um, with, uh, constituents that
I have on, on when they have to
travel down to Albuquerque or
Santa Fe for.
business and, uh, and see the
prices that they're paying down
there, um, uh, the, the, the
other question I have on the
price of, of the oil or or the
gasoline is I know that there's
a breakdown of the percentage of
of tax that that comes into
that, uh, portion, um, one thing
that, um, like City of
Farmington, which is in my
district, uh, they've really
benefited, uh, like I know, uh,
one thing I, I've heard them
talk about was the re
uh recreational trails tax,
which was part of the gasoline
sales tax and um and so that's
something that I, I just wanna
have more, uh, you know,
information on is, is what,
what, what are the breakdowns of
this gasoline, uh, sales tax
that we, we pay into like
more um, um, and also like, like
when, when does the window for
the recreational trails tax
opened up again for community
local governments to apply.
for. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Hernandez, thank you for uh your
comments too on cabinet in the
community and and on the YouTube
channel, so we appreciate that.
Um, if memory serves, the
gasoline excise tax is 21 cents
per gallon federally uh out of
our control, and then I think 17
cents per gallon state, which
hasn't changed in, in several
years, um, and I believe that
all just come straight to the
state. There's no um local
distribution of that. I'm not
familiar with that recreation
and trail.
local taxes, and maybe that's a
local option. I, I'm not sure
what that is, but we can, if you
wanna add, Mr. Chair, I'm not
familiar either. I'd be, I'd
love to follow up with you on
that and learn more.
That.
Thank you very much
Representative Hernandez. Uh,
next we're gonna go to Vice Cha
Dickson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, and
thank you panel. Uh, these are
fascinating discussions. I have
7 questions, um, that I'll try
to get through quickly so that I
don't think the answers need to
be super complex either. Um, the
first question is, um, and this
is piggybacking off, uh, just a,
a previous question here. Do we
know when global oil and gas
demand will peak.
Um
Mr. Chair and Madam Vice Chair,
um, we believe that it should
coincide quite closely with the
New Mexico peak. So, uh, the, of
course, various demands out
there range from 2026, which may
seem a little um soon to all the
way to 2035. But the midpoint
generally the consensus is
around 2030.
Wonderful. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
uh, thank you, Mr. Torres. So
along those lines, um, uh,
secretary props, you were
talking about um investment
funds. I think that was
Uh, within your part of the
presentation. Um,
Question about revenue from
investment funds. Um, will those
funds
Account for, so if, if they
cover a certain percent of the
budget.
Let's say the investment
earnings.
Um
You know, contribute 10% of the
state's revenue.
Um
As inflation affects our budget.
How will inflation.
How will the investment income.
Will it take that into account?
Times the charm, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, and
Representative Dixon, I think
the answer to that is yes, uh,
because, particularly with the
money that's invested in the
state investment council, all of
their, um,
Investment assumptions are
predicated on part of, part of
it at least is predicated on uh
inflation, and they do a lot of
analysis of what inflation might
be. So I think the answer is
yes.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
secretary, do we have a sense of
when uh the state Investment
council thinks that investment
income uh may be able to
replace.
Oil and gas revenue.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee and uh representative,
I do have that answer. uh, the
projection is 2040.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary. 2040.
Um
Final question on this, because,
sorry, this was question 2, A, B
and C. Um
Does investment income create
jobs?
Uh, Ms. Chairman and members of
the committee, uh Representative
Dixon, that's, uh, that it
really is a very good question.
I, I would say yes, um, I
Some of it may, may be indirect,
um.
Um, the fact that the state of
New Mexico has its fiscal house
in order.
I think is attractive to
business.
people who want to do business
and grow businesses, existing
businesses, businesses that may
come from out of state.
Um, so, you know, it may be hard
to quantify, but um.
Certainly don't think it could
hurt, Mister Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary. Um.
Page 12 of the Money Matters
report.
Um, I just want to draw
everyone's attention to the line
about reduced federal spending,
and I'm wondering uh if anyone
has, um, can provide information
on what type of a time frame
would we be looking at to know
um if the federal government
changes the way that they're
distributing education funds,
Medicaid funds, other federal
funds on which our budget is
heavily reliant about what point
in time would we know that?
Mr. Chair, I think, uh, Madam
Weiser, you're crystal ball is
probably as good as ours on that
one, I think that you would
certainly see some action in
Congress that might give you a
little bit of a head start, but,
um, I, I don't, I don't think
there's one answer to that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Torres. Um, given the
changes that we've made to
insulate the general fund, which
are phenomenal, and the bar
charts that are in uh the
presentations are extremely
helpful and and I think.
Just do a fabulous job of
showing exactly what the state
has done to insulate the, our
budget. Um, I'm wondering, this
goes to a couple of questions
that were asked earlier about an
appropriate level of reserves,
and
Our reserve percentages based on
just the recurring expenses for
the budget. OK, uh, they are.
And so,
As we have insulated our general
fund more.
Does it still, is there a rule
of thumb on whether or not we
still need to have 35, 30%
reserves, or whether a lower
amount.
Uh, would be sufficient and
sustainable.
Mr. Chair and Madam Vice Chair,
I think uh our stress test we
hope are the best source of
information for that and
guidance for that. And, um, so
as I mentioned, the stress test
would indicate 2.1 billion with
no additional new spending, so I
need a new additional spending
would be on top of that. Um,
and, and I also just want to
point out that other agencies in
addition to ours stress test our
revenues and make
recommendations or suggestions
on, on reserve targets, Moody's
is one of them, and uh the last
I saw on their map, they were
indicating over 25% reserves for
New Mexico.
based on their stress testing,
but they also advise individual
states to conduct their own.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. Thank you,
Mr. Torres. I wrote down 2.1
billion, but I couldn't remember
who said it and where it came
from. Um, so I appreciate that.
Um,
Film tax credits. So I'm
wondering, um, this, I think,
uh, gets to Representative
Herrera's questions as well. Um,
another very helpful bar chart
on showing corporate income tax,
um, and the reduction based on
the film tax credit. I'm
wondering if we have the and
this could be information uh
that I could get later. Um, the
amount, uh, the 10 years over
the past 10 years, how much has
been spent for
the film production tax credit,
the 10 year economic impact to
the state.
And a 10-year revenue.
To the state, because I think
it's important to differentiate
revenue uh versus economic
impact as we're looking for
that. Um, so that could be a
follow-up. And then, uh, Mr.
Chair, um, and panel, what is
the um what is one of the most
effective ways to reduce revenue
volatility for a budget or for a
state.
Particularly in energy uh
dependent state.
Uh, uh, Mr. Chair, and Madam
Vice Chair, the most efficient
and and time efficient way would
be what you all have done is, is
create fiscal measures that
address them immediately. Um,
you're in a, in effect, hedging
against price declines, so, uh,
you know, from a financial
perspective, you all have taken
that approach already the most
effective way.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Torres, would you
also agree that diversifying our
economy is one of the most
effective ways.
Absolutely, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Torres. Last question, um, how
much, uh, money, uh, does the
average $1 billion trust fund
payout annually.
Mr. Cha and and Madam Vice
Chair, I believe we're at 250
million now and growing quickly.
I might, that might be in the
current fiscal year, not the
coming budget year. Um, but I
believe we expect that trust
fund to grow to about $500
million by the end. The
distributions from that trust
fund go to almost $500 million
by the end of this forecast
period in FY 29. Sorry, Mr.
Terry, Mr. Torres, and that
you're speaking about the early
childhood education Trust Fund.
Yes, I'm sorry which has a very
different funding mechanism than
sort of a standalone $1 billion
trust fund that we, where we
would take a billion dollars out
of the general fund or
non-recurring dollars and just
park it in a trust fund. In that
instance, is it about?
$50 million a year.
That would be spun out. That's
right. OK, just, just really
helpful for everyone, I think,
to recognize the distinction
between how the early childhood
trust fund is set up and the
incredible growth that we've
seen in that trust fund and the
distribution amounts that you,
you mentioned, 250 million, 500
million versus uh just moving a
billion dollars, um, resulting
in, you know, approximately $50
million a year, so.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, sir. We're gonna go
to representative uh Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Sorry for
the last question. I just had a
question about uh.
Tax revenue from uh these huge
wind farms that we're building
or that are built um doing tax
the the energy sold out of
state.
No, Mr. Chair.
OK.
Uh, what revenues are we getting
besides the, the temporary
construction jobs that are, uh,
I guess occurring for building
these huge uh wind farms. Mr.
Chair Representative Sanchez,
you're also receiving the state
is also receiving the gross
receipts tax on any
construction, services,
materials, but, uh, in many
cases they might be on some sort
of IRB which would maybe defer
some of that groceryceipts tax,
but that there's still
grocerycets tax on the services.
You would also be the state may
be benefiting or, or
subsidiaries of the state may be
benefiting from property uh
payments in lieu of taxes, a
pill.
Or or pilot payments to say
school districts or local
governments as well. So, Mr.
Chair, sorry, last question to
add, uh, who is it the state
where the power is delivered
that gets to tax that revenue or
where is the tax?
going to, you know,
Mr. Chair and Representative
Sanchez, um, the, the state
receiving the energy would may
or may not impose a tax based on
um if they tax utilities or not
and the electricity being
provided to consumers of that
electricity.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you very much for, uh,
Sanchez. Uh, we're gonna go back
to represent Pettigroup for a
brief, uh, one more question.
We're gonna go then move on,
I'll have a couple of very quick
thoughts,
uh, representative.
Thank you, Chairman, for a
second ago. Um, real quickly, I
think it's important that as we
talk about our trusts are put
together, um, the volatility
graph that you showed with
respect to investments that
don't, that are worse in many
cases in oil and gas.
The, uh, question I have
specifically when we talk about
what our reserves should be,
chairman.
Or is the stress test.
It is now being looked at.
Facing reserves off of recurring
and non-reoccurring as.
New money is now defined.
Because if the stress test is
based off the way we used to
define money.
Then it's not an apples and
apples comparison. Thank you,
Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, if I may, I'd like
to get back to Representative
Brown on your question about
Social Security. We did a little
back of the envelope mass while
we were sitting here.
So last year is uh based on last
year's FIR, we estimated that
removing the Social Security tax
on the remaining roughly 15% of
highest income earners would
cost about $27 million to the
general fund per year.
And then here's where I get real
back of the envelope, um, the
current exemption is claimed by
about 119,000 taxpayers. We
estimate that their average
benefit is about $600 per
taxpayer. If you added the
highest income earning
$21,000 21,000, that's the 15%,
21,000 taxpayers that would
benefit the 27 million per year,
their benefit because their
income is higher increases from
the 600 or so per tax.
pair of the current exemption to
about $1300 per taxpayer. So.
That's what we.
OK, great. Thank, thank you for
time. Thank you for going back
on that. Um,
this is the, so this is our
first sort of I I guess I'll say
my comments and then I'm gonna
go to represent Do for a
follow-up. We very rarely sort
of do follow-up questions. I
acknowledging, uh, though
obviously there, there are 9 new
members of the committee,
several folks who are new, which
is great. We, we want to take
our time, uh, appreciate very
much, uh, incisive questions,
uh, and digging deep, that's
what we've asked.
For that's what you all are
doing. Uh, I'll just say thanks
to the secretaries, to the chief
economists when we go into our
next presentation with LFC
members please sort of look at
all of this as a way to continue
to build and a particularly
offline engage with these
experts across many different
areas. So, uh, I'll say that
we'll go to Representative Dow
for a final follow-up. Again, we
very rarely will do that because
we are in this case, 2 hours
over time.
But it makes sense because this
is our first big dive with a
number of new members send down.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and I'll, I'll try to
be brief. I, I guess I'm trying
to
Summarize what I think I've
heard about strategic
investments.
That the by 2030, possibly 2040,
we will lose 150,000 jobs from
oil and gas that we hope to
replace through diversification.
That the investments in solar
and wind do not generate a tax
when we sell it out of state.
Anyway, I'm, I'm trying to.
And that our coffers we're going
to have money.
The state of New Mexico is going
to have an abundance of surplus
because we are saving in
reserves and we're investing in,
in funds that are generating a
rate of return, greater than
we're expending from them.
How do we rectify?
Loss of jobs,
And representing the state with
the lowest per capita income.
And I, I'm just wondering where,
where
I see a plan for saving money so
that the government always has
money, but where, what happens
to these jobs as we move out of
this industry.
I hear you saying that we're
gonna save enough in the
government side to make sure we
can still spend, but what do
those 150,000 primary oil and
gas jobs and all the secondary
industries like leisure and
hospitality and restaurant and
those, what, what are those
folks supposed to do for
recurring revenue. Just, um, I
wanna start and then I imagine
others might want to comment,
but, um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Doo, we're not,
I, I don't think projecting that
those jobs disappear, and the
question that was answered
earlier was at what.
Point does investment become a
bigger general fund revenue
source than oil, but not to and
gas, but not to say that at that
year, whenever that year occurs
that oil or natural gas are gone
in New Mexico, and I hope that
clarifies part of it.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair. I,
I mean, I'm, I guess I'm feeding
into a little bit the governor's
goal of net zero and other
things that maybe I'm drawing
conclusions that are inaccurate.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
OK, that will conclude the
presentation. Thank you all very
much, extensive resources to all
the staff who are here on sort
of our right. Thank you all very
much. Uh, you continue to look
further out and give us more
ways to see uh the current and
future fiscal situation in the
state and it's deeply
appreciated.
OK, now we're going to, uh,
Directorle will come up there
with um Secretary probes.
Um
Director will start it off with
you, um, remember as the
director gets ready, members,
this is gonna be a high-level
overview of the legislative LFC
budgets, uh.
And that was voted on by the LFC
uh membership.
By, of course, by directorli and
then the executive project as
presented by Secretary Post, um,
that will start with Director
Sale, uh, and I know we have LFC
staff here who's great to see,
um.
Well
Turn it over to you, uh, please
feel free to introduce and
recognize the staff and describe
how you want the LFC staff.
Uh, and then, of course, the
same will apply to Secretary
Post as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
work on that.
Mr. Chairman, first of all, I'd
like
You've got a team of 45, uh,
down at LFC you greatly expanded
the number of staff, uh, last
year's budget.
Uh, they're here to help you,
uh, develop and put your stamp
of approval on the general
appropriations Act, as well as
analyze all the legislation that
will come through and do a
fiscal impact report.
of this session.
The
Um
We've got a couple of different
Uh, roles and responsibilities
at LFC for new members. The
first is we have a team of
fiscal analysts that they could
stand up in the interest of
time, I will introduce
everybody, but you should have
a, a staff directory in your
binders. Director members uh in
our white binders, you good to
pull it out here in the front,
yeah, everybody already has a
mouse. So y'all are ahead of me.
Uh, go ahead direction. So thank
you, fiscal analyst. Uh, they
will help, you'll see them in
front of you, uh,
For the first half of the
session presenting the LFC
recommendation. They have
specific agency assignments, so
like Mr. Liu will have uh
education, Mr. Jorgensen, higher
education, feel free throughout
the session to contact them
directly if you have questions
or need information and they'll,
they will assist you. We also
have a team of program
evaluators that go out and do
the deep dive government
accountability work, and a lot
of that work has helped
informed, uh, budget
development, um,
In these documents. They look
and see how much did you get,
how did you use the money, what
were the results? How do we
improve? So very data driven,
um, evidence-informed budget
development LFC if the
evaluators could stand up, and
they're led by Mikaela Fisher
and John Courtney uh oversees
the, uh, the analyst. Uh, you've
already seen your team of
economists that work on the the
revenue estimate, and then not
up here because they're making
sure everything's uh running
smooth smoothly back at the
office.
are, are very important and
dedicated support staff led by
Ms. Jane Ledger.
Mr. Chairman, I want to go over
a couple of
Uh
Documents really quickly, uh,
that will be incredibly
important for you, uh, during
this session. The first is this
document, this is called, we'll
refer to it as volume one.
And this has basically policy
and performance analysis.
Uh, and the policy analysis in
particular helps frame the
budget development. These are
the key kind of fiscal issues
that we were looking at during
the interim that we're looking
at going forward, and then
you've got a performance report
card for all the big agencies.
How much did they get? What were
the results at a high level.
It's not gonna answer, how do we
get better results or are we
spending money correctly, but
it's a, a, a quick dashboard,
um, for all the agencies, so you
can see how CYFDs.
Do it during their budget
hearing versus the healthcare
authority. The second document
is the actual budget
recommendation uh for recurring
uh budgets. This is a pretty
technical document. If anything,
this one is a good one to take
home this weekend in Peru
through, and you'll come back
ahead of 90% of the people in
this building.
This is kind of a technical
reference document, and you'll
see, um, materials in your
different sheets that Miss Plu
won't go over, uh, later, uh,
about the details of both the
LFC recommendation and we're
combining it with what
Uh, the, the governor's budget
recommendation. The final one
are supplemental tables, graphs,
and other information. And this
is a good reference document as
well. Who are the beneficiaries
of the collective land grant
permanent funds.
How much are they getting per
year?
Uh
How much are we getting into the
road fund, what are all the
sources and how are those used?
There's actually, you know,
who's getting a certain, you
know, what school district, how
much is their operating budget?
What are their cash balances,
you'll have all of that kind of
information in here. You can
feel free to call us, um, and we
may have more details than
what's what's published here.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I
wanted to very briefly blow
through some slides. I think you
may or may not have in front of
you, uh, I intended to try to
save some trees, but if we cut
some down for this, uh, so be
it.
I just want to reinforce a
little bit about what you heard
because it's important for how
the LFC ultimately developed
this budget recommendation for
the full legislature to concern.
And so you just heard a lot of
testimony about the flattening
of revenues, and I think about
our general fund revenues, if
you look in, uh, Mr. Torres
document in the back, you'll see
the actual detail of all the
different revenue streams going
into the general funds very
Uh, Byzantine.
But I think of them in 3 big
buckets. The first are revenues
that are impacted by our broader
economic prosperity.
Personal income tax purchases of
goods and services.
The second
I think about our direct energy
revenues and you heard about
those and how volatile they are.
And the third is our investment
income, which is, as you heard,
a growing really important uh
portion of our general fund
revenue.
The broader economic prosperity
and the strength coming out of
COVID, and even before, you've
taken that growth in revenues as
a legislature and you've pushed
it all back out into the
economy.
Through historically large, uh,
tax reductions and even
earmarked uh revenues. So you've
kind of taken the, the broader
economic prosperity and you've
given it back out to New
Mexicans in a, in a variety of
those tax code changes that the
economists went over with you.
You've insulated the general
fund in a very significant way
from the direct energy revenue
volatility. Still gonna be
there, but you've insulated it
in a very significant way,
leaving our long-term revenue
growth from investment income.
This is a, a graph that I like
to show. This is our roller
coaster.
General fund revenue, the black
line is the growth year over
year in our general fund
revenue, the blue bars or red
bars are spending changes.
Boom and bust, boom and bust. I
could run this back to the early
80s and that would be the story.
My economists went ahead and did
that to the late 60s. Same
thing, boom and bust over that
period of time. So, very
difficult for the legislature to
have confidence in a budget you
passed, we've come out of here
in good years hanging, we've got
to really worry about whether
we're going to survive the next
6 months, the next year, we're
gonna have to come back and
revise this budget or not. Now
because we're starting to
stabilize,
Uh, our revenues more, we're
looking out 30 and 40 years, and
for sure we're looking out on
spending, you know, the next 5
to 10.
That's a very different way of
doing business for us, and it's
allowing us to hopefully get out
of this boom and bust mentality
for when we're building the
budget as well. I got to get
Mine, while the kittens good.
You know, it's been a kind of a
strategy when we've been going
through the, the, the, the boom
times as opposed to how do we
have a sustained business plan
for government to get better
results for New Mexicans.
That stress testing, we went
over in detail, uh, and, and how
much the uh permanent funds will
take a hit.
If something goes awry first.
Oil and gas revenue in taxes,
uh, as well as, uh, transfers
from our land income constitute
about $15.2 billion.
Um, from this one particular
industry in the state, about
12.5% of it's gonna go into the
state and local coffers with the
balance going into, um, the
federal government. So challenge
is
How do we use this bounty, uh,
to transition our economy.
Uh, to not be as reliant on the
single source of uh income
because while it's booming now,
we just talked about it. It's
predicted to either depending on
the economist that you talk to
an industry level off for a
period of time from 2830, uh,
slow, gradual decline because of
decarbonization policies. Uh, I
look at new technology,
particularly around the ports of
LA and um
In Long Beach, and if there's
going to be changes in uh
commercial trucking.
Uh, no, that's where it will
kind of probably start in terms
of like a massive shift, that's
got a big impact on oil demand,
uh, more so than our, um,
personal uh vehicles.
These are critical charts
because what we've been talking
about representative Pettigrew
is like this unprecedented
bubble.
Of revenue growth and the
legislature not doing what we
have been doing before, which is
spending all the new money,
whether it's on the tax code or
whether it's in the uh the
budget.
And so
The challenge is how do we make
this uh sustainable growth rate
over the long term.
Everything will seem affordable
today when you look at those
figures uh from the revenue
estimates.
But the question is, the more
you spend today, the faster you
accelerate the date where you're
gonna hit your long-term revenue
growth of only 3%.
And if we go back to that those
earlier graphs under the
previous administration, we are
growing the budget in good years
about 4%. Same thing in the 90s
under the Johnson
administration, uh, where many
people felt that that was too
austere. Uh, it could be a a
right amount for other folks,
but it's gonna be very
challenging to put together 4%
budget growth, uh, with the kind
of demands that we've got in
Medicaid as an example. If we do
well economically, the federal
government will say that's
great, you can help pay for more
of Medicaid.
Now, maybe we get some savings
from having fewer people on it,
but the real cost drivers in
Medicaid aren't for uh the
elderly and people with
disabilities. Uh, so it's cheap
to cover kids, frankly, so we
get a bunch of or even um
able-bodied adults are very
inexpensive, the federal
government's paying 90% of
those.
So
That backdrop of how do we take
this huge surplus of both
recurring or non-recurring
depending on how do you want to
spend it.
And how do we push that out and
spread the surplus out over
time, and that's been the
strategy with the group.
You've grown the budget 61%
before you adopt a budget this
session. You've set us up for
the long term, very well in
terms of maybe replacing lost
oil revenue dollar for dollar.
But the girl is designed for the
midterm.
Don't increase the budget too
much before knowing that those
investments are going to
actually demonstrate good
results.
And this is uh just leave you
with looking at uh our
legislating for results
framework that's been developed
over the past 20 years, really
are a series of analytical tools
that we use to help advise you
on, um, where to spend the money
in the budget, and it starts
with that performance data. How
are we doing?
Uh, then
We're not doing too good there,
um, and then, and then we move
on to, it doesn't ask why or
what to do about it.
So we have to do a deep dive,
whether that's a program
evaluation. What do we need to
do with CYFD? What do we need to
do with, uh, any number of
things. How do we get better
results for 3rd graders, uh,
reading scores. Uh, we'll review
the inventory of things that
work. Uh, then you start
developing a budget over time
incrementally funding it. Uh, if
you want to help close the
achievement gap, we found pre-K
actually helps do that, and
you've been steering, increasing
amounts of money. Now we're
coming back to make sure that
investment is in fact yielding
those results.
Because when you pass this
budget,
That's not where it stops. The
implementation is going to be
critical and moving into the
interim through LFC and other
oversight entities will be
critical to make sure those
resources are in fact being
deployed correctly and are in
fact yielding better results.
You're making appropriations to
accomplish something.
That's everything in all these
documents, you're trying to
effect change in some way.
So, at the end of the day, you
want to be able to come back and
say, did it happen or not? And
that's what this uh framework
helps do.
So I'll go through the LFC
recommendations at a a very high
level, Mr. Chairman, on a
recurring sight,
Uh, LFC recommended growing the,
the base budget 5.7%. So right
out of the gate, made a fiscal
decision, not even to spend the
growth in uh in the revenue.
Didn't spend it all.
Because you've got decisions,
you can spend it in the budget,
you can spend it in the tax
code, or you can save it.
And so
There's, uh, that's what uh LFC
did.
The final thing for the LFC's
budget priorities.
He's trying to use those
surpluses, not just to spread
out the the not just spreading
out the surplus over the
midterm.
But making investments that will
transition hopefully our economy
for the long term.
And the first one is, if we're
going to be a more prosperous
state.
We, and by that, you know,
measures uh increasing New
Mexicans' personal earned
income.
Hm
We're gonna have to be a much
more educated state.
Everything from the trades to
advanced PhDs working in our R&D
sector.
I, I can't foresee how we could
be a more wealthy state without
a more educated population
working full time.
And right now, our economy is
probably being held back because
we have so many people sitting
on the sidelines, not even
participating, let alone under
participating.
So that's really important for
our long-term economic growth.
The second
We stopped growing as a state
since the Great Recession.
Uh, and one potential reason for
that is people's perception of
access to high quality
healthcare, certainly, New
Mexicans that are already living
here are struggling to get that,
and that would include
behavioral health. So what
investments can we make to
improve access to high quality
healthcare and behavioral
health. And the third, we've
never really been in a position,
maybe the, the other similar
time would be in the 1970s when
oil was first booming, to make
big investments in quality of
life kinds of things. Now that
can be everything from ensuring
safe.
neighborhoods
clean drinking water where
you're, where you're gonna have
unprecedented opportunities to
actually get projects done, uh,
for communities across the state
to having nice amenities. You've
made $90 million worth of
appropriations for regional
recreation and quality of life
grants, uh, that communities all
across New Mexico, particularly
rural communities, have used to
enhance.
The quality of life for the, the
people living there. Whether
it's a a new park in a small
eastern New Mexico village,
Rodeo Arena in Clovis, a new
lake and playscape and dimming.
You've got opportunities to
continue making those kinds of
big, uh big investments uh going
forward as well. So,
I'll move transition over to the
um
Key hearing issues, so 5.7%
growth in the budget focused on
those LFC's priorities. Also a
lot of work on education,
behavioral health.
Child welfare and wildfire
preparedness and recovery.
You'll see um big initiatives
in, in that particular issue, in
that particular area. Agency
budget requests came in.
In the fall at 18%, excluding uh
public schools and higher
education, so
That's not a sustainable level,
and the agency request uh that
we were dealing with in the fall
in LFC. I characterize as give
us targeted pay increases.
Let us have more people.
Uh, on staff largely to do the
same thing.
Uh, that was really what was
characterizing a lot of them.
Uh, so those were pretty, there
were other costing pressures
that are hitting agency budgets,
the cost of uh healthcare for
employees. We have an insolvent
healthcare program that's gonna
need an infusion of at least 10%
premium increases. The
employer's got a, a good share
of that. That's gonna hit the
employees and that's informed
our compensation recommendation
as well.
Um, liability insurance and then
just the cost of opening
government, uh, that we need to
get into the, the habit of, of
um
Supporting, I think, more than
we have in the past, uh, because
that was coming at the expense
of agencies' ability to hire
people and get the job done. The
LFC spending plan would leave
reserves at 33%. So ultimately
you set up a reserve target of
30%, uh, which is, I think the
reserve target for the executive
as well, kind of responding to
that uh credit rating score.
Uh, then you've got a little bit
of room without making any
changes uh to the LFC wreck, uh,
to do that.
Policy area summaries.
Uh, in early childhood, I'll
just go over a couple of these
early childhood, um, you'll see
a higher wreck in the executive
using more of the trust fund
that will take a bill.
Um, but even under the LFC
recommendation, there's
continued expansion for uh
pre-K, improving home visiting
rates, investments in um quality
oversight and support um for
providers in education, uh, the
budget would grow by 6%, 251
million, raise minimum teacher
salaries another $5000
compensation for teachers as
well as other public employees
at 4%, uh, higher.
education would come in at about
36 million, uh, including
increasing their basic
educational budgets, uh, that
use uh performance-based uh uh
formula, uh, that increases the
weighting factor for
institutions that are performing
would get more money than
institutions that are.
Another big difference between
the two budgets and the amount
of general fund is for the
healthcare authority where
Uh, both recommendations are
funding, uh, continued rate
increases for primary care
physicians for behavioral health
infant and maternal care, we're
gonna probably have the highest
rates for those types of
providers in the country at 150%
of what Medicare will pay. We're
hoping that's huge for the, the
ability to be able to attract
and retain medical providers
knowing that potentially 42% of
their panel, they could be
getting paid more than what
Medicare is paying versus the
opposite, which is what we had.
Before.
That gap is there primarily
because LFC was using other
revenue sources besides the
general fund, that gap will
narrow because we got a new, uh,
Medicaid forecast, uh, that I
think will um bring us really
close to being able to do all
the things that both
recommendations sought to do.
The non-recurring budget my
prediction is gonna be where
most of the action is.
Uh, I think you'll find, you
know, with the with the
governor's budget recommendation
at 7%, that gap already closing
with Medicaid alone, you'll be
able to figure out, uh, what,
what your priorities are and be
able to, to quickly move on from
that, but non-recurring is not.
Directionally, um, problematic
from the standpoint of being
different than the governor's,
it's very directionally similar,
but there are some big decision
points that you have to figure
out how to accommodate LFCs,
non-recurring highlights include
almost $300 million for
different types of water
projects, including loading up
the water project fund with $222
million basically supplementing
the amount of projects that that
fund can support for the next 2
years. It just so happens you've
got a lot of shovel-ready water.
projects that will benefit in
your communities all over the
state, right at the gate, so
that that's those strategies are
out there. There's 19 million
for aquifer, uh, mapping and
monitoring, uh, huge investments
all throughout, um, for
behavioral health and public
safety, uh, related.
Uh, projects, about 190 million
for a variety of economic
development, including 75
million for the uh match fund 35
million for site charactersite
characterization and
pre-development assessment, um,
50 million for the regional rec
plans, uh $350 million
transportation package to
supplement what we're doing
through the road fund, uh,
through for both um state assets
as well as $100 million for
local roads that typically
is, it's kind of about the high
end of what they can handle, but
that money gets deployed very
quickly in in communities across
the state.
There's also uh
600 million for to grow.
That most of that will be put
into that expendable trust which
will be part of the general fund
reserves, it will spin off.
25% of its balance. And that's
where there will be a series of
appropriations and other
differences that you're going to
see in the recurring base budget
where LFC did not recommend uh
recommended virtually no
increase in CYFD.
But then funded all of their
important requests for like
caseworkers and other things for
the next 3 years out of the
grow.
Some confusion with the public,
uh, maybe even with members, uh,
because last session, there was
this strategy of parking agency
expansion request out of this
grove for 3-year period, uh,
there was also member-driven
appropriations that came out of
the same fund. Uh, there's not,
um, room for that because there
was an idea that those were for
2 years and you're only in year
1, and so,
Um, hopefully that will clear up
some, some confusion going
forward.
With that, Mr. Chairman, there's
uh some side by side tables
starting on page 4. This is
gonna be a really important
document.
Uh, to help quickly determine
for the bigger agencies what the
differences are between the two
wrecks on uh on a recurring
basis.
Each of these bigger agencies
like the Healthcare Authority,
you will see a more detailed
side by side, um, really
explaining what you would be
buying, depending on the
recommendation. When you look in
the different the technical
budget documents, it's very
difficult to see what you're
buying. It's a change and
increase in personal services
and benefits versus contracts
versus other.
That's very different than are
we increasing home visiting
rates or fit rates? Are we
buying more pre-K slots? Are we
paying for a new literacy
program. So those other agency
high levels will be in all of
your packets and will really
help you understand what the
differences are in the budget.
Overall, Mr. Chairman, I would
say directionally, uh, big
picture, as well as mostly even
on a technical smaller level,
both recommendations um are
moving in the, in the same
direction. There will be some
decisions.
points and once you get into the
budget process, you'll see what
those are and, and how to work
them out. With that, I'd like to
turn it over to Secretary Foxx
for the executive budget
recommendation summary.
Thank you very much, Director
and great to see you, uh, in the
entire staff.
Good afternoon again, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, I'm Wayne Props, the
Secretary of the Department of
Finance and Administration. I
know you're running late, so I,
I too am not going to introduce
all of the staff that are here
from DFA state Budget division.
I, I do want to say though, Mr.
Chairman, that I am not
surprisingly terribly proud of
them.
in September of this year, I
reached out to Doctor Andrew
Minor.
Uh, and told him that we were
going to release our budget
early, uh, and in December, as
you know, Mr. Chairman, the
executive budget by statute
isn't due until right before the
session.
If you think, uh, moving that up
by a month is easy. Give it a
try sometime. Um, it's my
understanding that for at least
a few days after I uh told
Doctor Miner that he and his
staff started stopped referring
to me as Secretary props and
started using some more colorful
four-letter adjectives, um, but
they got it done, uh, and I'm
proud of them. I think it's the
right thing to do for the
executive.
To get the budget out as soon as
possible. It gives you more time
to review it, gives the public
more time to review it as well,
so particularly want to thank
Doctor Miner for his leadership
of what is a very talented group
of of people who care deeply
about the state. I have a great
respect for you. I have a great
respect for their colleagues at
the Legislative Finance
Committee, uh, as you know, Mr.
Chairman, we work far more
closely together than people
know.
Um, but I do, uh.
Appreciate the opportunity to,
to recognize them. Mr. Chairman,
as you indicated, uh, I'm not
the expert on these budgets, uh,
the LFC staff and state budget
division staff are, so I'm not
gonna go into great detail,
that's what you'll be doing over
the next 3.
Uh, 3 weeks or so at a very high
level, uh, you'll see that the
FY 26 General Fund
recommendation for the executive
is $10.944 billion as director
Celine noted when agencies
submitted their budget on
September 1st, the overall
increase was at about 18%, uh,
but by the time we released our
budget in December, uh, taking
out the compensation
recommendation, the executive
recommendation.
for recurring increases is about
5.3%.
So we are close, we recognize,
as do you, uh, the decline in
revenue growth and our need to
perhaps moderate some of our
expectations. We also recognize
Mr. Chairman, member of the
committee, that you all have
been quite generous, the state
agencies throughout the course
of this administration. You've
made significant investments in
education, health care, early
childhood, the environment, uh,
so frankly, Mr. Chairman, uh
many of our agencies that have
asked for and received.
Significant increases in
previous years, um, aren't
asking for them this year.
Poster child for that is the
Department of Environment. You
have made significant warranted
investments in the New Mexico
Environment Department.
They requested a 0% increase.
For FY 26. So I think we're all
on the same page, heading,
singing from the same hymnal
heading into the session. I do
think our, our recommendations
are close.
As I mentioned, as you'll see,
and we talked about in the
previous presentation, the
executive budget recommendation
would leave reserves at
approximately $3.3 billion or
30%, and you'll see in the left
hand side of the buckets and the
amounts that are recommended
from the executive for the
legislature, Health and Human
Services, public safety, higher
education, etc. I do think, Mr.
Chairman, that this year we are
closer and on public education,
uh, than we have been in a long
time.
as well, that would probably
make your lives a lot easier,
uh, but I want to thank, uh, the
public education department and
recognize Simon Miller, who
unfortunately will be leaving uh
DFA um for new opportunity, uh,
but has been our public
education analysts for a long
time, uh, and worked very hard
with the department and with his
colleagues at the LLC, uh, to
get us to what I think is a a
pretty good recommendation for
uh public education. Uh, on the
next slide, uh, Mr. Chairman,
You'll see, uh, the increases
further increases um with the
percentage increase over FY 25,
again 9 $10.944 billion 7%
increase, approximately 2% of
that, 7% is a compensation
recommendation of 3% for public
education, uh, and also
approximately 3% for public
employees. We are recommending
recommending in our, our, our
recommendations chairman.
A new program that would allow
for um longevity pay for state
employees to help with retention
of of state employees, and that
is included in our compensation
recommendation.
Uh, last line is Mr. Chairman,
um, priority highlights um again
echoing what Mr. Director Seli
uh indicated.
Our priorities are largely the
same. We know we need to make
significant investments in
infrastructure, and I think both
recommendations do that.
Uh, we do believe there's still
some more work to be done in the
early childhood, and that
perhaps using some additional
money now, particularly with
what's happening in the markets,
uh, and the return that that
fund has been experiencing uh
perhaps now is the time to, to
go ahead and fully fund uh ECUCD
out of the trust fund.
$30 million for summer reading,
or the governor talk yesterday
about or yesterday about the
successes, um.
Uh, in the, uh, early childhood
or the reading uh
Uh, initiative that was launched
this past summer, uh, again, we,
we know that there's still work
to be done in healthcare and
certainly behavioral health is,
is one of the areas where I
think we are almost in lockstep,
uh, in recognizing that we need
to do more and we need to invest
more uh there.
Uh, CYFD, our recommendation is
higher for CYFD, uh, but I do
want to recognize what
directorelli said that some of
the differences uh may be
accounted for through use of the
growth fund, uh, which you are
to be commended for. I think
there's a lot of merit in that.
did some good stuff last year
and it's his first year, I think
as it continues, I think that
would be a, a more, more and
more of an important avenue to
fund projects that you and the
executive feel I need some time
to fully prove themselves out.
The executive also recommends
$50 million for housing down
payment and $50 million for
homelessness. Again, you heard
that in the uh governor's uh.
Governor's address yesterday.
Uh, I would note just a couple
of other things, Mr. Chairman,
um.
Not a large amounts of money,
but there's, there is a
difference for the Office of
State Engineer, uh, in
personnel, we all recognize the
importance of water in New
Mexico, the work that you've
done, Mr. Chairman of this
committee has done there, so I
would, I would hope as the state
engineer comes before you,
you'll perhaps give that one a a
second look as well, um, but,
uh, overall, I think we're
heading in a good spot. I wanted
to thank Representative
Fernandez for his uh note about
the cabinet.
community, uh, it's one of the
highlights of this last year for
me because uh one of the members
of the, of the nation who got up
and asked questions, uh,
referred to me not as secretary
props, but as Mr. Money Man. And
uh I'll take that Representative
Hernandez. It was, it was good
to be, good to be there. So
thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Obviously look forward to
working with you and your
committee. Thank you very much,
Mr. Secretary, and again, thank
you to the staff. OK, uh, we're
gonna go to a few brief
questions.
Um, again, uh, just a reminder,
following this, we'll have brief
public comment, uh, and then
we'll conclude members will be
staying here, uh, we'll be doing
new member orientation, no
policy will be discussed. No
votes will be taken, anything
like that, but uh we still have
a, a little ways to go.
We're gonna jump right into
questions. Uh, we're gonna go to
represent Pettigrew,
Representative Garrett,
Representative Herndon, Vice
Chair Dickson, Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Director and secretary.
For your time.
I'm still going through the
books, I, and I have to put the
side by side for the last set of
the last 5 sets of books that I
have with respect to this, I
would say that
I, I'm looking at your red
versus yellow versus green on
page 97 of volume 1.
Not sure that I'm and then
comparing that to where we're at
on page 66, 60, 65, yeah, 65,
66.
608 78.
Um, with vacancy rates and
funding.
Trying to compare everything. I
look forward to having those
conversations over the.
Next couple of weeks. I do
appreciate the, the data. Now
it's just trying to dive through
and figure out.
Um, if everything you're talking
about is there.
And, and you're, they, they,
they complete themselves with
the reports over the last 5
years in the sets of books with
where they were at and moving
it.
I continue to have problems,
chairman, with respect to
Adding money to departments that
are continually in the red and
in the yellow and don't show the
improvements even though your
arrows are showing up, they're
still there year after year.
And I'm not too sure that the
The diagnosis and the solution
that was given yesterday is the
right avenue to go with respect
to some of these departments,
but I do look forward to having
the conversation over the next
couple of weeks. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, next we have
Representative Garrett. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you both
of you for your presentation and
thank you for everybody here
who's chosen to work for the
state, many of you could make a
lot more money not working for
the state, so thank you for
choosing. Um, I just have one
question, and I know this is a
bird's eye view, uh, Charles on
yours, it says 350 for
transportation projects, state
and local, um, and Mr.
Secretary, your mentions 300 for
road.
maintenance and road
construction, so it's a $150
million difference.
Do you know why that is?
Mr. Chairman, the details will
matter on that package as well.
There's gonna be even more
differences once you get into
the details, LFC has uh about
188 million for state projects,
100 million for local.
50 million for wildlife
corridors and then 12 for heavy
equipment and district offices
statewide versus, I think, the
executive is split between uh
heavy new projects versus heavy
maintenance. Uh, but all of it
at the Department of
Transportation and for the state
project, state assets. OK, so
you, uh, Mr. Chair, you've just
included some things that Mr.
Secretary, aren't on your list.
OK, thank you very much.
Thank you, Represent here. Uh,
next we're gonna go to
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh Mr.
Propsson and Mr. Sutley, I'm
looking at page 7 under the
general fund Appropriations
summary by agency. Now, I'm
specifically inquiring about the
African American Performing Arts
Center, which falls under Expo,
which is an enterprise
operation, not including on
here, but African American
performing Arts Center receives
general fund dollars. How are
you considering their budget?
That funding in the LFC
recommendation was moved out
from underneath the state fair,
I believe.
Or would be transferred to.
Yeah.
So Mr. Chair representative
within the LFC recommendation,
there is an appropriation uh to
state fair with contingency
language that um programmatic
operations would be transferred
to the Department of Cultural
Affairs contingent upon enabling
the legislation allowing that to
be done, um, as the Department
of Cultural Affairs plays a
similar role related to other
kind of cultural um programming
across the state.
So what you're saying it's just
not gonna be appearing on this
document. Is that correct? It's
at the state fair, Mr. Chairman.
That's the general fund amount
and that amount, the amounts
that are needed for the actual
programming within there would
the authority to transfer that.
to cultural affairs department.
And you need legislation to be
able to authorize cultural
affairs to do that kind of
programming. And that's what we
talked about during the interim.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, Mr. So. Thank you,
Representative Herndon. Next,
we're gonna go to Representative
Herrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um
thank you both for your
presentations, uh, I guess I am
confused about the growth fund,
so last year, individual
legislators had a girlfriend.
I, I can clear this up, uh,
thank you
So, uh, the last the growth
funds were for dispersed for a
two-year period, we're in year 2
of that. The main idea with grow
is to be able to look at what
works and what doesn't. The
things that are working as we've
gone through.
will be able to continue to
invest in the things that are
not working, uh, we don't, we
want to save the money for the
things that are working and so
that's why uh we're looking at
uh sort of agency focused growth
funds this year, not specific
member district funds because
we're in year 2 and in that
evaluation phase. Uh, so thank
you for that, Mr. Chair. So, uh,
who is the royal we that are
gonna.
oversee that decide who did a
good job and who didn't
thank you, uh, Representative
Verera, that, uh, will have a
grow accountability bill that um
is the result of a lot of
collaboration between LFC staff
and executive staff, that's
probably gonna be one of the,
the, it will be one of the
essential avenues, that's a
bill, uh, I'll be sponsoring
along with Chairman Munoz. It's
a bill that will come to this
committee and obviously the
entire legislature will have a
look at that is gonna be one of
the biggest ways that uh we're
going to look at how we evaluate
and the structure with which we
approach which we approach this
really important new tool that
we have to refine quickly to get
it uh.
Get it right.
Uh, thank you for that, Mr.
Chair. I just want to say, you
know, for, for legislators,
capital LA, you can build a
building, but it's really much
more important to be able to
hire people locally to do the
jobs that we know that need to
be done. So I hope we consider
doing doing that and um I'll
wait for the legislation. I
appreciate that. So the new
growth fund, the one that we're
talking about here, the 160
million, that will be, we will
have to introduce legislation
and say what we're gonna do, and
then, um
And that will either pass or not
pass, and then we'll get that
money. That's how that will
work.
Roughly, well, let's go um for
the um
Yeah, there will be a, there
will be a separate bill that is
focused on how uh we measure
accountability, uh, and measure
impact.
We're, uh, as part of the, there
will also be legislation that
similar to last year, has
significant new spending across
priority areas that are set by
the legislature, um, for
everything from CYFD to natural
resources to um the other to
healthcare and behavioral health
specifically, those will all
come before this.
Committee and I'll go before the
rest of the, of the body. And
and I I hate, I hate to just
keep asking, but so it'll be one
bill with a list of grow
projects that will equal like
1090 million, is that what
you're talking about
pretty much, OK, got it.
Thanks. Thank you.
OK, now we're gonna go to Vice
Chair Dixon. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, just two questions.
Um, secretary props, um, I see
that there's a request for $30
million for the summer reading
intervention program, sounds
like it was a great success. I'm
wondering if we can make sure
that PED provides a detailed
analysis of the results. Um,
that would be very helpful for
um legislators as we consider
that. Absolutely. Thank you. Um,
and then the.
Last question I have is, um, you
know, really appreciate the
governor's comprehensive speech
yesterday. She covered a lot of
great um great areas and issues.
I'm wondering if there are any
items that she mentioned in her
speech that have um large
tickets, you know, large
budgetary impacts that are not
included in the executive um
recommendation, um, or the LFC
recommendation, um, that we
should put on our radar and and
maybe that's a follow up.
Um
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, my initial, uh,
response is no, but I want to be
careful on that one, so I will
follow up with you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much, uh, Vice Chair Dixon.
OK, members, thank you. This
gives us an overview, the bulk
of our work is following will be
with uh all of the different
analysts that we see today and
others that are going to be
walking through the different
sheets uh and comparing budget
proposals. um, thank you,
Director Lee, Secretary Props,
thank you to the DFA and the LFC
staff, uh, we're gonna ask if
there's any public comment,
there's nothing on.
Zoom, from what I've heard any
public comment.
OK, I don't see any that'll
conclude today's hearing. Thank
you all very much again for
being here today. We're gonna
stay here members simply to go
into a new member orientation
and training to again emphasize
no policy will be discussed, no
no votes obviously will be
taken. Um.
And, uh, quick note and a big
thanks to the vice chair. If
folks want to grab, uh, you
know, anything, take no less
than 5 or no more, no more than
5 minutes. If you need to get
up, do whatever it is you need
to do, please feel free. We've
been here for a while. We are
gonna be back.
Uh
We'll say 4:35, so, uh, and
we're gonna get started right at
4:35. This is an essential part
of new and current member
orientation, we'll all learn
something.
