OK, thank you. Please start.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Scott Sanchez. I'm the
LFC analyst for public safety,
um, as the chair said, we're
looking at the sentencing
commission agency codes, uh 354,
which you can find behind tab 3.
And again, if you're looking at
volume 2, the recommendation
begins on page 109.
Um, we'll keep this brief on the
LFC side, uh, basically the LFC
recommendation holds general
fund revenue flat with FY 25,
whereas the executive
recommendation increases general
fund revenue by about $265,000
or 17.5%. The LFC recommendation
for the agency's budget holds it
flat, um, whereas the executive
recommendation in the base ads
funding for new FTE as well as
raises for existing staff.
And as far as the budget
recommendation for performance
measures go, we reached
consensus on all targets, um,
with me today, I've got Doug
Carver, the acting director of
the Sentencing Commission and SJ
Jessup from DFA if it's OK with
you, I'll let SJ add a little
bit of color to our narrative.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the subcommittee.
I have no additional comments to
the LFC recommendation for this
narrative. Thank you.
Thank you.
And you'd like to introduce
yourself and make comments. Of
course, uh thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the
subcommittee. My name is Douglas
Carver. I am acting director of
the New Mexico Sentencing
Commission. I'll be brief, um,
so we have plenty of time for
questions for you all. I
provided you a handout that has,
um, I think it's everything that
you have in your books.
Um, but it gives her a nice
little one sentence explanation
for why we asked for each of the
increases that we asked. Um, I
realize it looks big on paper to
have two FTEs. Part of that is
we are so small and over the
last many years, really since
2019 when House Bill 267 was
passed, we've had more and more
duties given to us, which we
love, right? I don't want to,
I'm not.
Um, decrying that at all. We
love what we do, we have a nice
team everyone enjoys what they
do, but we're beyond capacity,
um, at this point. Um.
The history of the commission,
just to give you a quick
background and the commission
was founded in 2003. He was a
successor to a um previous
similar commission, but it was
given a bigger membership, more
roles and responsibilities.
At the height of the
commission's work with staff, we
had 10 FTEs, 3 staff attorneys
on the commission, a bunch of
researchers, and we could do a
lot more with that.
Um, we got squeezed down in the
year since, particularly um
under Governor Martinez's
administration, um, uh, we got
slashed pretty heavily, uh, to
be frank, at one point we were
down to 4 FTEs, um.
We would love to get backward. I
know we're not going to get back
to 10 FTEs, we would love to get
back more more, we've had a
desperate need for a staff
attorney for a long time, um,
we, I do most of that work I did
as deputy, uh.
act as general counsel to the
commission, so I'm answering IPA
requests, etc. etc. um.
And I was doing that in
conjunction with my roles as
deputy. Um, we were able to have
a staff attorney we've had where
we've cobbled together other
bits of money to keep her, but
we don't have it actually as a
fully funded FTE.
Um, the grants administrator
that we asked for was to um help
us handle the crime reduction
grants, so that was part of that
HB 267 in 2019 was the creation
of the crime reduction Grant
Act, um, and sensing commission
through that bill and then some
legislation when we modified
that um crime reduction Grant
Act and I believe it was 22, um.
Gave the commission the
responsibility, complete
responsibility for managing
those grants. We are also in
charge of coordinating the
criminal justice coordinating
counsels, those are local
councils of people involved in
the criminal justice system
based in every judicial
district. So the commission's
also responsible for
coordinating those in the crime
reduction grants, which I can
talk to you about in detail if
you're interested, um, have to
come from members of the
criminal justice coordinating
councils and they go back
through there.
Right now we have a number of
different people administering
grants, dealing with the CJCCs,
um, we have someone on contract
who does a lot of that work. Um,
we have a desperate need for a
grants administrator.
Um, to take that load off when
people were doing double and
triple duty. Now, I understand
in the LC recommendations, um,
that the grants monies were
being moved over to DFA.
Obviously, if we didn't have the
grants, monies, we wouldn't need
a grants administrator. We would
still need the staff attorney,
um, the governor's
recommendation, um, had, it
didn't give us what we asked for
for the grants, we asked for 5
million, they gave us half of
that 2.5, uh, the reason we
asked for that big jump is
everything we're given, we get
out the door, so we don't sit on
money, we're getting more and
more applications, we're getting
50 applications a cycle, giving
25, 30 grants a year. We've
given, I just, I did a account.
The other day we've just given
it we in the last round, we hit
100 grants that we've dispersed
since 2019, but the last couple
of years with great support from
the legislature financially,
we've been able to give out more
and more interesting grants of
larger amounts. We provided seed
money for Taos County's domestic
violence court to get that off
the ground, um, the gun violence
program that's being run in
secondary AA's office also we
gave a lot of money to get that
off the ground. Um, so that's
why we had such a big ask for
the.
grants. That's a special
appropriation. So that's just I
can go into more details if you
want, um, Madam Chair, members
of the subcommittee, but the
raises, I'll just mention that
it's a very small amount that
34998, basically 35,000. The
reason for that is because um
staff of the sentencing
commission under a very long
standing MOU and or IGA with
University of New Mexico.
are actually employees of the
University of New Mexico.
So despite the fact that we're a
state agency that always causes
issues, um, and confusion. So
when you all give a raise to the
state.
Because we're not as, we're a
state agency, we're agency 354.
It doesn't automatically roll
into our budgets. So we absorb
it.
And then, um, um, we just
absorbed those rays it doesn't
get reflected in our budgets.
Last year, or correct me if I'm
wrong, Scott, I might Madam
Chair, 2 years ago, we got a
chunk of money to help.
Make us whole from prior races,
so we just put forward that, um.
A Little bit amount.
It's essentially retrospective
to cover the FY 25 raises that
um
from last year.
Um, just to make us whole from
having to absorb that, and I'm
welcome to answer any questions,
Amanda Armstrong, our longtime
CFO is here with us if you have
any uh deep dive questions into
our budget that you need to ask,
she can answer those questions.
Thank you very much. I'll turn
to the committee.
Uh, ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Could
you talk to me a little bit
about cash balances.
I'm looking at 223, uh cash
balance of 1,431, uh, 224 cash
balance of 6,1015, so it's quite
an increasing in cash balances.
Just
Just curious.
Um, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Chatfield, if I
can have Amanda Armstrong, our
CFO talked to that because you
could get into the nitty gritty
of that. That's fine. Thank you,
uh, Ms. Armstrong, if you can
respond to that.
Did you Madam Chair, Mr.
Chatfield, those monies are
grants.
funds that we've been given that
are in fund balance, we've often
had to ask for an extension at
the end of each year. They've
been appropriated for one year.
We typically, it's difficult to
get the grants.
Completed in one year, they go
through a cycle. So those are
entirely
Uh, crime reduction grant funds
that have been given to us that
are in fund balance that we are
currently expending.
So, Madam Chair, how, how
they're apparently less than one
year old because, uh, I see him
223, there was not that much and
there's quite a bit. That's
correct.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you,
ma'am. Thank you.
Mhm.
OK. Uh, Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation.
I think you just answered part
of my question.
Um
So by the crime reduction Grant
Act.
You guys issue grants.
What do you wish?
Uh, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Pettigrew, um, we
issued them to members of
criminal justice coordinating
counsels. So I'll, I'll explain
what that means, um, that's I
just, that's me, my lawyer had
going to the statute, right? So,
um, every judicial district has
a criminal justice coordinating
council that was also part of
the crime reduction Grant Act.
Criminal Justice Coordinating
councils are made up of the
district attorneys, the courts,
the public defense.
Um, if there's a county jail in
that particular county, they'll
also sit on the CJCC, um,
criminal justice coordinating
counsel and other interested
parties, usually the local
sheriff might be municipal
sheriffs as well as the county,
um.
Um, Sheriff, um.
will be as part of that CJCC and
the idea was to get kind of like
the sentencing commission
itself, which has members from
the dish um association District
attorneys and Department of
Public Safety and corrections
and the chief public defender
and lots of appointments from
the legislature and the
governor, the governor appoints
our chair. Um, so it's meant to
be a cross section of people
involved with criminal justice,
um, in a judicial district. We
have 21 county districts.
um, the 3rd, which is Donana,
and the second, which is
Bernaillo, all the other
judicial districts are 3, I
think they're all 3 county if I
recall, there might be 12
county.
Um, district. Um,
And so they all get together and
we're helping to facilitate that
process.
Members of the CJCCs can apply
to us for grants. So for
instance, we might get a grant,
um.
Like I said, I will use that to
uh domestic violence, um, court
that we helped to stand up.
They applied the court up in
house applied to us as a member
of the CJCC and so this was a
few years ago. I can't remember
the exact amount of money, but
we would like 10,000s of
dollars.
To, um
Uh, start a domestic violence
court. So they applied to us, we
gave them a grant, I think they
got a couple other pots of
money, they started that.
Um, DA Bregman down in the 2nd,
wanted to start his gun violence
prevention program and apply to
us, um, for money, so the DA is
a part of the burn, the 2nd
judicial district.
Um, criminal justice
coordinating counsel, and so
they applied to us, and we gave
them a big chunk of money to
help start um set that up.
We do a lot to promote the
grants program to the counties,
so we have someone on contract,
he just is on a limited
contract, but he coordinates
with all the CJCCs, um, promotes
the grants, talks about the
program, um, and so word of
mouth is spreading, is
spreading, and we used to be in
a case where we would get.
fewer requests for dollars from
a cycle of grants, then we had
applications. Now we tend to get
twice the amount that we
actually have in our pool, um,
then we can that we can give
out, that's why we asked for $5
million for the grants, because
the last couple of rounds we've
had $5 million in requests.
From these various members of
the CJCCs, nonprofits are also,
um, can be a member of the CJCC
if they want to be, sometimes we
get requests from nonprofits and
whether it's housing or working
with people who have been
released or whatnot.
Um, some of the grants are
really small, might be 100 to
$20,000 for things like scram
bracelets, you know, if we've
been, you know, need to be
tracked.
Um, sometimes we get money for
small grants so people can
upgrade their data systems or
sometimes we get six-figure
grant requests for something
like DA Bergman's program. It's
a huge range, we've given grants
to every judicial district in
the state, except for the 7th.
Um, the only reason we haven't
given anything to the 7th is
they've never applied. But we
reach out to the CJCC regularly
and say we don't have an
application so we can complete
the set in almost every county
in the state outside the 7th has
received a grant to some entity.
Um, Madam Chair, representative,
kind of.
Madam Chair Representative Peter
group I may 1 thing that the LSC
recommendation tries to make
clear is that there's no
question that the crime
reduction Grant Acts have been
useful and that the agency has
been capable of helping get some
of that money out the door. I
think that part of what you'll
see in the recommendation is,
there's a request to
reauthorize. It does not get out
the door as quickly as uh.
It had been originally intended
to. The second is that in the
crime reduction Grant Act,
Part of what the sentencing
commission is responsible for is
not just getting the money out
the door, but also rigorous
performance assessment to figure
out.
What effect these programs are
having, what types of programs
they're funding. One of the
issues is that in addition to
some of the novel things like
have been new and innovative.
It's also being used to fund
things like recurring costs,
stuff that should be in court or
district attorney recurring
budgets. So if it's being used
to kind of circumvent the
regular appropriation process
and pay for an additional staff
attorney in the judicial
district. That's not really in
line with what the crime
reduction Grant Act was intended
to be used for, and the lack of
rigorous performance evaluation
is also another.
concerned that the LFC's flagged
a couple of times, and it's one
of those things that.
If we wanted to just create a
pot of money to fund additional
workforce capacity building. We
actually have that in statute in
the public attorney workforce
capacity building fund that
exists at DFA.
If we want to fund crime
reduction programs that come
with the performance assessment
portion. That's what we want the
sentencing commission to do what
they need to do that second
part, and while we understand it
takes a couple of years to
collect data.
Has yet to show itself in a
clearing, you know, really
understandable fashion for
members.
Thank you for the clarification,
Madam Chair, I'm gonna read from
page.
110.
New Mexico sentencing
commission.
purpose of the Mexico Sentencing
Commission program is to provide
information analysis,
recommendations and assistance.
From a coordinating cross-agency
perspective to three branches of
government and interest in the
Mexicans, New Mexicans.
So they have the resources.
They need to make policy
decisions that benefit.
Criminal and juvenile just kind
of chair presenters.
There's nothing in the
definition of your scope that
says your.
Grant writers or that your grant
issuers.
Where do you get the grant money
from, Madam Chair, and why, if
you're doing that, is that not
part of the scope that's defined
in our budget books.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Pettigrew, uh, to be clear, I
think the crime reduction Grant
Act, which passed in 2019, I
don't remember the house bill
number off the top of my head.
That is what kind of parked this
project at the sentencing
commission. So we could probably
do well to update the, the
scope, um, but it is in their
statutory authority according to
that bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much for that. And
That alone is enough for, for
me.
This doesn't have to be perfect.
Matter of fact, we got a few
inserts after you guys printed
it. So, um, but with that being
said, where does the money come
from, Madam Chair, for the
grant? Um, yeah. Um, Madam Chair
and Representative, it comes
from special appropriations.
The book that comes from and
each, each year, Madam Chair,
Representative, we ask um for a
little bit more. I think we did
2 years ago, we got FY 24 and
25% funding, which was nice
because it gave us a little
flexibility, um, and we do have
a fun and you all created, it
was a couple years after the um
that House bill was passed that
created the crime reduction
Grant Act.
Um, and gave us those duties. He
created a fund called the crime
reduction Grant Act fund.
Money has never actually been
appropriated into that fund, um,
the idea of the fund was it
would just make money management
a little bit easier.
But money's never been
appropriated into that fund,
it's always come to a special
Madam Chair representative.
Madam Chair, um,
Why wouldn't we put the money
that you request and specials
into that fund.
And, and continue to grow it if
you don't spend it, then it's
still in the fun, still
allocated to that.
But
The second part of this question
is,
the prime reduction grant Act.
Have caveats to it that
said that if you issue a grant,
there has to be
Some level of oversight and
confidence that that grant is
being spent because listening to
what I just heard from, from
RLSC.
It was
Um, it doesn't sound like that's
being done or I misheard what I,
what I was being told.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
there are, um.
There's a couple ways I'm gonna
answer that question, Madam
Chair. Um,
There is an obligation to
oversee the grants, and we have
this whole system to oversee um
they file a monthly reports, um,
they give us budgets and we've
worked with the grantees because
some of these, particularly
smaller districts that aren't as
well resourced, you might never
have applied for a grant before,
Madam Chair. Um, so we work with
them on that, work with them on
budgeting. It's a reimbursement,
so they
expand, we return. One reason,
um, another reason for a staff
attorney is every grant that we
issue gets in intergovernmental
agreement or contract if it's a
nonprofit written, so we have to
draft all of those, and there's
requirements for data that they
need to submit to us, um,
oversight requirements, we do
lots of training with them, etc.
Um, and Madam Chair,
representative, there's 12
dedicated purposes for the
grants and um you can only apply
for a grant that's within the
four corners of those purposes.
Um, but Madam Chair
representative, um, and I've had
a long and good conversation
with Scott about this evaluation
part of the um.
That issues a struggle that
we've had or what we've thought
about pretty heavily as we award
the grants is that some of the
purposes, such as there is a
recruitment and retention
purpose, um, recruit or retain
law enforcement officers,
prosecutors, public defenders,
corrections officers, and mental
health purposes. That purpose
was put here before um
Representative Dixon's bill of a
few sessions ago with the public
lawyers and the law enforcement
and corrections thing. So that
purpose existed beforehand.
Um, that's also not easily
valuable valuable.
Um, and some of the things in
the crime reduction Grant Act of
purposes don't really lend
themselves to evaluation, but
have had a great conversation
with um.
Um, it's got here about those
issues and what they would like
to see going forward, and I have
a better sense um you can relate
that to our grants committee,
Martin Swazo, who might be known
to some of you as our chair of
our grants committee and talk
about the LFC concerns and were
we to get the grant's money
back. I'd want to sit down and
have a long conversation with
LFC staff about what they.
But they would prefer to see
funded and not.
Don't want to see funded, that's
more appropriate appropriately
in appropriation. We have been
very cognizant of the fact that
you don't like to give money
that then ends up going back to
you, right? Why did we give you
X amount, so we give it back to
you. So we're very careful, um,
Madam Chair and Representative
to um stay within the four
corners of the grants, but we
want to get the money out the
door as well.
And there is a tension because
some of the grant purposes don't
lend themselves easily to
evaluation like when we did, um,
for a number of judicial
districts, um, recruitment and
retention grants for DAs and
PDs.
Those don't really lend
themselves to evaluation in a
very firm way. But we've, um,
started conversations about that
and we can.
target the grants much more
carefully.
Madam Chair and representative,
I hope, I hope that helps, that
does help a little bit. Scott,
did you have any Madam Chair,
did you have any? Mhm he hit
our, I mean we have had
conversations about it, I think
that to the point about, you
know, making sure they get all
the money out the door.
The, the tension is real and
it's something we recognize
that, you know, again, we want
to see special appropriations
that this legislature makes get
spent for their intended purpose
within the confines of what the
grant is recruitment and
retention is one of those
things.
But I think LFC has been cleared
in our recommendations for a
couple of years now, the, the
committees voted to adopt the
recommendations that recognize
that these kind of recurring
projects should not be funded
through crime reduction grants.
We would rather reauthorize that
money for another year moving
forward and allow it to be spent
for evaluable purposes, things
that are innovative that
actually do help reduce crime.
And not necessarily, just try to
get the money out the door to
get it out the door. The idea
that they need $5 million
because they get $5 million
worth of requests is kind of
like the snake eating its tail,
right? Of course, agencies, once
they know the pot of money is
available, are going to come up
with a lot of things that they
could propose to spend that
money on. We want to see maybe a
smaller pot of money you spent
in a more targeted way, and it's
more in line with the intention
of this committee.
Like
Thank you, ma'am,
uh, Scott and
All the answers, so.
At the end of the day, it sounds
like one of the best things we
do is put an LLC analyst.
On the overview of the grams.
So we can sit there, madam chair
and.
Yeah, this really fun.
I mean you gotta do what you
want, but this is outside the
purview.
Seems like we've gone through a
couple of iterations of saying,
OK, we want you to do this this
way, but it continues on.
Leave it to you guys to figure
that out. I appreciate the
lesson.
Because
Every time I think I know
something, I figure out, I don't
know 10 times more.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative and
members, if you have never um
attended a criminal justice
coordinating council in your uh
district or your group of
districts, I strongly recommend
that you, uh, attend one. OK, a
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I, uh, I'm looking at this, and
again, uh, this is, this is my
first term. So this is uh really
all new to me to see this, uh,
um, services that's, that's
provided to the New Mexico
sentencing commission, my
district is in Northwest New
Mexico. So, um,
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, uh,
question that I have is, is I'm,
I'm just thinking about my own
uh experience, uh, of, of
community-based programs that
have helped, uh, juveniles.
Uh, uh,
And, and more, more importantly,
the uh item chair, the uh
Um
Crime reduction grant, um,
What, so program that I
participated in was known as off
the streets and onto the mats,
uh, to help, uh, you know, get,
get kids more actively involved
with something like that be
ineligible um recipient uh for
this.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Hernandez, it sounds like it
would be, um, again, we have in
the statute and, you know, I
know you get a lot of paper,
Madam Chair, so I just gave one
sentence and one, this one page
highlight, um, but we have 14 or
12 purposes to the crime
reduction.
For which crime reduction grants
can be awarded, Madam Chair and
Representative, and amongst them
are um developing, expanding and
improving evidence-based
treatment and supervision
alternatives to incarceration.
Um, one is reducing barriers to
participation by criminal
offenders in pre-prosecution
diversion or specialty court
programs.
Developing or improving pretrial
services, um, development or
improved coordination of
services between law enforcement
agency and treatment programs.
That's, I don't want to read
through all 12 in the interest
of time, Madam Chair, but sounds
like Madam Chair and
representative, that what you're
describing would fall into a
possible purpose if they came up
with an application process.
I'll let you know, Madam Chair
and Representative, we've had a
talk for the last couple of
years, um, in the commission
whether to
Award grants to juvenile
programs, the statute doesn't
say we can't.
In the discussions in 2019,
adult programs were always
contemplated as part of these
discussions, um.
We may have made the decision
that for the upcoming grant
round, um, if we get the money
back for the grants, um, that
will happen this spring. We are
going to open up, um,
applications to juvenile
programs.
The only caveat, Madam Chair,
and Representative to the um
The program that you mentioned,
which sounds fabulous, by the
way, is they would have to
become a member of their
criminal justice coordinating
counsel for that district. But
we do have plenty of nonprofits
and that's happening more and
more where nonprofits are
joining CJCCs.
Often so they can apply.
Um, for one of these grants.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and the
program I was in was a uh
freestyle wrestling program in
Colorado, so, um, I would like
to see more of that into
communities underserved
communities. Thank you.
Thank you. Are there any other
questions?
OK, I have one question. Um,
On page 110 of the Sentencing
Commission in our book two, it
says that uh in 2021, the
commission formed a criminal
code update Committee to begin
the work of rewriting the
state's criminal code and other
criminal statutes, and that was
extended, uh,
Through this last fiscal year,
and then it says, uh, do you
have any plans to endorse
legislation related to this
update. Uh, is there any, um,
update you can give us on
rewriting the criminal code. Um,
Madam Chair, um, members of the
subcommittee, the update on the
update, um, we did a lot of work
on that update we came up with a
um framework for a new felony
sentencing structure.
Um, it would have involved a
massive bill um for the leg, um,
in the legislature, I was in
conversations with House
leadership. I was in
conversations with legislative
council service where Madame
Cherry used to work for many
years, so it's not the kind of
bill you would have wanted to
take to them in November, um.
Because the foun the new felony
structure, the plan was that we
would have grades of steps of 3
years, which is effectively what
we have now, Madam Chair, um,
nominally, we have 4 different
levels of felony, but with all
the special laws that get
passed. This is a 3rd degree
felony, but it has this 11 year
sentence.
We effectively have this 8 level
structure now.
Um, I spoke with House
leadership we had members of the
commission, the head of our
reform committee, um, and I met
with, um,
Um, Speaker Martinez and his
staff, they seem to be game, um.
But then when it came time to
taking it to the Senate.
When I was informed by the head
of our reform committee is that
the Senate wasn't interested.
And so it kind of
died on the vine there, Madam
Chair, after a couple years of
really hard work. Um, just for
the um information of the
committee, Madam Chair, and I
can sympathize representative
because I became acting director
in October. I've been with the
commission for a while, but I'm
learning a lot about the budget
process, where to find things
when you publish your
recommendation, um.
And whatnot. I would love to see
that come back again, Madam
Chair. We had and we were called
in front of Senate Judiciary
Committee, I say called in
front, that sounds bad. We had
the opportunity to present to
Senate Judiciary on Monday, um,
as one of Senator Cervantes'
information sessions that he
does at the beginning of the
session, so I was delighted to
go in front of Senate Judiciary
and let them know what we do,
and there was discussion, Madam
Chair, there about we need more
flexibility in our sentencing
structure. So, um,
It feels like new life is being
breathed into that, and I'm
hoping to capitalize that, Madam
Chair, if I become the act the
actual director, the executive
director of the commission hope
to capitalize that in the coming
years so we can bring that
project back.
Because we have the framework,
and it would help you all, madam
chair, with those things, and we
did a lot of work on some really
tough issues, but we needed the
framework first. We were looking
at sexual exploitation of
children, looking at the child
abuse statutes, which people on
both sides, the public defenders
and um DAs say they're a mess,
they need to be rewritten to
help them correspond to various
Supreme Court opinions, um, we
were looking at behavioral
health issues. We did, um, with
no final product yet, but Madam
Chair, given.
some of the conversations I've
been having, Senator Maestas,
um, is very keen on this and has
talked to me, I'm hoping that we
can bring that project back to
life, Madam chair. We are able
to do it on a cheap budget, this
is something you'll be glad to
hear, Madam Chair, we asked for
500,000. And, um, I'm here. I
came up with that figure by
looking at what other states
had, um.
charged, but fortunately a lot
of the agencies we're working
with, the AG's office, the DA's.
LOPD, some others, um, basically
seconded their people to us, so
we didn't have to pay them per
diem mileage COVID came up, of
course, we, so everyone knows
how to do things on Zoom, so we
were actually able to do a lot
of work with expending very
little money, I'm here, I'm sure
you don't hear that a lot, um,
but my hope is that um in the
new year product because we
should have by now, I don't care
to be, I will, I will own that
we should have had that in front
of you by now.
Thank you for that update. I
really appreciate it. Uh, one
more question from
Representative Hernandez, uh,
pardon me, excuse me, Herndon,
uh, Madam Chair and presenters.
So my question is focusing on
survivors of domestic violence,
and one of the biggest issues
that has arisen with respect to
them is many of them, those
particularly who are living at
uh poverty level or below when
they leave their abuser, they
don't have an attorney when they
are going through a
Domestic violence situation.
So what I'd like to see us do
and to see if you thought about
this, is making sure that one of
those who is determined to be
low income, will have an
attorney appointed to represent
them, to bring more, to bring
about more equality in the
aspect of what happens after a,
they're looking forward to
leaving a domestic violence
situation. Have you thought
about that, Madam Chair, um,
presenters.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Herndon, we have not addressed
that issue directly, um, Madam
Chair, but the great thing about
the sentencing commission is we
are here.
For just these requests.
Um, and this is something I can
take back to the sentencing
commission and say
Representative Hern didn't ask
about this question because
amongst our 27 members we have,
as I think I said before, the AD
corrections LOPD AODA, um,
Department of Public Safety,
Victims' advocates.
We have all the players around
the table, and sometimes people
will bring us an idea, um, like
for instance, a geriatric and
medical parole bill that we
passed, um, you all passed a
couple years ago. I had worked
on that when I was at council
service. I said to the our
reform committee is something
that's relatively
noncontroversial, maybe we
should run it as a commission
bill, and we got a great
compromise between the DAs and
the PDs on the elements of that
bill.
And brought it forward, and the
fines and fees bill, the fee,
the removal of fees for um
criminal um processes in the
courts removal of court fees,
and because advocates came to
the commission and made a
presentation and we had lots of
interest. So, Madam Chair and
representative, I can bring that
back to you. We do so much more
than the grants I didn't give
you the whole song and dance
about everything we do, I figure
a lot of it's in your book, but
um we're doing a lot of work on
data integration as well and
trying to get all the different
parties.
who were doing criminal justice
data integration, we're doing
tons of work on that part of
that 2019 bill as well was to
coordinate criminal justice data
integration across the state. We
provided startup money for the
data exchange that the courts
use that was one of our first
crime reduction grants. Um, so,
Madam Chair, um, members of the
committee and it's good for all
of you to know if you have an
idea that you're interested in
or something you think you want
wrestled with by the experts,
um, because we have the experts
on our commission. um.
Talk to me, my uh DHM Carver um
at UNM.edu, um, I will bring
your idea, representative to the
commission and say there's an
interest in seeing if we can
tackle this and maybe come up
with some solutions, but I
extend that invitation to all of
you. Um, yeah, we're doing a lot
of work, yeah, we're completely
strapped, but um.
It's why I took the job, um, was
have people bring ideas and then
make them reality, um, it's a
great service, that's why the
commission was created in 2003,
and I'd be happy to do entertain
that any ideas, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, um, Mr. Presenter. I
just close with this, Madam
Chair, is that thank you
brother, thank you for bringing
up the fees and fines and doing
away with those because I wanted
to take uh those fees and fines
off the backs of those
individuals who were, uh, I
don't know, involved in issues,
but those monies went to the
Civil Rights Commission. The
problem that we're having now is
the Civil Rights Commission
doesn't have any money, so, um,
maybe we can, uh, brainstorm on
how we can make sure that they
continue to have funding to help
those individuals.
when they need it because those
funds are now longer available.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you and thank you, Mr. Carver,
for your service to this
commission. With that, I'll turn
to a vice chair, a
representativearana for a
motion.
Mameti moved the LFC
recommendation.
OK, we have a, a motion from the
senatorativearana and a second
from ranking member, uh
Chatfield, are there any
objections?
will note that uh Representative
Pettigrew objects.
OK and with that, thank you very
much for your presentation.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the subcommittee, I
appreciate it.
Up next, we have the Military
Affairs Department.
That's agency code 705.
And it's page 360.
In your volume 2.
And everybody, you do have a
handout, looks like this.
Everybody should have a handout.
OK, and start when you're ready.
All right. Good afternoon, Madam
Chair, members of the
subcommittee. My name is Scott
Sanchez, and I'm the LFC analyst
for public safety. We'll be
looking at the Department of
Military Affairs, agency code
705, which you can find behind
tab 7.
Um, also, as the chair
mentioned, you can find the
agency's budget recommendation
from LFC on page 360 or starting
on page 360 in your volume 2,
with me today from DFA is my
counterpart Diego Jimenez, and
adjutant general of the Mexican
National Guard, uh, Miguel
Aguilar.
I'll be brief, um.
We're gonna talk a little bit
about the LFC recommendation and
the executive recommendation
today, the LFC recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by 313.8,000 or 3.2%, whereas
the executive increases it by
1.6 million or 16.5%. The LFC
recommendation funds the state
match portion of the youth
challenge and Job Challenge
academies, um, which the
executive recommendation also
includes a let Diego talk a
little bit more about the
differences in what the
executive includes.
LFC wreck does not.
Uh, thank you, Scott. Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
um, as Scott said, I'm Diego
Jimenez. I am the uh public
safety analyst at DFA.
Um, Scott covered most of the
differences, uh, I guess I would
just add that on, on the
different sheet, the copies that
you have, it says that the
executive is recommending
182,000 to backfill personnel
costs and.
With, you know, take a minor
issue with, with using the
phrase backfill. It's more about
filling positions, um, it's not
that they're.
Have filled more positions and
need money and backfilling it
that way. They have positions
that need to be filled and they
don't have money for them. Um.
Additionally, um, you know, the
executive recommended about $1.1
million for what is a uh
Uh, fairly new.
Uh, youth program, um, that I'm
sure the general will will
discuss in in much greater
detail, but it's um
Called the the governor's summer
challenge and they did the
first.
Version of it over the last
summer or two, which I, I
understand um they saw some
great success, um, additionally,
and I don't think it's on your
different sheet, the uh
executive recommendation that
includes some language, um.
Regarding uh salaries for the
editor and deputy adjutant
generals, um,
The statues that govern the
Department of Military Affairs
allows you all to set what those
salaries are in the uh annual
general appropriations Act and
um
It's
was in the recommendation that
was adopted last year and
somehow it fell off throughout
the process, um, so it should be
in the FY25 general
appropriations Act, and um the
recommendation the executive
recommendation just asks that
we, we reintroduce it, um, to
keep that.
That language going um.
And with that, I will hand it
over to uh the adjutant general.
Thank you.
Thank you and welcome Major
General Aguilar. Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for giving me a little bit
of time. Um, I'll try to keep us
a little on track so you've got
a big packet in front of you,
don't intend to talk all of it.
I'll just talk a little bit
about some of the additional
requests we have.
Um, I will.
Oh, sorry.
I'm a little loud, I apologize.
Um, I will, uh, point out at the
back of the packet, you'll see 3
infographics that show you what
your National Guard has done
over the last year or so. Uh,
one of them talks a little bit
about the firefighting
Hermit'specalf Canyon, Ridoso
responses, there's a second
infographic on the flooding in
Roswell, and then, uh, the third
one talks a little bit about our
snow event that occurred in
November.
Amazing, amazing work,
absolutely could not have done
it if I didn't have a community
emergency response team that you
allowed me in statute to to hire
and keep on, uh, it's a very,
very small budget, didn't
necessarily ask for an increase
this year, uh, but
Having those folks working all
the time in high water rescue
and being prepared to come out
and save people's lives, uh,
made an amazing impact, uh, that
one night in October in Roswell.
So,
Talking getting back to the
budget.
The legislative, um, budget
allows for $250,000 general fund
increase to match uh job
challenge, uh, funding that was
in in a non-recurring uh funding
as we were growing the program.
That program is set to start
this this spring.
Uh, and so that $250,000 will
allow us to get into the general
fund, the amount of state match
that we need. It's a 75, 25
program, uh, to, to continue to
fund that program on a year to
year basis. Uh, the other, the
others that we, we, uh, we asked
for is I know uh Diego spoke
about it a little while ago.
It's, it's a small increase of
$281,000 but every year we
start, um, my 200 category in
the hole. So this last year we
started about 700,000 in the
hole.
Um, and so, if I have vacancies,
if I don't hire folks and I
can't hire them because I don't
have the money for it. We
eventually catch up and there's
a little bit of of 200 category
of money available.
But it makes it incredibly
difficult on top of that, uh, I
can't move money out of that
category because it's in a
deficit usually through the
first half of the year.
In that 200 category money that
you that you give me, there's
250,000 or so.
Uh, that is really targeted
towards the 400 category, uh,
for search and rescue
operations.
Um, to pay the federal
government back for the use of
helicopters and the fuel and
those kinds of things when we go
out and rescue people. um, and
so one of our, one of our ask
was an increase in that amount
of money in the 400 category,
uh, because this year we found
was that we couldn't actually
move the money.
Um, because we're already
negative in the 200 start of the
year.
Um
Recruit and retention expansion.
I want to let you know, I think,
um,
I've said in the past, uh, when
we've asked for this money that
I think there's a day of
reckoning coming.
When it comes to our our
authorized strength and where we
currently are, uh, with actual
people drilling.
Uh, that day appears to me to be
coming significantly faster.
Uh, over the last couple of
weeks, and so right now I'm
authorized a little over, just a
little under 2900 army and about
11,000 air.
Um, I'm sitting somewhere around
2400 army.
And uh in about in the lower
size of 900 air.
Why is that important?
When that day of wrecking comes,
when the Department of Defense
comes back and says, OK, we have
to readjust our numbers because
budgets are decreasing,
especially in the army, we see
that coming soon.
We're gonna readjust for
structure.
And when they readjust that that
force structure, we are likely
to lose.
Those number of positions in the
guard likely never to come back
to New Mexico again. And so our
strength numbers would sound
better if our authorized
strength was 220 or 2300.
But the number of opportunities
for New Mexicans to join the
National Guard and get the
change in their lives that I got
to have will diminish. This
$300,000 ask is is allowing us
to provide uh a a little bit of
a stimulus, if you will, to our,
our guardsmen are recruiting
effort so that we can continue
to fight to get those numbers
up. Recruiting is getting better
nationwide, um, it's slightly
better this year than it was
last year.
In New Mexico, but we're not
seeing the same trends that the
rest of the state see, and
that's my concern is that if
other states are improving much
faster.
And those cuts come.
They're gonna look to the states
that aren't able to meet their
their four structure numbers
and, and we're in that space
right now.
Uh, the governors summer
challenge program, I'll tell
you, uh, we ran a, we, we kind
of just
Found some money to put that one
together at Jimmy Carter last
year, thanks to CYFD and a bunch
of others to give us some, some
funds to do it. Amazing, amazing
results, uh, yes, we improve
literacy, but I think the most
important thing is if you talk
to that principal today, she
will tell you that those 34 kids
who attended that program are
not problems.
A disciplinary, their leaders,
they get along. That's the the
type of a change that we're
trying to make, and it's
National Guard led.
Soldiers in a uniform there in
the summer for 6 weeks, hoping
to mentor uh do physical
fitness, um, uh, grow these
youth.
Um, and, and then we augment it
with teachers, uh, and others
from outside the community who
come in, including behavioral
health specialists to provide
all of the things that we think
our kids need to be resilient.
Before we lose him, if you ask
most teachers and and some of
you on the committee know this.
We're losing our kids much
earlier.
And so we've got to catch him
earlier, middle school was
probably that sweet spot where
we can really start to effect
the change. We saw it in one
program.
This funding will allow us to
bring the staffing in that we,
we need to add an additional 2
programs, another one in
Albuquerque this coming year,
and then the thought is to
figure out how we do a rural
one.
Somewhere in rural New Mexico
and then in the coming years, as
we can expand to be able to
expand it if you think that it's
a worthy cause, and I'll tell
you that if what we did at Jimmy
Carter last year tells us
anything, it may very well be.
Um
And with that, uh, I think I
covered most of the ones that I
wanted to talk to you about.
I'll, uh,
I'll stand for your questions.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Uh, who has questions.
Yeah.
Representative Sarnoa. OK, thank
you, thank you for your
presentation. It's always good
to see you, General, and um I'm
very excited about the summer
challenge, but it's an
expansion, so we're not really.
dealing with expansions right
now, but um we will push for
that when it does come up, OK?
Um,
Personnel. Tell me again on
personnel. So where is the
problem? So you don't have
enough money for your current
positions. Is that correct? 2.
Madam Chair, uh, um,
Representative, you know the,
the problem is that what I'm
asking for is some additional
funding. So most of the
recruiting money that the guard
gets traditionally comes from
the federal government. This
$300,000 will allow us to
provide an incentive to soldiers
who give us referrals. So
essentially to to energize
everybody's in the guard
currently serving to refer us
folks so that we can increase
our, our recruiting numbers.
Uh, Madam Chair, so General,
have you used it before or this
is the first time using it?
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Santana, we, so this year we
started the program with some
general fund money that I have.
It's a very small amount.
Um, and so we didn't open the
spigot wide, uh, because there's
only a limited amount of funding
I could use, uh, and so we've
got, we've gotten some that come
in, uh, other states are doing
this program, and they've seen
some success with improving
their numbers.
I think that's all the questions
I had.
Most of them are in expansion,
so.
So Madam Chair Representative, I
think the, the one thing to
highlight is that the LFC
recommendation does not really
question whether or not this is
a program that should be funded.
We, we did include some funding
for this purpose, but we
understand that we looked at it
was there was kind of presented
as two different parts, right?
Part of it was the ASVAB
tutoring, which is bringing in
somebody on contract to kind of
help kids get a better score on
their ASVAB, the part that we
took issue with was the
stipends, because while other
states do it, no other state's
really been able to show that
there's an effective use of
funding.
Right, that it's actually had
the uh
Effective leading to more garden
numbers well I'm sure that there
will be some, there might be
other better uses for that
amount of money in their budget
that would get closer to solving
some of the other rules. Thank
you. Um, the other issue is
that, uh, I'm sorry, I lost my
train of thought a little bit.
Uh, there's vacancy savings,
which again we recognize part of
that is because they are unable
to fully fill positions that are
not 100% funded by the federal
government, but they do have
some vacancy savings that could
possibly be used for some of
this as well.
And you can see that on the PS
count towards the back of your
packet.
So in general, so do you focus
on math for the aspect, because
that's usually the hardest part.
Um
Madam Cherry Risser, so.
The
We're trying to start a program
now.
Recruiters are not allowed to
help recruits.
With federal funding and proof
on the ASAT. So you can't tutor
them with federal money.
Uh, they can give him a guide,
they can retest them, but they
can't help them through the
process.
What we're trying to do with
ASAb is we've, we've done some
like weekend type uh trainings
and you know this is an
educator, uh, probably limited
success. One of the things that,
that we're wanting to develop is
a program specifically with
youth Challenge, where we see
kids who absolutely take the
ASA.
Who do want to join the
military, but are scoring fairly
low.
Looking at what um they are not
doing well at tailoring a
program over multiple weeks
because they're there for 22
weeks, uh, to, to be able to
improve those scores so that
they can, uh, so they can uh
enlist if that's what they
choose to do.
I think that the only other
point that LFC would make is
that ultimately, and this is a
question that goes to even the
governor's challenge portion of
this discussion, right? Is that
when we look at a lot of the
expansions, we can come up with
very good reasons for why the
National Guard support program
could benefit from some of this
funding. Once we start putting
it in the budget, it's hard to
pull it back. And a lot of these
things, like the Governor's
Challenge program, even to an
extent the job challenge program
don't fit with the core mission
of the statutory purpose of the
agency. And so,
The job challenge program is a
program that we pump money into.
It's getting ready to get
started. We're excited to see
where that goes. But when we
talk about expanding to yet
another program that's not
strictly National Guard support.
The overhead that comes with
that, the additional
administrative staff that comes
with that. The question is, is
that the direction that you want
this agency to go in and at
least as far as the LFC
recommendation that was voted on
in the fall, it was not.
Um, Madam Chair, uh, general, do
you get or is there money in PED
that they could use or possibly
or not really.
Madam Chair, uh, Servignon. I
think the, the issue becomes,
yes, there are some, so last
year we used literacy funding to
cover the literacy block.
Um, but there isn't funding
there that would, and we use
them at-risk funding that CYFD
had.
Um, the challenging piece in
this is, uh, this money coming
directly to DMA allows us to
hire, uh, those teachers and
those guardsmen that we're
using. So what I did last year
is because I did one program, I
asked for some of my Title 32
full-time folks, uh, to
volunteer and so we rotated
people through the program, um,
which I can kind of get away
with.
Um, but, but not really with
that intent of that funding is
intended for. They have
full-time jobs. This funding
would allow me to hire, you
know, drilling guardsmen.
Who are interested in working
through the summer.
Uh, to come in and wear the
uniform on state active duty,
um, and get paid to do that job
and be there full time, and
create that, you know, 6 week,
um um relationship with those
kids that we wouldn't otherwise
have. So there may be other ways
to do this program. I'll tell
you that I think why the reason
the governor's asked us to do
this is there's some magic in
that uniform.
Uh, when it comes to kids and
getting their attention and
their respect is what drives the
success of that program.
And last question, do you have
data from the program or what
were you measuring with the
program?
Yeah, Madam Chair,
Representative, we, so we do
have some, although I don't have
it with me today, um, so we have
the literary scores, the
literacy scores where, uh, some
kids improved in, uh, in, in
reading categories, and so we
had something that went up to
like 2 years, um, the rest is
kind of like things that are
hard to to really get, right?
So, uh,
The real um benefit is
None of those 30 kids walk into
a high school with a gun
someday.
So because the areas that we're
hitting are these lower income
areas, uh, where we're trying to
build self-esteem and confidence
and, and give them the the tools
that they need to be able to
survive in the environment that
kids now have to survive and be
successful.
One last question. So attendance
wise, Madam Chair, did they,
most of them come out every day
or most of the time, Madam
Chair, uh, Representative Soana,
most of them did, as, as you can
imagine, it's summertime, it
becomes difficult, um, most of
them showed up.
The kids absolutely love the
program.
Parents absolutely love the
program.
Uh, I believe initially
educators were a little
skeptical, but they, they leaned
right in, love the program, uh,
the guardsmen who were there,
loved being a part of that
program. I mean, it was, it was
a, a pretty amazing success. If
you ask those kids today, if
they would volunteer to give up
their summer to go there.
And to do whatever else they
were gonna do that summer, they
want to go back.
Thank you, thank you, Jenner.
Thank you, Representative
Fernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
general, um.
Also, uh, when I mention, uh,
you know, first off, thank you
for your service and, and also
to the soldiers that are serving
here in in Mexico, um.
The, the Marines, they, they
have a program for um uh during
the summer called the Devil
pups, uh, in, in Camp Pendleton.
And uh every year, the Navajo
Nation, uh, only is allotted 10
slots into that program, uh, and
every year, I always see, uh,
you know, the, the interest, uh,
increasing, uh, but again, this
is only a 10-day program, uh,
but it's good to know more, more
about this, uh, summer.
Challenge program, um.
There's a, uh, uh, a facility,
uh, uh, I'm sorry, I'm
characterizing it wrong in
Farmington, which is in my
district, um, what is it, it's,
has, has its purpose changed and
I'm bringing that up right now
because uh 2 weeks ago in the
skies of Northwest New Mexico
over the uh community of
Shiprock over the community of
Farmington, there's been
multiple um reports of uh low
Flying military aircrafts.
Uh, flying in circles.
So, uh, I'm, I'm just trying to
understand what's going on in
the, in the skies of, uh, in New
Mexico.
The mentor. I'm, I'm sorry for
not addressing the, the chair,
so.
Madam Chair, Representative
Fernandez, um, so the, the
armory that we have in uh in, in
uh Farmington is, he's got an MP
company, and so they don't fly
aircraft and so if, if there's
been aircraft flying around, it
likely isn't the guard.
Um, but I, I, I'm sure one of,
one of my, uh, folks made a note
and we'll, we'll circle back and
see if we can figure out what it
was.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair,
and, and uh there's pictures of
it on social media. I was trying
to pull it, pull it, pull it to
better identify the aircraft,
but, uh, again, uh, I wanna,
Madam Chair, the, the other
question I have, uh, the last
question I have is on uh the
states on on the uh
constitutional duty for the
state defense force.
What is its role now today and
uh
what, what's the direction of,
of that duty. Thank you, madam
chair.
Um,
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Hernandez, so with within the
construct of the department of
Military Affairs is the Army,
the Air Force, and then the
State Defense Force.
Um, the state defense force has
gone through varying times of of
use, uh, where it is today, uh,
is, is fairly low usage, um, I
have, I have an assistant
adjutant general was assigned to
that position. Uh, they still do
some some training uh on, on uh
on some weekends, um, but what
we found through the last few
emergencies, uh, has been that
We, we just couldn't get anyone
to come.
And so, uh, when, when the
governor asked us to do
substitute teaching to keep
schools open, um.
They just didn't have the
personnel there. I will tell you
that I believe that there is a
place for them, especially in
some very specialized places,
and one of the places that I
think they would do really well
or we can use the model of the
state defense forces in cyber.
The state of Ohio has a a
reserve cyber force that's 200+
professionals who work at all
across industry that they
utilize to do uh cyber
assessments, cyber response.
And, and, and essentially people
do it for free because they have
the skills, uh, they're able to
get out and and do this in
support of their state and their
nation, and they've had a great
deal of success with it.
Um, and so we've started that
conversation about that's a
perfect place for state defense
force under under the Department
of Military Affairs to provide
the opportunity for people to
volunteer and also to have
really the liability cover for
them uh to be able to come in
and work with, uh, other
agencies or other companies uh
who require cyber assessments or
cyber response.
That you, that concludes my
questions.
Thank you, Representative
Herndon. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you, uh, general, just
to understand and give us a
better understanding of the
great work that you all do. I'm
looking on page 11 of the report
that you gave, that you
presented to us that said that
you delivered 1,131,847
sandbags, where we did, was it
that kind of flooding going on
in New Mexico?
Yeah, um, Madam Chair,
Representative Herndon, so this
is, uh, I think the number
you're seeing there relates to
um the uh
Burn scar Hermit's peak Ave
Canyon, uh, the fire in Riodoso
and subsequent flooding, uh, the
flooding in Roswell as well.
And, and, and I will say this,
we delivered them. We didn't do
it alone. So the Department of
Corrections did an amazing job
at in Santa Fe and in Roswell
filling sandbags for us. So we
didn't this time, we didn't have
to fill them. Uh, we pull them
out in pallets, put them on, on
trucks and got them delivered,
um, and so, uh, you know, they
don't get credit for it.
as, as much as they should, but
shout out to them because those
prisoners did an amazing job, I
went to Roswell uh uh last
month, and I took some Dion's
pizzas over to him, um, and we
just sat and had some pizzas
because I just wanted to tell
them how important, uh, the work
that they did was just saving
and uh and and making people
feel uh at ease that they had
the protection for their homes,
uh, as uh as these flooding uh
were hitting in these burn
scars.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, General. And then
just one other item on that page
says that 111,214 miles were
driven. So are you driving
people to a new location to live
or how does that work? Well,
Madam Chair, uh representative
He know so this is of all the
vehicles that we used.
Uh, in support of that mission,
that's the number of miles that
we drove and so it could have
been sandbag deliveries, uh,
drive, drive, uh, front and
loaders, uh, moving, moving
property, you know, we move
removing debris, those things.
So we track all those miles
because we've got to ask for
reimbursement for them. And so
we've got a pretty good amount
uh of, of what those are, but
it's, it's a significant amount
of uh windshield time for those
guys that are doing that work.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and just
a couple of, just clarifying
questions. So, um, general, if I
look at the different worksheet
and I'm looking at the, the
great conversation we've talked
about with respect to the
governor's summer challenge and
the moneys listed in a separate
uh section, but if I go up to
your personnel, and it looks
like that there is a reduction
in the permanent personnel from
Uh, 48 at the executive was
requesting it in 46 that the LFC
was requesting, what is the
personnel that you won't get.
If, uh, those two are
eliminated.
Uh, Madam Cher never heard it,
so the, the funding um that
we're asking for for summer
challenge.
Um
Is, is there's one position that
is full time, which is a, which
is an actual coordinator, uh,
that would run the program year
round, so there's a lot of, um,
so we want to keep a interacting
with the schools as years go. So
having that one person who's
dedicated towards interacting
with all those schools and
setting them up and then um um
creating opportunities for the
guard to be there, um, when, uh,
when it's appropriate to support
those schools and continue that
relationship.
So that's the one position. The
rest of them will all be
seasonal work, so we'll hire
guardsmen, uh, teachers, um,
and, uh, and some of the support
personnels, we use some JROTC
people as well, uh, in last
year's program,
uh, that'll be temporary funding
for that really 7 to 8 week
period so that we can bring him
in a week early, get them
trained up and ready to go,
execute the program and then
give them some time to kind of
close it down.
All right, uh, Madam Chair and
and general, just for
clarification, so the funding
that's shown in the expansion is
totally for just the total
amount of money that would be
involved, but you have actually
broken out for this program into
uh a separate area in your uh
FTE positions as well as in your
personnel services because there
was also a reduction of
1,114,000 there. So I'm just
confirming that we're talking
about the same program and
there's nothing.
else that's been lost to you and
your operations.
Madam Chair. So just to clarify
the executive, um, expansion
record, you look down at the
bottom under kind of the
difference for the expansions
that general fund number rolls
up into the top line general
phone number. So while it looks
like a $1.2 million dollar
difference. That isn't a
reduction, it's just simply a
reflection of the fact that the
executive, that 11,000 number
I'm sorry, the $11.2 million
number includes that extra 1.1
million for the governor's
expansion. OK. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you for the explanation.
Thank you. Um, just two
questions, um,
General, the youth Challenge
Academy in Roswell has been
quite successful. Have that
resulted in any of those
graduates and participants
entering the National Guard
after they're finished.
Um, Ma, Madam Chair, um, yeah,
some, um, and so,
There's always a little bit of a
balancing act when it comes to,
to challenge graduates in the
guard.
Um
For many of them,
They're wishing to escape a
situation that is not positive
for them.
And so, yes, we do get some to
join the guard, some of them may
not join for several years.
We have many of them who joined
the Marine Corps, the Air Force,
and go on active duty, move on
from there. We've also started
in, in our growing the program
with the Mexico Military
Institute, uh, to provide for
some of the kids who um don't
want to go back to the
environment that wasn't positive
for them, uh, aren't old enough
or don't have the scores to go
to the military yet, uh, but
have an opportunity through the
generous scholarships that are
already available at that school
to get them into the school, uh,
and going, in fact, I talked to
uh the new superintendent a few
weeks ago about.
Uh, we do credit recovery for
kids that are 15 to 16 with
Hierman High School, uh, we may
consider moving that
relationship to the Mexico
Military Institute and really
start to create a very robust
program.
Uh, that provides the right
level of tutoring and
preparation so that when they
get to New Mexican military
student, we don't lose them for
academics, because many of these
kids have fallen behind, and so
it becomes kind of challenging,
but, but I think there's great
opportunity and they're really
starting to lean in, uh, and
helping us do that. And so I
think those avenues and then
adding job challenge for those
who want a vocational training,
uh, and go on and do a job.
Those 4 avenues, I think are the
way to success with that program
for, for each and every one of
those kids.
Thank you and, and as a former
teacher at Jimmy Carter Middle
School. Um, I was thrilled that
it was there. I think we all
agree it's excellent program. We
understand that. No, that is not
the core mission of National
Guard, but reaching kids, uh,
with our first responders, our
military, our national guard.
It's just a very powerful
positive impetus. I hope we can
work as we go down the line to
support such a program, and with
that I'll turn over for
promotion from uh Vice Chair
Sarno.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Before I
do that, General, I have 5
middle schools in my district.
If you need a middle school for
your program, OK? Um, and just
to let you know, we have to take
the lower fund, so I have to do
the LFC recommendation. Thank
you.
So a second.
OK, we have a motion from uh
Weiserarignon, 2 from
Representative Little. Are there
any objections?
See no objections, uh, we accept
the LFC budget.
Next on the agenda.
Is a crime victim's reparation
commission.
Uh
And just a reminder the members,
I think we each probably could
ask 1000 questions, uh, but
there will be other
opportunities to pursue
questions and you can also
pursue some of your questions
and concerns offline as well.
OK,
so we have, um, again, this is
agency number 780.
And it is in your book.
On page 375. And please start.
All right, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, again, my name
is Scott Sanchez. I'm the LFC
analyst for public safety will
be agency code 780, the crime
victim reparations commission,
which is behind tab 7, and in
volume two, you can find that uh
LFC recommendation beginning on
page 375.
Um, with me today is executive
Director Frank Zubia and my
counterpart from DFA Diego
Jimenez. Um, I will briefly go
over kind of a top-level review
and then Diego and I will go
back and forth over the specific
program. So, um, the LFC
recommendation for CBRC
increases general fund revenue
by 500,000 or 3.6%, whereas the
executive doubles that and
increases funding by $1 million
or 7.2% in a different program.
Um, the LXC recommendation
increases funding for.
support in the uh
Victim compensation program,
whereas the executive said
increases the base budget by a
million to replace lost revenue
under the Victims of Crime Act
in the grants Administration
program.
So with that, Diego.
Sorry, um, so just to clarify
for the victim compensation
program, which is P 706 on that
second page, um.
The LSC recommendation increases
funding for this specific
program by about 15.2% by adding
$500,000 of general fund
revenue. This is just to provide
direct support to victims of
crime. Um, the executive
recommendation keeps funding for
this program flat, um, and as
for the performance measures, we
reached consensus.
Uh, thank you, Scott. Uh, Madam
Chair.
Uh, Diego Jimenez, I'm the
executive analyst for public
safety, um.
For the grant administration
program, the executive
recommendation increases the
funding, the general fund amount
by $1 million that's about 9.4%,
um.
And about half of that or
500,000 is to replace uh federal
funding due to cuts to the
The voca or the victims of Crime
Act and the other 500,000 is
actually for the uh uh sexual
assault hotline that time.
Representative Lujan, who's not
in the room, uh, asked about
during the one of the previous
presentations, um, and in this
program, the LSE recommendation,
uh,
Keeps the general revenue flat
for this program, and um,
We
Regarding performance measures
we have reached a consensus on,
on what the targets should be.
And with that, I think I will
hand it over to Director Zuia.
Thank you.
And Doctor, please introduce
yourself so our folks at home
can also hear.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Again,
my name is Frank Zuia director
for the New Mexico Crime Victims
Reparation Commission, um, I did
provide a handout, there's 4
pages to it, if we could just
turn to page 2, that would be
great. Um, I want to thank both
our LSC analyst Scott Sanchez in
our uh DFA analyst, uh, Diego
Jimenez, uh, we, we have very
lengthy conversations with
regards to our request. Um,
I also want to just take a quick
moment to introduce our chief
financial officer, because she's
the one that keeps me in line
and she's currently in the
audience.
Um, uh, without her, I would be
in trouble. Um, Madam Chair, uh,
members of the committee, I want
to begin with a story and I want
to tell you a little bit about
Samantha. Samantha's from
Roswell.
Um, Samantha, um, at the time
when she submitted a
compensation application, she
was 18 months of age. Samantha
was in custody of her maternal
grandmother, and because of
injuries she sustained by her
biological father.
She is a quadriplegic.
Um, Samantha's life expectancy
at the time that we received the
application was 5 years.
Timmante is currently 8 years,
so we're excited about that. Her
grandmother was struggling
financially and reached out to a
victim advocate in her
respective city, and they
reached out to us. At the time
we had a compensation
application and we were able to
provide collateral resources to
that family. Um,
Samantha was covered by
Medicaid, uh, but many of the
expenses that were recommended
by her pediatrician were denied.
So at that point, CPRC stepped
in. We provided loss of wages
for the grandmother, um, at the
time she was, um, when she took
custody of her granddaughter,
she went from a full-time job to
a part-time job in order to to
continue to provide um
assistance to her granddaughter.
Samantha couldn't regulate her
body temperature. Her
pediatrician recommended
refrigerated air.
again there in Roswell, Medicaid
said no, CVR C said yes.
Samantha has a colostomy bag,
and would soil herself
frequently throughout the day.
The pediatrician recommended an
orchi tub. We didn't know what
that was. She submitted the
expense to Medicaid. Medicaid
said no, we said yes. Um,
I give you those examples
because we are a really good
resource for most victims of
violent crime across the state,
and we're collateral resource.
Um, we do, uh, we're a payer of
last year's work when it comes
to providing those services, um,
but to date, we have expended
$36,000 to Samantha and her
grandmother, as far as assisting
her. Um, uh, last year, we our
organization assisted 3500
victims of violent crime.
across the state.
CBRC does a lot of work. We
don't do a lot of that work
without our service providers.
We currently fund 194 projects
across the state.
Those projects consist of um
domestic violence shelters, um,
rape crisis centers, child
advocacy centers, uh,
prosecutors, uh, victim
advocates at the DA's office,
victim advocates out of law
enforcement organizations, you
name it, we pretty much have a
foot in the door with regards to
providing funding to an
organization that provides
direct victim services to those
victims.
Um, if you, I think both Mr.
Sanchez and Mr. Jimenez.
Stated and if you refer to page
2.
Of the handout, historically our
organization was very dependent
on federal funding. And if you
look at FY federal fiscal year
18, we received the largest
appropriation, which was a
little bit over $20 million from
the federal government. Um,
subsequently, we've been
receiving less and although
these last several years, and I
want to think
His body and the legislature,
because you have been incredibly
supportive of the services that
we provide, um, you allocated in
various either special
appropriation or growth funds in
the amount of $7 million this
current fiscal year to ensure
that all of our service
organizations will be able to
sustain.
And I, I do want to let you all
know that we are able to sustain
because of those appropriations,
although non-reoccurring, and
that's why I'm at the table
again asking for more
appropriation, um.
We were able to sustain all of
those projects without any cut,
and we will be able to sustain
those projects until federal
fiscal year 26.
Um, I do want to, uh, on the
second part of that 2nd page,
that paragraph before, we are
asking for $3 million.
In general appropriation, and
that is directly for service
providers across the state.
We need for that funding to be
reoccurring, um, in order for us
to sustain our projects, um, if
we do receive the appropriation
this year, were able to sustain
our projects for until federal
fiscal year 27.
Um
We, unfortunately have received
and not unfortunately, we are
very grateful for the
appropriation, but
unfortunately, it's been
non-reoccurring funding. Um, um,
when I was at this committee in
October, it was asked Mr. Zubia,
you keep coming to the table,
and we don't understand why.
Well, it's because it's
non-reoccurring funding, and we
have to be at the table because
we have to make sure that we're
meeting the needs of crime
victims across the state.
In addition, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, if you
would turn to page 3 of your
handout. This is victims of
compensation. So our agency has
two primary missions. We provide
direct funding to victims of
violent crime, but in addition,
we also provide funding to both
governmental and nonprofit
organizations across the state.
Those are the 194 agencies that
I stated earlier. Our
compensation program is as um
As demonstrated in the graph,
we've increasingly, um, in, in
our victim payouts have
increased significantly every
year. Um, one of the good things
about the payouts is that for
every state dollar that our
commission expends, we get 75
cents from the federal
government. So we're very
strategic on how we actually
appropriate that money, um, I,
uh, I know one of the questions
was asked earlier by um
Representative Sheffield as far
as a fund balance, we, we try to
reserve that fund balance and
not tap into it. We're currently
down to about $200,000.
Um, in our fund balance, we used
to have a pretty significant
amount. Um, unfortunately, um,
Um
One of our revenue sources was
actually eliminated, um, a
couple of years ago, our fine
fees, our fines and fees, so
we're again coming to the to
this committee to ask for
additional appropriation. I do
want to let this committee know
that um our state is incredibly
violent, as you all are well
aware, our state currently for
the last 7 years has expended
close to $8 million on funeral
and burial.
In our state. When we give that
statistic to our national
counterparts, they're amazed
because their expenses are
usually medical and counseling,
but in New Mexico, it's funeral
and burial. So we're, and that's
truly unfortunate on so many
levels. Um, I do wanna, in, in
that order, that's actually on
your handout, members of the
committee. So funerals are
largest medical loss of wages is
our 3rd, counseling is our 4th
and rent and relocation is our
4th expense.
Um, members of the committee, if
you would turn to the last page
of the handout, uh, not the
annual report, the annual report
was added, so you all had some
data with regards to the
services that we're providing
across the state. Um, this
actually gives a breakdown with
regards to the services, um,
that we're currently providing
and asking assistance with
regards to additional funding.
The first two lines.
On the graph or for sexual
assault victim services and the
voca cuts. This funding request
is specifically for victim
service organizations to provide
much-needed critical services to
victims in our state. We are the
administering agency for this
funding. So we, money doesn't
come to us, we're just the flow
through organization and it goes
directly to all the service
providers across the state.
Sexual assault victims victim
services, which is led by the
New Mexico Coalition.
Uh, New Mexico coalition of
sexual assault programs, they
continued to do incredible work.
Some of that $2 million request
is for their helpline. Um, they
were
This year, their funding
supported is ongoing
establishment of the Mexico
sexual assault helpline. But in
addition, they are expanding
services throughout the state,
creating new sane units which
are sexual assault nurse
examiner units across the state,
but then also going to rural
parts of the state.
And ensuring that there's access
to services as well. The next
line item which is line item
number 2 on your graph, members
of the committee, is for $1
million for the voca cut. Again,
where the administering agency,
this money would be administered
out to all the service
organizations across the state.
Um, and we are anticipating,
unfortunately, um, as you all
are well aware. Yesterday, we
pivoted.
Because um we, myself and our
chief financial officer, we
scrambled to make sure that we
were able to draw down as much
of the federal obligation as we
possibly could, meeting federal
guidelines.
Um, but, uh, and we did it
within the time limit required
by the feds. So, um, we, we left
the office about 7:30 last
night, um, and, and not, but it
was a good exhaustion because we
were able to access the funding
that we needed. So we're able to
support our projects, at least
for the next couple of months.
Um, and now that the
Um, it's the, uh, the, uh, pause
has been rescinded. We don't
anticipate that there's any
potential ongoing issues. Um, in
addition, we have, um,
The third line is for crime
victims.
Uh, crime victims compensation,
which we referred to as care and
support. Our crime victims, um,
again, we continuously see
increases in demand to direct
victim compensation. So again,
all of the service organizations
provide our compensation
application to victims of
violent crime, and we are
currently paying out, um,
significantly more every year.
Conservatively, we're looking at
about a 9% increase next fiscal.
year, but at the current rate
that we're expending money,
we're gonna run out of money.
So I, I, um,
With regards to the graph, it is
a $4 million ask. We understand
that it adds an incredibly
significant amount of money, um.
We our agency does an incredible
job at administering that
funding. We have a less than 1%
reversion rate when it comes to
that. I know that one of the
questions was asked about
performance data, we have
performance data because we
Not annually, but every, every 2
to 3 years, we get audited by
the Office of the Inspector
General, Office of Chief
Financial Office Office of
Victims of Crime, Office for
Victims of
uh violence against women, a
Bureau of Justice Affairs, and
then obviously our annual agency
audit is conducted. Um,
I have provided all of the
committee members, a copy of our
annual report that gives you
additional data as to what we're
doing with not just our
compensation funding, but all um
both uh federal and state
appropriations to these
nonprofit organizations. I want
to thank you for the opportunity
to, to present, and these
gentlemen, although we're not
all on the same page, they
understand and where we're,
we're um
We respect each other's position
with regards to how things are
presented. So, but I say that uh
madam chair members of the
committee, um, that, um, I stand
for questions from the
committee.
Thank you so much, uh, members
with questions.
Uh, Representativeer Yen.
Do you have a question?
Oh
You
Uh, with that, I'll entertain
emotion from the vice chair,
ma'am sure I move up LFC
recommendation.
And we have a motion from Vice
Chair Sarno. Second from Brian
Baer.
Are there any objections. With
that, I will say that we have
flagged um the governor's budget
had an extra million dollars for
victims of sexual assault, which
is a very serious problem in our
state. Um, so we have flagged
that.
Um, at this time for adjustments
with the chair and the vice
chair of, of appropriations.
Thank you very much for your
presentation. Much appreciated.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
OK. Thank you. Our next is the
Homeland Security and Emergency
Management Agency 795.
On page 388.
All right, madam chair, members
of the committee, you'll see
some familiar faces for this
presentation. I just realized,
welcome back.
My name is Scott Sanchez of the
LLC analyst for Public Safety,
uh, with me today, um, my
counterpart from DFA executive
analyst Jimenez, uh, I just in
general, Miguel are you are
acting Secretary for Homeland
Security and state fire marshal
Randy B. So, um, with that, I'll
go quickly. Um, the LFC and
executive budget
recommendations um are
relatively different in terms of
general fund, but for other
revenue sources, it's not very
different. Um, the LFC
recommendation increases the
Federal fund for Homeland by
122,000 or 3% for FY 26, whereas
the executive, um,
Increase the general fund by
A little under a million
dollars, 953.2,000 or 23.8%.
The LFC recommendation funds
increased group insurance rates
and audit and compliance costs.
Um, again, this is kind of in
line with the goal of solving
some of the issues that have
been flagging past audits, um,
whereas the executive ads for
reasons that Diego can kind of
speak to here in a moment, um,
as far as performance
recommendations, we did reach
consensus that with that, Diego,
do you want to talk a little bit
about the differences on the
executive side.
Thank you, Scott. Um, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
um,
Yeah, the executive
recommendation included 325,000
for a grants management software
that will just relatively small
investment into this kind of
software for the agency will
provide a really significant and
substantial difference in in how
they're able to manage.
Yeah.
Hundreds of millions of dollars
in federal funding. Um, it would
really be a game changer for
them. And um in addition to
that, they
The Department of Homeland
Security is
They manage or not
100% sure what word to use here,
but, but the uh statewide public
safety radio services are housed
in their property and they are
charged by do it, um.
So they have to pay about
$300,000 a year for this service
that all of the
Local entities then also use um
So the executive recommendation
includes funding to cover that
cost for them.
Um, with that said,
As I mentioned that the, the
grants management software will
go a long way to help them cover
some of the audit and compliance
issues that they are are facing
and um otherwise.
You know, but
Legislative recommendation was,
was $70,000 for that and um.
You know, the executive has some
confidence that that they could
find $70,000 within their budget
to do that and that the greater
priority from the executive and
from the department was for the
grant management software.
And for the uh
The radio services.
Um
And in addition to that, the uh
executive recommendation also
included $440,000 to uh fund the
uh
Uh, disaster unit that I think
uh General Aguilar can, can
speak to in greater detail, but
that will also
Be a a significant investment
for the agency to start
transitioning away from a
contract and and into greater
management and having
um, some of their stuff
available for immediate
deployment when there are
emergency situations in order to
help the local communities that
are.
Facing an emergency situation
and also have to do a bunch of
emergency financial.
Of that 442,000 that the
executive recommend recommended,
excuse me.
Um, half of that is general fun,
the other half is federal,
includes 5 additional positions.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair members of the
committee again, uh, good to see
you again. It's been a while.
Um, before I get started, I want
to, uh, uh, and I'll, and I'll
let the farm marshal speak as
well on his budget, but, um, I
wanted to
This is very, very difficult for
me.
I was a police officer for 20
years. I, I like somehow find
myself uh supervising the state
fire marshal, and I see a bunch
of fire service guys that are
here, and I have to thank them
for being here, uh, to support,
um, the fire marshal's office
and so I say it in jest because
I love our firefighters, but
there's a bunch of them that
were here, uh, just, just to
show their support for the fire
marshal and what he's trying to
do with his academy that they
want to build here in Santa Fe,
which will from from mass
drastically changed the way that
we deliver training for.
fire service across the entire
state, so thank you guys for
being here. Um, uh, getting back
to DHS here real quick, um.
I want to point out a couple of
things that I think are
incredibly important. Um,
The
The world and our environment
has changed.
Don't know why. Doesn't really
matter. We're dealing with the
implications over the last few
years.
Uh, we are now in the recovery
of multiple presidential
disasters, Hermit Palf Canyon,
uh, Riodoso Roswell, um,
And there's likely more to come,
and it almost it seems like at
least 1 or 2 every year, uh,
that we're gonna have to deal
with, and there's a cascading
effect that occurs from that
because we're still dealing with
Hermit's peak A Canyon. The
fires in Rio, and the recovery
in Roswell. And so, um, this
agency has been honestly
woefully understaffed to do the
work that it needs to do to
manage the millions of dollars
that come into the state to keep
track of it.
Keep track of the millions of
dollars in emergency orders that
we, that we go through on almost
a yearly basis, um, and provide
the service that every one of
those New Mexicans.
Whether their disaster was 4
years ago, or the disasters
tomorrow, uh, deserves to have.
And so the expansion that we
asked for this year, uh, in
personnel was driven with that
thought in mind. I have a
contract with a, with a
contractor for $2 million or I'm
sorry, that would cost us $2
million of state money, uh, to,
to provide uh the same level of
support that that contractor
does. Now we're using federal
money, it's not costing the
state to do it now, but we're
building institutional
knowledge.
And how to manage these things.
With people who will leave.
Um, when the money runs dry.
In fact, I can't even hire them
because many of them have
noncompete clauses, so even if I
wanted to hire them, I can't
hire them.
We've got to set about
Hiring, you know, people that
work for the state of New
Mexico, who could do this level
of work. And so some of what
we've asked for is expansion in
finance to get our finances
better. We're doing
significantly better in the last
2 or 3 years, no doubt, there's
much, much work that needs to be
done, and the rest is to build
this disaster unit.
So that we can send out state
employees when these disasters
hit.
And start going door to door and
help um our victims.
Work through the incredibly,
like, a difficult process of
working through FEMA
reimbursements or working
through state funding that's
available for them.
That is, that is the, the bulk
of what we talked about, Diego
talked about the, the radio
service money that we've asked
for, um,
I'm not sure why DHSEM.
Pays that bill, um, but they've
been paying it for years. It
comes out of a grant, and when I
pay that bill out of a grant,
that means it's grant money that
someone else uh doesn't get.
And and uh and then I'll, I'll
leave you with this thought when
it comes to DHSEM.
Um
We use about $4.5 million in
federal grants.
To fund this agency's personnel.
Year to year.
We spent
Just a little over $2 million in
state funding.
Um
We don't know where that federal
funding is going.
Uh, in the years that come.
But we need that, we know that
we need more personnel than we
currently have. And so we've got
a set back to look at almost 60%
of our personnel costs being
paid with federal grants.
Um, is, is a, is a very, it's
there's a lot of risk that we're
managing and doing that.
The other thing is the bulk of
that money comes from EMPG
funding, which is for emergency
management.
Uh, if we weren't spending it at
the state level.
We could be pushing it down the
locals.
To help them, um, provide the
level of emergency management
that they need so that instead,
most counties where there's only
one emergency manager, maybe
there's 2 or 3, or we can build
the capability with that funding
to create emergency management
teams to send out so that day
one, every one of these
emergency managers have what
they need.
Um
And so with that, I'll turn it
over to the fire chief and he
can talk a little bit about
their fire.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
Um, I'm Randy loves to fire
Marshall. So with our budget
this year as we've been working
our projections in the last few
years or probably in the last
1015 years, our projections have
been very low with the monies
that we distribute to our local
fire department around the
state. So this year what we're
doing is we're working on the
operating budget. We're trying
to increase our budget to the
10.29.
And with the distribution, we
also put $750,000 into repara.
That's where the volunteer
retirement.
So which helps our volunteers
once they get 25, 10 years or 25
years of service, our
distribution this year we would
like to increase that to about 1
123 million.
And to our grant funding would
be about 22 million.6. Our grant
funds will actually drop. This
year we give out 32 million and
it'll drop down by about 10
million, but you'll see an
increase in the distribution and
on the distribution, it really
helped the departments upfront.
It's a lot of departments don't
get a grant, and we only have so
much money to give out yearly.
So with the distribution, you'll
kind of balance it out.
So that's for a total of
increase of $48,699.34 3.4%
increase to the 200 and 13.5% to
the to the 400.
That's what we're looking at for
this year.
So we also have, uh, we're
actually asking for more money
this year. We're asking for
money for our training academy,
uh, in Santa Fe, it's a.
Which is very important. It's
very important to me. It's very
important to the fire service in
New Mexico.
Oh.
Different.
OK.
OK.
Sounds good. OK, so on the uh
budget that that's our budget
that pretty much covers our
budget for the year on the what
we're asking for for this year.
And if we go over to the
priorities for SFMO total
request of 577,700.
We're looking at actually
On our 200s, we're asking for
210,700 to support homeland
security. Homeland Security
actually supports us with
financial, legal, human
resources fleet facility,
information and technology. So
they do provide a lot of
services for the fire marshal's
office.
So that's 210,000 that we're
requesting on the FF20 FY 2526
that's from other 400s, we're
asking for 367,000 increase on
equipment, travel, employs fuel
courses, materials, and other
operational costs. So for the
equipment, it's equipment mostly
for the fire academy and Soorro.
Sokoro, as you are aware, was
built back in 1989. We put a lot
of money into this department in
the last couple of years.
So we're trying to increase it
and improve the surro
facilities.
So we're working really, really
hard to improve those facilities
and the fuel or code
enforcement, uh, our current
enforcement, this guy's traveled
4 days of the week. This guy
spent 4 nights out on the field.
Uh, they travel daily, uh,
they're putting up to 40,000
miles up.
Per vehicle per year. So it's
very expensive. Of course
materials through the academy as
we increase our classes at the
academy, uh, we've increased
them to 385 classes per year,
3200 students.
That we've seen and then uh
Numerous hours of training, and
then other operational costs.
That's what I got for our for
our budget for the fire marshal.
Um, and you'd like to say
anything more before we go to
our members.
OK, members.
OK.
OK. Representative Baca.
OK.
I'm sorry, Representative Baca.
Representative Chatfield will go
first.
Thank you, Madam chair.
Good afternoon, everybody. Thank
you for being here. Uh.
OK.
I'm sponsoring some committee
legislation that will establish
two funds.
Uh, I know whenever our state
caught on fire this last time,
this, I know one day they
governor wrote 27 emergency uh
edicts to fund that fighting of
that fire. So,
Uh, we need to stop doing that.
We need to have uh I think the
first one is get ready, get set,
and the 2nd.
fund is go man go, right?
Mobilization, go fight the fire.
And so I'm excited about doing
that. I, and, uh, so I'm, I'm
looking here and I'm, I'm seeing
6 funds that exist today. I just
wanted to ask you guys a little
bit about the, the uh, the first
thing I see is the Governor's
disaster declarations and I see
about $75 million sitting in
there. Is that what was left
over after we fought fire, and
it kind of sitting there to
fight fire again. Tell me about
that fun just to
Minute just a little bit about
it.
Governor's disaster.
79,500 Homeland Security. Last
year it had 43.
Man, this year 75 million, Madam
Chair Representative Chatfield.
So, so those are, those are the
accumulation of, of where those
EO's go. Yes, um, and
For each one, and they're
specific to
a, a particular uh disaster or
at least a set of them can be,
right? So for a particular
incident, um, and then so many
times, um, that disaster may not
be done for several years. Yes,
uh, and so that funding may
reside within that accounting
before it gets reverted back to
the state, uh, till we're
completely closed, and so that's
one of the things that, uh,
from, from a DHSEM perspective,
we've been working very hard.
To get the software and the
finance and the budgeting staff
in place to make sure that we're
managing those, uh, much better
to ensure that we're reverting
that money back as quickly as we
can so that it goes back into
the pot of money that could be
used for the state.
And, and that's perfectly fine.
I'm just trying to, I need to
understand it so I can do a good
job for, for you. And I also
wonder if that money goes over
into any of these new funds that
we're creating, uh, you know,
this is, it does not, Scott, OK,
so Matam to Representative
Chatville, and I only know this
because Natural Resources was my
block before this, but the funds
that we're talking about in the
committee sponsored legislation
are specifically for the state
forestry program. That was the
result of a lot of conversations
between LFC, the executive, and
the Pew Charitable trusts to
kind of solve a problem that
was.
Flag bye about how state
wildfires are funded best
practices from other states,
something that New Mexico is
going to try.
The homeland aspect of that has
not yet been contemplated and
it's something that we've kind
of flagged as maybe the LLC can
get into it in the future
interim, but this pot of money
that you're seeing in the back
of volume 3 is specifically for
disasters that go back as far as
fires in the Gila in the 2010s
that are only for those
purposes. So, you know, money
from the black fire, that'll get
reverted once those emergencies
are closed out. I'm, I'm good,
and I, I thank you for
explaining that. I knew that
that money went to State
Forestry. I didn't, I know that
when a fire starts, there's a
lot of
people fighting it and I didn't
know how that, uh, how that
worked to, how you guys work
together. And so that helps me a
lot now and we need a little
money there to you to finish up.
my second question.
Um, I hope is as easily
explained. Uh.
That's the federal fund.
And I see that it was 25 million
in the negative last year in 53
million in the negative this
year. And uh just, is that a
reimbursement? It's not, so it's
just nearly doubled in the
period of a year, we're not
getting reimbursed for some of
the work we're doing, what's
happening there?
Let me bring Allie in here. This
is Deputy Cabinet Secretary I'm
not trying to make be a rabble
rouser. I'm just trying to
understand it, so.
Madam, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Chatfield. So
what that is, what you're seeing
right now is the, oh sorry, I
apologize. My name is Ali Rye.
I'm the state director for
Department of Homeland Security,
um, I cover the program side of
the house, so all the responses
to the um any kind of disaster
that goes on runs through
through my side of the house.
Um, so what you're seeing right
now is the um drawdowns that are
coming from, so the way that it
works is for the most part,
DHSEM upfronts the money we pay
for the.
disaster as it comes when the
feds come in, they reimburse us.
It's a reimbursement grant. So
what you're seeing is the
exchange of the federal and
state dollars, so the feds are
paying us back, so that's the
reason that those dollars are
starting to come down. We've
been drawing down the money to
reimburse the state back for the
dollars that they've already
expended.
So they owe us a little money
right now. They owe us a lot of
money, sir.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Baca.
Thank you, Madam Chen. Thank you
for your presentation.
I'm gonna be looking at page 3
on your uh
Your dip sheet here.
Uh, it's under personnel
services and employee, let's
see, uh.
Page 3.
Can you explain the, the
increase, almost the $11 million
increase.
Under personnel services there.
Um
We looked at as far as 25, we
looked at $7 million.
And then basically we're looking
at $18 million.
Request for, for this year, so
it's page 3 personal services
and employee benefits, and it
also appears, I mean, and this,
again, it's
That, that doesn't include any
new FTE, so can you tell me just
briefly what
What that is, what that means.
All right, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Baca. So if you
notice the other revenue sources
kind of balloon this year in
both the LFC and the executive
recommendation, um, where you'll
see, you know, a 455% increase
in federal revenue. That is kind
of a corresponding increase in
the uh
Personnel services and employee
benefits, recognizing that part
of what's been flagged in the
kind of the turnover and
secretaries is that the way that
the funding was allocated and
accounted for in budgeting
practices, wasn't always in line
with what ended up happening in
the budget. And so what, um,
this.
Both recommendations are
attempting to account for is
that they know there is going to
be a massive amount of federal
money coming in, the better they
can budget for that from the
beginning and their personnel
budget, the better they're able
to staff up and kind of be
prepared, um, while, of course,
the executive.
Recommendation includes a higher
general fund number to kind of
include those baseline
positions.
They're not increasing the
permanent FTE because so much of
what they do is in the
contracts. And so you'll see
that there's a huge number, like
the number uh for contractual
services agency-wide jumps from,
you know, uh,
4.8 million, I'm sorry, 2.4
million in their FY 25 operating
budget to almost $8 million this
time, um, we look at the grants
that go out to local
governments, jumping from 123.2
million to almost 385 million.
So it's so much of the work
being done in the grants and the
contracts, and a little bit of
it in PSEB. That's what you're
seeing there.
Yeah, thank you for the
explanation. Thank you, Madam
Chair, because yeah, I was.
Can I address that question too?
Um, as Scott said, it is
primarily like a uh accounting
and and budgeting practice. Um,
it is a significant increase in
federal revenue, and that is
because of the way that they
they were budgeting it, they had
these.
These federal grants that were
budgeted outside of the
operating budget and over the
last year.
Within the last year, they
decided to move those into the
operating budget, so the federal
funds shot way up, and then
after we did that, you know,
communicating with the, the, the
department a lot. We've realized
that.
You know, that $255 million and
In federal revenue. They're
they're not gonna spend that all
in one year, the $11 million
increase that you are asking
about in the personal services,
they're not gonna do all of that
in one year.
So in consultation with them,
you know, I've asked them to
sort of relook at that and
reconsider it, and
Because the, the, the money, the
dollar amounts that we have here
include grants that will last
for 434 or 5 years. And so
we've, I've asked them to look
at it again and
So we could, you know,
appropriately right size their
budget and have it in the right
place, whereas before they
Had it in a different place.
I
And then they would bar it in or
do some do some sort of
budgeting mechanism. They, they
would, they would expand it
outside of the operating budget
and um.
So that that's one of the things
that we've changed and by May
1st when the operating budgets
are due, I would expect that to
come down quite a bit to have a
smaller single year amount for
FY 26.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that answer. So, is that
the reason why we haven't
planted numbers here and our
volume 2 on page 388 down there
looks like, and again, I had to
put on my glasses here because
I've been in my chair for 10
hours already and uh
You just decide my lunch was
peanuts and a Pepsi, so, uh.
$280 million. Is that, is that
correct? Cause I
Can you just, I mean, I, I want
brief as far as that cause I do
want to talk about your fire
academy and training center, so.
Just help me to understand that
is this kind of a similar
Uh, scenarios we have with the
increased fund, page 388 volume
2.
I'm sure what he's looking at
that. Do you mind if I add on a
little bit more. So, um,
Representative Baca, one of the
things too that I think it's,
it's important to know is, so
our EMPG fund very much like
Scott, um, and then talked about
is a 3 year grant, so we, we
receive a chunk of change for 3
years. That dollar amount is not
just for personnel services for
us. It's also personalnel
services for our local emergency
managers, but it also includes
some additional funding for us
for operating budget. So what
you're also seeing there and the
reason that the shuffle
sounds a little crazy is because
when we moved over into this
new, we had a new administration
come in. We moved it from the
multiple years, and then we
condense it all into one year.
We are also seeing is every time
a disaster occurs,
unfortunately, but fortunately
enough, the federal government
gives DHSEM a portion of that
federal disaster for us to
operate off of. So you're gonna
see those numbers rise and jump
with each federal disaster that
comes.
in, we get a chunk of change off
that. It's not always
reoccurring. It's just something
that you get as a one time
allocation whenever a disaster.
Thank
you. We'll probably touch up
based offline so I just that I
can understand. I'm not gonna
waste, I won't say waste more
time. I'm not gonna spend more
time on it. Uh, Madam, I do want
to talk about the fire training
academy.
Um
Tell me, as far as I know, our
current one is in Socorro. Is
that, is that correct, uh, Madam
Chair and committee, uh.
Our to our state fire marshal.
Uh, how many, how many folks are
trained in that facility in
Socorro.
And what would the impact of a
new facility due for the
overall, uh, our ability to help
and to respond to disasters in
our in our state.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative.
So we currently train, I'm gonna
get a number from my assistant,
uh, Anthony, how many numbers do
we have for last year, 3000?
I think last year we ran about
3000.
Students through the fire
academy.
So the impact there with the
academy, it's one of the issues
we're having as uh increase in
training growth, we actually
have 3 training rooms at the
academy. We have 2 in the main
facility, one in the fire
station. The max that we can
hold in those screening rooms is
20 personnel, and we usually
have to open up the fire station
base to hold classes. So this
would actually really support
the southern part of the state
and northern part of the state,
it would break it up, and we
could use our facility in Santa
Fe for advanced classes.
Because this would be training
rooms that we have. We're not
gonna have any props, any burn
facilities in Santa Fe, or
facilities for burning of be in
the sourro area.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
thank you for that answer. I, I,
I do believe that uh
That the proposed training
facility in Santa Fe is nearing
our National Guard as far as uh
property. So, uh, Madam Chair,
in uh state fire marshal, so
One of the concerns is so, is
that it would impact and we'd be
looking at closing this, the
facility in Socorro. Can you
briefly address that because I
know as we, as we talked about
and discussed it, um, can you
just elaborate on that? You did
say about that you will not have
any burn, uh.
As far as apparatus here or
training here,
Madam Chair Representative,
that's correct, uh, the
facilities will not shut down.
The facility support will
continue because that's a prime
academy for the state of New
Mexico. We currently do all our
burns there. We have all our
props incorro.
So we do fuel burns in Socorro,
and we're one of 3 in the nation
can actually do the burns. We
cannot bring any that any type
of, uh, fuel burns into Santa
Fe, Albuquerque, or any other
part of the state because
environmental will not approve
that.
So that's in that move. We
currently have $2 million to do
upgrades at the Socorro
facility. We did a master plan
last year with the cost of
$102,000 which gave us all the
breakdown of the needs and what
we have to replace in that area.
So we have committed. Last year
we committed a little over a
million dollars to the the
academy.
So, uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for that answer. So
you're right, so you're saying,
how would it, how would as far
as differ as far as what we'd be
doing? Would we be supporting
some of Roland uh in in
firefighting as far as in our
forest fires and our response to
like the fires that have
happened up in the cal fire and
otherwise. Is that what we're
looking at? Are we looking at
storage of equipment? What, what
are we looking at for that
training facility?
Ah, Madam chairs representative,
the facility here in Santa Fe
would actually hold offices for
the fire marshals personnel, who
also have training rooms that
will hold up to 40 people, an
auditorium, the important part
about this facility we would
have the firefighter memorial.
There will be inclusive to this.
It would be part of the
facility. So we would hold
indoor classes in Santa Fe, uh,
which will support the northern
part and any part of the state,
and if we have to move
personally to Socorro, what we
would do is they would only
spend 2 days in Socorro doing
their actual burns, instead of
spending a week or two in
Sapporo. Uh, we have a lot of
people, a lot of volunteers that
have to travel from this area,
even when they, when you got to
take thee personnel out of the
city of Santa Fe and.
Go for 2 weeks, they got to
bring other personnel in and
they got to pay overtime plus
the per game. And I think the
cost for firefighters to go to
somewhere between $11,000 and
$1200 per student.
So if they go up to score for a
couple of days that really cuts
down the cost.
For this areas.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you. I do think that, uh,
you know, as
My support for our first
responders, police fire,
military is definitely there. I
think that we need to, you know,
one, put aside some of the fear
about the corral facility,
figure out how this differs and
also the impact that it has, if
we're talking about having more
firefighters, fire personnel out
there to support our folks and
we make it more efficient.
Uh, and more cost effective, you
know, those are the types of
things that we're interested, so
Adam, thank you.
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
presenters. I just have one
question for clarification. If
I'm looking at the difference,
and I'm going back to look at
your, um,
Your performance measures, and
I'm looking at your percent of
prior year audit findings
resolved. So it's never reached
100%. So it's at 87%. So what is
that audit finding that you all
can't resolve and um
I'm listening.
Mature uh representative heard
it, let, let me have my other
deputy secretary talk about it
because I know that she's been
going deep into this audit
finding, which has been
significantly improved over the
years in timing and the types of
things that we're seeing.
OK
Madam Chair, Representative, oh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Regina Chicone.
I'm the deputy cabinet Secretary
for Homeland Security, Emergency
Management on the uh admin side.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Herndon, the, the finding that
has been reoccurring that we
have the Department of Homeland
Security has been working on
diligently is our federal funds,
our grant funds, which does lead
to the increase because there
was multiple.
Ways of approaching it that our
accountants had advised and so
what we needed to do is we
needed to bring it in and bring
the federal money in and then
draw it down.
Or drawdowns have to be done at
a consistent basis, so we can
expend the money and pay the
invoices for our sub recipients.
So, so that has been the, the
constant.
The constant finding. All the
other findings have actually
gone down in the last two years
significantly. Um, we had at
1.25 findings for our agency,
um, and then the the last two
years, we've only had, we had
one last year. Well, we had 4
recommendations, and this year
we had 3 recommendations and a
finding, a modified finding. And
so, so I do, even though that is
a finding that we have been
working on, it is.
A
We use the analogy. It's really
difficult to turn around the
ship in a in a dock, right? And
so, but we're doing it. We have
a plan. We're working very
diligently to work on that, um,
and, and so it is at the top of
our radar.
And that is one of the reasons,
if I may add, that we are asking
or we asked for the expansion
for our disaster team because
that team would consistently
work on the disasters from the
beginning to the end and track
all of the expenditures, all the
EOs, all of any funds that were
used and then any.
Thank you. Thank you for the
explanation.
I'm that's all, madam chair. I
don't have any other questions.
Thank you, Representative
Serone.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for the presentation and all
the information, um.
I think we need to definitely
fund FTEs.
And, and I'm gonna tell you why
some of you aren't like it, but
um I'm on the energy committee
and we hear about oil and gas
constantly.
Right now we have 70,000 wells
in the Permian and San Juan
Basin.
And of those wells, 70% of those
are polluting beyond the legal
limits.
So that's about 49,000 wells
polluting.
Um, and this causes when they
pollute, they cause higher ozone
levels and ozone levels cause
heating of the, of the, of the
planet and um this contributes
to climate change and climate
change brings on those extreme
fires and floods. So this isn't
going to change. We're going to
have more of these every year
until we get some of this under
control.
But
It's, it's a gas and oil
industry that again pollutes 70,
70% of them polluting beyond the
legal limits. So until we can do
something about that, it's gonna
continue, so we definitely need
to fund you because this is
gonna go on. I just want to make
that comment. Thank you.
Thank you. Are there any more
questions?
Get up, OK, Representative
Fernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Again,
I'm, I've only been on the job
for 7 days, Madam Chair.
You're, yeah, I'm going over
this, uh, multi, you know, um,
uh, this.
To, to me, Madam Chair, you
know, the, the, it's, it's, uh,
the needs there in Madam Chair,
I, I
Uh, in my community of Shiprock.
Uh, in September, we had a
flood.
That resulted in uh 40 families
being homeless.
We, uh, it, it damaged the
administration building of the
school district, and I
immediately went to my, um,
again, I'm, I'm a former
volunteer firefighter. I went to
the fire station and uh they
didn't have the capacity to, to,
to take care of everybody. So
then I went to the San Juan
County Volunteer firefighter,
they were waiting for uh an a uh
for Navajo Nation to issue out
an order. So neutral aid can,
can be done.
And, and I'm just trying to
understand this, Madam Chair, if
uh I could have better
understanding offline on how a
department of Homeland Security
can uh respond uh with mutual
aid to our tribes, pebbles, and
nations, uh, because this is
again very much new to me and
I'm still learning on how we can
better serve our citizens. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much, um, with
that, I'm going to go to our
vice chair for a
Um,
Madam, I'm gonna move the LSC
recommendation.
So a second.
Thank
OK, it's a motion from Vice
Chairer on Serana,
uh, 2 from ranking member
Chatfield, are there any
objections?
Um, I have been asked to flag
the 5 FTEs, so we will flag that
and speak with our HAFC
committee, um, just so you know
that we're gonna do that.
Thank you.
Believe it or not, we're onto
our 5th and final.
Uh, which is the judicial
Standards Commission agency 210.
Yeah.
And it's page 7.
Sorry
In your volume 2.
Yeah
be hard.
OK, I'm just gonna introduce
you, that's fine
Is that right? OK. OK. Sorry
about that.
I'm ready to go
please start. Yes. Uh, good
afternoon, chair, members of the
committee. My name is Felix
Chavez. I am the LFC analyst for
the judicial Standards
Commission. With us is executive
Director Phyllis Dominguez, as
well as Marius Miglia, the DFA
analyst, my counterpart. We're
behind tab 2 in your binders,
agency 210.
For further information in the
volumes, they're in pages 7
through 8.
Being that this is a single pea
code agency, I will be
presenting this and have and of
course allow time for Mario for
comment as well as the executive
director for her presentation.
But with that on the revenue
side, the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by $28.6,000 or
2.5% in the general fund. Not a
very large difference, but that
difference is because the
executive funds pay increases
for staff that qualify.
for the judicial branch
compensation initiative, while
the LFC does not recommend that
because the overall LFC
recommendation funds a
compensation funds compensation
through the compensation package
with that I pass it over to
Mario for his comments. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, committee members,
thank you, Felix. Uh, just
wanted to add that the executive
recommendation, uh, fulfilled
the agency's request of a 3.5%
increase as Felix said, the only
difference is the small pay
increase, which probably isn't
small to the employees, but, uh,
that was requested by the agency
did not fill. So I will hand it
off to the agency right now.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the commission. I appreciate
the opportunity to be here
before you. And I'd also, I
would like to introduce um our
CFO Christy Jos Chavis, who is
here with us today, and the
chair of our commission, Doctor
William Food is also here with
us today and we're requesting
the DFA recommendation which
fully funds the JSE request of
$39,700 and as Felix uh stated
this um is funded as part of the
judicial branch compensation
Initiative, and we are not part.
of the unified budget part of
the judiciary but not part of
the unified budget, but we
follow their pay bands and it's
our understanding that the
judiciary is asking for this
increase of the compensation
initiative for their employees
and as members of the judiciary,
we would also questions.
Questions from the committee.
I do have one question on page
210, a budget issue, um, the
state ethics commission included
provision that expanded the
judicial Standards Commission's
jurisdiction to include hearing
officers of the judicial branch,
then it goes on to say the only
means by which.
These hearing officers may be
brought within the commission's
oversight is by public vote to
amend the constitution until
this unconstitutionality can be
rectified by rescinding the
statutory provision or passing
an amendment to constitution,
the commission will continue to
dismiss complaints filed against
its hearing officers.
How big of a problem is it? Do
you get a lot of complaints
against hearing officers. Well,
Madam Chair, we do not, but this
was, this was repelled in uh
2023, um, the state ethics bill
was passed in 2019 and the
senator just amended a floor
amend amendment to add to expand
our jurisdiction to include
hearing officers administrative
um court judges, workers' comp
judges, but we are a
constitutionally created
commission, so the only way to
expand our jurisdiction to
these hearing officers would be
through constitutional
amendment. So that was struck
from the ethics bill in 2023, so
that is, that is no longer.
So this passage should actually
be corrected in the book. Yes,
ma'am, we, we, we, we got that
updated information once they
were published, that will be
updated in future volumes. OK,
thank you for that
clarification.
Uh, Representative Herndon, uh,
Madam Chair, uh, presenters,
mine is just one for
clarification. So in, in
District 2, judicial District to
the 2nd judicial district,
there's been a request for an
additional judge. So is it the
is it the responsibility of the
judicial standards commission to
determine the viability of that
need.
Um, Madam Chair and represented
Her. It is not.
That is not
It would go through the um
nominating commission.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for the explanation.
See no further questions, uh, go
to Weishererana for a motion. I
move the LFC recommendation.
Donal's 2 it went.
OK.
It's been moved to Sarana,
seconded by Representative
Herndon, are there any
objections? See no objections,
we will accept the LFC
recommendation. Thank you very
much for your patience and
staying here until 5:22.
Thank you, I appreciate your
support.
Thank you.
Uh
You know, there's, we don't have
a comment online and that there
may or may not be.
Are there any public comments?
There's none online. Is there
anybody here wishing to make a
public comment.
OK, see no public comments
online or in person.
This meeting is adjourned.
