Especial supplementals and
deficiencies. We will not be
making any decisions today.
There won't be any sort of
motions members. I do want to
ask, though, as you have
questions If you have concerns
If you have flags, we want to
work timely folks need to
probably leave. Certainly no
later than noon, perhaps a
little bit earlier, but do want
to encourage you members as
there are questions or flags.
Ah to raise those during this
hearing.
We will not be making decisions
Thanks to all, uh, from the
executive and other partners who
are here today if there are
specific questions that we need
in the face the director Sally
and the LFC staff for being
here, Okay with that we will go
to Mr Simmons. The start us off.
Oh, yes.
Thank you, Mr Chair for the
indulgence Just for a minute. I
think for any of the newer
members of our committee, it
would be good if they understood
what the different sections
someone correct me If I'm wrong,
that section five is specials.
Six is deficiencies. Section
nine is trust Account section 10
is fund transfers and then we
have our appropriation, so
I hope that's accurate. I think
that's helpful. I hope
absolutely represent Brown.
Thank you for bringing that up.
That is accurate. And Mr Simon's
Mr Miller as we go through
within our packet, please. For
the suggestion, maybe take a
little bit of time. I know
there'll be folks online who are
watching as well. Think it's a
good idea. Cool.
Yes. Oh, Jesus. Thank you. Good
morning, Mr Chairman. Members of
the committee. Um, as you said,
my name is Joseph Simon I'm, an
analyst with the Legislative
Finance Committee.
And just very quickly going to
go over some some big picture
items with the LFC
recommendations for specials,
supplementals and deficiency
appropriations. So, Mr Chairman,
you all began this week and
probably feels like ages ago
now, but began this week hearing
a report from the States
economists on the historic
revenue growth we've seen over
the last few years.
Also, as part of that report
you've seen, uh
A slowing of that growth, and
that presents you all with a
challenge of growing budgets.
Despite that, that slow growth
at the same time over the
interim, the LFC spent a
significant amount of time
diving in deep into agency
performance management through
the legislative process,
emphasizing that
You know program designed around
evidence based programming is
the best way to get results for
New Mexicans. So in the fall
when we received requests from
agencies for special
appropriations, you know they
responded to that record revenue
growth requesting a total of
$2.8 billion in special
appropriations for the for
mostly
For spending and the next fiscal
year. In some cases they were
for transfers to trust funds or
for
Programs that are taking a multi
year strategy to to spend a
large amount of money, But there
was a lot of requests for
spending. Um
So the L. C embarked on a
strategy that, uh
Looked at. How do we spread out
the historic revenues that you
all have been saying over the
next couple of years, pushing
out that date at which you're no
longer able to grow budgets at
the rate that you've been
growing them over the past
couple of years?
So the LFC recommendation totals
2.752 billion around the same
amount requests from agencies
But pursuits of strep, a
strategy of making consistent
investments over time with a
mechanism called the Government
Accountability Trust. So the
overall the LFC recommendation
includes a total of $1.4 billion
in transfers to funds, including
$300 million
To the Government Accountability
Program Fund. Uh, for, uh, for
appropriation in the current
year and an additional $663
million in the in a transfer to
the Government Accountability
Trust that would allow you all
to invest in programs in future
years.
So, Mr Chair on page one of your
packet, Um, looks like looks
like this. Uh, there is we begin
a list of some of those areas of
investment and
The LFC took
Approach of of looking at, you
know programs that were
Requested by agencies that were
promising that maybe didn't have
all of the evidence based
backing. So looked at those.
This is an opportunity to you
know, funding agencies for those
programs consistently over four
years from FY 25 through 28 and,
you know, really embed that
That program evaluation aspect
in there to make sure that you
all are getting the best results
for the amount of money that is
being invested by the state.
So there are a couple of areas
that were big in the in the
Government Accountability Trust,
looking at Workforce
development, health outcomes and
child well being.
So to start with Mr Chair,
There's $127 million for the
Public Education Department for
several different programs,
programs, including investments
in Career technical education
programs, steam programs,
support for new educators
entering the classroom as well
as some some pay incentives
designed to get. Um uh
You know to incentivize
educators to go into some of
those hard to fill special
education vacancies. There's
also $80 million for the higher
Education Department to support
community college and regional
university workforce training
programs.
There's $20 million for the
early childhood education and
care department to implement and
to again embed a study of wage
and career ladders for the
Childcare Assistance program.
There's $20 million for the
Healthcare Authority Department
to expand evidence based
behavioral health services.
There's a 19.9 million in total
for several programs at the
Children, Youth and Families
Department to expand evidence
based prevention, intervention
and differential response
programs. And really in that
area looking at programs where
over time, the federal
government will pick up a large
share of the expenditures in
that program.
There's $12.5 million for the
aging and long term services
department to, uh, implement and
study the New Mexico program.
There's a 10.4 million for the
Workforce Solutions Department
to look at programming to ensure
that, uh young adults not in
school or remain engaged in the
work force.
Six and 6.5 million for the
office of Family Representation
and Advocacy to look at outcomes
for either Children that are in
the custody of or that are risk
of being in the custody of the
Children, Youth and Families
Department.
$2 million for New Mexico Tech
to look at geothermal resource
Development and $2 million for
Santa Fe Community College to
look at suicide prevention and
training programs.
So, um, with that, Mr Chair,
That's the big highlight 11.
Another big one. I didn't uh,
didn't miss real quick. There's
a $300 million transfer in the
LFC recommendation to the
Conservation Legacy Permanent
fund fully capitalizing that
fund and you know, providing a
stable source of revenue for
those conservation programs in
the future.
And so, with that, Mr Chair, I
will hand it over to Mr Miller
to do a overview of the
Executive recommendation before
we get into the details of the
recommendations. Perfect. Thank
you, Mr Simon.
Thanks. Very, uh, good morning,
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee again. My name is
Simon Miller and I'm an analyst
at D. F a
Good thing today is you can just
say Simon and one of us will
respond. Um
Joey gave a good overview of the
non recurring recommendations.
Um
Between the executive and the
LFC.
Um, if you go to page 31 of the
packet
You'll see the totals.
By each section.
I'll give you a second.
So as representative Brown was
saying.
Section five are special
appropriations, which are valid.
Um, in the last couple of months
of fy 20 for the current year
and then all of fy 25
Section six are supplementals
and deficiencies. So
supplemental is just additional
funding for the current year. A
deficiency is shoring up. Um
Ah, something that was over
spent from the prior year.
And
Then section 10 is funded
transfers as Joey indicated LFC
recommendation is much higher in
fund transfers, largely because
of the
The proposed government
accountability.
And innovation Trust.
I hope I got that right. The
gate fund.
Um
And you'll see the executive
recommendation is quite a bit
higher in Section five and
special appropriations and, um,
a good portion of that comes
down to transportation,
education and housing. So, uh,
with that, we will do our best
to go through this.
30 page document of
appropriations and attempt to
answer all the questions that
you all have. There are some
agency folks here that, uh,
probably
Better equipped to answer
questions than me. Um
But we will do our best. So with
that alternate back to Joey,
and, uh, you all can turn to
page three, and we'll just start
going page by page through this.
Thank you.
And yes, I missed Mr Chair. Um,
as Simon mentioned, you know,
typically we go through this
page by page typically got a
couple of issues to highlight
for you. Um and, uh, just
You know, uh, if how you wanna
handle this is just if we skip
something that the member wants
to ask a question about just let
us know. And we'll go back to
that one. Thank you. I think
members uh what we'll start with
We want to go sort of through
the different area this section,
So as we see, we're starting off
sort of it within the
administrative office of the
courts and some of the other
justice areas.
Let's go through those, and then
we'll pause. See if there's any
questions that way. We're not
sort of interrupting, but we're
taking some fairly frequent
pauses.
Yes, Mr Chairman. So starting
off, as you said, with the
administrative office of the
courts, uh, the LFC
recommendation and includes a
total of 3.8 million for
different court items here. The
bulk of that is wrapped up into
line four. You'll see their $2
million for court technology.
Um, we saw, you know, as as I
mentioned before these
Recommendations were largely
based on agency requests. We saw
a lot of small requests from
courts. All of these were
wrapped up into a single, um
Single recommendation that you
can see online for it, I would
say. Also, in addition to that,
uh, Mr Chair, um
The administrative office of the
Courts requested, you know
significant amount of
reauthorization of, uh, prior
year appropriations that have so
far been unspent. Um, I think
there's a balance. Um, they
asked for, uh, reauthorization
about $19.5 million that, as of
earlier this week had not been
encumbered by the agency. Um
So, uh,
In addition to that 3.8 million,
there's some reauthorization
action there, Simon
Thanks. Very Mr Chair. Members
of the committee, um
The courts. As Joey said, two
minute a variety of requests for
vehicles, security and
technology upgrades, so the
executive recommendation
combined all of those into one
unified recommendation of 10
million for the administrative
Office of the courts for
distribution to each individual
court as they see fit, and
that's on line two.
That's where you'll see. Uh
$10 million recommendation there
for, um for the courts.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. There's also
Ah, relatively small, Uh,
recommendation of $150,000 from
the executive for recruitment
and retention initiatives at the
office of the Public defender.
Um, that's an area of government
that struggles with
Vacancies in turnover. So that's
a small appropriation there to
help the office address that
And Mr Chair. That's that's all
I have on this page three.
Thank you. Let's suppose let's
finish up on the attorney
general side. So, Mr Chair, the
attorney general, um,
appropriations are at the bottom
of Page three and moving on to
Page four. The LFC
recommendation includes 1.5
million for a Crime Gun
Intelligence Center pilot
program with funding from the
Consumer settlement fund.
As well as a $400,000
appropriation for forensic
genetic testing. Also from the
consumer settlement fund.
There's a little bit of a
difference there with the
funding source. The executive
recommendation comes from the
General Fund. What while the LFC
recommendations from the
consumer Settlement fund, Okay,
remembers any questions.
Rep. 700. Please. Thank you, Mr
Chair and presenters in terms.
I'm looking specifically at the
administrative office. I'm
looking specifically at the
administrative office of the
court and both and the
administrative office.
Put in funding for something
called the members of modest
Means program, and that program
was specifically set up to help
individuals when legal aid, for
example, either doesn't have the
capacity or that they they have
some sort of
Obstacle that would prevent them
from being from handling those
cases, and with respect to those
cases, they have helped
individuals in 31 out of the 33
counties, and I am asking, how
is that included in here And if
it isn't that is something that
absolutely needs to be included
and considered. And Mr Chair.
I'm just I'm looking for an
explanation. I This is very new
to me.
So I can find out where we are.
So, Mr Chair just reviewing
this. I don't see a
recommendation for that in
either the executive lfc, but we
can work with our analyst to
follow up and and get an
explanation for for that, Mr
Chair and present us. Thank you
very much. I think that program
is highly important and thank
you for looking into it. I was
quite surprised to see that
neither the executive of the LFC
had made a recommendation
regarding
Because of the importance of
that program. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you, Hernan.
Bye, Sir Dixon.
Thank you, Um
Quickly. Um, do we have for the
public defender, the recruitment
and retention initiatives are
those separate from what? Um, I
mean, the LFC is saying that
those are addressed in the base,
but I'm curious if the L A P D,
um is arguing that they're
different.
So, um
So I'm not sure about the L A. P
D s, um based budget
recommendations. So as a as I
said, this was something that
was looked at. While LFC staff
were working on the base budget
request so we can we can follow
up on on what exactly was in the
base budget for that, And if
some sometimes we moved things
from the base budget, two
special appropriations,
sometimes the reverse direction
so we can see
Thank you, Joey. Another quick
question. Um, for security for,
um
The AOC.
Obviously, it's rolled into the
executive $10 million request.
but then for the LFC
recommendation, it's just
multiple technology requests. So
where is funding for security
for the courts? So, um
Mr Chair and representative
Dixon, so it would depend on the
type of security if it were, um,
a
If there were more of a capital
item, and it could be there if
it were an operating budget
item. It could be there. But
you're correct. The LFC
recommendation focuses on those
technology needs at the courts.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much, Mr Dixon.
Okay, Uh, please keep on
continued going. Oh,
you want to talk about taxing?
Um, Mr Chair members of the
committee, turning now to Page
four.
Uh, line 17, the state auditor
for virtual server
infrastructure that was just
taking care of through a board
of finance emergency Grant.
Uh um.
Then.
Uh, on line 20, you'll see a $3
million recommendation from the
executive for, uh, the Taxation
and Revenue department and that
that 3 million is contingent on
the Legislature, making some
sort of change to the tax code.
This session. Um anytime that
you all change the tax code
their implementation costs for
TRD. So that is what that
appropriation is for, and I'll
let Joey talk on this. But the
LFC has funding. I'm not exactly
sure of the exact amount, but
it's it's in a different area of
the recommendation.
Yes. So, um, Mr Chair and and
members So again, this is this
is sort of a speculative one. So
it wasn't included included
here, However, there is language
included, Um and you can see
that on your language only only
sheet that would allow text, the
Taxation and Revenue Department
to access up to $2 million. I
think this is three. That's
inaccurate. It's $2 million.
Um, from the appropriation
contingency fund, subject to
approval of an expenditure plan
by the State Board of Finance.
Alright, Mr Chair members of the
committee, um
So lines 24, 34, 35 and 36 are
all related to housing, and this
is one of the largest areas of
focus within the executives non
recurring budget recommendation.
Line. 24 is a $250 million
recommendation. We have just
members real quick. We have that
online 23, So I'm sorry, Simon.
Yeah?
You're fine. My apologies, Mr
Chair. Uh, I might
Be throwing you off for a couple
hours here, then? No, I think
the these generals should be
right. That one. All right? My
apologies. Um
Lines. Where was I?
$250 million recommendation for
the Mortgage Finance Authorities
Housing Trust fund and whine. 35
is another $250 million
recommendation for MM Phase
Opportunity Enterprise Fund.
The Opportunity Enterprise Fund
will require a statutory change,
branding the use of that fund to
include housing.
Overall, the purpose of this of
these significant investments of
$500 million in total.
Is to expand. Um, the
development of an access to low
to moderate income housing
statewide.
According to a May 2023 report
from the LFC. The supply of
affordable rental units in New
Mexico has declined by 50% since
2020 since 2017 rent in New
Mexico is increased by 70%.
while wages have only grown by
15%.
Additionally, almost half of all
renters are considered cost
burden, meaning that they spend
at least 30% of their income. On
how line 36 is a $40 million
recommendation to expand
services for those experiencing
homelessness.
From 2022 to 2023 homelessness
increased by 48% in New Mexico.
And the estimated annual cost to
taxpayers and hospitalization,
incarceration, medical
treatment. Emergency shelters,
uh, is over $100 million
estimated to be therefore, the
executive recommends a
substantial investment to
address this issue.
Finally line 34 is a $1 million
recommendation for start up
costs to implement an office of
housing at D. F a to serve as
the centralized state entity
responsible for statewide
planning and coordination goal
setting technical assistance
monitoring industry trends and
forming policy recommendations.
Um, so in total
That I believe was $541 million
towards housing.
Uh um, Various components of
housing in the executive
recommend, and, Yeah, Mr
Chairman, just, uh, comment on
housing Very quickly. Um, you
won't see anything here, but
there is in the LFC
recommendation. A, um, a $50
million transfer to the housing
Trust fund. Um, well, we'll see
that a little bit later. Also,
if you flip over to Page five
for the LFC DFS recommendations
You can see there is, uh on line
31 $10 million for transitional
housing and shelter facilities
for victims of domestic
violence. Um other items for D F
A in the lfc recommendation
includes $50 million for
regional recreation centers and
Quality of Life grants
continuing program that you all
have funded for the last several
years. That gives grants to
local governments for those, uh
Recreation centers and other
programs.
Um, also point out on a line 28.
There's a recommend. There was a
recommendation from
The executive related to
providing matching funds to
local government, tribal
governments and and state
agencies. Um, for, um, to be
able to go after, um federal
grant opportunities, so the
executive has $100 million in
that pot and, um the LFC
recommendation has $20 million
with an additional
$58 million on line 32 related
specifically to little local
infrastructure projects. Thanks,
Joey. Uh, Mr Chair members of
the committee staying
In this area of the packet D F a
Um, line 27 in line. 37. I hope
those are right. Uh,
There's uh, those are $35
Million recommendations from the
executive for law enforcement
recruitment and firefighter
recruitment.
So 35 million for each bucket.
Uh this funding will be used to
assist local departments
statewide to hire new, uh,
police officers and new
firefighters. The Legislature
appropriated 50,000,002 DF to
for lunch force. Mint
recruitment. Uh, last year and
the year before I believe in the
$50 Million ballpark. Um and the
FAA is distributing that funding
to local law enforcement entity
statewide over a three year
period.
The funding pays for 100% of the
salaries of a certain number of
new officers in year one, and
then the funding tapers off. Uh,
so those entities can then work
those new positions into their
own based budgets. Um
Over time.
Great. Okay. Thank you very
much. We have some questions on
the FAA will start with Epsom
Luhan, and we've got to make a
member. I'm sure
Thank you. Thank you for
clarifying some of the housing
stuff suit.
The allocation under the phase
specials E equals to the but
it's over the 500 million that
we saw from the executives
budget request. Is that correct,
Mr Chair?
Um
I'm sorry. I'm sorry, Mr Chair
Representing you Repeat your
question. I didn't catch the
beginning of the housing. Um,
request under the executive Ask
The total of those those, um
Those amounts equal to $500
million that we heard from the
executive budgets request
earlier this week. Is that
correct?
Mr Chair, Representative, Luhan,
Uh, yeah. Yes, The 500 million
is the 250 to the Housing Trust
fund at M F A and then 252 nmfs
Opportunities Enter Opportunity
Enterprise Fund. That's the 500
million. I believe you're
referring to you, and will this
be contingent upon alleged? Yeah
legislation, especially with it,
creating the housing
Um, unit at C F a
Um, office. Excuse me, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair. Members of the
committee. Um, the 250 million
for the Opportunity Enterprise
Fund, I believe requires this
statutory change to expand the
language to allow the use of
that fund towards housing.
Um, the office of Housing at D F
A. I
Think requires legislation, but
I'm not 100% sure, and I
apologize for that. So I'll
check on that. I just if you
clarify it with us, Um, I'm
gonna just focusing again on
some of the things I did.
Yesterday. Um, regarding, um
Especially for the $100 million
to provide matching assistant
pay line 28 to provide matching
assistance to local entities
were matching local and federal
funds and it looks like we're
putting 20 million in there. I
think we need to do more, Mr.
Chair. I just like to
To work on that to see how much
more but I don't I think 20
Million is not gonna
Get us to where we need to. For
all that That fund can do across
our state, and then I just
wanted to point out lying 27. I
believe there's going to be
legislation for this as well. If
you've heard about that for the
Department of Finance to the
Firefighter recruitment fund.
And that was legislation that
was passed last year. But you
have someone work on the
governor pocket, vetoed that,
and I think it's coming back
around so that we could work on
it this year. So I'd like to
just, um, point those two things
out.
And and you cleared up, you'll
clear up the housing part with
me, too, because I think we need
to understand what parts of the
this these specials require Some
legislation to back them. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Remember Armstrong, Mr Chair,
Representative. Sorry, please.
Sorry.
Um, uh, You had said that the
LFC recommendation has 20
million for matching funds. Um,
but just wanted to remind you
that a couple of lines down
there's also another 58 million
in lfc recommendations. So those
two combined I think the LFC
recommendation there is is a bit
the language is a little bit
narrower.
Than the executive language, but
overall, the amount is 78
million between those two
buckets. I appreciate that.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you. I too was going to just
bring people's attention to 28
and 32. And I think I saw
yesterday Mr Chairman and a lot
of budgets requesting for
funding for federal matching
funds and and I would just
recommend that they all go into
this bucket.
And and everyone
Uh, Paul from the same bucket
with the same guidelines and we
can have data.
That we can. We can trace the
other.
Situation I was curious about is
if we if we put money in
something and specials and
supplementals, depending on if
the legislation passes do we
need language in here that says
it's dependent on that so that
the money goes back or where
does the money go? If we put it
in there, and and the
legislation doesn't pass Mr
Chairman and representative, we
would certainly recommend that
you do that for any of the items
you want to you.
I want to put in that require
legislation. You included that
contingency language. Um,
sometimes those projects, um if
it was waiting on legislation,
sometimes the governor will line
item veto those things as well.
But we would certainly encourage
you to put that contingency
language. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. Thank you very
much. Remember, I'm strong.
Next. We have representative
dela Cruz.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I'm
curious What housing means in
this
that we're discussing today.
Does that mean that the
Mr Chairman. Does that mean that
the state is gonna build houses?
Does that mean that states
outside of fund to help people
that can't afford a house? What
is that exactly mean?
Um, Mr Chair, Representative, Um
I know means an expert in
housing, but from what I know
the 500 million is, uh,
financing mechanism to expand
the development and the
preservation of
Low to moderate income housing
so that 500 million is not, uh
I
Homelessness assistance. That's
that's related to housing
supply.
And then the other 40 million
is, um, services for those
experiencing homelessness. So I
hope that that answers your
question somewhat, Mr Chairman,
it doesn't.
So I still I'm still not clear
if the state is going to
Create a fund to assist
developers is a state going to
the old houses, multifamily
individual dwellings. I'm just
not sure
Um, Mr Chair, Representative, Um
Ah!
I'll get you more information
from the program. Experts, um
I can't tell you 250 million of
it goes to the Housing Trust
Fund at MF A. Which
Uh, is already in, you know, a
fund that is operational. Um
And so this new 250 million
would be for the same purposes
as what that fund is currently
used for.
Mr Chairman. I think this is a
huge issue. It's a huge issue
because right now there is a
shortage.
Both of multifamily housing
units as well as individual
residences.
Throughout the entire state.
Ah!
In fact, if you consider it's
kind of like a
Like a catch 22 of sorts because
you consider that very often.
Communities don't like to see
housing expansion.
I can tell you about that all
day long if you want to spend
about an hour with me.
But at the same time
We're trying to find a way to
Build more houses and make
particularly when you talk about
Workforce Housing Santa Fe
experience a shortage of
workforce housing
Chronically.
And so I'm just really curious
what that means. Because we're
sitting here, Mr Chairman, and
we're trying to determine a
budget around this or to agree
to expand.
And yet we really don't even
have a clear definition. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. Thank you,
Representative. Uh, we'll ask
that Miss Whitfield, Mr
Hernandez and others involved in
this area provide some feedback
for the so that there's more
clarity on from the executive
asked how that money is
intended.
Okay. Lets go on. We'll go now
to representative Chatfield and
thank you, Mr Chair.
Mr Chair.
I think my question is more
about process and it comes down
to what we were just talking
about. There's quite a few
requests in here by the
executive.
Some of them are real clearly
defined may be requested by the
agency's others are just kind of
like a little murky to me. What
they're what they're for, and
and, uh, you know, I don't blame
these guys for not making a
recommendation. Uh, somehow
we're going to have to sort
through that. And And can you
help me understand what the
process for that is? Yes, sir.
Thank you, Representative Field.
We're
We want to hear these now in
public initially to sort of go
through as members again want to
encourage members concisely, but
intentionally raised concerns.
Questions note Your areas of
interest. I think, as we've seen
asked for more information on
particular items. We're going to
keep bringing that information
in
And as we've done with our
The recurring budget hearings.
Ultimately, we're going to be
balancing the recurring, the
Section nine Trust fund and
these specials to work through
to our best budget
recommendation. Thank you, Mr
Chair. You know, some of them
are clearly defined requests.
Others are just not easily
understood.
So
Maybe we can do some research on
that. Thank you, sir. Thank you
very much represents Chatfield.
Next, we have represented
pedigree then represent Brown.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you gentlemen for sitting up
there in the hot seat. Um
I'm gonna
Go along with representative
Daylight, Cruise and
representative Chatfield.
There's a lot more questions to
get out based off the document I
have been are answered right
now, with respect to that
chairman and
Gentlemen.
Line 23 in line 35. Can you do
me a favor and differentiate
between the 2 $250 million
requests?
Um
Mr Chair members of the
committee.
Uh huh.
Representative Pettigrew.
Uh, the difference is the two
funds that they go to one goes
to the housing trust funded the
Mortgage Finance authority. The
other one is intended to go to
the Opportunity Enterprise Fund
at the New Mexico finances
Authority. Um, that one would
require us statutory change, Uh,
to expand the use of that fund.
To include
Housing.
Um, so that's the difference
between those, uh two
recommendations, but
The mechanics of those two
funds. Um, I don't have that.
I will never be someone better
to answer that question. Um, at
a later date just briefly, and
we'll go back to your
representing Pettigrew. Thank
you for that. I think we were
going to get from the mortgage
Finance authority. Mr Hernandez,
A breakdown of the 250 million
that's included. I think
whichever of these lines and
we're going to have to ask Miss
Whitfield
And potentially others in the
executive to detail. Uh they're
in 250 million
Thank you, Chairman. And thank
you, gentlemen. I was just
curious if this is an if then
statement or if end statement.
Yeah. When you start looking at
programming, you know?
We get one. We're happy with not
getting the other.
Type of thing, or do we really
want $500 Million to go to mm
essay.
And so
With that, Um
Chairman.
Gentlemen.
Last year, there was a bill that
was passed community block grab
on on housing and funding with
respect to that.
I would like to know.
At some point LSC could get back
with me on how much of that fund
was was actually spent, and, uh,
What? What? What came out of
that Because that falls into
this housing piece, right? And
so I'd like to know how how that
came together.
And German my last question
without taking all this rule in
depth right now is, I think from
the executive presentation, I
heard different statistics about
Um, how much income has gone up
versus how much rent or how much
mortgages have gone up interest
rate on on loans, different
things like that.
Um
If y'all could get back with
with us, Uh, if everybody else
wants it me specifically.
Um
How much
It's the entire wish list was
fulfilled.
How much of that?
Also applies to medium income
people as well.
Because the same stressor.
Exact chairman presenters. Same
stressors exist for the medium
income people at the end of the
day.
For the 44 people out of 100
that actually
Pays for the other 56. Those
stress are still exists. It's
not just low income.
Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you very much represented
a group. Next we're gonna
represent Brown and then Vice
chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Um I'm
looking at line 33. And this is
D f a agency. Um
I don't It's for operational
support of nor Lee General
Hospital.
Um, it's an executive ad of $1.8
million. This was not requested
by the agency Could either of
you explain what the issue is
there? It says operational
support if we have a little more
detail on that, Mr Chairman.
Mr Chair members of the
committee.
Um
I
I don't know anything about that
recommendation. I apologize, but
I'll get I'll get you more
information following the
hearing, Mr Chairman and the
Simon's Do you know if there is?
Is this a public hospital? I
take it
Okay, Um, Mr Chair, given the
fact that, um we really have to
be mindful of how some of our
hospitals are struggling.
Um I would like this to be
reconsidered to be added into
the the budget.
Apparently, the governor was
made aware of the issues, and
she took it upon herself to make
an an ad here so
I just would like to know that
we're really going to take
another look at that. And
possibly, I would hope. Put that
money in there. Thank you. Thank
you represented, bro. Okay, uh,
we're gonna go
Um, thank you for fighting for
recommend asking for that, Um
The I think we're gonna conclude
now with Vice chair Dicks, and
then we'll keep going. Thank
you, Mr Chair. I'll keep it, uh,
succinct. There are a couple of
line items in here where
The agency hasn't fully spent
the money or you know where we
have appropriated in the past,
So I'm looking at line 28, which
is the matching grants. The
agency still has 8.4 million.
Also, there's the law
enforcement.
Uh, fund that went to D f A for
you Know, 57 million last year.
I think it would be really
helpful for members.
I know I have asked for for this
in the past and have received
it, But I think that all of the
members on the committee should
get an updated list of where
those funds have gone.
Um, so that they can see if
they're making a difference in
their community, and we can also
assess you know is 100 million
needed, you know, uh, the
additional 35 million for
firefighters for law
enforcement. We need to see how
those funds are being allocated
and used, so I would just make
that request. Thanks. Thank you
very much Vice chair Dixon and
will likely try to square away
some public time, too.
Okay. Please continue. So just
very quickly. Mr Chairman before
we move on. I just wanted to
respond to some of our
representative Dixon's questions
from the, um from the courts.
Uh, there is a million dollars
in the base for hiring new
attorneys for the law office of
the public defender, according
to our analysts there, and then
there's also in the LFC
recommendation. Reauthorization
of $2 million for court
security.
So I wanted to just answer those
questions real quick because we
had heard from our analyst, Um,
anyway, moving on to Page six.
Mr Chairman and the General
Services Department.
So there is online 40 a $55
million recommendation in the
LFC recommendation to the
General Services Department for
Healthcare costs.
Uh, so in in that would include
costs related to the Covid 19
That funding source noted there
is from amounts you all
transferred as part of the
special session to the
appropriation contingency fund
related to the American Rescue
Plan. Act. Um, your note later
on in, um, in the packet is a
collection of recommendations.
From the executive for that
money. Uh, the LFC
recommendation is here. Um, for
those, um, Also on Page six, Mr
Chairman, if you look at line
number 45
Uh, the LFC recommendation has
25 million and the executive
recommendation is 42 million,
Uh, for broadband, Um, just
point out the agency has over
222 million remaining of past
state broadband appropriations
and about 660 70 million in
federal funding.
Ah for broadband, so this amount
in both of those recommendations
would supplement that.
And did you want to make any
comments before we go into
tourism? Mr. Chair members of
the committee? Um, as Joey said,
you're going to see
Various recommendations
throughout this packet for the
General Services Department for
the Health Benefits fund, so
just to summarize it.
Uh um, The LFC recommendation
has 150 million
To, uh
Present infusion into that fund.
And the executive recommendation
between the different sections
has 125 million.
So I just wanted to instead of
looking them at them
individually throughout the
sections just wanted to let you
know what the total amount
Is, um, throughout this this
packet.
And then one more thing on this
page line. 42. There's a $2.8
million recommendation from the
executive to subsidize
subscriptions for local
government emergency responders
to use do its digital trunked
radio system. This system
provides interoperability
between radios of multiple
responders.
Who would otherwise be unable to
communicate directly during an
emergency event, So I just
wanted to bring that up one up
because that's one that's in the
executive recommendation. Benign
LFC recommendation.
And that's all I have on this
page, Mr Chair.
Okay. Are there any member
represent pedigree, please?
Thank you, Chairman. Um, with
respect to the to the trunk
system is my understanding the
majority of our counties now are
using centralized, uh, emergency
response systems.
And already have that in place.
Why are why the
Why the statewide trunks are so
can you can
If you don't have that answer
right now, I understand if we
can get back on what the full
scope of that is
I would appreciate it, Chairman
Mr. Chair representative. I
don't think anyone from the
Department of Information
Technologies here, um
Good morning, Mr Chairman,
Representatives members of the
committee. I am Michael
Rohrabacher. I'm the director of
Public Safety Committee to
answer your question.
Representative. The state is
deploying a statewide ecosystem
primarily for state agencies,
but it's made available to
saving and the detail with
Chairman. I appreciate the
response would like a little
more detail offline on this.
Certainly.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Thank you
for presenting Pettigrew, next
week's second
Oof!
Yes, Please be, uh, will turn
off the microphones and
sometimes the biggest culprit of
that, But
Getting up or or sitting down,
Make sure the microphones are
off.
Represented. Chatfield is next.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
So
Online 40. There apparently is a
total
Throughout this budget of 150
million
From LFC.
125
From the governor's office.
Does that make us whole?
Miss Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Um
Yes, it would put the fund
Back it zero in terms of the
cash balance to end this fiscal
year.
Um there's also a 9.2% premium
increase for FY 25.
I
Fairly certain that
Fund will likely go into the red
again in FY 25. I don't think
that a 9.2% premium increases
going to match revenues with the
expenditures.
Going forward even after the
fund gets back to zero. I don't
know the exact number right now,
Um
But yes, that's that's the
situation.
Just very, very quickly. Mr
Chairman to follow up on that.
So Simon is correct. So based
budgets included in 9.2% premium
rate increase, Um, you know, to
address some of those, you know,
ongoing. Did you know? Did we
fill the whole issues? The LFC
recommendation, including an
additional 5% as part of the
compensation package. Um, you
know, In addition to that,
frankly, the the the New
Healthcare Authority Department,
um
That is going to take over the
employee benefits programs from
the General Services Department
Beginning in next year. They're
going to have to be focused on
cost containment and what they
can do to, um
You know, to make sure that
those programs are operating
more efficiently, But so there
is a little bit extra in the LFC
recommendation for premium rate
increases to make sure that we
don't have to keep coming back
and doing these kinds of special
appropriation.
So, Mr Chair after the 9%.
What we like.
15 maybe Yes. So 14.2.
Would. Yeah. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Thank you very much for some
Chatfield represent Herndon,
please.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair
and presenters. I think it's
important to bring to your
attention that there is a, uh,
legislation that has been put
that has been submitted.
Regarding the General Services
Department and the purchase of a
long term residential
rehabilitation facility in the
request was for a $16 million
appropriation for the purchase,
remodel in security at that
facility is primarily focused on
making sure that there is long
term, uh, facility for abuse.
And, uh
I'm sorry for those who are
suffering from addiction and
abuse of drugs and also to allow
individuals who are single
parents who have a child over TN
to live in a facility with them,
and that does not seem to be a
facility available right now. So
if you could please make a note
of that, it's incredibly
important. Mr Chair.
And
And there are there are also I
might ask. Add Mr Chair that
members of the House, the
Senate, the health, security and
there are there are also I might
ask. Add Mr Chair that members
of the House, the Senate, the
Health Security Health Authority
counties in the cities are
meeting on that right now, so
it's that's why that is another
reason that it's important that
you all consider that
Thank you very much. We're going
to go now to representative
Gareth and representative in
Yemen.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
Could we have some
Um online 45 officers of
broadband
Can we have some clarification
on that for the executive, Mr
Chair members of the committee
as Joey indicated the Office of
Broadband has a substantial
amount.
Of broadband funding. Um, much
of it hasn't been spent yet.
I think somewhere in the bulk
they have somewhere in the
Ballpark of 800, or $900 million
From what? I understand the $42
Million recommendation here from
the executive is to serve as
matching funds for, um, a piece
of their, uh, federal funding
that they're receiving that Mr
Chair. Does that answer your
question?
Um I just want to pursue more
because they've expanded from
six people to 26 people.
And
What they have to do a lot of
front stuff.
That federal funding comes
later. So if we can just
Sure market for future
exploration.
And it's really coming together
now, in an incredible way. Thank
you.
Thank you. Representative at
Indiana.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have a
question on online 44. So what
are you, um This is for cyber
and related mitigation in the
Department of Cultural Affairs.
Um, Workforce Solutions and
Department of Health. So what I
understand is, um
This amount of money right now.
these three organizations or
agencies don't have the
particular protective equipment
they need to they need and it
needs to be updated. Um,
equipment falls under the
agency. But do it would like the
money is trying to get the money
so that they can or stops the
cybersecurity trying to get the
money so they can, um
Gain some standardization within
all of the agencies because
they're limited on people
learning all these different
things is or how did or some of
the different applications and
different things needed to
bring these up is difficult. So
it cost $10 million just to the
complete cost was 10. Minutes
believed him million dollars to
re mediate when R L D
Was hit, so this isn't much to
help make sure that they have
protective equipment. Updated.
Um alright, So that's I believe
this is important that we fund
this. Thank you very much
represented Shinyanga for
flagging and please. Analysts
make a note to ask for do it.
Okay. And just very, very
quickly. Mr Chairman, I would
just point out also in the
reauthorization. Um, section.
there's some reauthorization of
some appropriations you all made
last year.
Great. Thank you very much.
Okay. Uh, see no further
questions. Please continue on.
Did you wanna talk about
tourism? Mr.
Please continue. Yes, Mr
Chairman members of the
committee, um
Still on Page six.
Um
Line 48 for the Tourism
department.
You'll see $15 million
recommendations in both the L F
C and D F A
Are you have seen executive? Um
Lines there. The
The appropriation that
Tourism received for national
marketing and advertising. Last
year was 15 million. So this is
flat to that amount. LFC
recommendation has a little bit
broader language, too.
Uh,
Use a small portion of that
funding for other activities,
not just national marketing and
advertising the executive
languages just national
marketing and advertising.
Um, line
40
Nine. You'll see a
recommendation that I know that
you all discussed yesterday with
the tourism department. Uh, it's
$2 million from the executive
for centralized State Agency
marketing campaigns through the
New Marketing Excellence Bureau,
which, um, that bureau was
created through legislation last
session and goes, um
Goes live in July of, um
This July, 2024.
Now moving to the next page to
the Economic Development
Department on line.
53, you'll see a recommendation
of $20 million from the
executive to serve as matching
funds for a potential National
science Foundation grant. Uh,
the amount of federal funding
that that would bring in if the
New Mexico team is awarded is
$160 million over 10 years, so
This would be the state's
portion of
There was matching funds and is
obviously contingent on the New
Mexico team, uh, receiving the
award, and hopefully we find out
about that scene.
Then on
Line 54. You'll see a $1 million
recommendation from the
executive for the Healthy Food
Financing Initiative. This is
one piece of the, uh
Governors Food and Hunger
Initiative. From the last couple
of years. This funding has been
used in a variety of ways as a
financial incentive to improve
access to fresh and healthy food
options and food deserts.
The, um This is has been funded,
Um
The last two years, And so the
department is requesting a third
year of funding to continue this
program.
Then on line 50.
Five. You'll see a $2 million
recommendation for the Economic
Development Department from the
executive for a pilot program to
establish and support new
businesses that are
commercializing science and
technology products from New
Mexico universities.
The 2 million was served as seed
funding for these businesses in
their infancy and also fund
entrepreneurial consultation and
mentorship. The department notes
that despite being home to world
class research and innovation,
the state sees a smaller
economic impact from science and
technology than other states. So
the executive includes this 2
million appropriation to
hopefully reverse this trend.
Then online 56. You'll see a
$1.5 million recommendation from
the executive for Business
recruitment.
Um
So this money is there used as
marketing dollars to try and,
uh, get businesses to, um, set
up shop here in New Mexico and
create jobs for new Mexican line
58. This is a big difference
between the recommendations
relates to Lida.
Uh, the executive recommendation
has $25 million for Lita.
Whereas the LFC recommendation
doesn't have any additional
funding for Lida.
The department is projecting a
remaining fund balance of 18
million at the end of this
fiscal year, so the executive is
adding 25,000,002.
Um
Bring the balance of that fund
up and and keep expenses from
the leader program in line with
what they have been the last
several years.
And then online 59. You'll see a
$4 million request. Uh, for the
operation and management of the
Media Academy.
The department is aiming for the
media academy to be self
sufficient several years from
now, so these would be one time
startup costs over the next
couple of fiscal years for
operations.
And with that I will turn it
back to Joey or back to you, Mr
Chair for questions, however,
you want to proceed. Thank you
very much. We're gonna go to
questions we first have
represented dela Cruz and
represent Luhan.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
I brought this up last year. I'm
gonna bring it up this year.
You're going to probably at some
point. Think I'm a one trick
pony.
But I really love route 66. I
think it's a treasure for New
Mexico. I think that if we were
to fully develop it to, it's
true potential around tourism.
We would be well served
economically because I believe
it is an economic development
driver.
And we're unique because route
66
In New Mexico is unique for this
one reason it is the only place
in the country. Mr Chairman that
you can find four points of
route 66.
In downtown Albuquerque.
On fourth and Central is the
only place in the country that
there are four points of route
66. And the reason is that pre
1937 route 66 was a line that
came from Denver South
To Los Lunas last Luna's west to
California.
Its unique and so so many people
come to take a picture of that
intersection.
In Albuquerque, but isn't just
Albuquerque throughout the state
from Com. Carry on.
And so I just really, really
consider my colleagues. Mr.
Chairman to to support the
efforts around, uh, financing
and enhancing the ability to
create a more of an economic
development driver on that
unique
Special place in New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Representative Han and
pedagogy.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I'm gonna
Echo and thank represented. The
crews were saying that, um
It's it's It's a great
investment. I think for tourism,
but I'm gonna focus on line 58
on the economic development, the
25
Million dollar direct from the
executive. This is something I
questioned during our hearing,
and I knew that it and I
questioned the second, the
acting secretary of the time,
and they said they had I believe
like $18 million still unused in
the leader, but they had it was
already encumbered that they
would have it spent through the
fiscal year.
And so and through other
discussions and looking at
potential other, um, legislation
to to expand language and
leader I think that we need to
probably
If not that full 25 million,
maybe half of 12.5. I don't know
something in addition to that,
because I think we're going to.
We're seeing that as a as a
As a way of really using those
funds and expanding our
businesses and and, um
Incubating but basically doing
that, so I would say, Let's look
at that. Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Next. We
have represented pedigree then
represented
Thank you Chair and thank you,
gentlemen. Um
Chairman. Uh early you may be
able to answer this. I'm not
sure. Um
Hmm. How many different revenue
or how many different funding
sources.
Go into the Labor Day
celebration in Santa Fe Furs,
Zozo, Bro.
How many different So, Mr
Chairman? I don't know The
answer to the question I'd have
to to ask around and see if we
have that information if we
could, Because I'm you know, I
understand the route 66 piece of
this and and those are two
separate events. And so I would
really like to know what that is
and and what the return on
investment is to the state.
G R T
Mr Chair. I would like to help
on that.
Okay, lets
We can take it off line as far
as Yeah, we can take that off.
Fine. That's great, Great and
then chairman
Online 58.
In the endless comments and
talks about
Um, I mean $70 million in the
fund balance.
Can you get back with us? Joy or
or either one of you on how much
of that 70
Okay, So, um, Mr Chairman and
representative, I think Simon
indicated all but 18 million had
been encumbered. Is that
correct? Mr. Chair
Representative. That's correct.
Uh, the latest projection from
the department showed an $18
million projected balance to end
this fiscal year that I thought
I heard that. But then I read
this over here, and I was trying
to make sure I'm connecting the
dots. So of the 70.3.
Chairman 52 of it or 52 of its
encumbered.
Mr Chair representative.
Yes, the
Short projection would mean that
52 million goes out the door
this year.
For their for their than to be
an $18 million fund balance at
the end of the year.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you
very much for episode Pettigrew
actually have represented heard
it.
Thank you, Mr Tear, and analysts
I'd like to first bring your
attention to line 59.
And that is the $4 million
request by the film office.
To help with the academy. And so
what I see is a record no
recommendation from LFC because
they couldn't understand how the
money would be used. So I just
wanted to explain Mr Chair and
analysts that one of the things
that that media academy does is
that it works. It will be
working directly with the New
Mexico Academy for the Media
Arts, which is a
Its charter school, and they are
working very hard in in and
In bringing media.
Students to the forefront as
well as producing things like
why there's mental health issues
with respect to our students
right now, after Covid. In
addition, Mr Chair with respect
to that operational costs, they
also connect places like Netflix
and others with US. CNN, For
example, film school and how
that's going to be working.
And creating and working with
family liaisons to make sure
that communities of color with
all the film industries and
pictures and and television
shows that come in here that
those connections are made. I
present that to you, and I hope
that that recommendation would
be from both entities and then
Mr Chair. I also point out to
the
Alliance 60 for the analysts in
terms of the funding the $10
million for the trail and
outdoor infrastructure grants.
how it's important it is within
this state to be able to utilize
our outdoor facilities and that
they are in good shape and that
people will not get hurt, and
they are in Wales. Sustained, um
Manner so that the individuals
and the 2.1 million people we
have in our state can utilize
these infrastructure, outdoor
trails and facilities and then
finally, Mr Chair in analysts,
I, it is important to bring to
your attention that there is
Legislation has been introduced
in the amount of $500,000 to
look at to study.
The reintegration of an intra
state airline for this state.
There has been a lot of money
being put into roads, but there
has to be ways in which our
economy grows and the movement
throughout our states, uh, is
enhanced in the way to do that
is to study it through an
interest interest. State airline
Structure, looking at places
like Gallup and Hobbs and Clovis
and for Minton, and how they
moved effectively and other ways
than just driving. So if you
would please make sure that
you're considering and looking
at that, Mr Chair members, Mr
Analyst. Thank you very much for
upset. Herndon. We're gonna go
now.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
I'm tourism on route 66. You
know the city of grams.
Rooted student right through it
and have cheese that name to
Santa Fe Avenue.
And what I'm getting out of. We
need to find funding these
projects because I'm trying to
get it back to route 66.
And you know that it's expensive
to do And what would happen to
hear Mr Chair and vision.
Gentlemen work losing part of
history here.
Because that, you know, route 66
is history and then the United
States and we we really need to
come up to it and and put back
to what it should be because it
went from two grands. Don't
those donors and then went back
into Albuquerque, 66. And we've
lost that piece of it.
We've lost.
Gallops 66.
Grants. Haven't you changed it
already, But we need to change
it back to what it used to be
done before. You know it. I
appreciate the consideration of
better funding these projects
that we need to do in the state
of New Mexico. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you very much
represented Garcia. Okay. Thank
you very much. Let's keep on.
Oh, sorry. Represent Chatfield,
please.
Well, I just I think I would be
remiss if I didn't say that to
that route. 66 comes right
through to come carry. It's also
very important to my district.
Go to carry right on the
Amarillo down through there, so
That's something that's
important to me Also, Thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you represented
Chatfield. I think from the east
of the west side of New Mexico,
We have route 66 on this panel,
which is great. Thank you all
very much.
Okay, let's continue on
analysts.
Um
Mr Chair members of the
committee moving to Page 88
Moving to page eight aligns 67
through 71.
Our, um, several items for the
office of the Superintendent of
insurance Online 67, you'll see
a recommendation of 2.15 million
from the executive. Uh,
For OS I to respond to and fix
the issues caused by the cyber
attack on their office earlier
this year.
Lines 17.
And 71 are related to OSC s
accreditation through the
National Association of
Insurance Commissioners or the N
A. I C
The N A. I C reviewed OS is
operations and determined that
they are not meeting the
baseline level of financial
oversight regulatory standards.
In order for OS I to keep their
accreditation they need to
greatly improve their risk
focused financial analysis, both
in house and through contracting
technical experts.
You'll see a special
appropriation of 2.5 million
from the executive online 70. So
that's for expenditure through
the end of fiscal year 2025 for
contractual financial analysis
services.
The LFC has an appropriation for
the same purpose. But as a
supplemental instead of a
special, so you'll see that
later in the packet and Section
six
Then online 71. The LFC also
included a non recurring
appropriation for salary
increases to retain in House
financial analysis experts at OS
I then
Uh, well, I'll stop there and
and pass it over to Joey for any
additional comments, Mr Chair?
Yeah, I think Simon covered OS.
I will go to any questions from
the panel, Mr Chair.
Advice for Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Joey or Simon, could you walk me
through the recommended language
online, 68 and 69 for OSC for
the patient, Um
Compensation fund.
What it means.
So, um, Mr Chair and
representative, I don't have a
good understanding. We might
have to follow up with you on
that. I believe this may have
been the language requested by
the agency. I don't know if it
was adjusted by either lfc or
the executive, but we can follow
up just to make sure we know
exactly what that is. And don't
give you false information.
And Mr Chair, Representative, Um
All right. Are you specifically
asking about the language? Or do
you just want like a summary of
what these appropriations are
for? Um
Okay, Great. Great. Follow up.
So, Mr Chair, so it says funding
contingent on the enactment of
language that PCF liabilities do
not need to be 100% funded. So I
apologize, Madam Chair and, um
Sorry, Mr Chair. And Madam
Representative, uh, that comment
that we did. That's not
accurate. Uh, that was a
That's a mistake so
That's my fault. Thank you.
Represent dela Cruz.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. This is
a bit of a question online. Uh,
72.
A position emission to poverty
scanner to continuously tracked
the health of all sequin
athletes are run on the New
Mexico racetracks.
My understanding is that that
the animals have to be tested.
As a matter of course for the
participation in this, uh,
sport.
How is
How was that? Uh, How does that
jive with an increase? I'm not
real clear, Mr Jayce.
Mr Chair, Representative, Um
I'll do my best with the
information I have
So this is a $1 million
recommendation to purchase a
tomography scanner that examines
the internal structure of an
equine athlete to ensure that it
detects problems early on before
the animal has a serious injury
while running on the track, the
governor wrote a letter to the
Racing commission in September,
expressing her concerns about,
um animals getting injured and
so
Uh, the commission submitted
this request to, uh
Ah, hopefully prevent
Further injuries.
Mr Chairman, it almost seems
like that should be a mandatory.
Item that should be available to
the Racing Commission.
I'm curious if if you know why
the lfc
Did not recommend that funding.
Mr. Chair representative. I will
leave the LFC analyst. So, um Mr
Chair and representative, I
don't have a lot of detail on
why that was not included. Other
than than, um, This is not
something that this is a new
initiative that's not been
historically required. But we
can have our analysts follow up
with you on that.
I would appreciate that, Mr
Chairman. One thing that you
Mexicans greatly appreciate is
Good care of animals,
particularly animals that are
competitors as as they are in
the racing.
World and so I would really
encourage that that happened. I
think it's an enhancement and it
would have it would help stem
off a lot of the abuse that
we've seen around these animals
either being drugged or or run
too hard. So its chairman, I
really would like to see that
happen. Thank you, sir.
Hmm. Thank you Represent Herndon
and recent Luhan.
Thank you, Mr Chair in analysts,
I would like to bring to your
attention the number of
conversations that are going on
with the superintendent of
insurance regarding, um, drug
transparency and $100,000 that
has been requested through
legislation to to enact the
prescription Drug Transparency
Act.
Or the state of New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Representative of hot. Thank
you. Just some points of
clarification. Um, Mr Chair
lines.
Is it? Nope. Thank 68.
Um
I caught that too, That one
thing for clearing that up, But
the 35.9 million is this to
share up the fund because
Solvency, Mr Chair.
Uh, yes. So, Mr Chair and
representative, That's my
understanding. It's it's a cash
infusion into the fund to fund
so, Mr Charges based on one that
we did last year did we do the
98 million last year? Or was
there something in that field of
or range and so with this be
what the executive is asking
versus what the agency might be
asking for Mr Chair.
Mr. Chair, representative. I
don't remember the amount of the
General fund infusion last year.
Charles like
Oh,
Mr Chair and representative, Mr
Sully might be able to answer
your question.
So
Mr Chairman, Representative
Luhan. You did I think we've
done
30 million a year for the last
two years. It is okay, um
There is an actuarial
requirement that was put in
statute to basically pre fund
Potential.
Claims.
That is driving up the premium
increases at a rate that the
provider community finds
unsustainable.
And these cash infusions are
intended to moderate those rate
increases.
On a cash basis. If you look in
volume three this fund has, you
know
Over. I believe 100 and $50
million in it. So on a cash
basis, it's not
Insolvent.
But from a pre funding potential
claims for malpractice.
That's what's driving the need
for this infusion of money.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and just I
don't believe they have the next
to Eri in place right now. I
know they're looking for
somebody. So I think is that
goes to my next question in
line. 71 is that line to hire?
And
Or to get an actuary in place.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
Representative, Uh, that line
there actually isn't related to
the patient's compensation fund.
It's uh, some of their other
regulatory responsibilities that
are struggling. I appreciate
that. Thank you. That answers my
question. That's all I have. Mr.
Chair. Thank you very much.
Representative Luhan represent
Brown that represent chat food.
Yes, ma'am. Thank you, Mr
Chairman, Um, back to mine. 72.
This is regarding the Racing
Commission and the tomography
scanner.
Mr Chairman. We have an analyst
comment here. That, um
It's not recommended that this
million dollars be spent, it
says. It's a new initiative, but
it's based on a full staff of
veterinarians at the agency does
not have and has not had
historically.
So, Mr Chairman and analysts I
don't understand why you would
need a full staff of library
librarians.
Veterinarians.
To, Um um
To do a scan. I mean, isn't
something one veterinarian could
do, Mr Chair?
Um, Mr Chair, Representative
Brown. I just got some more
information on this item from,
uh the analyst Ginger Anderson.
Um, so the
The the S R C does not have
That's but beyond that.
Um, they would also need special
infrastructure. So, um, to
operate a pet scanner. I'm told
you need a clinical environment
free of dust particles. That's
another consideration that, um
That does not currently exist at
the at the commission.
Okay, Mr Chair. I think that's
important information. Um,
stables and all that can be
pretty dusty. I think so. I just
want to add to that. Possibly
the use of the scanner. Mr Chair
could be fee generating. Perhaps
the horse owner might have to
pay a certain amount to have
testing dance, So maybe it could
be some recruitment there over
time.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
Represent Brown represented
Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr Chair on
Online 76.
The rural libraries. Endowment
fun been getting a lot of
emails.
From people that are really
Uh, concerned about not this one
Not being funded. I I look
around. I wonder if a lot of
other folks aren't also this is
the place where people can come.
They can get Internet access.
They can check out a book.
Yeah, they can do research. It's
very, very important to a lot of
our rural communities. The
library is kind of a hub, and so
is there a reason that it's not
recommended to be
Funded
So, um, Mr Chairman and members,
Uh so I believe you had a
discussion about this yesterday
with cultural affairs. Um, I
think the reason it wasn't
recommended was because that you
know there's a balance in the
funding that money has been been
slow to move. But I think
You all you all heard more about
that yesterday.
Mr Chairman. I did not have a
discussion. Okay about that with
cultural affairs. I
unfortunately missed the
Part of this the later part of
this, and I'm just so I'm not
sure where we're at with it, But
I would hope we wouldn't think
about putting some money into
our rural library. Thank you.
Thank you.
Oh, my apologies. I have a
little more information on that
If you please. Mr. Chair,
Representative. Um, I think
right now, the balance in the
fund is about 28 million.
Max. Expenses or Max. Expenses.
Um
Maximum distribution.
This current year was like
24,000. And so we didn't fusion
of 10 million would bring that,
uh, distribution up to 33,000
And then you know, obviously,
the fund grows over time. And so
the 10 million, uh increases
short term and long term
distributions. But But Joey was
correct to say that there
There is money in the fund.
There's 28 million right now.
So, Mr Chair, possibly We need
to know how to
Inform people of the way the
access that funding which is not
our job here today, but it would
Maybe help me in the future.
Thank you Represented chapter
and grave represent Garcia.
Thank you, Mr Chairman Back
towards represent Chatfield just
said about rural libraries. You
know, you always get feedback
on. Well, you can get it off the
Internet.
That's fine and well, but most
of my communities out there the
original Internet and rule
libraries are very, very
important to people out here.
rooting Mexico. So if we get
fund that properly, that would
be very, very well appreciated.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you represented Garcia Vice
chair, Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
On that same issue. Could we
potentially get a breakdown of
if an additional 5 million were
added to the fund what the
annual distribution would be for
the rural libraries? Um, you
know, just to sort of see the
impact of different amounts that
might be helpful. Thank you.
Thank you, buddy.
What's the C to process
periodically? Here? Great. Uh,
Mr Simmons, please explain. So,
um, Mr Chairman and
representative. That's the, uh,
Mr Simmons, please explain. So,
um, Mr Chairman and
representative, that's ah, the
Department of Information
Technologies computer systems
process, So it's essentially the
form that it's called and
Generally called the C D
process you all making annual
appropriation to the Computer
Systems Enhancement fund that
funds the general fund portion
of those projects.
Thank you
briefly with respect rld
analysts. There's uh we need to
fund our cannabis enforcement
division.
Uh um, This will be on the
recurring side. They've
requested a special with LFC is
not recommended.
I'd ask that we look at that
issue specifically.
Okay, let's continue on.
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Um, the biggest
difference.
On this page is line 84. You'll
see a $20 million recommendation
from the executive, uh, to
establish a green bank.
Green banks serve as a financing
options for the development,
adoption and implementation of
climate friendly energy
technologies to ultimately
reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Um, so that's a
A fairly large request their
recommendation there from the
executive
And that's all I have for this
page. Mr Gerald, Pass it over to
Joey. And, uh, Mr Chairman, just
drawing your attention to line a
$32.5 million for the oil
conservation division to address
some of the backlogs in
compliance.
Excellent representing
guarantees. Yeah, is there um,
Mr Chair? Is there Green Bank
legislation? You're not
legislation number for follow up
from the analysts. My
understanding is that there has
been, uh
Yeah, well, let's get any other
questions.
Representing carignane. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. I have a
question on 1779 80
it says do not recommend request
for public education. But it's
talking about the climate risk
maps software, and we, it says,
do not recommend because we
don't know why it's used for the
public. But it's this money is
to update, um, hemorrhage 2020.
Climate risk map, and the map
looks at the vulnerable
abilities of climate change.
Wildfires, floods and all these
things and the public can access
it on their website. So the
public
I'd like to know if there's a
wildfire near me that I can get
jumped on there and see where
it's at. So I think that's
important.
And the second one.
the E V Tax credit program if
that that bill passes, is it
Where will the money come from?
Is that part of what this money
is for?
Was it worth?
Mr Chair representative.
Uh um.
I
I don't believe that This
request is related to that bill
for my understanding This
request is to, um improve the
efficiency of the current
process. Right now. It's a mail
in application.
Uh, process And so this money
would, um, move the application
process to an online platform.
Thank you. Mr. Uh, is Mr Miller
acting director or acting
secretary fuse? Is there
anything you'd like to add to
that?
Yes, Please come on up.
Mr. Chair representative.
Actually, there is there will be
legislation in the upcoming
session related to tax credit
processing. There is not a
current
E tax credit. And, as I
understand is that legislation
is currently structured there
would be an imminent
certification role. Um and so
Based on lessons learned from
prior tax credits and other
pieces, which we've moved online
sort of contingent on that
legislation passing some
investment in enabling us to
streamline processes would be
helpful and designed, testified
yesterday supporting staff.
Thank you.
Okay?
My apologies, Mr Share. I was
dead wrong. No worries and
again, please turn off the
microphones. If if folks get up
or sit down and again I can be a
culprit on this. Please turn off
the microphones. Which is? Yeah.
Thank you, Acting Secretary
Representative Luhan. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Rep. Sonja picked some
of the things I was going to
talk about, but I'm going to go
on line 84.
Um, that's a in addition to from
the executive for the $20
million
And
Can you? I don't see that It was
requested by the agency. But I
think that there's something
I like a little more information
on. I think this is important.
They think we've asked for. I
think we're gonna get 84.
No representative, I think thank
you for the question. We've
asked will have additional
follow up from, uh, energy,
minerals and natural. Appreciate
it. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Absolutely. Thank you.
Okay, let's keep on going on.
So, Mr Chairman, we're now on
page 10, and we get into some of
the requests. Um, from the state
engineer. Um, you'll see a big
difference in this page is on
line number 87. So the
Uh um.
The
Executive recommendation is, um
well, I'll let Simon uh, talk
about that. But it is in terms
of the LFC recommendation. So I
would just note that the agency
was looking for funding for
current and future settlement
costs. The elephant in the
You know, current planned
allocations were in the 5 to $8
million range, which is why we
have that amount there. I'd also
point out for, um, the state
engineer was another one, where
there was some pretty
significant amounts in
reauthorization requests that
you'll see in that Mr Chair
members of the committee, um,
turning your attention to lines
Uh um 89 and 90.
You'll see a $5 million
recommendation from the
executive for the Irrigation
Works Construction Trust Fund
and 2 Million for the
improvement of the Rio Grande
Income Fund.
Um, those funds have been slowly
dwindling over time as they've
been used for agency operations.
I think it dates back to the
great recession. Um, so this
These recommendations here just
to replenish those funds that
are, um, slowly dwindling.
Then online 91.
You'll see a recommendation from
the executive for 5 million for
a home visiting per child
payment pilot program.
Uh, early childhood programs are
evidence based and offer
positive returns on investment.
But unfortunately, enrollment is
often below the appropriated
amount. And so this is a pilot
program to see. Uh
If
This certain incentive, would,
um
Increase enrolment into home
visiting then online 92.
You'll see a $3 million
recommendation again for E. C.
C. D.
For low interest loans in
partnership with the New Mexico
financing Authority to increase
infant and toddler care in the
states. Childcare desserts
Certain areas of the states of
the state are experiencing a
shortage in the supply of
available childcare. So this is
a short term strategy to build
the supply of childcare in high
need areas.
Then online 95.
You'll see a $2 million
recommendation for changes to E.
C. C. D s data systems to better
track enrollment in pre K
allowed for longitudinal
tracking of pre K outcomes and
allow for pre K and childcare
data to be linked.
And I will. Um, Mr Chairman, the
back to Joey.
So, Mr Chairman Any any
questions from committee on that
area?
Uh, yes, represented Garcia,
please. Thank you. Mr Chairman
on line 87.
And that to support the end and
the point in the water rights
settlement.
My understanding that the Indian
part of it, the federal
government is paying their
portion of to them.
And
It started off with 100 million
to begin with, and they would
not have 50 million. Now what
now? The 35 million
And you guys are here. Yeah,
required doing 5 million
And this water fund is affecting
the city of Grand civility of
Milan.
And other communities are sick
as around the that part of the
country and the
like to revisit it, if possible,
because there's a lot of
different descriptions see
between 5 Million and 35 Million
Charles
Mr Chairman, representative.
Um, these amounts that are
requested by the state engineer
for settlement for non native
communities.
First settlements that have not
been actually approved by
Congress yet.
Um so the lfc and our
understanding from the engineer
is that they would only be able
to spend if they did settle only
about 5 million a year so that
the LFC recommendation was to
set aside 5 million for
something that hasn't happened
yet.
To find your one. If it does
happen between now and and the
next session
And then allow you all to figure
out
Settlements actually come to
fruition, either on an annual
basis or set aside the full
amount for the next what every
time period on the settlement
calls for
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Charlie,
you know, I understand that, but
things change too much from one
session to another on what we're
trying to do here. And to me,
That's a big description. She
between five and 35 so
Thank you, Charles Garcia and I
see Miss Rise of white here. We
had asked for, um
From the office of the state
engineer if there are plans to
expand sort of pre settlement
funding.
Uh, if you have anything that
Add, please re break. Yeah.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
representatives of the committee
and your questions,
Representative Garcia just to be
really brief. My name is Hannah
Risley White. I'm the Interstate
Stream Commission director.
Um, And that is correct. Part of
the request here is for early
funding for planning and design.
so that once these settlements
are approved, we can move
quickly and implementing the
associated projects. Um, and
it's also worth noting these
settlements have the potential
to leverage lots of money for
for New Mexico in the
settlements that were
Um, reached in the last year.
The Associated funding state
funding could leverage up to $2
billion for those projects. So
thanks for that question, Thank
you and
How much can you spend per year
Miss Riley White.
Thank you, Chairman. Um I think
it's possible to spend something
like up to 5 million. There's a
There's a significant need, Um,
the early funding portion in
this this request is intended to
support the parties and both the
okay Wingate settlement and the
House of Beta settlement with
projects that could move
quickly.
Um, And so that would also hope
many insignias on the trauma and
the city of Espanola.
Mr Chairman.
Thanks for that. Is this
something different and paper or
we just talking about it because
I can see it from this year to
next year. Things will change
because it when this first
started to determine with 100
million and they were not a 50
million now down to 35. Now
we're down to five. You know my
constituents the word was going
to happen next year.
We'll come up with something
else and say, Well, you can't
spend it anymore. So we're not
gonna give it to you. That's
just a conservative German.
Thank you. Very, thank you for
your input on it. Absolutely.
Thank you, Sam Garcia. We're
gonna go now to represent
Sanchez. Mr. Chairman. I just
wanted to around two. A rep.
Garcia was saying as well. You
know, the city of Espana, Okeyo,
India and a lot of the seculars.
In northern New Mexico. They
came to an agreement that was
signed off by the governor.
I think the big question is not
if but when this is going to be
passed by Congress, and I think
what rep Garcia's getting out
is, Are we going to have the
money to sufficiently fund that
when it signed off by Congress?
Or is this something we have to
look at? Now that we have the
money in our budget?
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much. Representative
Sanchez. Next we're gonna go to
representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I'm
looking at line. Um 93.
This has to do with the early
childhood education and care
departments. Request. Um, well,
they did. Actually, that
department did not request this
amount. But LFC is putting in
proposing $3.5 million for
consumer education software to
provide families with awareness
of where to find early childhood
services across the state.
Mr Chairman. I'm just
questioning why we even need to
do that. And 3.5 million sounds
like a lot of money for some
software. Um, I wonder how
parents would access that. I
mean, currently it's Google it
if you have a phone
Um, we have daycare providers.
You provide information. I think
very generously. We have
pediatricians. There's word of
mouth. Any agency that deals
with Children is, I think very
knowledgeable that were services
can be found. So if, um
We could just get an
explanation. Mr. Chair on. Why?
$3.5 million? Sure, Mr Chairman,
representative around that That
amount was requested by the
agency. The LFC recommendation
was based on that request, and
And in that amount, um
Uh, so this this I believe has
to do with the home visiting
program and, um, you know,
increase increasing the
persistence of people within the
within the home visiting
program. Wait a minute. I might
be thinking of a different one.
Sorry I can get more
information, but I do know that
this was absolutely request.
Okay, Mr Chair. It's just a
blank here on our sheet, So
okay. Mr. Chair representative.
The executive did not recommend
you Don't you don't have all of
the agency requests here, Um
So it's not in the executive
recommendation. It is in the LFC
recommendation based on that, um
That request from the agency,
But, um, we'll follow up. Okay,
Mr Chair, I would like some more
information on how $3.5 million
will be spent on software and
how that actually feelers out to
the people who would need this
information.
I'm just not sure this is
justified Expense. Thank you.
Thank you representing Brown.
Next. We're gonna go to
representative Herndon, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
analysts. I am
Bringing your attention to lie,
91 and I'm specifically looking
at
There is a executive
recommendation for 5 million for
the home visiting
Childcare Pilot program in the
L. N C recommendation. Uh,
explanation says it will not
recommend or does not recommend
It said it should use Medicaid,
federal matching so
Is there a matching funds that
are there to create this
program and how much would have
to be matching in the second
item is it says lfc Wreck for E.
C D. Section four includes 2
Million E. C. F T. I don't know
what that is, if you could
explain for Medicaid rates and
incentives, so
Uh, help us understand why LFC
did not recommend
Mr Chairman, representative. The
home visiting program has, um
Struggle to get
They're funded for more Children
to participate, then they're
able to get to participate in
the program, so there's already
We think we feel, um lots of
money in the base Recurring
budget.
Um, to do these types of
incentive programs to improve
enrollment, including, um
The part of the program that can
leverage Medicaid money, Um,
with the state match and the
reference to the The acronym is
the early childhood trust fund.
There's a recommendation some
increased money from that.
Source of revenue, um for home
visiting programs.
So rather than doing a special,
there's already money in the
base budget to be able to try to
increase enrollment, and that's
been a focus of lfc legislative
process with the department to
monitor their ability.
Um, Mr Chair. Thank you for that
explanation, Mr Chair. Uh and Mr
Salim. My question is, maybe you
could tell us our share with me
with that extra base. Money is
that you see is already there
that could be utilized for this
program. And the reason I raised
this is that in talking with the
secretary of the C E. C. D.
One of the big issues that has
often been raised was looking at
Children of color, not
participating in these home
visiting programs in this state
being comprised of more than
57% people of color, So this
incentive funding that would be
offered here to help with that
program has a
Proven to be successful with
respect to looking at the
program. That was, um, that was
held in Las Cruces and the
success of that, just looking at
basic income increase, so I'm
just Mr Chair.
Advocating or looking for how
much money is in the base that
we that lfc thinks is there for
this program and how this could
be very successful with the
additional information that the
secretary of EC EC D has
indicated she's going to expand
her diversity of her home
visiting individuals, and all of
that could make a big difference
in
Making sure that we're taking
care of the chairman. We can get
you that information of the
amount of funding that's
available versus what has been
spent and how much more money
could be leveraged by using
Medicaid for those incentive
programs to improve enrollment,
including making sure that that
enrollment reflects the
diversity of our state.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
Have heard and represented Luhan
quickly. Thank you for that. I
had a question on that. You just
answered that question to the
next question quickly, it is
going to be the next line item
92 for the 3 $3 million, and I'm
going to kind of tie it to the
conversation regarding line. 91.
We were there was there was a
lot of discussion around that
whether it was if you
I was under the anti donation
clause if we could do these sort
of things and how they would do
that, So I accept what you're
saying. I think we need a little
more research and information on
that. But, um, the $3 million on
the next line.
Um
I think that I think I need some
more information on that,
Charles, if you wouldn't mind,
mr Chair
Why we're not not recommended.
Chairman. There's
Over 80 Million expansion for
Childcare system budget, so that
would include this, but they're
doing with this. Ask Mr Chair,
The base budget is so broad.
That could be something that's a
strategy. Appreciate that to do
that. I don't see where they
would be prohibited. Thank,
thank you very much. And then
with the executive out online,
95
This is this goes down to data
and information. Are we already
receiving some of that data Do
we already have that? So is that
something that
We need to have $2. Million
invested. Mr. Chair. Mr
Chairman, Representative Lfc has
been linking that data for it.
Um, And there's a new 20
database. Um, that childcare
files could easily be at it. We
can link from childcare systems
to pre case a higher education
to work force to
Where people are working in the
workforce. What kind of jobs?
What kind of wages that's
already been perfect. Thank you.
That's all I have. Thank you.
Representative Hunt. Okay,
members. We have about an hour
left and we're about a third of
the way through, so we're going
to have to pick up the pace and
we'll go back to our end.
Mr Chair members of the
committee page 11.
Run through this as quick as I
can, uh, line 98. You'll see $5
Million recommendation for the
Kiki Saavedra Senior Dignity
Fund, which provides a variety
of services to senior citizens,
largely in rural areas.
Um
Both the LFC and executive have
a little over $2 million in the
agency's based budget from this
fund executive includes $5
Million Special appropriation
for
All the various services that
are funded by this fund, food
transportation, caregiving and
other services outlined in
statute.
Uh, line 102.
You'll see a $5 million
recommendation from the
executive to support the
operations of, uh New Mexico's
five regional food banks.
With the end of the public
health emergency, um
Sorry. At the end of the public
health, emergency snap
allotments and Medicaid
unwinding That department
indicates that community demand
for food bank services are
growing. So the executive has $5
million to support their
efforts.
That online 105, you'll see a $2
million non recruit non
recurring appropriation for
healthcare Receivership.
This funding would only be
tapped into into in the event of
a Receivership where the
department contracts with the
company that takes over a
struggling struggling healthcare
facility to ensure that the
doors stay open and patients
continue receiving care receiver
ships are often unpredictable
and don't happen on a regular
basis, so funding should not be
in the agency's base budget.
Found with a couple million
dollars only only to be used for
Receivership would ensure the
agency has available funding
should they need to enter into
Receivership with the facility.
And finally online 106, you'll
see a $17.2 million
recommendation.
Uh um.
To expand the supplemental
Nutrition assistance Program for
certain populations. This
includes a change in the snap
eligibility parameters from
165% 2 of the federal poverty
limit to 200%.
And it would also provide a
modest increase in snap
distributions during the summer
months for families who have
kids that are certified to
receive free or reduced priced
meals. Um
The language that I'm seeing on
here doesn't quite reflect the
purpose that I just described.
So, um Joe and I will follow up
with each other to
Make sure that that's squared
away. Mr. Chair. I believe this
was perhaps the original
language from the agency
requests and possibly the
executive recommendation.
I made some some some tweaks to
it and apologize for that. And
we'll get you that
Okay, Great. Thank you. Any
questions Represent Garcia
represent chances Real quick, Mr
Chairman on the food banks.
On line one too. You know, there
was no record me
recommendation by ALGA C with
I'd like to revisit that to the
You know, I have a food back in
my community that is really
struggling to supply 80
assistance to people in the area
in my area coverage, Laguna, a
comma.
It's a big area and we only have
one food bank and we really need
to revisit. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you Represent
Sheffield.
Thank you. Mr Chairman Line, 98
Kiki survived their hand.
Uh, up in my area. We have no
grocery store.
It's not a problem for me, but
if you're older can't see well
kept drive. You can't get
groceries. It's many miles to
those groceries. We had a
program set up using the K. Kiki
surveyed refund that was
temporary. Uh, one of our
grocery stores up in Clayton
would, uh, the folks at home
would
Fill out their order the elderly
Ah, the grocery store in Clayton
would fill that for free.
It would be brought down to Roy
or the area there and dispersed
for the elderly. That is one of
the programs we're talking about
here.
The other program is
transportation to medical care
for elderly. Uh
Very remote area. Not you guys
have seen us on TV here lately.
Not everyone has a child that
can take them to the doctor.
Uh, that I'd like to think about
this a little bit before we
don't
Give any money to it. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you very much
represented. Chatfield
represented Herndon, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair and Mr Chair
and analysts. I'd like to bring
two items to your attention. One
is with respect to a discussion
that was earlier about a with
the General Services Department
and the purchase of a long term
rehabilitation facility for
substance abuse and addiction.
But now there's also in the
healthcare authority, a request
through legislation for $400,000
for a study coordinated
behavioral healthcare between
the state, the counties and the
city.
I want to make sure that was
just flag for you. And also
there was with the Healthcare
authority. A request Mr Chair
through legislation for
$100,000.
Study to combine and create a
Department of African American
affairs joining together Martin
Luther King Jr Commission, the
Office of African American
Affairs and the Performing Arts
Center introduce so with
absolutely incredible increase
and improve the health of the
state. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Rendon. Okay, let's continue
moving on.
All right, Mr Chair, members of
the committee attorney to page
12.
Line 109.
You'll see, uh, very large
recommendations from both the
executive and the LFC to help
address the limited access to
medical and behavioral
healthcare in rural areas in New
Mexico. The executive includes
100 Million while the LFC
includes 120 Million to cover
operating losses for rural
healthcare providers for new or
expanded services.
In medically underserved areas.
And Mr Chair. That is all I have
on this page. Joey, Do you have
anything? No. Mr Chair, but
Stanford questions.
Okay? I don't see any. Thank
you. Let's keep going.
So, Mr Chair on page 13. You'll
see a lot of, um common items
between the two recommendations.
Um, some of the some of the
items were, um not agency. A
couple of these were not agency
requests that the executive is
recommending but was not was not
considered by lfc because we
didn't receive them.
Um
And with that, if anybody has
any where Simon has any
comments or anybody has any
questions, no comments. We're
gonna go to represent Garcia
then, huh?
Thank you, Mr Chairman on on
line 122 Department of Health.
Operational costs into Mexico
Veterans home.
Ah
don't know what it was based on
to begin with the July only 49
patients in the home Now we're
up to 65 from the capacity of
that, Uh,
Facilities. 132 brand new
hospital, Mr Chairman, and, uh,
old like to look at more funding
because it isn't rural New
Mexico and it's hard to get
people to stay there because of
the cells or whatever, but it's
very important to me because I
am a veteran.
And that's It is a brand new
hospital and we need to fund it
fully so we can get people under
the work to take care of our
veterans.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you Represent Garcia
Robson Luhan quickly, Uh, line
112 back on page 12 with
development. Disabilities for
special education abutment is
quickly is, Is there going to be
something that's going to go to
P E D as well with their special
education requested.
In budget, Mr Chair.
So, Mr Chairman, I believe the
special education I'm bad is
specifically isn't specifically
not at PD, so it wouldn't it
wouldn't go to ped.
Yeah, I guess I'll ask Sonny off
line because I knew they've
asked for some updates of ped
also their special education. Um
Expansion, So I'll do that.
Thank you. Thank you, Please.
Thank you. Mr Chairman. First
up. Thanks for recommending, um,
123 through 125 for e D, um I'm
127.
We've talked to the general last
night or yesterday.
Believe or day before, but
marketing and outreach to
veterans in New Mexico, he was
saying.
You know, but the constant
turnover in this department, Um
he was saying, it's really
important this, um the marketing
and outreach. So what veterans
all over the state know exactly
what they what we are offering
and what we need and they can
tell us what they need. And he
he really emphasized that in our
meeting that
The outreach and letting them
know is really important. So I'd
like to see
Funding on that possible. Thank
you. Thank you very much
for processing unit Represent
pedigree, please.
Thank you, Chairman. And thank
you again, gentlemen. On page
12. I don't align 111.
Chairman. Can I get a brief
understanding of why we're
Appropriating $58 million of non
green fund too.
Something that's continue. So,
Mr Chair and representative, I
don't have any information on
that particular item. But I can
have our analysts follow up with
the perfect director director
Silly to come up. This is with
the short following gsd I
believe, Or is it if it's not
okay?
Please.
Mr Chair. These would be for
similar kinds of startup cost.
What?
Organizations should be able to
expansion.
Not for our chairman and
director. I appreciate that
answer, but it says
I think I'm trying to track
tracking with your answer, but
it says support expansion of
services in shortage areas, so
that implies to me. Yes, we want
to expand, but we have a
shortage somewhere.
So correct it. It's similar to,
um we don't have a certain type
of behavior and this could help.
Be the bridge to organization
that needs to hire somebody to
provide the counseling services
go through the training to get
certain.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you
directly. Thank you, Joy. Thank
you. Very much represented.
Credit grew really appreciate
you flagging that, um,
represented Allison, please.
Thank you. Mr Chair. My question
is in relative to line 118.
To study the uranium tailings at
a site near Gallup.
It says, Do not recommend. I'm
surprised that department
Is not asking for a new study.
I just hope that it doesn't
become ignored, just like the
abandoned uranium mines in my
district in northwest New Mexico
just to call it Mr Chair.
Thank you very much.
Representative Allyson Vice
chair, Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
like to go back to line 111 and
just get a little bit more
better understanding of the
difference between
111 and 109 and the healthcare
delivery fund. So exactly how
these funds are different and
interplay.
So, Mr Chairman, As I was
saying, before, I might need to
get with our analysts and and
get that additional information
for you.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
Um, going back, I would just
flag the office of the natural
Resources Trustee. Uh, can we
We see some appropriation. It
says that Appropriations haven't
been fully expended their This
is line 126
would like to see sort of that
breakdown and also understand
from the request from the okay,
let's get going.
So, um, so, Mr Chair, just
moving on to page 14. You'll see
some
Some requests here from the
Children, Youth and Families
Department. I would just remind
you and we'll see these in just
a couple of minutes. Um, you
know, C o f D was one area where
the LFC recommendation looked at
the Government Accountability
Trust to fund some program
expansions on that. And, uh,
Simon, did you have anything?
Um, Mr Chair members of the
committee. Uh, biggest
difference on this page. Here is
line 140.
Um, there's a recommendation
from the executive for $7
million to purchase law
enforcement vehicles. Um,
believe 38% of their fleet is
over. 100,000 Miles. Um, I think
that comes out cars.
Uh, this appropriation would, um
Support about 80 new vehicles.
And
Madam chair if you just want us
to keep going to Department of
Transportation, and Simon's got
some stuff there.
Um miss or Madam chair members
of the committee page 15 now
lies 143. Through 145. You'll
see an executive recommendation
of 240 million from the General
Fund for transportation related
items statewide, which is
significantly higher than the
LFC recommendation.
Um, the Legislature appropriated
292 million from the General
Fund for transportation projects
last year and 303 173 million in
2022. And so lfc staff has
indicated that these
appropriations from prior years
still have high remaining
balances, which is why the LFC
recommendation is is lower than
prior years.
And then on line 147. Now we'll
get into public education. Let's
um let's just take a pause here
before we go into PD and see if
any. Yes, uh, Representative
Armstrong. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, I think there's
several people on this committee
that would really like to see
that transportation.
Uh, fund a lot more for major
infrastructure and road
projects. 380, some others in,
uh
Um, Southeast New Mexico. That's
line item. 143. Thank you.
Great. Yes, Representative
Brown.
That advice, Madam Vice chair. I
echo What? Thank you.
Excellent. Sounds like we've got
a lot of consensus on that
representative Garrett. Yeah, I
was just going to add Madam
chair that, um, I think it's
house built 42 that many of us
are doing for Transportation
Trust fund. What was the amount
How much
Uh, my my bill is requesting 400
million. There's another bill. I
believe. Request representative
pedigree. Then representative
Chatfield.
I think we can all echo those
comments and I'm sure at some
point in time Madam chair and
vice chair.
Um, we're going to have a
conversation about
Um, uh, right now we're in
Section five.
But at some point in time over
the next couple of weeks, we're
gonna have a long conversation
about how
Section nine got hijacked.
So thank you. Thank you,
Representative Chatfield.
Just echo the same thing. You
know, we have good money. Now.
one of these days we want roads
or something that we're gonna
leave behind for people to
remember us by put some money in
them.
If you would like to continue.
Thank you. Wait, wait. Sorry.
Thank you. Um uh, chair I
I don't want to get past line
item 147 just yet if I may just
discuss that for just a moment.
Um, I asked Mr Kerry s the ped
to give me a synopsis of CTE
funding. How it all washes out
in the budget. We have several
different line items on it.
Um
It's not reflected here in the
exact but I guess it was an
agency request for 40 million,
which would match what we did
last year. Mr Chair.
If we dip down to the 13, is it
11 million that here it, says
1311 million that the LFC is
recommending We will be at risk
of losing Perkins funds.
And I don't think we want that
to happen. And it's my opinion,
Mr Chair and I think of many
people here on the committee.
That CTS, a central component of
improving high school education.
A note here from the analyst
Comments says, Um, they
recommend at least that lower
amount but again, I wish that
would go up. It says CD programs
show evidence of increasing
student engagement, graduation
rates and post secondary
attainment, So I want to make
sure that the net for CTE is as
high as we can get it.
And I don't want to settle for
11 million there and then
Regarding, um
Early literacy. I'm just going
to get in a plug for that as
well. Mr Chair, the LFC budget
recommendation apparently moves
20 million from the operational
funds for schools. That's the
SCG.
Adds back 10 Million for
education initiatives that could
include CTE or early literacy.
But like all operational funding
is at the discretion of the
schools. And I think we, the
Legislature need to push and
keep pushing for. It's a lot of
students.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representing Brown. Roxanne
Garcia. Thank you. Much German
on Transportation Department.
Another $160 million difference
from one to another.
You know, we really need to do
roads more than anything else in
this new Mexico, you know, and I
said, and transportation and
without roads were not going to
exist. So you know rules are
expensive, are are important for
everybody.
School Busses so forth, So we
really need to look at that.
Thank you. Sure. Thank you
Represent Garcia. Briefly, Mr
Science. Perhaps we can get
feedback. I know it's in our
volume three. But whether the
special appropriations for
transportation what the status
is how whether they've been
spent. We don't need to go
through it now, but very much
here that I'm sure that we have
eyes on what's been spent. And
what
Okay, let's uh keep going
through ped, please. Mr. Chair.
Members of the committee. Um,
Representative Brown should take
my job. She, uh, went over the
two things I was gonna cover, so
CTE funding. The executive is
flat at 40 million. You know,
it's not reflected on this page
because the CT funding is all
throughout the budget.
But executives flat at 40
million. The LFC recommendation
is between 14 and 24 Million
again, depending on how some of
that recurring funding is. End
up how they end up using it. So
the executive is is
significantly hired for career
technical education and then on
early literacy.
Or structural literacy. The
executive is also quite a bit
higher. The executive has
51 58.1 million spread
throughout the budget, and
that's over. Double the amount.
Uh, in the budget from last
year, the LFC has a modest
increase. Um, of several
million. I can't remember the
exact number but but those are
two
Areas of the education budget,
where there's a pretty big
difference between the executive
and LFC recommendations.
Mr Chair. Can I make one quick
comment, please represent
Garrett Elia. See, um, had put
in for 46.2 Million for C T E,
but we have that
30 million chunk.
Literally.
Great. Thank you.
Representative. Thank you so
whine 155 on the behavioral
Health prevention program. I
mean, training Supports for
staff to is this also
duplicative
Negative. Um, I'd ask you but
also Sonny, who's here? I see.
But it's saying here for no
detail on request. So I'm
wondering, too if we need some
guardrails around this type of
funding. I'm happy to work on
this, too. But
Is it also in the PD fund? Um,
budget. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Representative, Um
Last year the department
received or this year 5 million.
For this purpose. This is on top
of and separate to, um all of
the at risk funding generated
through the SCG, uh, for school
district operations. This is for
real health.
Um, initiatives for programming.
The specifics of that. I'm
sorry. I don't have that for you
today, but hopefully that
Clarifies
A little bit. It does a bit, but
I'd like to get some more detail
on this just coming out of covid
and knowing the high, um,
numbers we have for the need, Mr
Chair.
Thank you Represent Herndon,
please.
Thank you, Mr Tear, and
analysts I draw your attention
to line 158. And that is the
implement provisions of the
Black Education Act. I see that
there's $400,000 Mr Chair that
is recommended by the
Executive and that the that the
LFC says
It's in the base operating
budget, and I just bring this to
your attention because of the
past couple of years after this
act it's been implemented. It
has not been funded. So, Mr
Chair, and analysts would ask
for you to take a closer look at
that.
And, uh, funding that program.
Now that it has passed.
Thank you very much here.
Absolutely thank you represent
Herndon.
Okay, let's continue on endless.
Okay, Mr. Chair, members of the
community just to
Speed things up a little bit
here, Uh, let's go ahead and
turn to page 18.
Uh um.
Online 181. There's a $10
million recommendation and that
That language is, uh
Old and not
Very descriptive. It should say
to support schools designated as
in need of improvement. So that
$10 million there would be to
provide evidence based academic
interventions at some of the
schools low it's or some of the
states. Lowest performing
schools. Um, the ped has a new
database that designates each
school.
Um
Based on a variety of student
outcome indicators. So this is
peds effort to direct more
resources to those schools for
evidence based interventions.
Um, this at departments called
the differentiated system of
supports, and this year they're
using federal funds for that
purpose. Federal Arba money
that, um they've said won't be
available.
Next fiscal year. And so that's
why you see a request or a
recommendation here from the
executive of $10 million
Then.
Joey, Do you have anything on
this page education? Okay. So
pays 191 or not 191 Sorry. Page
19 line, 191.
You'll see an $8 million
recommendation from the
executive for, uh
Summer internship opportunities
and those are with local and
tribal governments. Um
Ped this year, I believe is
using $9 million in funding.
Uh, for these internships, Don't
quote me on that. I think it's
close to that, Um
And some of that is is federal
funding that won't be available
next year. Um
And so the executive has a
recommendation to keep that
internship program. Uh
Having continue into FY 25.
And then on line 197. You'll see
a recommendation to conduct and
ministers, student standards
based assessments. The LFC
recommendation for that is in
the recurring budget. It's at
$10 million. The executive has
it here at $14 Million, and then
the line above that is a
Uh huh.
One of the biggest
recommendations from the LFC for
educate for non recurring
education. Um, that's a $50
million infusion into proposed
new Tribal education trust fund.
And I just point out Mr Chair on
that item. There was a
discussion earlier about, uh,
appropriations contingent on
legislation. This would be an
example of that. That kind of
language. You see there, um
With the appropriation
contingent on passage of
legislation.
Excellent. Thank you. We're
gonna go to represent pedigree
representative Han Group.
Thank you, Chairman.
Gonna backtrack just a little
bit NASCAR bigger question.
So is I look at this and then
look at everything in here and
the example just given on
Requiring legislation.
There's only a handful of those
throughout this this 31 page
document, and so
Chairman.
Whoever wants to answer this
question.
I take this whole document.
As non reoccurring money.
With no strings are tied
attached and no performance
measures attached. Is that a
fair statement?
Um Mr Chaired members of the
committee.
Uh um, Money has to be spent.
um, according to the
appropriation language, So those
are the boundaries that you all
set in terms and then in terms
of performance measures, some of
these appropriations are related
to the agency's official list of
performance measures. Some may
not be, um, but
That agencies are required to
provide
Information at the request of
the state budget Division or the
legislative finance. Not sure if
that answers your question, but
that's the best I can do.
So, Mr Chairman, representative,
I think so. Some of, uh,
The issue. Behind your question
is one of the reasons Lfc took
the approach of creating the new
government Accountability Trust.
Right, So you know, have
guidelines around specific
program that you want to fund
and then in bed within that, a
requirement for ongoing
performance evaluation so that
you know that the investments
you all are making in that
particular program.
Are leading to actual results to
improve the lives of new
Mexicans, so you know
As with these significant amount
of money that the Legislature
has put into these non recurring
appropriations, uh you know,
that was one of the
The
The needs that that was out
there is, you know, set up a
structure for funding these and
make sure that your monitoring
and evaluation and evaluating
how those funds are being used.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Joy.
I don't know. Maybe I'm the only
one here that has a concern with
this, but I get why now
understand?
The the statement on the
government accountability uh
Still
Still not sure that
It's a it's a good idea to have
government overseeing itself,
and so
There. There's a concern with me
with putting three point
Or 2.5 if we went with Yellow
Sea recommendation.
Not including other $2.3
billion.
Uh um.
Two agencies with no guardrails.
And
Chairman this week is huge. Ask
But with respect to that with
each one of these, um
313 lines that don't come with a
piece of legislation that enact
them.
And therefore potentially future
rulemaking or something that
would go along with that.
I would suggest anything that we
do choose to fund becomes a
performance measure inside this
book.
So just a thought. I'm there.
There's a concern that that
we're putting nonrecurring
funding out there.
It's not going through a piece
of legislation other than house
built to
And, um
At the end of the day.
The public is not going to see
90% of this.
We're not going to hear the
debate over 90% of this. Yes,
we'll go through house Bill two,
but you can't go through a
document. It's an inch and a
half thick and in a three hour
debate
Or and forever how long it
happens on the Senate side with
respect to that, so the depth of
a lot of people's knowledge of
that's only going to come from
those those few debates.
And that concerns me.
And, you know, sitting here
trying to figure out how to
I had to turn this around and
message this to 31,000
constituents that I have
That this is gonna all go
through one bill for the most
part, except for the
Lines that we've talked about.
And, um
It's just going to go through
one bill, and nobody's going to
get the opportunity to hear the
debate over that subject unless
they go back and hear the brief,
you know, three hour meeting
that we had about it today and a
few things that we follow up
with over the next couple of
couple of weeks between now and
January, 30th January 31st, So
it's just a huge amount of
concern for me. It's a lot of
money.
With without a whole lot of
accountability to the agencies
that are receiving the money, so
just
I thought in in it took me a
while to grasp everything that
we were trying to.
Trying to do here in the lack of
accountability that
Goes with that.
So thank you. Thank you,
And just really quickly. I'm
sure I was able to read through
more things Aligned 166 the
million dollars for safety and
say, right deployment of mobile
panic buttons. It's lacking down
data. And if efficacy is what
you list here, I know there's
gonna
There's gonna be some
legislation on this if that's
going to help you, Um so I just
flagged out for you and say that
we need to look at that. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative Han
and I want to apologize to
everybody for violating the
microphone rule. They're very
clear example.
Okay. Now I want to go to
represents a question.
Thank you all. Um, Yeah,
Briefly, Actually, Mr. For the
analysts and the committee. I
want to flag line 191.
This has been, uh
Extremely successful in Dona Ana
County, upwards of thousands
Extremely successful in Dona Ana
County, upwards of 1000 High
school students receiving
internships all across the
county.
Um, we need this Stay wide.
I want to. We want to make sure
I want to make sure that there's
sufficient funding statewide to
support this and to, um, would
offer up certainly Dona of
Job opportunities.
Kate. Let's keep going.
Okay, Mr. Chair. Members of the
committee. Uh, last thing on
education is, um
In terms of what the LFC calls
educator clinical practice that
includes, uh, paid student
teaching fellowships and, um,
residencies, the
They're very appropriations
throughout this document and
throughout the recurring budget,
But just to flag for you all the
executive recommendation is is
quite a bit higher for FY 25 for
those various items residencies
paid
Whatever the other one was
fellowships.
So with that.
I will move on to page
Um, night page 20. Excuse me.
Um, so on
Page 20. You'll see a
recommendation of $15 million
from the Teacher Loan repayment
program. Uh, recommendation is 5
million from the LFC, the
executive recommendation funds.
This program at current
application rates through the
end of FY 27 the LFC
recommendation. Ah!
Finds the program through the
end of FY 25 I believe
And I will pass it over to you.
Joey. Mr. Chair. Thank you. Yes.
So, Mr Chair on this page, you
see a number of items for the
higher education department.
I'll just highlight you know,
the 32.5 million for B, R and R
Building replacement. So excuse
me, building renewal and
replacement and for facility
demolition for higher education
institutions and the $5 million
for equipment, replacement and
renewal.
On the next page. You can see
some additional items in the LFC
recommendations. So, uh, 10
million for graduate students in
stem fields. Um, for for some
Grants there. Uh so 10 million
to support research universities
and then an additional 10
million for endowed faculty
teaching positions and student
financial aid to support social
work programs.
And with that, Simon, did you
have any final on higher
education items, Mr. Chair? No,
I'm I'm ready to move on to
section six when you are, Joey.
So, um, Mr Chairman, there's
some additional items. Uh, I was
just gonna say there was some
additional items on higher ed
that you can look at it and
we'll Stanford questions on any
higher ed items. Perfect
represented. Allison, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Um
Reference to line 27 the dual
credit program.
I would like, uh, the amounts to
be reconsidered The
recommendations.
Thank you very much. Colleges
are very dependent on the deal
Credit program so
But like Ricans reconsideration
familiar melts. Thank you. Thank
you. Absolutely Thank you.
Okay, uh,
Represented 100. Mr Terry, if I
could just ask for a
clarification online to 12, and
it talks about behavioral mental
health initiatives that higher
education institutions does that
include amounts that you had
reference, Um
Analyst Simon regarding
fellowships. Internships is that
included in that funding.
So Mr Chairman and
representative, So I think the
comment there from our analysts,
is that the LFC recommendation
for the base budget for, um
For in the instruction in
general includes funding for
students supports, which is is
sort of in the same in the same
area.
And Mr Chair, representative.
The funding I was talking about
earlier for educator, clinical
practice. That's for K through
12, aspiring K through 12
teachers to get them experience
in the classroom prior to
becoming, uh, you know, official
teachers in the classroom so
unrelated to this
Oh, Mr Mr Terror, and Simon, if
you could just just clarifying.
The funding that is for
fellowships, internships. Those
programs for graduate students
what it is, they're going to be
in the higher Education
Department. Um, Mr Chair,
Representative, Um, some of it
is in the higher education
department like the Teacher Loan
repayment program.
But the residency funding the
fellowship funding and the paid
student teaching that's in the
public education section of the
Thank you, Mr Chair, Mr Analyst.
Thank you very much for Stanford
it let's continue on.
Okay. So with that, Mr Chairman,
we have well, actually. One more
item for Section five at the
very top of page 23 are
transfers to the computer System
Enhancement fund. That's the sea
to process we referenced earlier
and agency I t projects broadly,
um, moving on to Section six,
which has a representative,
Brown pointed out earlier today
is for supplemental and
deficiency appropriations. Uh,
So the the bulk of these are,
um supplemental appropriations
that would be for fiscal year
2024.
Right? Yeah, that's where we
are. Um and, uh, some of these,
including us in significant
items for the General Services
Department are for prior year
spending that you are all coming
that the the requester
recommendations are to come back
and backfill. Uh,
Money that's already been spent.
but the agency didn't have money
for in those funds so you can
see as I was saying for the
General Services Department
online to 33 of Page 23.
There's a $69.8 million
recommendation from the LFC to
settle the deficiency as of the
end of FY 23. So, um, the
executive recommendation of 16.7
million is based on a little bit
newer numbers. I believe that
amount is based on the audited
balance of the fund, according
to the General Services
Department's audit.
Um And then, in addition for FY
24 the year recurrently in
online to 36 you see a
recommendation of 25.4 million
from the General Fund and 65
Million from the General Fund
for, um, expenses in the current
year. I'll just remind you, Mr
Chair we were We were talking
about the General Service
department in Section five.
The LoC recommendation had an
additional request in Section
five.
Uh, also point out, uh, online
to 37. The executive
recommendation includes 24.8
million to reimburse the state's
public liability fund for legal
claim or for risk management
claims. Uh,
As it says in the comment there.
These this was not included in
the agency request. But you all
heard in lfc a valuation of that
program. And, uh, you know, just
in seeing the news, a large
number of, um significant claims
against the risk management fund
there that that had been paid
out over the last year.
Simon, Did you have anything on
page 23?
Mr Trained members of the
committee. Uh,
Yeah. Line to 37 for the
The public liability fund. Um
Similar to the health benefits
fund premium increases for this
fund haven't kept up with, uh,
cost increases over time. So
cash reserves have started to
dwindle in that fund. Uh, cash
users were 70 million to end fy
2043 million to close FY 23 and
the department is indicated that
some shock loss claims in the
current year.
Uh, could deplete the fund.
Uh um.
So the executive recommendation
includes this $24.8 million
infusion into the liability
fund.
As well as $20 million
recommendation online to 69.
Potential C Y F D settlements
over the following year and a
half that would have otherwise
been paid out of G s D s
liability funds.
And that's all I have on this
page, Mr Chair. Great. Okay.
Thank you Represent Herndon and
then represent Luhan. Mr Tear
for a point of preference and
clarification. We talked about
the higher education department.
But we didn't specifically talk
about the University of New
Mexico. And it's important, Mr
Tear analysts with respect to
Uh, agency recommendation. There
are lots of guardrails and
limitations on how the
university puts its budget
together. But one of the
important items for you to
consider is the community career
to careers program. There is
legislation for $1,178,286
specifically for that program,
and it's ready to go in many
conversations about it. And if
it had been in the agency
Uh huh.
Budget. It would I have every
confidence that would be
recommended by both the LSC and
the executive, Mr Chair, so I
want to bring it to your
attention.
Thank you very much. Mr Herndon,
Robson Luhan.
Great, um, yet to go to line
two.
37
Um
What would it mean? If we don't
put the the funding or some of
that funding into there with
that risk management?
And those those
The liability there, Mr Chair.
So, Mr Chairman, representative,
I'm sorry, Mr. What do they have
there already? That's missing. I
guess So. Mr Chairman,
Representative Luhan. I believe.
Simon said that he had about $43
million in cash reserves, so
they do have cash. I think the
concern is with the number of
high dollar claims that have
been
Flowing out over the last year.
There's some concern about
Um, that's fun Going down Lower.
I will just say, you know, uh,
part of that.
Evaluation that was done by the
LFC program Evaluation unit, you
know, made some recommendations
for the risk management division
of the General Services
Department on you know some some
some ways to into basically
increase increased rates. So you
all fund? Uh,
Some fund agency contributions
to the public liability fund in
the operating budget. Um and so,
looking at maybe, you know,
increasing rates in the
operating budget, which does
have a fiscal impact on the
operating budget rather than um,
funding through special
appropriations, But so they're
just different strategies that
accomplished the same. Have it
further talk about that because
I think that's how I understood
it. So this is
Yes. I didn't see this when we
were looking at this agency yet,
So Yeah, Let's talk about that a
little bit more. Thank you.
Thank you very much for
presentable Hunt. Vice chair.
Dixon. Thank you, Mr Chair. I'd
like to actually focus a little
bit more on 237. But really is
it related to acute
Uh, line to 69. The I f d
settlement cost
So, um
Ms. ER. Well, Simon
Uh, not Joey. Simon, Could you
walk me through?
Do we know what the settlement
costs are already that C y f D
is going to have to pay out or
they totalling 20 million are we
estimating? Um, yeah, Mr. Chair
members of the committee, the
General Services Department
would know how much paid out
this year from C Y F D
settlements, the 20 million
figure going forward.
Was just to have cash available
for potential settlements over
the next year and a half.
Because the liability fund is,
uh
Dwindling.
Mr Charron. So could we
I mean, what happens if we don't
have the money in there to see
why f d then come have to come
to us and say, Oh, we, You know,
we need a deficiency.
Um
Of X amount. Mr. Chair
representative.
G s D would be the one that
would come to you guys for, uh,
come to this body for deficiency
appropriations. Um
They're like I said there are
cash reserves of 43 Million, so
it seems fairly unlikely that
that fund is going to be fully
depleted by the end of this
fiscal year.
But the department
Has warned us of that
possibility. Mr Chair do we have
A list of the upcoming
settlements. I mean, probably
not because they're
Still in process. But do we get
a list of you know, after the
fact How is this working?
Mr Chair members of the
committee. I believe GSD is
legally obligated to publicly
release uh, settlement
information after it's
determined, um, but Joey would
probably know more than me. So,
um, Mr Chair, and, uh,
representative, um, one of the
things that came out in that lfc
evaluation was so GSD is
obligated to report to lfc on
Every, um, payment that has been
made, um by the end of the end
of the calendar year.
Um so I I G s D at that meeting
made a commitment to
Uh, they stopped doing that, and
GSD had made a commitment to
begin doing that. You know, as
of this year, uh, I'll have to
check that we have actually
received that in everything
preparing for the session. I
haven't actually done that. But
I will check and make sure GSD
has provided that information as
they have committed to do. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you, Joey.
I would really like to make sure
that that is happening.
Um and
You know, I think annually is
too infrequent actually, given
some of the Yes. I'm sorry. I
didn't mean to interrupt, Um
You know, I think you're you're
correct and annually is maybe
too infrequent one of
Other states have much more
rigorous, um, you know,
reporting and like, so based on
the level of claim, right, So if
it's up to a universe up to a
million dollars that might only
have to go up to a certain
level. If it's more than you
know, $10 million, it might have
to go up to another level. And
so one of the recommendations of
that report was to you know for
for you all to look and perhaps
place some additional reporting
requirements in on those high
dollar claims.
Thank you, Joey. I think that's
a great point. And I really
appreciate you bringing it back
to the recommendations that we
have all that we've seen. And so
my personal feeling on this
particular line item is that I
am not comfortable setting aside
$20 million for claims when
there is a balance, um and
without this rigorous reporting.
That I believe the legislature
deserves. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you regular member. I'm
sure
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Just on
that point. I think that we
heard the C Y F D secretary say
yesterday that
That they do settle some claims
in that entity. And so I just
want to make sure that
It all goes through GSD.
And just to positively make sure
and then the reporting. I would
echo those comments on the
reporting. Thank you. Thank you
very much. Thank you, Member
Armstrong.
Um okay is there I think that we
would ask for those multiple
pieces of follow up and very
seriously flagged line 269. And
maybe as we sort of central
legislative opportunities, let's
continue on and finish up doing
Mr Chair members of the
committee.
Um
Uh, turning to page 25.
Sorry. Um, Mr Chair Line, 253.
This is a pretty big discrepancy
here between the the exactly
recommendation in the LFC
recommendation.
So the executive recommends 26.3
million from the General fund to
be matched by 78.9 million in
federal funds for the Human
Services Department to
administer the required Medicaid
unwinding following the end of
the public health emergency.
Through the first years of the
Covid era. The feds required
states to keep people
continuously enrolled in
Medicaid in exchange for a
higher federal match rate.
The public health emergency was
officially declared over at the
end of March of 2023.
So the feds gave states 12
months to return to normal
eligibility and enrollment
operations, including taking
people off Medicaid, who are no
longer eligible.
This return to normal operations
is what's known as the Medicaid
unwinding.
In order to meet this federal 12
month unwinding deadline HST
hired on a large number of
contract staff this year to
assist with the high volume of
Medicaid eligibility,
verification and re
determination activities
required by the unwinding.
Since the end of the public
health emergency last March, HST
has dis enrolled roughly 100,000
individuals that were no longer
eligible under normal Medicaid
eligibility guidelines.
So this request for supplemental
funding covers the cost of this
additional contract staff needed
to meet the 12 month unwinding
deadline and avoid penalties
from the federal government.
And then on that same page
lines to 59 through 263 our
recommendations from the
executive to shore up
anticipated current year
shortfalls at several of his
medical facilities.
Continuous challenge for the
agency is staffing the
facilities, especially in more
rural locations.
To ensure adequate staffing. The
division often needs to use
outside services, which are more
expensive than
Internal FT. And this cost or
this drives up costs
significantly.
And the facilities also must
adhere to two required staffing
ratios.
The facilities received General
fund, but they also rely on
other state funds, primarily
revenue from patient billing.
In FY 23 d O H had 94 million in
budget authority but only earned
about 65 million in revenues.
So while the agency didn't
overspend its budgeted total,
they did spend about 4.6 million
over there earned revenues and
the agency is requesting a
deficiency for that on line, um
to 57.
And it's recommended by both the
executive and the LFC.
And so the, uh
The recommendations below that
the supplementals it's due to
that same issue that D O. H is
seeing this year with their, uh,
with their
So, um, Mr Chair members of the
committee, I will turn it back
to Joey or over to you. So I
think Mr Chair did you have any
other supplementals are such
deficiencies.
No. I think Mr Chair that
handles are comments for the
problems and deficiencies if you
wanted to stand for questions,
thank you very much. We will go
to represent Alison first.
Thank you, Mr Chair. My question
is on line 250.
In your analyst comments.
There's no indication of whether
It receives a recommendation or
do not recommend
Um, I'm hoping it's just an
error because
It's it sounds like if we're not
recommending anything.
We're punishing the recipients
of the capital outlays at the
expense of the failure of the
New Mexico State Agency.
Thank you, representative. Ms.
Thank you, representative. This
document, sir Garcia, Mr. Chair
Representative. I can speak to
that line. I'm the LFC, analyst
for Indian Affairs. Um, that
deficiency request came to the
LFC. I believe on December 12th,
So actually, the same day the
committee was considering the
recommendation. So we just
didn't have
The information or the request
at the time to include it in the
recommendation. What it can
speak to is kind of what that is
so and back in FY 22. The
department has experienced some
challenges getting capital
outlay. Money out the door. Um
and so did not submit for
reimbursement in time to do the
accrual for those
reimbursements, and the funds
reverted. And so, um, that one
we flagged during the hearing,
but might be one to put on your
radar.
It wasn't included, simply
because we didn't receive it.
In time for the LFC
recommendation. Um, but the
department did, then bring it
forward once they had a number,
because those are reimbursements
that were never made to tribes,
and the funds reverted. So
Uh, Mr Terry, you're telling me
that reimbursements are going to
be
Activated and Mr Chair
representative and, uh, not at
this time, so the agency
currently does not have the
funds any longer. Um, to make
those reimbursements and
therefore brought forth this
request. It just came after the
LFC recommendations were
compiled.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much.
Representative Allyson. Thank
you, Sandy Luhan and then over.
Great. Thank you, Mr Chair. I'm
just looking at line item to 63
D O h writing necessary services
for patient care at the New
Mexico behavior Health
Institute. Um
Says here that you need they
need to provide current year
projections has up. Have they
gotten those in yet? Mr Chair?
representative? I don't know. I
have to follow up with our
analysts. I would like to know
when they do. And if they do, I
think this is this is our
essential. Um
Unnecessary, Um, institute we
have for behavioral health, the
only one like it in our state,
So I think we need to really
look in and see what that means,
Especially when they're asking
for $6.5. Million. Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Thank you,
representative 107 100.
Thank you, Mr Tear and Mr Chair.
I would like to go back to line
250 for just a moment, and the
analysts who just spoke Mr
Chair, one of the things that is
a very concerning here is it
says that the Indian Affairs
Department failed to reimburse
the tribes and our big concern
would be. Why should the tribes
after suffer because the Indian
Affairs Department failed to
Reimburse them. So it seems to
me that there should be some,
uh, that we are making some
accommodation to make sure that
we are addressing the tribes and
that they are getting
reimbursed.
And then Mr Chair also want to
point out line to 51, the aging
and long term services and Mr
Chair. I'd like to clarification
from the analysts. This is that
this is for us to supplement to
supplement employee benefits. So
what benefits are the employee's
gonna be without? And this is
not clear when you are not.
Recommending a supplement for Mr
Chair.
Yeah, I have one more question,
but I'll wait for your answer.
So, um, Mr Chair and, um,
Representative, I can get you
more detail on what exactly this
request was. But there is a
You know, personal services and
employee benefits. Appropriation
to the department. Um, you know
you you passed that last year,
The agency is coming back and
asking for an additional $3
million to what was not
included.
And thank you, Mr Chair. Thank
you, Mr analyst. I just want to
make sure we are not hurting the
employees because the again like
in item 250, where the Indian
Affairs department failed to put
forth the capital, Adelaide that
the tribes and
Would be tribes and pueblos
would be hurting and also if
they failed to do something that
they should have done so that
the employees and not getting a
benefit that they are entitled
to. Maybe you open about that
explanation once you get it, so,
Mr Chairman and and
representative, um
I have not heard anything about
so employees are still getting
paid. There's an appropriation
to the department. It's a little
different, because you know, um
you know the reimbursement
process and and, um, you know,
so essentially, my money
reverted from Indian affairs
that would have would have
otherwise gone, but just the
reimbursements were delayed.
So it's a It's a little a little
difference. Situation between
line to 50 1951. I think Simon
might have more Mr Chair
representative.
The
This request here is basically
Request to higher positions
beyond the amount that were
budgeted for, so let's just say
their budget is
5 million right now for
200 employees that math probably
doesn't add up.
This is just a request of
another few million for tire on
another 50 or 60 employees
again. Those numbers I just made
up, but that's it's
That's what it's for just to
hire beyond their current budget
capacity.
Okay, Mr Chair. If, uh, I'm a
also would just like to bring
your attention to to 63.
And, um
This is, uh, the Department of
health to provide necessary
services for patient care at the
New Mexico Behavioral Health
Institute, so their executive
makes a recommendation. The LFC
doesn't but it says the
department needs to provide
current projections so just for
clarification once those
predictions are provided, are
you going to consider those Mr
Chair, Mr.
Analysts helped me to understand
what your explanation means. So,
um, Mr Mr Chair and
representative, so now that
we're in the legislative, that's
your function. Thank you very
much. I just bring it to your
attention and the attention of
the committee. Thank you. Thank
you very much represented it.
Alright. The race is on is
Sawyer Brown would sing. We're,
uh
So let's try it will conclude
take us through the final pieces
of Mr Chair. Members of the
committee, just one more real
quick. In Section six, Section
six to touch on is line to 77.
That's a request.
Recommendation from the
executive for 19.9 million for
Universal Free School Meals. Um,
there's a shortfall in the
budget for universal meals and
if if that's not funded than,
uh, those costs
That the districts have to eat
them out of their own operating
budgets. Um so I just wanted to
bring that one to your
attention. And so with that I
will pass it back over to Joey,
who will probably tell you about
the gate fund. Um, if briefly
receptor degree. Did you have a
question there? Thank you.
Chairman. Is that similar to the
requests that we did last year?
Or 30 million that that
supplemented each of the 89
school districts, plus charters
for the the three meals a day.
Hmm. Mr. Chair, Representative,
Um
The the funding last year. The
appropriation you all made, I
believe was 20 million.
The original projection at that
time was about 30 million.
The costs were not more kids
enrolled in school meals and now
the projection for this year.
Is about 40 million, which is
why you see this $19 million
supplemental request.
Yeah.
Great. Thanks. Thank you very
much. Thank you Represent the
group for the question. Further
questions. Okay. Seven. Lohan
briefly. I just like to remind
us rain committee that we are
statutorily, um, responsible for
for providing that school meals.
Um
And looking into that I just
like to flag that it's we passed
passed legislation to provide
the cost for this, So I just
like to make sure that we
understand that Mr Chair. Thank
you. Thank you, Garcia.
Uh, maybe I missed the boat
chair. I haven't had a question
on page 26.
Tell us the line.
But why? I'm sorry Line to 66
and veteran services.
There's a deficiency there of
$881,400 this deficiency in the
amount of 8881 400 covered with
the transfer from the veterans
home back to the Department of
Health in 2019 has been in
material finding in our audits.
It's a problem on the rod is for
the Veterans services now.
But this happened way before.
Right now, and we don't like to
revisit that because at the end
of the day if you have a bad
audit, it affects your
budgeting.
Figures like that, Mr Tremor, we
will thank you very much for
seven. Garcia.
Okay. Uh, Simon, please. Um, Mr
Simon.
Please talk us through. We're
gonna We're not gonna spend a
ton of time going through this
as members recall. We talked
about the gate at the beginning
of the, uh
When we kick this off on Monday,
so it's appropriate that we'll
sort of conclude this first week
talking about the gate now.
Yeah. So, Miss Mr Chairman, as
you mentioned you all you've all
talked about this and I sort of
ran through. Uh, some of the
items at the at the top of my
presentation here, you'll see.
Um all of the appropriation
recommendations for the various
departments, Um, and so I won't
repeat myself from earlier in
the meeting. Uh,
But you can. You can see those
items there and and comments.
And before, like, you know,
maybe we should have switched
the section numbers but because
it would have been nice to end
with the gate. But we do have
fund transfers in the back. Um
so, uh, as I as I mentioned
before, so appropriate or
recommendations for fund
transfers, so not appropriations
It's been in the current year,
but, um
To set aside those funds for
future years totalled 1.463
billion, so
Uh, more than half of the LFC s
recommendation for, um
For specials and several medals
is in this fund Transfer
section. So as I mentioned also
at the top line to 99, both lfc
and the executive have a
recommendation to transfer funds
into the compass can serve Asian
Legacy Permanent fund.
In addition, uh, you know,
Simon, when we were talking
about DFA a, you know, talked
about some of the executive
recommendations for housing and
I mentioned there was a $50
million transfer to the
Affordable Housing Trust fund.
You see that online 303
And then on lines, 304 and 305.
You see the big transfers for
the government Accountability
Trust. Um So, uh, again, This is
one that would be contingent on
legislation. Uh, approving that
trust, uh, and transfer money
into those funds and
Um, Simon, Did you have anything
on
Mr Chair members of the
committee just to finish off.
On page 3031 lines 309 through
313. I believe there's a little
more than $50 million in
appropriated art, but funding
and
Senator Munoz was quick to
remind me that
It is up to you all to
appropriate and not the
executive. But the
The
The executive did include a
recommendation for the use of
those funds. If you're
interested, and that's lines 309
through 313, with the majority
of that recommendation going to,
uh, vehicle charging
infrastructure statewide is the
end of this very long packet.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
We'll go now to
I'm sorry, Just real quick, Mr
Chairman, and there was a there
was a discussion in the Senate
finance. Uh, earlier this week
about some of those unspent RP
funds and, um, considering about
re appropriating some of those
unspent balances, and I just
wanted to highlight that for the
committee, I think maybe Charles
might have a
The LFC had record there was an
appropriated balance of about 55
Million and Arfa executive has
appropriated as recommended
appropriating those for a
variety of projects. The LFC
recommended appropriating it to
GST for the health benefits
program. Since we have those
healthcare costs, um
Thank you very much. Director.
Slowly. Okay, We're gonna wrap
up first. We're gonna go to
represent category.
Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you for the long morning.
Um
Line 313.
Last time I checked.
Mapping of the aquifer system in
the state of the Mexican
represent pedigrees. Your
microphone on it is it's just
too far away.
Um
Chairman, presenters flying 313.
Last time I checked.
The mapping of the Oxford
Systems and monitoring was the
job of the OSC. Why are we
giving that to me? Enemy to New
Mexico Tech?
Sure.
So these are trusts Mr. Chair
representative. I don't know
that answer today, but I'll
Check with the experts that
would know that answer.
Excellent. Thank you very much
for represented. Luhan, please.
Oh,
My mic was on. Sorry. Um yeah.
So
I
It's just like a clarification
question regarding the arbor
appropriations since we didn't
really go over those in our
committee, Mr Chair you sent it
is
Taking upon themselves.
Is so when you gave us this page
31, we're looking at that 51.5.
Is that all that they're talking
about? Is that the balance of
all the opera? Uh, funny that
hasn't been expended. Mr. Chair,
Mr Chairman and representative,
so the balance of what has not
been appropriated is reflected
on this sheet and in the RP
lines, um
But there's additional
discussions on other things that
I wanted to point out for you
and Mr Chair. What would the
that can you get us the balance.
And what your those additional
things you're just you're
talking about, Please. So, Mr
Chairman and representative,
those funds have already been
appropriated. Okay?
All right. That's what I'm
asking. I'm trying to find what
what? What we're doing with that
And what was discussed in Senate
finance as opposed to doing here
today, Mr
To be clear. We have to focus on
our work in here.
It's always good to have
context. But I don't want us to
start to balance. Mr Chair.
Yeah, I don't wanna know what I
mean. We just got an update what
they're recommending, but what
we need to do here. Thank you,
Representative. I want us to be
very clear. We're not going to
be doing Senate finance
business, nor will they be doing
our business. Correct. Thank
you. And that's Yeah. Thank you.
I think that's what I'm trying
to distinguish. Um
The difference of what they're
doing. Leave it there and then
what we are doing, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair, Representative. The
Officially UN appropriated
Amount is about 55 million.
Excellent. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much.
Representative. Want to do and
also, um
I'll leave that there for now. I
have another question. Thank
you.
We'll go now to represent
Chatfield. Thank you, Mr Chair.
I think representative Luhan
just effectively ate my
question, so I'm gonna just
gonna add to it a little bit.
How long do we have left to
appropriate the 55 million left
in our, uh
Miss. Oh, no, This is your
I was just gonna say missed. Mr.
Chairman, We're gonna have the
same answer. Mr Chairman and
representative, you have to
appropriate it this year. This
is your last opportunity to
appropriate those funds.
So, Mr Chair. Let's do that.
Thank you. Good. Thank you.
Representative Field
representative Brown, then
Representative Garcia. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. Um, you were
given a handout earlier today.
The caption. It's a one pager.
it says language to HB two
proposed by Rep. Brown to the
Section nine higher Education
departments.
Pilot program regarding career
and technical work, workforce
training, and this is wine to 96
in our spreadsheet. Um so, Mr
Chair, um, this is for the
committee's consideration. Um,
what? What This essentially does
is change up some of the
language. Um, we've had some
informal discussions with some
community college and university
officials.
They provided some guidance on
this and some language
enhancements. But the bottom
line is what this new language
would do is provide more
opportunities for more students.
The opportunity Scholarship
covers everything except trade
and workforce training programs,
and I think that's
discriminatory. And so this
would indicate that, um New
Mexico community colleges and
regional universities could
provide to pay up to the
forecast of student tuition and
fees for workforce training
courses not eligible for other
state program funding right
financial aid.
Hmm. So, Mr Chair and members,
um
This is all about workforce
training. I think the original
language in the spreadsheet is
fine, but it doesn't do enough
to open up opportunities for
more students.
And this is in the nature of a
pilot program. The expendable
trust does have 80 million for
workforce training.
And again. I think this would,
um
Make things more even handed in
terms of funding for for higher
Ed.
So I just asked to sit on the
committee to consider this
language and I hope we can talk
about it A little bit more.
Thank you. Absolutely. Thank you
for your work on this represent
Brown Garcia. Thank you. That
your one question and 311.
They had a press conference the
day before yesterday with the
federal government gave a $16
million for addictive fication
of vehicles were charging
stations that have any effect on
this budget.
I'm so sorry, Mr Chair
representative. Do you mind
repeating that?
The federal government just gave
$68 million to the city of New
Effect on this because there's a
didn't 311 $30 million for that.
Mr Chair, Representative, Um
I was unaware of that until you
just told me But this
recommendation is separate from
whatever pot of money that is,
Um this is from remaining are by
balances that the state has
Okay?
Thanks for that, cause, you
know, I just I was in that press
conference and the and the Biden
administration gave the city to
Mexico. $68 million for that.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
Represent Garcia represents
Santayana.
And thank you, Mr Chairman, So I
just need clarification. So the
55 million and what's with the
The executive is requesting or
added. So is that a yes or no, I
I missed everything went to
fast. Yeah, I was just gonna
say, mr Chair, so the LFC did
appropriate those dollars as we,
uh said early. It was just in in
Section five in
Uh, to the Health benefits Fund
for the General Services
Department. So both
recommendations include
appropriations for that amount.
Um, they're just a different
places on the sheet.
Okay, Mr Chairman. So so.
Going to the water Conservation
fund or for the, um the other
areas with as a no.
Uh,
Thank you, representative.
Currently we're not. The LFC is
not recommending the same uses
that the executive is is making.
Because Mr Chairman
Remember, there's nothing for
environmental in the and the
other in that trust fund, so
this would be something that
maybe we need to look at it as
as viable for the money. Thank
you. Thank you very much for the
fight.
Okay?
I don't see any other questions.
Okay, represent so
representative Herndon
represent. I'm sorry, Mr Chair.
It's just a clarification
following up on representative
Syrian Nana's question. So the
55 million in opera funds could
be used for anything You said
they're already in this budget
somewhere. Yes, but we don't
know where we thank you.
Mr Simon, if you can detail once
again in the LSC recommendation
they've been put into health
benefits fund too.
Uh, if you could take us to that
line, Mr Chair, you're going to
want to look on page number six.
Line number 40.
So we see a $55 million
recommendation from LFC for
healthcare costs to the General
Services Department.
And Mr Chair. Where did the
executive put it?
They the very end. Joey, can you
give us the line numbers and
pages, please? Mr. Chair,
representative line. 309 through
313 is where you'll find the
executive recommendation for
that. And and, uh, they can't
quite be spent on anything.
There are certain allowable
expenditures. Um, D f a general
counsel has taken issue with
these funds being
Uh, appropriated to the health
benefits fund. I don't know. All
of the details. Um, that's where
they are right now in the LFC
recommendation, and so, um, that
may be something that needs to
be examined to see if if that
isn't allowable use
Okay. Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank
you, Mr analyst. Okay. Thank you
Represent Herndon, South
Garrett.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, I like
to point that representative
Pettigrew grew up that as we
explore the gate.
Ah plan looking at legislation
needed versus policy with the
guard rails that representative
Brown suggested, and then just
point out that L. E. S C has
made
Formerly had House Bill three.
No longer does. That's d O t.
But we need to look at the L. E
S C recommendations. In addition
because there's a long stuff
about education that just needs
a deeper dive, which I think
everybody realizes, so I'm
looking forward to absolutely
thank you very much. Okay, uh,
members. I think that takes us
to through this process.
I want to say a big thank you
first and foremost members.
Our first members we've spent
probably over 50 hours and I'm
sure in addition to all the
preparation time both pre
imposed you've spent 50 plus
hours this week before anybody
else begin comes into the
Legislature doing this work
truly. Thank you. I see more
engagement from the committee
And from each and every one of
you, I think we're very
grateful.
Uh, quick reminder on that is
Please take everything home with
you. Especially on the paper
side. Remember on the volumes,
you'll have to bring those back
up. These are are the volume 12
and three We will be having lfc
in here and we need to clear
this room for
Um, you can leave your if you
want to. You can find those
volumes online as well.
Um, if you leave papers here,
sort of the loose papers. Many
of the papers that we've had
expect those to be recycled or
thrown away, as is a
Uh, the binders can state your
state
Yeah, That's right. Okay, great.
Thank you. That gets us into
thinking r h a F c staff. Don't
Amanda. Great for our H S C
staff. Can we give a quick round
of applause for all of our time
and and that? Of course, Marty
stands never stands alone. But
is it really never standing? Uh,
Marty is always working, going
across and throughout the
building.
I want to say a big thank you to
the executive staff and other
advocates who are here We've
engaged. I think of more
thorough as thorough of a
process as we can asking you for
more information, inviting you
to participate, and we see your
work and we really appreciate
it. Finally, I want to conclude
with just a big thank you to
director Sally and to our LFC
staff.
Let's give them a hand as well.
Uh, your this is a very big
undertaking. It only gets more
difficult, but also more
rewarding from here is the
actual session begins. So thank
you, Director. Thank you to your
staff with that we're gonna
conclude and we'll see everybody
either. Monday or Tuesday. Thank
you all please drive safe.
Yeah.
