Representative Ezzell.
Representative Garcia.
Representative had it up.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Lane.
Here.
Representative Lara.
Here.
Representative Sarinana.
Representative Sweetser your.
Representative Trujillo.
I share small here.
Madam chair.
You do have a quorum.
Your muted madam chair.
Okay let's go ahead and start
house bill two oh three house
bill one twenty two and house
bill two forty seven we're going
to roll over those bills today
madam chair.
Yes I think it's house bill two
seven four two seven four.
Was it two seven four yes double
check that here.
Three the text message again.
All righty okay it's not two
forty seven it's two seven four.
That will be rolled over let's
go through it again V. two oh
three one twenty two and two
seven four.
So those at the request of the
Sanchez.
Okay let's go back up to house
bill one eighty four as amended
and I understand that there's an
amendment being worked on was
Representative Sweetser and
Representative address Romero is
that correct Representative
Sweetser.
Representative Sweetser.
Picture but I'm and she was on
just a second ago.
Representative Romero can you
hear me I can I can Mr chair so
we had discussed the issue of a
possible amendment yes so we
don't think it's necessary at
this time.
Okay well I do so we're gonna
have some trouble them with this
bill yes Representative Sweetser
to work with you on what the
concern was that came to us
regarding budget issues.
Thank you to take a look at that
it's an important amendment I
believe but I don't see her on
here so I don't know what's
going on we'll have
representative Nathan small
texter if we can't find out
what's going on.
So madam chair as far as the
amendment I don't fully
understand what the issue is
And don't think it's really
necessary at this time
I think the the bill has already
passed the house Education
Committee on which is that
substantive committee in the
question here is about finances
which is what is already been
budgeted and house bill two four
on the extension of this program
so I think it very much fits in
the purview of of what we'll be
talking about in the bill as it
stands currently.
Representative Sweetser to
explain to the committee what
the issue is thank you madam
chair and I apologize I I had a
call from my district court
judge at home about an emergency
in Deming and I apologize for
having to step away so this
morning I was alerted to the
fact that that our intention
with this bill is to reward
districts who can extend their
school day by giving them that
flexibility and that we've been
talking about and some districts
especially forty districts
already have an extended day and
so we needed to make sure that
we were able to our
hold the districts to extending
their already extended day if
that's what they chose to do to
get this money and so I had
requested
an amendment I had talked to the
primary sponsor our chair and we
talked about whether we wanted
to do it here or on the floor or
how we needed to do it going
forward but unfortunately have
not received the amendment it is
and Legislative Council I know
they're swamped and that's where
we are so so most most school
districts have a five and a half
hour day some school districts
have a six and a half hour day
and that's where we want to make
sure that we don't
that that the money is actually
going towards you know enhanced
time in the classroom for these
potential districts and as I
said chair Romero and I
discussed it we weren't sure
exactly where we wanted to to
make sure that we got this
aligned with what was going on
to the Senate but I do not have
an amendment post okay so what
I'm gonna do is we're gonna
we're gonna push this bill back
to later in the day and see if
here Representative Romero can
can come to some conclusion on
this he feels like he doesn't
need an amendment I feel like he
does I feel like it has a direct
impact to the budget and so I'd
like you to if you would you
guys could top off.
Line for just a few minutes I
mean we're we're we're not
pressured to get through this
week we're not going on the
floor until four thirty anyway I
mean we've got a lot of time and
most of these bills are going to
be tabled anyway for obvious
reasons so I'm going to go ahead
move on to the next bill
Representative Romero but we
will get you back on before the
end of our meeting today and
that is house bill two thirty
six Representative Capulet
argued out you told me that your
co sponsor may be running late
is he here with you today.
Madam chair and
Members of the committee thank
you he is not yet and I.
came on a little prematurely
with you meant that click on
another committee so he's not
Keith if we can continue to roll
it I mean not Roland but he's
not yet I've been texting him
and he hasn't come in yet okay
so we may wait also today and
then you guys up on when you get
here okay thank you.
Hi Amanda no problem okay let's
go to house bill two forty three
as amended.
Gail Armstrong.
Yes ma'am.
Okay it is budget anywhere or.
I need to move to table okay we
have a motion to have a second
to table.
Representative Herrera is that a
second okay yes second second
okay we have a motion and a
second to table house bill two
forty three is there any
opposition to that saying on
that one has been tabled.
Okay let's go to house bill two
seventy three.
Yes Representative Chasey here.
I just texted her madam chair.
Okay it was my understanding
from staff that the money is in
junior.
And that we do not need the
bill.
But the.
We want to make sure that we
bring that up before we.
Table this bill.
Bill you want to get on on this
one you want to.
Say something about this bill.
Madam chair of the bill is a one
section built solely
appropriation for the purpose in
the title.
And it's that simple however
there are junior requests are
that will Fund Act funds okay
reporter we don't need the
language on it is that what
you're saying no ma'am.
All right you got the staff
analysis on this bill so we can
we can table it.
I need a motion.
We're good thank you move to
table madam chair okay we have a
motion from the second and
second from Armstrong is there
any opposition to table a motion
for house bill two seventy
three.
Saying that what is been tabled.
we have house bill thirty eight
paid family and medical leave
act is Representative Chandler
on.
You madam chair she's also
communicated this was similar to
house bill twenty which passed
the floor so she is okay with us
tabling this bill okay let's
make a motion move to table
house bill thirty eight is
amended.
Second have a motion and a
second is there any opposition
to that saying no that one's
been tabled.
Okay were rolled over one twenty
two let's go to House Bill to
all seven is representative
Stansbury on the same thing
chair I move to table house bill
two zero seven it's and it'll be
in junior and does not need the
language secretary.
We have a motion and a second to
table that one.
Okay let's go to house bill one
thirty one.
Thank you.
Yes Representative Trujillo go
ahead.
Yes.
this is the Assistant Secretary
of Hispanic Education it is so
one hundred thousand dollar
appropriation I've sent the
information bill Valdez I have a
three a post partners that.
Are donating money to.
But available.
Okay Representative we have an
amendment here so I need
somebody to love the amendment.
So.
Okay we have to Dixon and
Herrera to move the amendment
for discussion the house bill
one thirty one and basically
what that does is it strikes
making appropriation on page one
line fourteen and fifteen.
That on page seventeen heads um.
Striking section eight in its
entirety which is the
appropriate appropriation
language so is there any
opposition to this amendment.
Chair I call getting any
information on that amendment.
Excuse me well it's not
amendment says that I have in my
file and basically all it does
is strip the appropriation
because you have the money in
June you're already.
But the bill's going to go out.
Okay thank you okay so we're
stripping the appropriation is
there any opposition to this
amendment.
Saying on the amendment has been
adopted so back on the bill I
need a motion.
Do you pass on house bill one
thirty one as amended.
Second.
The motion and a second have as
amended recognizing the funding
is in junior is there any
opposition to that motion saying
line you've got to do pass on
that bill.
okay let's go to house bill two
four seven is Representative
Lujan here.
Go ahead Representative.
good afternoon
Chair and committee house bill
two four centers after school
and summer programs it
appropriates two million from
the general fund to the public
education department for the
purpose of expanding or enabling
after school and summer
enrichment programming in fiscal
year twenty twenty two.
And so basically currently the
state of New Mexico has no
allocated funding for that for
that this type of after school
program we want to change that
it's critical to invest in our
school and summer learning
programs to meet the increased
needs of our children and
families.
After school summer learning
programs are essential for COVID
nineteen recovery.
And after school play an
essential role in addressing the
learning loss.
You during the pandemic.
Those so it's basically it's
just it's just a straight
appropriation of two million
dollars madam chair and I do
have some expert witnesses if
we're allowing those today's
meeting.
Allow a few bandits for expert
witnesses but just to be a fair
Representative Lujan this is an
in the budget and if it's not
gonna be funded through junior
or another funding source it'll
be tabled today so I just want
you to know that
let's go go ahead and and I and
we want people to raise their
hands under X. our water safety
things about this bill.
And small Brandon.
I'm not sure who they are so I'm
sorry madam chair they made
steak bacon is the expert
witness.
And if the madam chair.
Representative on thank you
okay.
Go ahead then we have a few
minutes.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity it's important to
speak even though this bill may
be tabled this is our third year
to be trying to get this two
million dollars appropriation
for at the school summoning and
I think the money then then my
main message to the committee is
to understand the difference
between extended learning and
after school and and some of
learning and to be desperately
need funding that's gonna be
helping the extended learning
sites actually implemented
implement the mandate after
school programming because
currently there is no and I
appropriation setasides strictly
for after school so the schools
throughout the state are going
to struggle on the parents when
they are moving into the
recovery phase from the pandemic
to meet the needs of the gaps
especially in rural New Mexico
as you know the twenty first
century community learning
center is our maybe federally
funded after school program in
New Mexico through PED and one
of every two applications are
not funded and it's it's two
million dollars that we are
requesting again this year is
based on a previous application
cycle review PED received forty
applications from across the
state and they could only fund
ten and that's funding stream
was eliminated once the extended
learning program was instated or
mandated made into law.
So now the funding none so this
particular funding stream two
million but fund forty sites
about two thousand children in
New Mexico and the overall need
is the one hundred and thirty
four million to have a systemic
after school program and that
means eleven hundred dollars
times hundred twenty four
thousand children of the
estimate are waiting for an
after school program in our
state so the gap is huge and
this is a small
step towards a vision where all
children have equitable access
to quality after school and
summer learning which we do not
have at this point in time so
thank you so much for that
opportunity and we will keep
coming back and keep advocating
for this very important
you know need among our children
and young people in our state
thank you madam chair thank you
very much
Is there is did you say there
were more than one one person
associated with this bill
Representative Lujan.
Madam chair I don't know if the
gentleman
is on making you introduce him.
Call the Wilson with the boys
and girls club CEO are you on
with us.
He may not have made and he he
was supposed to be on that okay
that's okay.
I just wanted to make sure that
folks had a chance well it
sounds like a great program
Representative but this is not
in the budget so is there any
questions from the committee.
Representative small for the
motion thank you madam.
Well house bill two four seven.
We have a set second.
Okay.
Okay we have a motion and a
second is there any opposition
to that.
Oh one one one in opposition
Representative Trujillo okay
thank you very much
Representative Lujan and and
hopefully will be able to get
the stand.
I thank you madam chair thank
you thank you very much okay
we've got to bills that are
still on our calendar and I
think we're going to go ahead
and recess at the call of the
chair thank you the presenters
for.
House bill two thirty six to get
here I know that there's
conflicting meeting schedules
right now and also a potential
amendment for house bill one
eighty four so we're going to
recess of the call of the chair
until three PM not at that time
we'll take up these two bills.
Thank you very much see you all
at three.
