Representative Little.
Representative Little,
Representative Lu Han.
Representative Luhan,
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew,
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sanchez,
Representative Saignana.
Representative Silva
Representative Silva.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Chemo.
We have a quorum. Excellent. Uh,
OK, thank you, members, uh,
we'll try to get through these
efficiently members House Bill
109, uh, is, uh, being rolled
for the rest of the session.
There'll be more work on that
that will not be heard this
session, we're gonna go to house
Bill.
70 or well, well, we can come
back to that one, members, let's
go to uh uh House Bill 175.
Our own representative Vincent
I'm not accepting any motions.
I have questions. There's lots
of questions though it sounds
like, uh, we've got our forester
here. I want to thank her for
being here.
good.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, uh, first of all,
I want to brag on our state
forester.
This gal is tough.
And she had a bicycle wreck.
And she's got some
And, and my other colleague from
San Juan, he, he understands
this, but um she really
shouldn't be here, but I'm
thankful she is. I appreciate
her commitment, but, uh, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
this is House Bill 175.
And um it is our forest and
watershed restoration Act
amendment.
And what this bill does is
It creates buffer zones, uh,
will significantly slows the
spread of fire, wildfires by
creating strategic barriers
between natural vegegetation and
residential areas providing
critical time for emergency
response and evacuations.
Firefighters will have safer,
more defensible operational
areas from which to combat
approaching wildfires, improving
their ability to protect
communities and minimize
potential damages.
The strategic placement of these
buffers will dramatically
increase the likelihood of
suppressing.
Fires before they can reach
residential structures,
potentially preventing
catastrophic community wildfire
events.
And by creating international
separation.
I'm sorry, by creating
intentional separation between
rural.
Natural fire uh sources, human
settlements, the bill offers a
scientifically informed approach
to wildfire and risk management.
The wildland urban interface,
woo buffers.
The challenge reducing community
vulnerability.
The devastating South Fork fire
that swept through the village
of Ridoso and Lincoln County on
June 18, 2024 revealed the
extreme vulnerability of
communities that live near
natural landscapes unmanaged
vegetation and lack of strategic
buffer zones create a dangerous
environment where wildfires can
rapidly spread from natural
areas into residential
neighborhoods, putting homes,
lives.
An entire communities at risk.
And
Mr. Chair, just for, I, I've got
a lot to say about this bill,
but just due to time we have got
to start working on buffer
areas, we have to pull more.
timber out of our forest, we
have to start doing our due
diligence and making sure that
all this is pulled out because
um, we're tired of watching
people's homes burn to the
ground.
And Mr. Chair, I would also like
to introduce and I already did
my expert witness, but I'd like
to turn the mic over to her if
you don't mind, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, this
bill makes 3 strategic
amendments to the existing
forest conservation Act.
First, it defines buffer zones
and high-risk areas. These are
not defined in statute already.
Secondly, it expands the
definition of eligible projects
to specifically include creating
and maintaining protective
buffers around wildland urban
interfaces.
And by doing this, it
accomplishes the 3rd thing,
which is to enable the state
forestry division to use the
recurring dollars in the forest
land protection revolving fund
for these critical prevention
projects.
OK, OK. Thank you very much. Uh,
there's no appropriation in
here, uh, so it does not need an
amendment. Uh, is there anybody
who wishes to speak either in
support or opposition in the
room, freeze your hand.
Great, please come on up.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee carry Robin Brunder
representing Lincoln County, uh,
quite honestly, when the fire
was happening last summer, we
probably owe the survival of our
community to the Mescalero
Apache tribe who had treated
there for several years earlier,
that buffer zone that was on the
Mescalero tribe is what slowed
the fire down as it was coming
over the ridge, and I think that
we've all learned a really
important lesson that these
buffer zones around our
communities is a really critical
component to fighting wildfire.
in the future. Um, we hope the
lessons learned in Riodoso can
spread throughout the state, and
that's why we're so supportive
of this bill. Thank you so much.
Thank you.
OK. Uh, we have one person
online, Michael Morris, to speak
on House Bill 1175.
Go ahead, Michael, if you can
mute, please.
OK, um.
Go ahead. Yes, sir.
Good evening, uh, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee.
Can you hear me?
OK, thank you for the
opportunity to address you, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee. I'm, I'm Mike Morris.
I, I happen to be mayor of
Clovis, but uh I'm speaking to
you really as much as anything
as um a licensed insurance agent
uh who has
served New Mexicans and and
assisted New Mexicans in, in
Securing property insurance for
the last decades, and um I do
have customers and clients all
over the state and and those
affected in the wildfire fire
areas as well. And so, you know,
I, I, I wanna, I wanna to speak
in support of this bill. I want
to thank the bill's sponsor,
Representative Vincent, for, for
bringing this important
legislation. I do believe that
it's, um, uh, a strategic plan,
uh, to, to addressing these
wildfire risks and creating
buffers.
around, uh, the communities that
face these wildfire risks. I, I
believe this is just a a a
crucial step, um, that would not
only
You know, keep residents of New
Mexico safe, but it's, it's also
going to ensure that New
Mexicans can have access to
affordable market insurance to
effectively manage the risks
associated with property
ownership in our state. Again, I
thank you for your time and I
urge your support for this bill.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
OK, that'll conclude the public
comment. Uh, any questions from
the committee?
Uh, we're gonna start with
Representative Duncan, then go
to a ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, just
one quick question. Um, ma'am,
he never called me tough when I
told him about my wreck, so
we'll we'll talk later,
representative. I've got lots of
questions about this bill now,
um, Mr. Chair, um,
representative, is there a
component in here that uh
loggers can get in there and
start logging.
Mr. Cherry Representative
Duncan, not in the bill, but we
do have another bill that's
September grading bill, so I
would say that none of this is
gonna go wasted. And you know,
if, if we have access to that,
you know, we'll be able to take
it to a meal. There's also, um,
Gonna be a bio plant in Ridoso
that uh whatever timber doesn't
go to the mill, whatever the
leftovers are, that green waste
will go out there and they'll
they'll utilize. Thank you.
Sure, um, on 3 talked about
cluster around priorities
priority areas that are able to
supply a useful amount of wood
products for industry, and
that's why I was asking. So
thank you, Mr. Chair, that's
all.
Great. Thank you very much for
ranking member Chatfield,
please.
So the last fire that was in
Riodosa had been quite a while
back it was the Little Bear
fire.
Guess where they put it out.
They put it out on the
Mescaleros whenever it hit the
Escalero Authentic project. I've
been there and toured the toured
the, where the fire was to where
they, where they put it out, and
it was exactly where they, where
they did a
with woo.
For wildli urban interface and
uh so,
Guess it must work because both
times, that's where they put it
out and I was very interested to
hear that testimony. I, I didn't
know that this one was, had
followed suit and been put out
in the same, by the same manner,
so I think it's a good idea to
take care of our, our forests.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, ranking
member Chatfield. Next, we'll go
to Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thanks
for this bill. A few questions.
Are there any municipal or state
laws regarding new homes built
in these areas requiring them to
have buffer.
Uh, establishment, clearance,
there an existing loss, Mister
Chair Representative Garrett,
I'll start off and and then if,
if the forester wants to talk,
she can, but in, in the village
of Riosa there are ordinances,
and we have a, we have a um a
local government forester,
forestry division, and they will
go to your hou, they will go to
your property and evaluate your
property, tell you which trees
need to be taken out and how to
harden your home.
how to get all your vegetation
right and when you're done, you
get a certificate of completion,
and you turn that certificate
into your insurance and your
insurance, they at least know
you tried, and that's what we're
hoping to do is bring a whole
lot more of that to light
throughout the whole state of
New Mexico where we can start
bringing traditional insurance
back and getting some
I would say some fair market
value rates.
Because right now, and I, I,
I've presented another bill in
energy, um, there's a gentleman
in Ridoso that reached out to me
that was paying $2200 a year for
his property insurance. Now he's
paying almost 7000. So we can't,
we can't beat up on the on the
um.
Insurance companies, because
we're not doing our part. We
have to do our part and they
can't take all the risk when
they know what's gonna happen,
and another thing that was
mentioned this morning is
lessons learned. Well, we've had
our lesson. It's time for us to.
And sure, I just asked because
um I always remember going to
Rick Warren's big church in
Temicula Valley, California, and
it was built from the beginning,
um, you know, was actually a
stream running through. I mean,
they thought ahead of time, not
after the fact, so I would just
like to see more of that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, my second
question is, so currently 2
million a year goes into the
forest land protection revolving
fund. There's 5.5 million.
Um, based on this, can we, are
we gonna be asking for more to
go in the annual budget, because
it just seems like this is
really an important thing to get
done, Mr. Chair and
Representative,
uh, we can use a diversity of
different kinds of funding to
accomplish this and.
This being the buffers, and the
balance that's in the forest
land protection revolving fund,
um, can get a really good start
on the buffers as well as
continuing the projects that
have already been started with
that fund.
Um, and there are other budget
requests such as special
appropriations and capital
outlay that can also be used
toward buffers, uh, as well, the
bill that representative Vincent
was talking about earlier Senate
Bill 33 does have a component in
it that will address both the
building codes that you were
talking about and, um, statewide
mapping.
That will help us set priorities
so that, um, the buffers are.
You know, we'll, we'll need to
find a balance between the
communities that really want
them and are willing to help out
to make sure that um all the
clearances are in place to get
those buffers in place, coupled
with being in high risk areas
that um could frankly, um cause
the state to spend a lot of
money on wildfire suppression.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much. OK,
that concludes our questions.
We'll go to ranking member for.
Miss Cha I move
House Bill 175 due pass,
and moved by ranking member
Chatfield, seconded by
Representative Sanchez. Is there
any opposition to that motion,
seeing none.
Dupe, thank you very much,
Representative, Mr. Chair. Thank
you. OK, uh, members, we're
gonna jump around just a little
bit, uh, we, uh, representative
Garrett, can we go to House Bill
156, please.
And then, uh, can we do House
Bill 240 after this one?
Great. Representative Garrett,
thank you. Uh, thank you. I'm
introducing House Bill 156, it
increases minimum teacher
salaries by 5000 by tier 55,000
level 1, 65,000 level 2, 75,000
by level 3, and with that I
stand for questions.
Right. Uh, thank you very much.
Uh, we'll go, uh, first again,
uh this is in our budget that we
passed over, there's not an
appropriation attached to it. Is
there anybody who wishes to make
comment on House Bill 156.
Uh, anybody online.
OK. Any questions from the
committee?
OK, uh, I'll accept the motion
now, sorry. Perfect. Uh, there's
a motion to um pass.
Uh, second by, um,
Uh, by Representative Baca. Is
there any opposition to that
motion?
no
Uh
We've got to do pass.
Thank you.
Um
OK, now, next we'll go to um
House Bill 240 and then uh we'll
go to 1 or 449.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
pleased to present House Bill
240 before you, and it really is
uh allows the New Mexico Finance
Authority to provide grants for
the construction and
rehabilitation of drinking water
facilities, and I will let my
expert, uh, expand on that.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. So
this uh fund that we're talking
about today is a federally
funded program, the drinking
Water State Revolving Loan Fund.
We've been operating this
program in partnership with the
Environment department since the
uh late 90s. Uh the loan program
itself, the law that governs
this, the state law that governs
this hasn't been updated since
2001, um, and since that time,
the federal government has made
some changes to the way in which
financial assistance has to be
awarded.
And so we have uh our state law
is outdated relative to federal
law. So the purpose of this bill
is to make some updates to the
state law so that it comports
with the current version of
federal law. Most importantly,
the federal law recently has
required as we get these grants
down from the uh from EPA that
we provide a certain amount as
grant, but our state law doesn't
allow for us to make grants from
this program. So we've been
doing a relatively tortured
version of that by doing loan.
forgiveness, and it's more work
for the for the um underlying
clients and it's much more
difficult for them to frankly
understand. Um, so that's the
biggest change this, the other
two changes relate to the term
of the loan under current law,
we can go up to 20 years for a
regular project, 30 years that
the project is severely
disadvantaged. Those have been
um upped by 10 years under
federal law. So we've now got
these uh regular projects can go
up to 30 years and if the
community is severely dis
Managed, it can go up to 40. So
those are the primary changes.
There's a couple of minor
technical cleanup things, but
the substance of the bill are
those three items, and I'm happy
to stand for questions. Great.
Thank you very much. Thank you
for the um uh the explanation.
We got to schedule some more uh
NMFA bills for the rest of this
week to keep going, to keep our
streak alive. Um, is there
anybody who wishes to make
comment on uh House Bill 240.
OK, anybody online?
See and are there any questions
from the committee?
Representative Duncan, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Can you
tell me, uh, what, uh, that
grant portion, can you tell me
who would be available for that.
Uh, so Mr. Chairman, under our
current regular program, um, it
is, it's delivered our, our
policies provide that virtually
every project that's got a
construction project, we'll get
some portion of it in a
grant like term. Um, there are
other specialized capitalization
grants that have come down from
EPA, um, for instance, for
emerging contaminants where the
entire award should be delivered
as a grant. So it just, it, part
of it depends on what the EPA.
says when they give us the
capitalization grant, they tell
us what the minimum requirements
are, um, and then
In those instances in which we
have some discretion, the
finance authority has put in
place a different portions of
grant based on certain
conditions. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you for that. So we're
talking municipalities,
counties.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, uh, primarily
in water districts and this is
also one of the few programs
because it's federal, where as
long as they are considered a
public water system under by the
Environment Department. They
also qualify. So we have a few
for-profit water companies in
our portfolio as well. OK. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate
that. Great. Thank you very much
for representing them. OK, uh,
any other questions? Resentative
Hernandez, please. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, um.
Um, Mr. Chairman and
representative, thank you for
bringing this forward. Uh,
really means a lot, especially.
And um Northwest New Mexico, um,
on the Navajo Nation where um,
you know, just trying to
understand more about like how
this grant can be applied with
the local governments that are
out there on the ground,
implementing if, if maybe if you
could share it is is that uh
something that, that, um,
can be used in, in, in uh, in
those tribal communities.
This
Mr. Chairman, uh, yes, tribal
communities are eligible to
apply for the program, um,
whether or not they're put on a
priority list is dependent upon
the drinking water bureau at the
Environment department. Um, I'd
also note that, that often EPA
will send down special tribal
earmarks, and in those
instances, if you're getting
funded partially by a tribal
earmark, you can't get funded
from the drinking water, but we
rarely see any conflicts there,
Mr. Chairman Representative,
what if it's a uh capital outlay
project, can that be?
Shared with this, Mr. Chairman,
yes, we frequently use the
drinking water state revolving
loan fund to make up um the rest
of the project when Capital
Outlay has been a portion of the
project. And these are, I should
mention, Mr. Chairman, for a
core water treatment, clean
drinking water kinds of
projects. Um, and it has to be
for existing service lines. Mr.
Chairman, my, my last question
is, uh, uh, Representative, I, I
went to a community in Colorado.
They had this really awesome
Um.
A truck that had drinking water,
and it was through the osmosis
and all those different uh uh
filters, and they had it hooked
up to, Mr. Chairman, they had it
hooked up to a, uh, just like a
hose, but when he tasted that
water, it was so refreshing, uh,
would, could, could this be a
possible project in rural
communities, Mr. Chairman
represented.
Mr. Chairman, we'd have to look
into that. I, I don't know the
answer. I'm sorry.
That was true.
Thank you, Representative
Hernandez. Represent Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a
quick question on um page 16 of
the bill.
It says here, paragraph that if
um there isn't money available
for a loan for a drinking water
project.
Uh, drinking water facility
project that the local
government, I guess, may
obligate local funds and then
there's a a possibility of
reimbursement.
Um, for, for that. I is it ever
where there's not reimbursement
if local funds are obligated,
Mr. Chair. Mr. Chairman, that
original language stems back to
the late 90s when they thought
there would be a real um need
for these dollars, um, like many
other federal programs in the
state. These are the last
dollars often to be used, so
we've never run into this. So we
have not yet awarded dollars
where we didn't have plenty of
money already, uh, ready to lend
to them.
Thank you. Excellent. Thank you.
OK, we're gonna go to the
ranking member for the motion
move that House Bill 240 do
bounce.
He's been moved by ranking
member Chatfield signed by
Representative Garrett. Is there
any opposition to that motion?
then
Thank you.
OK, members we're moving on to
House Bill 449.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you committee um House
Bill 449 attempts to uh or
create a fund to address some of
the high costs that we have as
far as with our capital outlay
projects for a higher education.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, the uh many of these
projects due to the high
construction costs succeeded,
and this is really targeted for
projects over $50 million.
Many of these projects are
funded, funded through the GO
bonds and projects that are
large like the projects that
have been identified at UNM as
far as in the biggest the
humanities, um, and the medical
school would actually drain the
bulk of this fund. So with this
bill does is it proposes to
create a fund that would give
opportunity.
To uh help universities to
address this, and so with me, I
have my expert witness. I have
Kelly Carswell, who will give
comment on some of the other
areas of this bill.
Uh, thank you, Representative
Baca. Uh, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, um, just adding
to a couple of things the
representative said, um, as he
mentioned, the goal of the bill
is to create a statutory
framework for a new fund that
could be um a new source of
funding for major academic and
research projects at the
four-year institutions, as he
mentioned, um, with the dramatic
increase in construction costs
recently, essentially like any.
major new academic, uh, building
replacement or kind of new
building at the 4 years. Um,
those projects are running
definitely above $50 million and
as high as $100 million for
something like the humanities
building at UNM and um with the
prospect of a new medical
school, we're looking at a, you
know, $500 million plus project.
Um, the, the general obligation
on funding, um, which is
available biannually, has not
anywhere near kept up with the
sort of increases in costs we're
seeing. So when we have even one
of those major projects in a
single year, it really puts a
squeeze on everything else, and
we have difficulty, um,
completing funding for it in a
single year, as well as
addressing all of the needs that
the other institutions have, um.
Additionally, um, this bill.
would create a funding source
for the first time for auxiliary
projects for higher education
institutions, um, which
currently the state does not
fund through its statewide
capital outlay process and
institutions um increasingly are
having difficulty uh funding
those projects as well with
their traditional sources, being
tuition and fees. Um, I should
also say just generally, you
know, our higher ed institutions
are at a place where there's a
lot of.
replacement and repair needed
due to the age of both the
academic facilities um and the
auxiliary kind of student
housing student life.
Facilities, so we will stop
there and stand for questions.
Great. Thank you both very much.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
we'll go, uh, is there anybody
who wishes to speak on House
Bill 449 yeah, please, if you
could thank you represent Buck.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you USD members of the
committee, uh, we do have an
amendment to this bill to House
Bill 449, the
Sorry, can you read us the 231
number and then we'll ask to
move it for discussion, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
thank you, committee. The
Numbers 231-632.1.
Uh, so it's which, which one is.
I think um
We've got uh
let's make sure, can we, uh,
make sure that uh the right
amendment is down there.
Yeah. So there should be
And if not, we need to get this
amendment copied really quick,
you can get it.
I
Check
Oh, all good.
We're making sure we have the
right one. Thank you,
Representative Baca, for
reminding us to go to the
amendment.
Or maybe we, we either have the
right one up there or we have
the wrong one in our books, so
we're gonna, Mr. Chair, I think
you had the wrong one in your
books. OK. That's fair.
Um
Great. OK, so good that we
caught that.
My apologies, uh, Mr. Chairman
and committee, we'll make sure
that we um that we get the right
amendment before you. All good.
Thank you very much. We'll make
sure that we've got that.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, and
committee if you, uh, I would
also, there was a couple of
points that I would like to
highlight as this amendment is
being presented, um, for this
bill.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and committee,
one of the important uh features
of this is that, you know, this
would still be under legislative
as far as appropriations would
be from the legislature, and on
top of the major projects, we
also talk about quality of life
for student projects, some of
these other projects, this could
be addressed in some of the
issues that we've had students
for, um, that have come to the
To the capital that could be
addressing issues of housing and
so, um,
Mr. Chairman, the, the other,
the other part of this is it
would really, um,
As far as the kind of outlines
as far as the, you know,
definitions of what schools will
be covered by this. It is the
hope, Mr. Chairman and members
of the committee.
That this will be able to
address all public institutions
in New Mexico. So that is
another.
Important part of this bill, and
uh.
As I said before, really is
including the student life and
student housing projects, uh, if
you guys are some of the, some
of the, the housing and some of
the dorms that I attended many
years ago where I lived in many
years ago or or sitting there
and
Uh, very much in, uh, in need of
upgrades, Mr. Chairman.
Excellent. Thank you very much
from Sabaca. The amendment we'll
get that back here soon. Think
we can go ahead, uh, it's pretty
minor amendment. We're gonna go
uh to public comment now to see
if there's anybody who wishes to
make uh public comment on House
Bill 449.
Please come on up.
Good afternoon, uh, members of
the committee, Mr. Chair,
Clayton Abbey with the Mexico
State University, uh, we want to
thank, uh, sponsorerente and
also Representative Brian Baer
for carrying this piece of
legislation to the Legislative
Finance Committee for one
endorsing this piece of
legislation and pushing it
forward, uh, is noted, this is
an important aspect of making
our universities attractive if
we are able to uh improve our
housing if we are able to
improve student life and
currently we are not able to do
that through the current capital
outlay process, um, one thing I
would like to note and uh
First is that uh the council
university presidents and
executive director Mark Savajo
is unable to attend today, but
he asked me to stand on his
behalf and make note that the
council university presidents
also uh is in favor of this
bill, um, one thing he did ask
me to note and this is important
to NMSU also is that it is
unclear currently the
expectation that universities
and to your institutions provide
uh some sort of meds.
Upfront. It's unclear how we
currently would do that. What
the source of that funding is,
and I do think that that will
be, continue to be a challenge
for universities and to your
institutions. We certainly don't
want to uh put the combustion on
the bill as a whole, but we do
want to make note of that. And
again, we want to thank
everyone, we do encourage, uh,
support of this bill. Thank you,
Representative Baca. Thank you
very much. Good evening, chair
small members of House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee, Vanessa Hawker, I'm
the executive director for New
Mexico.
Independent community colleges,
and we also thank the sponsor,
thank Representative Baca for
presenting this bill today, as
was mentioned, typically for
higher education institutions,
the general obligation bond has
been the source of major capital
outlay for our institutions.
There have been many significant
projects that are very costly
that have been split over
multiple GOB cycles which drives
up the cost. It's
Definitely a stressor on the
system with this bill, this
would set up a process by which
higher education institutions
could have another way to get
our major capital projects
funded. It does treat
universities and two-year
institutions different, we are
very appreciative within the
community colleges for the
ability to have student life,
student housing, very important,
and we thank you for your
consideration. Great. Thank you
very much.
Chairman, members of the
committee, Linnea Montoya,
associate director of government
relations at UNM. Uh, we would
like to stand in support as well
for this bill and thank the
sponsor and representative Baca
for standing in today, uh, we
want to thank him for the
upcoming amendment that you guys
will be seeing. It does include
our branch campuses, which we
are very important to us, and we
wanted to make sure that we,
they were included. Um, we
do have some concerns about the
revenue sources for the matching
funds and what those might be
and what those might be
considered, but apart from that,
we are very supportive of this
bill. We thank LFC staff for
meeting with us yesterday to
discuss this bill and to go
through all the questions that
we had, so we were very thankful
for them and for the sponsor for
this bill. Thank you so much.
Great, thank you very much. OK,
uh, is there anybody online who
wishes to comment on House Bill
449. OK, seeing none, we're back
to the committee and back just
in time as we're getting it
passed out, um.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. I feel like the substitute
teacher who lost the lesson
plan, so, uh, uh, you, you
representative Lite, if you're
out there listening, first of
all, good luck to you and uh
yes, we'll, we'll talk about
this later, but
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I, I apologize, but
before you, we have a, a 23
numbers 231-632.1. Perfect. Hey,
that is what we have, uh, and
then can you go through the
amendment briefly?
Oh, excuse me, oh, you don't
have it yet.
OK. Let's wait till we get that
amendment.
That's we'll, we're just, we'll
wait till we, everybody has a
copy. I think we've got one up
there. We, we need one.
Um, yeah, so the, the 321
number.
Or the 231 number is uh, OK,
fair enough. OK. Uh, 23 is, can
you read it one more time,
Repaka, please. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I will be happy to
read this again. Uh, the 23
numbers 2316.
32.1.
OK.
OK, it's been moved, uh,
seconded by move by Sanchez
signed by Vice Cha Dixon, uh,
please explain the amendment
briefly.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, so the amendment
makes a couple minor technical
corrections and just kind of
clarification, um, that came up
in discussion with the
institutions and the education
committee. Um, so number 1 and 2
are one of the clarification
corrections. It removes tribal
colleges from the definition
under two-year institutions and
instead inserted them in the
language.
Of the parts of the bill, um,
that apply to the tribal
colleges, substantively there is
no change. It's just kind of a
change in style. Um, number 3 is
just a minor technical
correction taking out one word,
um, number 4, is another
technical correction, um,
addressing an issue raised by
the independent community
colleges in the definitions, um,
ensuring that uh eligibility,
um, specifically only applies to
public institutions and
clarifying it would not apply to
private institutions. And
finally, again, it just a
clarification that branch
campuses of UNM and NMSU are
included and uh considered
two-year institutions for the
purposes of the bill, not part
of the 4 years.
Great, thank you very much. Uh,
any questions on the amendment?
OK, uh, as, oh, yes,
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and um
representative, I, I really
appreciate the, this amendment,
especially with the uh tribal
colleges, that's something that
I've, uh, we have 4 tribal
colleges in New Mexico. I have
two of them in my, in my
district, and, um, um, Mr.
Chairman, Representative, um,
A lot of times with, with some
of the, the, the, the state
funding, one of those
institutions, uh, Southwestern
Indian Polytechnic Institute, uh
does not somehow, uh, get to
have access to some of the state
funding because of its federal
status as a uh institution from
Bureau of Indian Education, uh,
will, will this be the case for
sippy, you know, can, can, uh,
Mr. Chairman, representative can
simply apply for this fund
funding.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
yes, the intention was to make
all the tribal colleges eligible
and SIPP is currently eligible
to apply for regular capital
outlay, although they're often
challenges spending the funds
because of their connection to
federal funds, which are some,
for some reason, extremely slow
to reach Thank you. Great. Thank
you very much. Any additional
questions?
OK, there's a motion to adopt
the amendment 2 from ranking
member Chatfield moved by
Sanchez, any opposition to that,
seeing none, we've adopted the
amendment.
OK. Uh, any questions back to um
House Bill 449 now as amended or
said Duncan, please. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. On, on page 2, rep,
um, that's a 10% match.
And then
And that's for the construction
phase funding and and section or
line 23 or 24.
And then on the next page on 3,
and then on line 3 is a 50%
match and then line 6 is a 20%
match for four-year institution.
I wondered if you could tell me
what, uh,
page 3, line 3.
At least a 50% match from
sources other than the state for
two-year educational.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
so, um, this brings up the issue
that um some of the public
commenters raised that basically
the bill treats the 4 years and
the 2 years differently in terms
of the required match, um, and
that's because they have access
to different revenue sources,
um, the two years have access to
local support through uh local
property tax that the four years
do not, um, and that's why their
match is higher, um, that is
true of the existing capital
system as well, where the two
years have a required.
match that the 4 years do not.
Thank you, Mr. Kelly. So then,
Where is the 10% come in to play
then.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative, so
the 10% from the 4 years. Um, so
currently, um, there is often
through the higher education
department and LFC kind of an
informal match requested of the
4 years. Um, and this would
essentially uh create some
formal math requirements for the
4 years as well. Um,
You know, one of the reasons
that this bill is creating a
statutory framework for a fund,
but without money in it
initially, um, is because
they're um is an implementation
phase that is going to be
necessary to kind of stand up
the program and define some of
these further, which would
happen through an administrative
process, um, and currently the
sources of um match that the
institutions can bring um
include uh student fees,
institutional.
Serves, um, philanthropy, things
like that.
Thank you, sure. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Represent
Duncan. Repenter. Thank you, uh,
Mr. Chair, and uh and
presenters. So I, as I look at
this uh piece of legislation and
you're asking for a match from
the, from the colleges. My
question is how
Would you please explain how
this helps them because if most
of the time they're asking for
money because they don't have
the money, and now you're asking
for them to have a match if
they're going to have something
like housing or other uh
educational.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, so it helps them, um,
One, because currently the state
does not provide funding for the
auxiliary projects, so the
student housing, student life
projects. So yes, well there is
a match, the state is also
offering to come in and cover a
substantial part of the cost,
where under the current system
we cover nothing.
Um, so it provides a new source
of state funding that they don't
currently have access to, um, on
the major projects, um, it also
provides a new source of state
funding, assuming the
legislature chooses to
capitalize the fund in the
future, um, that we expect would
benefit all institutions by
essentially relieving pressure
on the existing general
obligation bond funds, so
they're sort of more opportunity
there by kind of giving.
Those really big projects that
can eat up a lot of that
capacity now, another place to
go. Um, and like I said, um,
there's kind of informally an
expectation that the
institutions do contribute to
projects now, and they do in
practice, so this would sort of
more formally uh define the kind
of baseline expectation or what
they're participation will be,
um, finally, the bill also um
outlines the process by which
the
institutions can request a
waiver of the match, uh, if they
don't have the funds, um, the
higher education department
would be responsible for
initially reviewing those
requests and making a
recommendation to the
legislature on whether to
provide a waiver, um, partial or
in full if that required match,
and then it would be up to you
all to ultimately um approve
that recommendation.
And Mr. uh, chair, and one of
the clarifying question
presenters with respect to the
request, it says that all
requests must be made by
November the first, but who's
approving this? Is it higher
education? Uh, it's approved the
request and then making it to
the legislature, uh, to, to fund
this, uh.
This uh to provide the funding
for the fund.
It's unclear how that is fine.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative, do
you mean to initially capitalize
the fund or to appropriate from
Mr. Chair, uh, Madam presenter,
if I am a college and I wanted a
new housing facility for my
students. It just says that the
secret of Higher Education, so
notified the Secretary of
Finance and Administration, uh,
of the need for funds by
November 1. So is it higher
education who's approving the
request to the legislature.
doesn't improve, they just put
the money in at the request of
the higher education secretary,
Mr. Chair, Madam Presenters. Mr.
Chair Representative, so that
part of the bill is only
applying to the waiver, um, as
far as general requests from the
funds, um, we expect that it
would work similar to the
current process, higher
education, uh, institutions make
their capital requests in the
spring, and sorry, in the
summer, um, they go through a
higher education capital outlay
committee.
Um, that LFC staff sit on with
executive staff, um, then those
requests, um, go to the
legislative Finance Committee
are considered as part of the
development of the statewide
capital outlay framework, um,
but ultimately the legislature
retains authority over
appropriating capital funds, and
that would be true of funds from
this fund as well. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Fernan. Kate, I
don't see any other questions,
um, I'll go uh to for a motion
on, uh, for approval of House
Bill 449 as amended. It's been
moved by Vice Chair Dixon,
seconded by Representative
Duncan. Any opposition to that
motion.
Tan
Moving ahead with houseboat,
thank you very much for
representing Baca.
Um
Now, OK, members, we just have 2
more bills, uh, we've got House
Bill 70 and then House Bill 191.
Um
Uh, we're gonna ask the vice
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Uh, so, uh, this afternoon, uh,
we're presenting House Bill 70,
uh, for the appropriations
committee and House Bill 70
would require the healthcare
authority to submit a Medicaid
waiver, uh, to the federal, um
Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services to provide
long-term home and
community-based services to
individuals with a behavioral
health disability, uh, serious
mental illness.
Emotional disturbance, substance
use disorder or brain injury.
So, uh, think of the DD waiver
program, uh, but for individuals
uh with these.
Illnesses or issues that also
make it difficult, uh, to live
on their own.
Um, my expert is uh
Jim, do you go by Jim?
Uh, Jim Jackson, um, and we do
have an amendment.
OK. Can you tell us that 231
number. Hopefully.
The um amendment, sorry, is
0.231647.1.
Great. OK, that matches. Does
everybody have it?
Got it. OK, and briefly explain
the amendment or actually, can I
ask for a motion to move the
move the amendment for
discussion, saying by
representative Garrett, alouded
silently by Represent Vincent.
I, um, briefly explain the
amendment, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. The
amendment strikes the
appropriation uh from the bill.
Uh, there is funding in the
budget for um the start of this
process. OK, great. Thank you
for that. Any questions on the
amendment?
OK, can we have a motion, uh,
ask for a motion to adopt. It's
been moved by Representative
Duncan.
Seed by.
Uh, by, uh, Representative
Silva, uh, any opposition to
adopt that motion, see man,
uh, we've adopted the amended
bill. Uh, now we'll go to uh
public. Is there anybody who
wishes to make comments?
Please, come on.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee for
allowing me to public comment.
My name is Dana Flannery, and
I'm the Medicaid director, and
while we understand that the
intention of this bill is to
further behavioral health, we
respectfully oppose this bill as
is. We do understand the budget.
has been put in place to do the
feasibility study and we support
that. We think that's the best
next step.
In order to properly assess what
services we already have in our
benefit package and in our
multiple waivers, so we have an
11:15 waiver currently that was
just approved for a five-year
waiver.
As well as in SUD waiver that's
been active for a couple of
years, and we're still
negotiating the SMI SED waiver
with our federal partners and
also with the changing federal
landscape, being mindful of of
some delays in our current
federal approvals as is.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee,
Ellen Pine's representing the
Disability Coalition and we
support this bill, um.
Some 40 years ago, I don't
remember the exact date because
I wasn't around at the time, um,
the legislature realized that
our Medicaid program doesn't
adequately or didn't at that
time adequately meet the needs
of people with developmental
disabilities and directed the
creation of a waiver to serve
that population, uh, by the same
token we now recognize that our
Medicaid program does not
adequately serve the needs of
people with serious mental
illness and other behavioral
health issues and, and
Um, brain injuries. So we
believe that this is the time to
move forward on creating a
specialized program through a
waiver to serve the needs of
that community. We really
appreciate the money that was
put into House Bill 2 by y'all,
um, and, uh, believe that we
should move forward on this bill
as well as that appropriation,
so we urge your support. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Winter
Torres. I'm um licensed attorney
here in New Mexico and Colorado,
CEO and founder of New Mexico
Eviction Prevention and
diversion, I'm also speaking on
behalf of the Public Safety
Coalition today, which is a
coalition of 11 organizations
who believe we should look at
the root causes of crime and
address those instead of
furthering um more
incarceration.
Um, I had spent the last year or
so trying to wrap my head around
homelessness and why we do it
the way we do it, and it's
primarily a matter of state of
federal funding forcing people
to be chronically homeless
before there's substantial
support, and we truly believe
that there should be more on the
prevention side. We know who a
lot of folks are who are likely
to become homeless and um I'm
proud to say
that this is an innovative
approach that not another state
or place I have seen have done
this. We need housing and we
need to house folks immediately.
It takes years to build
permanent supportive housing,
and this is a different option,
and urge you to support. Great.
Thank you very much.
OK, we have two folks online.
We're gonna go first to uh the
person with the name is Santa
Maria El Mirador.
Please, uh, introduce yourself
and uh.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Patsy
Romero. I'm president CEO of
Santa Maria Elmirador. It's an
intermediate care facility for
adults with intellectual
disabilities, but this
afternoon, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, I stand in
advocacy for the National
Alliance on Mental illness. You
know, this is a great
opportunity, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee to
apply to CMS for the
authorization.
to operate this Medicaid waiver
program.
You know, thousands of New
Mexicans and at the National
Alliance on Mental Illness. We
get calls every day. Individuals
with serious mental illness,
substance use disorders, brain
injuries are not receiving the
essential treatment and services
that they really desperately
need. Or you know what, we risk
what we've been facing for
almost 30 years in New Mexico.
Homelessness,
the individuals are caught in a
revolving door of being.
taken to an emergency room or a
hospital or taken to a detox
facility or jail, and then
they're only to be relieved
without need for follow-up and
treatment and that follow up is
essential. We have none of that
in New Mexico. The best hope,
Mr. Chang.
I'm sorry? Oh, if you could
please conclude your thought.
Yes. OK. Well, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you, uh, again, we urgently uh
ask that you support House Bill
70 and uh with for all the
reasons that we've stated here
before. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
OK, we're gonna conclude with
Jim Copeland.
Uh, Jim, go ahead, please.
Evening, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Jim Copeland,
executive director of the
Association of Developmental
Disabilities Community
providers, and we stand in
support of House Bill 70 as
well. There are duly diagnosed
people currently being served on
our developmental disabilities
waiver, and we think the House
Bill 70 would be a great
opportunity for Medicaid
eligibility not to be determined
just by IQ score. Uh, there are
folks on the DD waiver currently
that have IQs of 70 or below,
and there are folks that would
benefit from the
waiver that would be provided by
House Bill 70 that may have an
IQ of 71 or 72 that doesn't make
them eligible for the
developmental disabilities
waiver. So we would ask for
support for House Bill 70. Thank
you very much.
Great. Thank you very much. OK.
Uh, I don't see any other
comment. We'll go to committee
questions.
Uh, Representative Sanchez,
please. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh.
The title seems a little uh
It doesn't seem like it ties to
the actual intent. Does this
have any overlap with Senate
Bill 123, the billion dollar.
Uh, legislation we passed.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So the, the
short title is Behavioral Health
and Medicaid Waiver Act?
So,
um, what this is doing is
providing uh the funds to the
healthcare authority to start
the feasibility process for
which there is actually um I'll
note a 50/50 uh federal uh
Medicaid administrative match.
Um, but this starts the process
so that we can, uh,
Apply, uh, in the future.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Great.
Thank you very much,
Representative Vernon. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and Madam
presenter. So what we heard
today was from the healthcare
authority and their opposition.
So have you been working with
them to figure out like
what you all can do between the
two bills, the process that's
been offered. I'm sorry, it's
not thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Uh, that's
a great question. Um,
The
I, I would say that I think uh
discussions can and should
continue. Um, there is an
advantage I would say, of
starting the feasibility process
now, uh, because we, we do need
to take steps internally, um.
And then once we apply, once the
state applies for the waiver, it
will take a number of months to
a year, um, to find out. And so
if we wait, uh, we'll just be
further behind the, the 8 ball,
and this is also something that
LFC uh did look at, um, in the
November 2024, um, program
evaluation or uh sorry, a report
on the development.
mental disabilities and uh mea
waivers, um, so it's certainly
something that has been looked
at um by the Legislative Finance
Committee.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you, Representative
Herndon. We're gonna go next to
Represent Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative and
presenter.
So this fund
What guarantees do we have that
you're gonna receive federal
Medicaid funding.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative Vincent. So
this doesn't set up a fund. Uh,
this provides, uh, the
appropriation, um, the initial
appropriation in the bill was
$1.1 million to HCA to do the
feasibility study, and those
funds would be matched, uh, with
federal funds. So it's not
setting up a fund, it's just
beginning the process to be able
to apply for a waiver.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative.
So what if, what if federal
funding drives up, dries up and
what, what do we do then? Um,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I think that's
certainly, certainly something
that.
Could happen. Um, I would argue
that at this point in time, we
don't know, but I don't think
that New Mexico should hold off
on exploring our options when we
know it's something that the
state needs, and it will take um
Well over a year.
Uh
To have that process with the
federal government.
So
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative, so
If the federal funding does dry
up, will we be stuck with the
portion.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Representative. I
think, um, perhaps, uh,
More likely option is that the
federal government would not
approve the waiver, um, but I'm,
I might be able to ask my expert
if he'd like to weigh in.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Jim Jackson, I'm
registered lobbyist for
disability rights in New Mexico.
I hate to reflect my age, but I
was actually around working with
the legislature in in 1920s in
uh in 1983,
1983, 40 years ago, when we,
when in fact the legislature
mandated the establishment of
the DD waiver program, and this
is modeled on that, so, uh,
representative, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative Vincent.
I think your question gets to
the issue of if this is an
approved Medicaid waiver program
than like any other Medicaid
service in New Mexico, the state
pays its share and the federal
government pays its share, um,
so if it, if the approval was
given from the Center of
Medicaid and Medicare services
in Washington, then this would
be just part of the regular
Medicaid program, if Medicaid
funding at the federal level
goes down or is eliminated or
whatever.
Well, that, of course, would
have pretty catastrophic uh um
repercussions all for the the
entire Medicaid program, but
this would be if this program
was approved uh through after
this process, then it would be a
part of the regular essentially
part of the regular and
and presenter so what I heard
you say would the state would
probably be on the hook for the
whole thing if federal funds
dried up.
Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, uh the, the.
Um
The nature of a waiver program
as opposed to, you know,
hospitalization, for instance,
that's a, that's an entitlement
program under Medicaid. The the
waiver programs are strictly up
to the state to decide how many
people you're going to serve,
and so the state can, uh, and as
you probably know in the DD
waiver program, we did this for
a long time until just recently,
they would set a cap of the
number of people and so it's not
an open-ended commitment in that
regard and so the state could
actually cut.
Back on the number of people
that are authorized to be served
under a waiver program, and
that's what I, I say it would be
part of the regular Medicaid
program, but this is one of the
ways that a waiver program is a
little different than sort of
the regular big chairs. Thank
you for the answers. Thank you
very much, Representative
Vincent and next we have
representative here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So
Somebody in the budget for this
bill.
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, yes.
OK.
Um, cause I'm seeing that where
we struck the appropriation.
Uh
qualified consultant to guide
this process as part of that, so
that can still be done.
Mr. Turn my confusion though is.
I'm seeing
Three different advisory
councils.
Like in section 3.
Subject to the available
availability of appropriations,
number 3.
The Healthcare authority will
establish advisory councils and
task force as necessary to guide
the development of and to review
the operation of supported
services to persons.
And then see the healthcare
authority will solicit the
involvement of persons.
Um
To develop rules and then
section 4, the healthcare
authority shall immediately
conduct monthly meetings with
persons and it just
So are those 3 different groups.
That there that under the
guidance of the consultant.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Garrett, I think, I, I think the
bill addresses 3 stages or 33
different processes, uh, and the
participation in those processes
may be just a little bit
different depending on uh
people's issues and interests,
but there's gonna be an awful
lot overlap. These are gonna be
some of the same.
the people who are providing the
services uh um the, the provider
agencies, the consumer and
advocate interests and so on, so
the exact makeup may be a little
bit different, but I, I think
the intent is to simply make
sure that you're involving the
community that's gonna be
affected by this as throughout
this planning and then into the
implementation process, assuming
that, of course, it was
approved.
And then my final question is,
uh, Mr. Chair is your response?
Director of Medicaid.
programs who said that
regrettably they're not in
support of this. How, how would
you respond to that?
Mr. Chair, Representative. Um, I
think that um there's certainly
um,
time to continue to discuss
differences. I think that the
legislature frequently does
evaluations and comes up with
recommendations, uh, and
appropriations that the
legislature believes her in the
best interest of the state, um,
and, you know, through the
process, um,
You know, there's some back and
forth to figure out what's going
to work, um, and what
His past and what is potentially
vetoed.
Thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Representative
Brown. Thank you
Mr. Jackson. I
Just have one question on, it's
on page 6 of the bill, um,
starting at line 5.
It says,
Mr. Chair, that the healthcare
authority shall retain a
consulting entity to assist the
healthcare authority in the
development.
Of an application to the Federal
Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid, and so forth.
Um
Mr. Chair Representative, uh, is
that something that would go out
to bid or is that no bid, if you
could tell us and then who, who
might be a view here for this,
uh, role.
Um,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. My apologies.
Could you remind me which page
and line?
Mr. Chair, and it's uh page 6,
starting at line 5 and going
through line 10.
One moment, please. I had, I had
Bill 7.
Mr. Chair and representative.
That's a great question. So
typically, if um the contract is
for a sum, I believe, greater
than $60,000.
It does require an RFP process.
I'm, I'm getting a, a nod here,
um, and so it would go through,
through that process. And I
think also, I would note that.
Allowing the agency to hire a
consultant who has expertise in
this area, um.
Won't
Be a strain on the agency.
Um, were we to have them do it
on their own.
Um, thank you for that. I, I
guess I would expect the
healthcare authority would have
staffers who know this area very
well, at least how to approach
it and I would have expected to
see a May retain instead of a
shell.
Uh, so just, just one thought on
that.
Thank you. Great, thank you very
much, Brown. Let's see, any
other questions I have, oh
sorry, Hernandez.
Thank Mr. Chairman, I, I'd like
to go back to page 5,
Line 17.
Um
The Healthcare authority shall,
uh, immediately conduct.
Monthly meetings with persons
with behavioral health,
disabilities, and their family
members. Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, um.
I've, I've seen successful
Um, treatment services.
Uh, when family members are
involved in, in, in, in the
process from beginning to end.
Um, Mr. Chairman,
representative, is there funding
available for families that
don't have the financial means
to attend these meetings, or is
there a way to like if for those
be to overcome those barriers
either in the in this
legislation or through the uh
healthcare authority. Thank you,
Mr. Car.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. That's a, a
really important uh comment
about involving families. Um,
and while it does not
specifically say that members of
um uh these advisory groups and
councils would receive per diem.
I don't believe that
The healthcare authority would
be restricted um from
Support
In that way, um, to help with
the conversations.
That might be something that we
would need to work with the
authority on just to make sure.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, I'd like
to continue that conversation
offline.
Great. Thank you very much. OK,
uh, I have a brief question.
Thank you, Representative and
thank you, Representative for
stepping in to present the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Jackson. I'd like
to ask actually, uh, Director
Flannery, you could come up
really quickly, um, so we've,
we've established that there's
funding in the bill for this in
our house built to, um, director
in that there is a section here.
Uh, see on page 6 that um
is where, where the, where you
would be required to submit a
waiver. Can you talk us through
sort of how long it takes to to
get that waiver together, and
then also sort of what a range
of response times federally to
waiver requests can be. Thank
you for the question, um, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
So if we are required to submit
a waiver, typically, it depends
on which waiver vehicle it falls
under. There's an 11.
15, 1915, 1915, 1959. I'm gonna
go with the 11:15, um, because
that's the most common uh
utilization uh utilized vehicle
with that, the entirety of the
process can take about a year.
Typically those are only renewed
every 5 years. There are 5 year
cycle, we just received
approval, and in New Mexico, it
took over 2 years, uh, to
negotiate that, and that was
just finalized. And so, um, any
Subsequent amendments wouldn't
necessarily be the entire
package, but you would look at
approximately
A year's time. So I do think
also of note, the feasibility
study can also look at other
vehicles that may be more
appropriate. So whatever the
delta is of what services for
what populations could be
articulated through that study.
And then it could be evaluated
is that most appropriate for a
state plan amendment or a
waiver, which could have a much
faster turnaround time if you're
adding to the benefit package
versus the waiver. Got it. Thank
you and thank you, thank you,
um, director. So, and, and with
the funding that's in the budget
with the um that.
But you're gonna be able to do
that study with the funding
that's in the budget.
We will work within the
parameters of the budget to do
what we can on a feasibility
study for this. Yes, sir. Got
it.
OK. Um,
Thank you for that.
Um
Great, OK, thanks for that. I
know we're sort of, we're
working through this. Um, right
now, I think, um, I probably
best members if it's OK to ask
that we roll the bill. I think
we're, where there's money in
the budget, we need to work
through sort of it's a very
prescriptive bill at this time,
uh, although, um,
You know, it's wise for us to
look at addressing this. So
we'll bring this back in some
shape or form, uh, Vice Chair,
thank you for stepping into,
we're gonna go ahead and roll it
for now, uh, director and, uh,
Mr. Buccas, thank you for being
here today and we'll work
through.
Um, to have what we think is
sort of the, yeah.
Best way forward. Thank you,
Vice Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. OK, and I'm gonna switch
places really quick.
Uh, for house Bill 191.
Uh, OK, and we have a committee
substitute, Madam Chair.
Or how uh this would be house
preparations and finance
committee.
Substitute for House Bill 191.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Would you
like to read the 231 number?
Yes. Madam Chair, 231.
644.1. Excellent. I think it is
still getting passed out, but
that is, uh, the number that I
have.
Um, would someone like to move?
The committee's substitute, OK.
Uh, do we have a second?
22. Great. So, um, Mr. Chair,
would you, um,
Be willing to describe the
substitute. Absolutely, madam
Chair, committee members are
substitute for House Bill 191,
um, keeps the two funds, but
Madam Chair,
present uh committee, it
provides more concise
definitions of wildfire control
and suppression, who Madam Char
made one of the things we heard
from the forester to have a very
clear delineation of what you're
doing when you're fighting
fires, and then, uh, anything
else. And so, Madam Chair,
Um, the, uh, section two of our
committee substitute renames uh
the wildfire preparedness fund
to the post wildfire Fund that
would allow greater flexibility
for the use of funds for fire
personnel and um
Uh, ensures that the fire
prevention activities are
separate from uh post-fire
activities, uh, post-fi post
wildfire activities are also
defined in the substitute, um.
The forest fire and wildfire are
also defined and uh Madam Chair
committee, this sort of goes
back to the two main goals of
the legislation. One is to have
a transparency, um, and clarity
around the wildfire related
activity, particularly as the
temple of fires is increasing,
so we want to have more clarity.
Right now, Madam Chair
committee, the main, if not the
only way to deal with this
outside of just regular
appropriations that go to the
agencies is through uh emergency
orders that are issued by the
executive.
Um
So this has report on status of
the fund balances, summaries of
reimbursements, appropriations,
and anticipated wildfire
conditions and other
recommendations. Uh, secondly,
uh, Madam Chair, committee, this
should help with the deployment
of resources, um, by having
strong legislative oversight and
buy-in and investment and we
include Madam Chair, uh,
committee, uh, investment in our
budget for this purpose. We know
we're gonna need to
Provide more probably, uh,
particularly, uh, in, in, you
know, we know that this year is
shaping up to be a very, very
challenging year for the state.
Uh, want to thank the Forester.
She's here for any technical
questions. One thank Forrester
McCarthy and the executive were
working closely with us, uh,
between the first committee and
the substitute that we have
here, also want to thank Mr.
Davidson and LFC. This began as
LSC endorsed legislation and
with the uh foresters' help in a
lot of work.
We're here today with that, uh,
that
Uh, explains this. Thank you.
Um,
Should we and then go to
questions or you can ask if
there's any questions on the
substitute, and then we maybe
adopt the substitute and we can
go to public comment.
Any questions on the subs. Okey
doke. Um, is there a motion to
adopt?
OK, uh, the motion, uh, made by
Representative Duncan, second by
Representative Herrera. So we
have adopted the committee's
substitute with that, we can go
to public comment. Is there
anyone here who would like to
speak in support or in
opposition, uh, go ahead and uh.
If you're online and interested
in speaking, go ahead and raise
your hand.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, Sherro horse with
PNM. PNM stands in strong
support of HB 191 as it will
help uh support swift response
to a wildfires within our state.
Thank you.
Alright, thank you. Um, I have
not seen any hands raised, uh,
online, so we will go ahead,
we'll go to a committee members
for questions.
We can start with representative
Vincent.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So I, I
heard you say there's two funds.
One could be, uh, one's gonna be
a post fire fund and the other
one could be prefi fun. Uh,
Madam Chair Saint Vincent, yes,
the wildfire suppression fund is
created and it's a stable source
of funding for suppression of
wildfires, the Forester Maner
wanted a very clear focused way
to fight fires that uh we are
Uh, investing in, you know, as
much as we need to and as often
as we need to. Secondly, uh,
that now it's the um
Got it here. Hot wildfire Fund,
Madam Chair Representative.
That's for everything
afterwards. Thank you, Madam
Chair and and uh chair, so on
the post, let me, let me go to
the front, so does the pre-fire,
does it, does it include
prevention?
Any kind of prevention work.
Uh,
Madam Chair, um, the
representative, the focus there,
and I don't know if the forester
wants to add Mr. Davidson can
also as well. The focus actually
is very much suppression, Madam
Chair Representative, we're
working on a wide range of other
areas and they're sort of their
current wheelhouse is uh forest
thinning, we're expanding that,
we're investing in all the
things and the things to your
leadership in that area.
This fund itself is very focused
on suppression. So stage it,
getting the resources, staging
the resources, deploying the
resources, um, focus
specifically on suppressing
those fires that are
threatening uh people, property,
that kind of thing. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Chair,
and I really appreciate that and
um.
Whenever so post fire.
How do we do so do we use well
we use this money and get
reimbursed from FEMA on projects
or would this just be used
without FEMA project worksheets,
how would this work?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Vincent, um.
Yeah, I'd invite the, the
forester to weigh in
technically, but Madam Chair
Representative, um, we, one of
the things of having this sort
of separate and transparent. We
want them to get as much
reimbursement as possible, but
again, we also want a place for
us to be able to invest so that
timely work can happen as
quickly as possible.
I go to the forest, Madam Chair
and Representative as well, um,
as you know, not all fires are
FEMA eligible. So where FEMA
reimbursement is possible or
cost share is possible, this
fund will help us there and
where we have
Frequently this happens, we'll
have a smaller fire that wrap,
wipes out a community water
supply, for example, that would
enable us to do some work there
as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
You nailed that question. Thank
you.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Duncan.
Madam Cur, I think my question
was answered, but let me follow
up with it, Mr. Chair. So
reimbursement would be from
FEMA, would it be from a, a, a
county, would it be from the
municipality or just FEMA?
uh, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, I think it's
going to be all of the above,
just like the state forester was
discussing in previous meetings,
it's dependent on where the fire
is, who is then going to be
reimbursed, so just like she was
saying, if it's not specifically
on federal land, and the federal
government isn't going to
necessarily be reimbursing the
state, and so that's where those
clear lines get divided, and so
that's why we want one of these
funds, so we have a clear place
to have those reimbursements
processed. OK. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
All right, great, we're gonna uh
go to Representative Brown and
Representative Vera and Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair. Um,
I think this bill is a good
idea. Uh, I think we really need
it, um, just not real clear on
the funding for it. Is it a $12
million.
Section 5, Special Appropriation
from the general fund.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Brown, that's the initial amount
that we've included uh from our
initial work on.
All right. uh, Representative
Herndon, please. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I, and on that
point, I would, I'm asking
another question as we look at
the um House Bill 175 that we
talked about earlier, so in the
future, we won't need to fund a
175 bill because of this fund.
Is that correct, Madam Chair,
uh, presenters. Uh, Madam Chair
Representative Herndon, uh, no,
we will continue to fund 170.
5, in related efforts will help
uh reduce the potential impacts
of fire around our communities,
uh, and, um, do a lot of good
work to lessen those impacts to
communities, better protect
homes and properties, that kind
of thing. Uh, Madam Chair
Representative Herndon, um, for,
uh, 191, this fire suppression
fund, it's gonna be used every
single year, regardless.
list, I mean, our state, there
are always forest and brush
fires, the intensity and some of
the danger, obviously we're
seeing are maybe increasing, but
this fun, Madam Chair
representative, it will always
be needed 175 and other efforts
are gonna make it, um, where
that risk and danger for
communities that are in these
wild land, uh, sort of urban
interfaces are in less danger.
And give us a better chance,
frankly, Madam Chair
Representative, to fight the
fire.
OK, and thank you and Madam
Chair, Mr. Presenter, this is
another clarification. There had
been a lot of discussion at the
national level that perhaps
money would not be made
available to states to cover
things like these wildfires and
other things. Is that the other
reason for the creation of this
fund,
uh, Madam Chair, representative
Herndon, the work on creating
this fund began in earnest sort
of a year and a half or so ago
in this last uh this last
interim.
was where it really uh worked
closely, Pew charitable trust,
were part of helping convene
that. So, Madam Chair, I said,
the work to do the work on the
fund is preceded some of the
recent uh federal announcements.
I do think, Madam Chair
Representative, um, we're facing
a very tough situation with lack
of moisture, uh, probably, you
know, very, a lack of capacity,
uh, the federal forests.
and, and which is why Madam
Chair and I think I want to
thank again the work that the
Forester and others think the
work that represented Vincent
and others are doing very
critical right now Barrera and
many others. Sanchez are leading
to um prepare us, so.
But short answer, it predates
any of the recent changes. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Uh, we have a
representative Garrett and then
uh ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And so
section 4, just clarrifies
definitions, they seem to be
updated as well. So, um,
Uh, especially like the forest
fire wildfire, the multiple ways
they start, so.
It seems that really clarrifies.
For people who want to know, can
we use the money this way. So I
just wanna to appreciate that.
Thank you and the big man, big
thanks to the forester, uh, that
was all really her.
Amongst other things for work.
Thank you, uh.
So I just uh clarification about
the reimbursement, uh,
Recent fires were on Forest
Service land, uh, they started,
they were started by the Forest
Service and the reimbursement
comes from the federal
government because they started.
Uh, what about the cats? You
said something about counties
reimbursing, will they be
charged for putting out a fire,
do you have a, it's not a fire
that's not on for service
property here and I just
I didn't understand that.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
I'm sorry I thought uh provided
any confusing clarification of
Representative Duncan's
question. I don't think I was
trying to state that the
counties were going to be um
responsible for this
reimbursement. So I can
certainly follow up with you in
terms of a breakdown of
reimbursements that's not what
you.
Yeah, miniature ranking member
to be very clear, we're not
suggesting at all that counties
or any other folks should should
should any of the federal costs
should shift to them.
We're just, this fund will be
transparent about who all is
putting in money, who is
required to put in money and
who's responsibility and uh
that, that doesn't shift at all.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, thank
you, uh, ranking member. Um, I
just, uh, had a quick question,
which is, uh, cause I didn't see
any other questions and then I'm
gonna go to representative
Vincent, um, but it seems to me
that through throughout this
legislative session, we are uh
coming up with sort of a package
of policies and funding
opportunities to cover different
um sort of separate but
complementary.
parts of managing wildfires, um,
and other extreme.
Natural events. Is that correct?
Absolutely, ma'am, Chair
committee, we're very much doing
that and I, I think it's a wide
range of members who are really
doing a ton of great work on
that.
Uh, and informed by excellent
staff and some folks in the
executive who've been responding
to many of those working with
members all across the state,
and now we're bringing those
improvements. Great, thank you.
Uh, representative Vincent.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I would
like to make a motion.
That HB 91 do not pass, and that
committee sub HB 191 with a due
pass. Wonderful, we have uh
emotion from Representative
Vincent and a second from
Representatives Chatfield and I
believe Brown, um, is there any
opposition to that motion?
Seeing none.
All right. Great members that
that all that's a thank you all
for uh a lot of work after a
long 4 session, really
appreciate everybody, uh,
staying so engaged. We're
