Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sariana.
Representative Silva.
Representative Vincent.
Vice chair Dixon.
Chair, small.
OK, uh, we have a quorum, uh,
number of members who are
presenting bills and or uh uh
out today, but, uh, real quick,
members only big change we're
gonna go ahead and and put
general services first, agency
code 350, uh, the two analysts
will need to depart for some
other commitments after we hear
that. So, we'll, uh, invite up,
uh Mr. uh, well, yeah, Joey,
Simon, and Mr. Miller.
Or sorry, yeah, mystery minutes.
Um,
secretary or secretary
designate. Great to see you.
Thanks for being here.
So, good morning, Mr. Chair.
Members of the committee. My
name is Joseph Simon. I'm your
analyst for the General Services
Department, and as you noted
with me are Diego, uh Jimenez
with the Department of Finance
and Administration and acting
secretary Anna Silva of the
General Services Department.
3 in agency code 350 and uh this
is a uh a pretty large and
complicated budget. There's a
total of 7 programs, uh, managed
by the General Services
Department, and there's a couple
of differences across these, but
if you look at the different
sheet on page, on page 3 in your
packet, you'll see that the
total, uh, difference between
the LFC recommendation and the
executive recommendations, only
about $400,000. That's a little
less than 2/10 of 1%. So
overall,
pretty close. Um,
I will note that some of the
numbers, uh, on the contractual
services and the other category
are a little different because
of uh the LFC recommendation
continues the practice of
breaking out each of the risk
management funds into a separate
line item, uh, which, uh, is why
there's a, a big difference
there. So we can see the total
difference to that in the, uh,
risk management funds program.
But to start off, I'll uh ask uh
Diego if he wants to get started
with the program support program
on.
page 5 of your packet.
Uh, thank you, Joey. Uh, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
as Joey said, I'm Diego Jimenez.
I'm a
Sort of the, the acting analyst
for the General Services
department for uh the time
being, um.
So for the program support
program which is uh POde P598,
um, the program is
Funded primarily by transfers
from, from the other divisions
within the department. And here
the LFC recommendation is lower
than the executive
recommendation by about
$114,000.
The
executive recommendation funds
40 FTE and helped.
The contracts and other cost
categories flat with the current
year operating budget.
The LFC recommendation shifts
funds from the other cost
category to support projected
pay needs for current employees.
And, and Mr. Chair, if you look
at page 6, you can see a
breakdown of the procurement
services program. This program's
funded by fees that uh state
contractors pay to the division
on statewide price agreements.
So it's entirely other state
funds revenue. Uh, you'll note
the LFC recommendations about,
uh, almost $500,000 higher, uh,
a portion of this is in the, uh,
personal services and employee
benefits category. The
department has recently started
a what they call a mobile
procurement officer.
program. So basically, they send
GST staff out to assist other
agencies who are maybe having
some procurement issues and
help, help them work through
some of the pretty complex areas
of the procurement code. So
this, uh, the LFC
recommendation, uh, included
additional funds for, uh, for
that program, uh, in, in
addition, there's a slightly
higher as Diego mentioned for
program support. There's a
slightly higher increase, uh,
for the, um,
Uh, for the transfer to program
support. This was done to limit
the uh need in other programs
for that, uh, program support.
The executive recommendation
funds a total of 22 FDE at the
agency, um, whereas the LFC
recommendations a little bit
more.
You you go.
Uh, Mr. Chair, excuse me.
Um, next is the state printing
Services program, which is
funded entirely by by uh fees
that that are charged by the
agency for um
Printing jobs that they do, uh,
both recommendations are equal
here and and are slight decrease
from the current year operating
budget.
And on page 8, Mr. Chairman,
you'll see the risk management
division. So this funds the
operational costs of the risk
management we'll see the uh
actual, um, you know, the risk
management funds program in a
minute. But so the agency did
request a very slight decrease.
This is primarily due to the
transfer of the uh employee
group health benefits program
over to the Healthcare
Authority. So, um, the agencies
is projecting they don't need as
much in their budget and also
they need fewer positions
because of those.
transferred. Uh, so both these
recommendations support the, uh,
support the agency request.
Uh, do you?
Uh, Mr. Chair,
sorry. Uh, next is the
facilities management division.
Uh, it is the only program
within the department that is
exclusively or, or primarily
anyway funded by the general
fund.
Uh, the LSC recommendation
includes a pilot program for
building use fees, which is uh
in line with what the LSE
program evaluation has, has
suggested, um.
The executive recommendation
includes 1.27 million for
personnel costs to support
requisite staffing at new
state-owned buildings and that
should fund it 13 additional
positions. Uh, the LFC
projection shows a shortfall in
the personnel category and funds
projected personnel costs,
moving funds from the other
costs to.
The personnel category.
And Mr. Chair, as I mentioned,
we'd go over the risk management
funds program on page 12 in your
packet. You'll see a very uh
small difference relative to the
size of these appropriations,
about $202,000. This is in the,
um, actually in the workers'
compensation retention, uh,
program, the LFC recommendations
about 200 and $2000 lower. Um,
uh, the other, the other, all
the other funds the both
recommendations are exactly the
same.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, and
the final program that we'll
review here is the
transportation Services Program.
Uh, this division includes both
General Fund and uh excuse me,
uh, vehicle use fees as revenue
sources.
The LSU recommendation includes
an 18% increase, which is based
on higher rates that is, that
are charged by the department.
The executive recommendation
includes a 19% increase, um, so
in total there is about $102,000
is the difference between the
two recommendations.
The LFC recommendation held the
personnel category flat and
reduced contracts and the other
category based to reflect the
previous year actual
expenditures and the executive
recommendation includes a small
increase for personnel.
And I don't think we mentioned
before, but, um, the analysts
have come to consensus on the
performance measures and um with
that, I believe we'll hand it
over to the acting secretary.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, members of the
committee, and thank you for the
opportunity to come and talk to
you a little bit today about the
general services department.
Um, our agency is dedicated to
supporting state government and
all other agencies offering a
comprehensive range of services,
everything from custodials for
to custodial services to
maintenance to project
management, architects,
engineers, um, all the way up to
attorneys.
Um, our state purchasing
division as uh was described
earlier overseas all state
procurement for the state of New
Mexico to include local public
bodies, or transportation
services division oversees our
state fleet and our state
aircraft and our state printing
um services, um, presents mostly
um state printing services to
include some of the bills that
um you have before you.
Um, 88% of GST's budget. Thank
you, Joy. 88% of GST's budget is
covered by enterprise funds as
this was described earlier, and
only the facilities management
division is 100% um supported by
general fund.
Our $32 million increase is the
budget for R&D to cover actual
costs for settlements, and the
remainder of the increase is to
cover personnel costs primarily
in the facility's management
division for 26 positions that
are term positions that will be
expiring at the end of uh June
30th.
Looking to the next slide.
Um, this is our special and
supplemental, only 2 of these
have been supported by the LFC,
um, R&D for a total of $22
million and the $5 million
request is for transportation
services division for electric
vehicles. Looking at page 4.
Um, this is our funds and budget
request. If you look at the risk
management fees line, this is
the cover operational costs for
the facility for the um risk
management division. The risk
management division fund, which
is made up of 3 funds, the
workers' compensation fund,
which is premiums um for all
local public bodies, schools,
and state agencies. Um, it's the
premiums that they pay to cover
them in the event of a work comp
claim.
And the public
Public property fund, which is
the fee we pay for property
insurance.
And the public liability fund,
which the fund is called, which
are premiums we charge to ensure
entities belonging to our pool.
Turning to page 5.
Our public liability fund.
The public liability fund has
been able to meet the costs of
annual claims and annual fees
collected from agencies and
entities covered by the fund.
Up until FY 23, this method has
worked. The agency was able to
collect enough fees annually to
cover claim costs.
However, with changing times and
shock losses, which are losses
that are over $500,000. They
have increased as a result of
higher awards, costs, and fees,
which have now created a pay as
you go system that no longer
works and costs have now
exceeded fees that have been
collected.
Looking at the table on the
bottom right.
These represent unforeseen
claims that represent 35% of
total claims paid in FY 25, or
roughly 20 million of the $56
million that we paid this year.
Traditional insurance plans
utilize a reserve method to
project the potential costs of
their unrealized liabilities.
In other words, what we're
saying, it's like if you have
your mortgage and you pay your
monthly mortgage costs, but you
have to save in the event of a
flood or something unforeseen.
That is what we are working
toward.
And lastly, just a few things to
highlight about GSD.
In the middle of the page, that
is our district one facility for
DPS.
Below that is the state aircraft
that we purchased last year.
To the left of that is the crime
lab that we completed last year.
In the middle to the right, that
is our pine tree facility in
Albuquerque. That's a success
because we moved state agencies,
primarily the CYFD building from
a uh leased facility to a
state-owned facility, saving the
state $2 million a year in lease
savings.
And above that is the CPO
program that Joey was describing
earlier, that's the Environment
department where we had a CPO
help the environment department
because they had lost their CPO.
So we were, um, supporting them
in that.
And with that, I will stand for
questions.
Thank you very much, Madam
Secretary designate. We'll go to
questions during the thinking
over Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, how many funded
vacancies?
Did you have this year?
OK,
um, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Chatfield, we're
showing that out of 334
positions, um, we have a 15.86%
vacancy rate.
And Mr. Chair, I'm just looking
at 525,000.
In the
Uh transfer out of personal
services and employment
benefits, uh, did any of that
was any of that money used?
Or contractors to replace the
employees that you did not have.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Chatfield, so we
had created 26 term positions,
um, and we also have to have a
contract staff to help
supplement the shortage in uh
staff that we have to facilitate
and support the 7 new buildings
that we brought online.
So, Mr. Chair, I guess the my
question is,
If you're short on employees,
sometimes you hire contractors,
and that would be a different
line item. So it did the money
that came out of personal
services and employee benefits
go over here to pay for
contractors.
Mr. Chair for contract staff,
that is correct.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much. Uh, next we
go to representative uh Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and uh
good afternoon.
Just a couple questions, um, so,
Mr. Chairman, I first of all, I
wanna, well start with a
compliment, the state printing
office, I think is really good
exceptionally good job.
And they're quick uh responsive
accurate and uh makes our jobs a
little easier when we get out
the starting gate. So thank you
for that. I did want to ask a
little bit, Mr. Chairman, about
um
I know a lot of uh
Senators and representatives are
um establishing district
offices.
is GSD the organization that
would do say we need copy paper.
Are you the people we call for
that, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Brown for a printing services,
yes, you can call State
printing.
OK, let's say we need paper
clips. Do we go through GSD,
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Brown, um, no, uh, we do not
support that.
Thank you uh for that
information. Um, I wanted to ask
a little bit, Mr. Chair, about
the airplane. Um, I've been here
for a few years now and I've
heard a lot of talk about state
airplanes.
Uh, what's the capacity, the
passenger capacity of what's
being used to, I don't know what
type of model it is, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Brown, both planes, um, have a
capacity for 8 passengers each.
I see. And, uh, Mr. Chair and
ma'am, um, acting secretary,
says new plane up and running,
so this is a brand new vehicle,
is that correct? Um, Mr. Chair,
uh, Representative Brown, yes,
we purchased a new plane last
year.
I think it's all I have. Thank
you. Excellent. Thank you very
much, Representative Brown.
Next, we're gonna go to
Representative Luhan and then
represent Pettigrew. Represent
Lohan, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um.
One of my questions, uh,
In regards to your, uh, Mr.
Chair, your budget for your,
your operational you have to,
um, you now have, and I may have
missed this part of your, um,
presentation, you, you have a
lot of more encouraged work uh
work duties now if you wear a
workload, if you will, due to
some of the things that are
being shoved around the state
agencies.
Can you maybe comment on that,
you know, I know that you have
more of a workload because of,
um, you need duties um with
working with do it and so on,
can you comment on that?
I'm, absolutely, um, Mr. Chair
and Representative Small, thank
you for the question. So in
2019, um, the state purchasing
division, uh, we moved the
professional services from the
Department of Finance to uh
state purchasing division. So,
um, this year we are now moving
the IT procurement from do it to
state purchasing division. So
now we truly have um a one stop
shop so all procurement uh for
state agencies run through state
purchasing. Um, with
that, um, with the move, um,
now, uh, with the consolidation,
we do have an increase in
workload because we are moving
IT procurements from do it to
SPD, but we did not receive um
an appropriation or a staff to
support that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I
appreciate you, you going on
with that, and I know it's hard
for us to keep up with all the
things that are going on with
all of our state agencies and
sometimes, um,
They happen really fast. Um, so
thank you for the answer. I
think that that that just um
goes to show that you are doing
our
Our division is doing a really
good job with with with with the
staff that you have, but there
are, there are additional needs
that we're
We didn't um really capture
through our budget process right
now because it happened at the
time that they happened and um
most of our work gets done
during the internment and um
voted upon in December as as far
as like the direction where our
budget goes. So thank you for
that. Are there any other, uh,
particulars that you wanted to
mention with uh that have
happened that maybe we haven't
captured Mister chair, um,
Representative Lu Han, Mr. Chair
Representative Lu Han, um, the
biggest, uh, impact to that we
are asking for.
Is uh supporting the 26 FTEs
because we do have the 7 new
buildings. Um, we did not
receive the staff, so we had to
create term positions. The term
positions are only good for 2
years, they will be expiring in
June 30th, the significance of
those positions is because
they're specifically for capital
projects. These are project
managers that are on the
forensics, uh, new forensics
building in Las Vegas. They're
on the Veteran cemeteries, um,
they are supporting the new DPS
facilities, uh, the new
Um, uh, the new, um,
Facilities for the uh fire
marshal and so there's um a
significant need for these uh
project managers and without
them they would be directly
impacting uh the projects around
the state.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for answering that question. I
just think that we need to, to
really consider that as um new
information or additional
information as we're we're
reviewing the budget, you know,
now during the session, which is
appropriate. Um, Mr. Chair, um,
I
was listening to the, the, the
claim cost that you're going
over in the higher awards, um,
and one thing you said is a pay
as you go program. How are you
looking to um address this.
And I think you were, you were
talking about, but can you give,
give a little more information
on that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Lujan.
So, um, our magnificent team
here is doing some really
creative out of the box, um, uh,
things, um, to address some of
the issues that we're having. So
one of the um what I like to
call it our risk management team
thing, um, something that
they've done is they've doubled
the size of our attorneys. So we
went from 4 attorneys to 8
attorneys, and the case load is
3800 cases a year. So each, um,
attorney was having like 300
cases per attorney.
And it was an unmanageable
workload. So we've doubled the,
we've doubled the amount of
attorneys to help with um the
case code. The other thing that
we're doing is we are, in order
to support CYFD, we are, um,
dedicating 3 on-site contract
staff to help support the
training of uh staff that are in
high risk positions for CYFD.
Um, we are also, um, starting a
monthly um agency meeting with
the high risk agencies that
we're considering the top 5, and
so we will be meeting with the
uh top agencies with us in order
to discuss their current claims,
their actions, their statuses,
the time frames so that way they
can be a part of the decisions
that we're making. So those are
just a few of the um things that
we're doing to help mitigate
some of the issues that we're
having with these agencies.
That's great. Thank you, Mr.
Those are, those, thank you.
for that update. I know you have
an incredible staff, um.
Also regarding
You mentioned that there's $20
million of the fund that we have
already expended. Is that
correct? And we have uh $50
million.
fund for the entire fiscal year.
How do you see that?
Is that gonna, are we gonna
surpass that? Is that what you
were getting at during your
testimony, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative Lu
Han, um, this year, uh, we have
paid $56 million 600, 600,000 of
that roughly $20 million has
been paid just for the 5. Thank
you for that clarification. I, I
didn't quite catch the entirety
of it. So by the end of this
fiscal year, what do you think
we're going to incur in costs
for uh for risk, Mr. Chair.
Um, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Lujan, so
We don't know cause we're only
at half the year. So we don't
know what the remainder of the
year is going to look like. So,
um, we have requested um 76
million and um it looks like uh
depending on how you all help us
out here.
Um, it looks like we might be
supported with um from the LFC
request, I think we're looking
at a $20 million. And my last
in, in the same area, why do
you, is there any, any
delineation that you might have
of why the words are hard are
higher at this time, Mr. Chair.
Um, sure. So if you look on page
5.
At the chart on the top right.
So this represents 2,639 open
claims.
So, um, these open claims are
representative of total active
litigation, which are current
lawsuits, and then the one below
that, the non-litigated, those
just have not been assigned an
attorney yet.
Or their um being investigated.
So, um, if we were to just like
a snapshot to kind of uh put
something in perspective.
If we were to look at the 2,639
claims, and we were to close our
business today, close the doors,
that would represent $333
million in um liabilities. So
what we are doing now is we are
actually assigning a dollar
amount to each liability, which
we were not doing before. So now
we have real numbers associated
with each case. So we can say
this is the true snapshot of
what we're doing as far as how
much money is.
out there in these uh claims
that are still open. I really
appreciate that, appreciate
that, but, um, and
A little more clarity. Why do
you think that the awards
themselves are higher than
they've ever been, Mister Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Lujan.
It could be a um result of uh
the uh
Um, HB 4 and the civil.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So we're
seeing more awards due to the
legislation. I, I, I, I guess is
what I'm hearing, but we can
have more discussion offline,
but I just want to be clear
about that that this is why
we're going to incur more, more
costs because of the legislation
that we passed, which we
rightfully did. So thank you,
thank you for that.
Thank you very much,
Representative Lujan. uh, next
representative Pettigrew, then
represent Duncan.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you
for being here today. Um,
This was actually one of my last
questions, but I'm gonna follow
up on Representative Lujan's
final questioning.
If, if we were to look at this
931 active 1,708, unassigned
yet.
Um,
So 2600 cases out there.
Just a snapshot, 2600 cases,
determine how many of those?
Actually make it to court and
and are not or not.
Um, pre-negotiated.
Um
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigrew, so if we want to look
at the total active litigation,
those are, are primarily the
civil rights and the malpractice
cases because they do have
attorneys assigned to them. Um,
the total, um, active
non-litigated, those are
primarily the slips and falls
that don't primarily um need an
attorney. Although it's hard to
say um what is going to be
litigated there we can't just
determine what that's going to
be. We can just from this
snapshot tell you that's where
we're at.
So,
determine, we, we put
So
Civil rights, and we also put.
malpractice in there.
Give me an example, chairman of
the malpractice this, this
wouldn't be a medical
malpractice lawsuit, would it?
Um, Mr. Chair representative
Pettigroup. Yes, that's exactly.
So between House Bill 75 and
House Bill 4, we've actually
created our own monster which is
grown your litigation and
liabilities. Would that be a
fair statement?
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Pettigrew, um.
I
Don't feel qualified to say
that, but it's a contributing
definitely.
OK, Chairman, um,
For the other questions that I
have right now, um,
With respect to.
Presentation seats.
Sheets, uh,
Code 604, I believe I heard the
statement that
you have a mobile support
trailer. Can we talk a little
bit more about what that is?
What that does.
C
Mobile support unit
representative Pettigrew.
So that's a program that we just
started this year.
And the reason for that program
was we have several agencies
that uh through attrition or
through um um maybe.
They could be maternity leave,
uh, there's a break in service
for one reason or another, and
an agency is not covered and
does not have their chief
procurement officer.
So what we have done is we have
created a chief procurement
officer mobile unit.
And what they do is they go to
the agency for the length of
term that they are without their
CPO. So while they hire a new
person or while the other person
comes back from maternity leave,
so our mobile CPO will go into
the agency and support them with
their RFPs, with their ITBs,
with their POs, with their
procurements, so that way they
don't stop services and they
continue their business.
As usual. Thank you, Chairman
and thank you.
That, so.
Is it strictly within within
state government, or do you also
help?
Political entity, uh.
Lovington, for example.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Pettigrew. So it
is just for state agencies,
however, our chief procurement
officer program supports the
entire state and all um.
Local public bodies and
municipalities as well. So if
they call for questions or
anything, we are happy to
support them.
Thank you, Chairman. So,
As I heard your explanation with
the reason why you created that.
Uh, mobile support was because a
lot of it has to do with
potential pay time off because
people, CFO is not or chief
procurement officers not being
there. Would that be a fair
statement, Mr. Chair, uh
Representative Pettigrew, or the
the CPO has retired or um has
left the agency for one reason
or another.
Thank you.
I would be curious to have an
offline conversation about how
HB 11's gonna impact. How many
more mobile units we need to
add?
If that were to pass.
Um, German on, uh, PO 608.
facilities management.
I believe I understood Chairman
under facilities that
You all have a building new fee.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Pettigrew, there is a a building
use fee that is in statute, but
we do not have one right.
The Mr. Chair and
Representative, so just to
follow up on that real quick, so
the LFC recommendation does
include 169.2,000. We've, we've
recommended that the department,
uh, start.
A pilot program for this, so
You, decades ago.
The legislature passed a program
that allows general services to
charge up to $10 million a year
in building use fees.
They've never taken advantage of
that statutory authority. Um,
and so if you, if you recall,
Mr. Chair, and, and
representative, the LFC a couple
of years ago did a program
evaluation of how we're managing
our um, our facilities
statewide. One of the
recommendations of that is that
we should shift GSD away from an
agency that's directly funded by
the general fund to one that
relies on fee for service. So
GSD provides an agency with uh a
facility
they pay a fee just like they
would if that facility were
leased on the open market, like
a number of agencies do, right?
So, um, we, the, uh,
You all passed uh a bill a
couple of years ago to provide
for a new building for the
public regulation commission.
They're moving from leased
space, so what we've, we've
proposed in this recommendation
is to take about half of what
PRC was spending in their in
leasing. Give it to GSD as, you
know, the facility manager to,
to cover the costs of janitorial
for that, you know, potentially,
you know, building upgrades or
it's not very much money, so
we're probably not at that
point, but just to cover
the operational costs of that
new facility.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Joey and thank you
secretary. So once, if, if that.
is implemented and they start
doing that, then it would have
its
We, we would no longer chairman
be looking at.
The, the only P code that we
have that's not 100% general
fund.
On
Mr. Chairman Representative,
that's correct. It would not be
the gen the facilities
management division would be
partially funded, at least from
a, from a non-general fund
source.
Chairman and secretary uh Joey.
If we did that,
We could expect agency
increases.
So that they could turn around.
And pay for what we pay GST.
Which is a terrible
cycle.
You get into it. So, um, Mr.
Chairman and Representative, I
think, you know, you, you've
pointed to the difficulty of why
the building use fee was
difficult to implement in the
first place. What the
recommendation did specifically
is like, OK, we're already, we,
we, there's already money in the
base budget.
leasing that facility for for
leasing a facility, I should
say. Let's keep the, keep the
lease money in there actually.
You know, reduce it a little bit
because saying, you know, you
should get a little bit of
savings.
Uh, included building use fee,
and so, so that.
Effectively you're saving a
little bit of money by going
with the state and, um, and not
leasing on, you know, in the
private market.
Um
11 thing, uh,
I lost my train of thought
there, Mr. uh Mr. Chair and
Representative, I'll come back
to it later, I promise.
Thank you very much. So.
Chairman and, and
Victory, I would, I would
challenge you that if we chose
to go down that road.
That
One of the first requirements
that we would put.
On this would be before a new
facility is built.
Proof of not being able to use
an existing facility and I'm not
talking about because it needs
upgraded or because it needs
that, but
That has to be the first option
to, to, to house people in our
existing buildings before a new
monstrosity is built.
Just a suggestion, just a
thought.
From a business side.
Of things.
Mr. Cha and Joey and, and
secretary.
Uh
P code 799.
Did I understand that we have a
vehicle use fee as well.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigrew, um,
We, um, have a program where the
agencies pay for um fees for
taking um um defensive driving
and um for leasing vehicles from
uh our state fleet, yes.
The
Chairman and secretary.
Just say,
uh, through, through the
training and the hiring of the
uh
The constituent services person
or I guess, yes.
We call him a DLA constituent
services better, but um.
We were told that they could,
they could check out a vehicle.
To, to use, which
Um, has its own set of problems,
but with that, that would mean
There would be a a charge back
to legislative council.
Because they're the managing
people over.
DLAs. So would that be an
accurate statement,
Mr. Petty Group, yes, that's a
great example. German and uh
Madam Secretary, I'd love
offline to know what those
typical charges would be.
So that I understand what that
is because at some point in
time, right now, um,
We pay for.
Uh, my guy's got, my guy's gas,
and there, there is no way to
bill it.
So there is nothing to do
because there's no budget for
it, so da da da da da, we can go
down that rabbit hole, but I'd
really love to know what those
expenses are.
Chairman, thank you.
Thank you. Uh, next we have
Representative Duncan, please.
Mr. Chair. Um, one quick
question on going back to the uh
the planes, the lawsuits, um.
I, I would love to know how many
of those are litigated as
opposed to how many of those are
just settled. The reason I asked
that question, um, you know, as
a former county commissioner, we
got sued if somebody got killed
on a state highway and we had a,
a county road within 200 yards
of that, we got sued.
And we always seem to settle,
and I hated that and I, I, I
begged them to go out and, and
litigate this. Um, one of the
things we need to do in the
state legislators is we need to
change the law. So if you bring
a lawsuit against us as a state
or county municipality and you
lose, you pay for it.
We shouldn't have to pay for
that. So I'd love to find out
what's litigated, what's claimed
on that, and then you also
mentioned, uh, Madam Secretary,
that you've come up with an
amount, and amount is attached
to each one of those lawsuits or
litigate, um, so in this case,
and who comes up with that
amount is, or do you work
through insurance on that? Do
you work with doctors?
Um, Mr. Chair, uh Representative
Duncan, we, uh, work with an
actuaries that help us with the,
with those numbers. OK. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
secretary. And then one last
question. Tell me a little bit
about the plane. Who, who all
uses this plane within the state
government.
uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Duncan. So the planes are
primarily used uh to transport
children from um hospitals to
that are in care, um, home, so
that's the primary use of the
plan.
Um,
however, uh, governor is primary
and then lieutenant governor as
well as um other uh elected
officials and representatives.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, thank you, thank you
secretary on that. So this plane
that we just got last year. Can
you tell me how old that plane
is?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Duncan, exact age.
It's a 2022, it's fairly new.
Thank you for that. And can you
tell me, Mr. Chair, can you tell
me how many, uh, that seats?
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Duncan, it's an 8
seat 8, OK. The reason I'm
asking that, Mr. Chair, is
governor wants a new jet, and
they want something that sits 6.
So we've got a uh prop 2 inch
prop.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Duncan, it's a King Air, and so
it's a it's.
I, I was playing. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I appreciate that.
Thank you very much,
Representative Duncan, uh, vice
chair Dickson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you. um.
Uh
Madam Secretary, um.
I wanted to follow up on uh 2.
Uh, issues that have been
discussed. First, I just wanted
to uh confirm uh the question
regarding the claims paid um by
GSD from the fund for UNMH.
Um,
The, the question was whether or
not um House Bill 75 impacted
that and I just wanted to
clarify for the record that it
doesn't, uh, because, um, the
UNMH is not a part of that of
House Bill 75, so I just wanted
to clarify that. Um, and then I
did want to note Mr. Chair, um,
and Madam, um, acting secretary.
Um, I really appreciated the
list of the proactive steps that
the department is taking.
Um, with regard to the claims,
the fund balance. And I was
wondering, are there other
Um, sort of best practices that
you have seen in other states
that perhaps the state should
look at as well.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Dixon, I'm going
to uh turn that question over to
our risk management division
director.
Jeannette Chavez.
Mr. Chair, Representative Dixon,
thank you very much. Um, we do
look at what other states do,
and we look in terms of what
their tort claims liability Act
may look like. We look at um how
they might work on a public
entity fund that's a little bit
different from ours. But what we
try to do here is we try to
assess the claim individually
because every claim is assessed
on its own merit. We can't lump
all claims together because
they're all different. Um, and
then we place reserves on those
files and then we try to figure
out whether or not they should
be settled.
or whether it's something that
should be litigated because we
have a positive defenses for
them. So that's the gist of our
base of foundation of evaluating
claims, um, but we do look to
other municipalities for new
ideas and such, but we are
limited in terms of what we can
do with the caps that we have
here and the Tort Claims Act
that we. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, um, for that. Perhaps
one of the issues that the
legislative Finance Committee
could uh do a little bit more,
um, sort of in-depth.
Um, discussion with GHD over
the, sorry, GST, um, in the
interim is to look at um
You know, other ways that um,
you know, we can sort of shore
up some of the, the fund balance
and get ahead of um claims
before they even happen, uh,
which are some of the things
that I really liked, like the,
the trainers, um, that you have
providing 3 onsite contract risk
mitigation trainers. I, you
know, that, that sounds really
great. Um, and if there are
other steps that the legislature
could look at taking uh next
session. So thank you very much,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair. Uh,
thank you, members, great
questions, madam, uh, secretary
designate, uh, really echo the
comments of the vice chair.
Great to see the, and so your
risk management director, um,
As we go into the summer and
into next year, this is an area
that it's great to see the state
on the front foot as there's
additional support or what you
all are finding, I think will be
really interested to see, uh,
the only other thing, yeah,
Madam Secretary designate, um,
as we look to right size space,
which means adding space in some
cases, it seems very clear, and
this is an issue that comes from
the community that I represent,
things that are still on GSD.
either rolls or that require a
checkoff for those to be
community-driven assets.
I would just urge that the the
GSD work with communities and
community partners to right size
that.
And in those cases, and again,
this is a very specific case
which I sort of rarely talk
about, but, you know, if we need
to think about.
As you are doing the needs for
the next, uh, you know, the next
decade plus.
Addressing things that are on
the rolls, but really not
utilized in any way can be a
part of that, and it can also be
very helpful for community.
Um,
and great to see too that
there's uh a very small
difference at the end of the
day.
What's being recommended, uh, in
a lot of alignment. It feels
like in most areas.
With that, we'll go to the vice
chair for the LFC
recommendation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move the
committee adopt the LFC
recommendation.
Second, OK, it's been moved by
Vice Cha Dixon, seconded by
Repson Luhan, any opposition to
that motion.
I don't see any.
Thank you. OK, uh, we're gonna
go, we'll ask uh Secretary
Chardon Clark to come on up.
Sorry. Uh, thank you for being
here when we get to you, please
feel free to introduce members
of your team. We'll go ahead and
uh start out with LFC, uh, with
Mr. Montagno.
Good afternoon, Cher and members
of the committee. Uh, my name is
Noel Montano, and I'm the LFC
analyst for the taxation and
revenue Department.
Agency code 333, which will be
located behind tab 3 in your
binders.
To my far left is the DFA
analyst for the Thaksin Rev, uh
Ariana, uh Viel, and in between
us is the cabinet secretary,
Stephanie Chardon-Clark.
Overall, the executive
recommended.
322.4,000 or 0.4% more general
fund revenue than the LFC.
The only differences was the,
the executive funded two
reclassifications of 2
positions,
1 within the tax administration
program and one in the
compliance enforcement division.
Uh, the performance measures,
uh, the executive in the LFC
both reached a consensus in the
performance measures, and
specials will be located on
page.
Page 7 of your packets.
I'll now send it over to DFA to
see if they have any comments.
Good afternoon. uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the council, I will
briefly go over the specials,
um.
In order of uh well, first, uh,
the major differences in
non-recurring starting with the
C2 requests, um, that the
executive recommended what LFC
did not, um, in order of
priority, I have the Gen KFI
replacement system, which is a
12 year old system that um.
Cabinet secretary will go over
and then we have the TRD
electronic titling.
And then the return analytic
system.
Um,
As far as the specials, I have
the ID services that LFC
recommended for 3 million and
LFC, I mean, and DFA, the
executive did not.
I also have uh to implement tax
and motor vehicle changes
mandated in legislation that the
executive recommended for 5
million and LFC did not
recommend anything.
With that, um, I will pass it
over to the cabinet secretary.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, it's a
pleasure to be here with you. If
I might take a moment to just
introduce myself and the team
that's here to support the
budget request. I'm Stephanie
Chardon Clark and the secretary
of the Taxation and revenue
Department and then members can
wave or stand up. We have uh
deputy secretary for
Administration, Miss Aishamora,
we have our ASD director Denise
Erian and Deputy Director
Annette Reynolds, uh, and then
also in our ASD we have our
budget director Marie
rimer.
And then from MVD we have the
director Ted Gonzalez, and from
the audit and compliance
division, we have Director
Santiago Chavez.
Thank you.
All right, so, um, members of
the committee, Mr. Chairman, to
just kind of go high level
through the budget priorities,
the theme of tax and Rev's
budget is similar to um in years
past where we've just, uh, for
the last 6 years been attempting
to chip away at our unfunded
vacancies and just fill and fill
and fill as many positions as
possible because we know that
the more uh of those positions
we have filled, the better we
can achieve our customer service
goals for all of the
constituents statewide, and so
the budget request and the execu
a recommendation both uh just
chip away at the budgeted
vacancy rates across across all
of our divisions, um, not just
filling a couple of vacancies,
but we're also looking at pay
alignment continually trying to
improve pay equity and across
the division, and then there's
uh money added for our IT
systems. We're very contracts
heavy. We have two major IT
systems, Gena, that's the tax
system of record and tapestry is
the MVD system of record and um
the additional 1 million that's
built into the request.
in the executive uh
recommendation, um, adds 1
million for recurring costs of
those systems.
Um, to talk a little bit about
specials and and um uh
non-recurring projects because
that's really where the main
differences are. Um, our analyst
talked a minute ago about the
high priority replacement for
the Gen KFI system and I was
here on Saturday for the talk
about those, I know there was
some discussion of of the
committee, but um that request
that's our highest priority C2
is for 5.6 million and, and
basically we have a homegrown 12
year old software that images
all of the incoming paper.
returns that the department
receives. And so not only is it
kind of a risk of system failure
and the developers who developed
it in-house 12 years ago, have
all since retired, um, so what
we're looking to replace it with
is sort of a best practices,
state of the art system that not
only images the incoming
correspondence but has optical
text recognition to read them
and uh give them a confidence
score that will tell us how much
human review we need of a
particular incoming return, um,
under the
current system about 25% of our
incoming returns that are paper
filed end up in an error queue
for one reason or another, and
you can imagine that creates
pretty significant backlogs for
the processing of paper returns.
So that's really what that C2 is
about.
And the second one, is the C2
project for MVD that's 1.4
million to allow MBD to
transition to the issuance of
electronic vehicle titles, and
along with that goes electronic
lean tracking on on vehicles. So
again, this is a best practice
that states are moving towards.
There are a lot of efficiencies
for both the state for
businesses and just regular
constituents. I can talk about
that in detail if the committee
is interested.
Um, the last thing on our
non-recurring is, um, we had
requested like usual in past
years, 5 million for bill
implementation, and especially
because I know there are some
new members of the committee.
Um, we, we started requesting
this special funding in 2020.
The idea being that the tax
package and the budget both come
together at the very end of the
legislative session, and by the
time we know what the
implementation costs will be on
the tax package and other
tax-related bills. The budget is
already sort of done and wrapped
up and so the 5 million is a
contingent money that we use to
the extent we need it, to the
extent we don't end up needing
it if there isn't significant
tax legislation, it would just
revert, um, but for example,
The bills that we, you know, do
FIRs and we always put our
administrative impacts at the
bottom of the bill, and uh, you
know, one bill might be fairly
simple, like just change the
distribution from here to there
or a new tax credit might cost
us a relatively small amount,
but we've seen at least one bill
this session that would cost us
about $3 million to implement.
So that's, that's the kind of
thing that this is for. And um I
know one of the differences
between the two recommendations,
the LSC rec includes about $3
million for the issuance.
IDs and birth certificates in
correctional facilities. That's
something I've talked to the um
HAFC staff about potentially
repurposing for the bill
implementation, we couldn't use
that funding if we need, if we
tried, um, for the, the
correctional facilities and my
understanding is that's
something that the corrections
department is already achieving
internally without additional
funding.
All right. Um, I'll go over this
in just very
Um, short detail, but here's a
high level. I think you've
already gone through this though
in the different sheets, you can
see the executive recommended
3.1% general fund increase, the
LFC was a little lower at 2.7%.
And um in response to member
Chatfield's question on the
earlier agency, we kind of went
through and looked at what our
funded vacancy rate is, it's
very low, um, go to, um, slide
5, or vacancy rate is currently
at 19.9%, but of that only 14
positions or 1.3% of those
vacancies are funded. So across
an agency of about 900
employees. We have about 14
positions that we can currently
be filling, and we are.
Um,
OK, back on slide, um, I don't
think I need to go in this in
great detail just to say, um, we
are mindful of our reversions.
We average about 4% per year and
really the results of that is
usually positioned in flux, um,
tax and Rev, we, we studied this
this year. Every time we fill a
vacancy, there's about a 43%
chance we'll fill it with an
internal person, creating a new
vacancy, so we've, we never take
the foot off the gas until we
run out of um funding within uh.
Program, but um the internal
hires, I think do contribute to
our reversions.
And um one last push for our
agency, um.
We've provided here kind of an
outline of how much revenue is
coming in to tax and rather than
being distributed out to all
different state and local funds
have grown, while our number of
FTE positions has come down. So
what the, you know, what this
picture means is that we're
constantly finding ways to work
smarter, not harder through IT
automation through simplifying
processes. And so while we don't
really have um in the cards to
request new FTE, the IT
improvements that we oversee in
the systems that we must
maintain our
incredibly important to us
meeting the overall mission, and
we do appreciate the committee's
consideration to chip away at
our funded vacancy rate.
I'll stand for questions. Thank
you.
Uh, thank you very much, Madam
Secretary. I'm gonna look to my
left.
Am I right?
I don't see any questions, um,
want to think, oh, I apologize.
Representative Hernandez.
Like it was, Madam Secretary.
Presenters, um,
Mr. Chairman, um, I, I have a
question, uh, as I don't know if
if it relates to the compliance
section or the duties, how far
back do does your department go
to help, uh, citizens with um
maybe some of the uh the uh
taxes that they may have been
questioned about, um, and, and
I, I, Mr. Chairman, there,
there's constituents of mine who
have reached out about
Um, their state taxes and, and
how far back does, does the
agency allow maybe for like an,
like an investigation into into
that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for the question,
Representative Hernandez, um, it
depends. The statute of
limitations on review and audit
of a tax return depends on a
couple of things, but, um, for
example, if someone does
file a return and pay, um, but
it's found out that their
payment or their return was
incorrect or maybe they were um
evading some of the tax. There's
a different, a shorter statute
of limitations on then if they
don't file and pay at all, if
they completely attempt to
evade, so the statute of
limitations depends and it
depends across different tax
programs. It's all set up in the
um tax Administration Act, which
is chapter 7, Article 1. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. That's all
the questions I have. Thank you
very much Representative
Hernandez. Uh, next we're gonna
go to Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. Quick question
on the C2 request, your highest
priority is to replace the 12
year old homegrown imaging and
data capture. What percentage of
our New Mexican tax returns are
paper. Can you give us the
numbers and the percentages?
Yeah, absolutely, Mr. Chair and
Representative Garrett, I think
in the personal income tax, it's
about 5% paper and that has
come, you know, it trends down
little by little, and we hope
that things like IRS direct
file.
and just as time goes by, people
will become more familiar with
that, but still, um, 1% is about
um 10,000 returns. So maybe
something like 5000 to 70,000
pit returns come in paper.
And then, of course, there's
some paper GRT returns and some
other programs.
Thank you. So it is, uh, Mr.
Cha, vital to have a working
system. It is Mr. Chair and
Representative Garrett, you
know, I think sometime in the
future, states will mandate
electronic filing and payment,
but New Mexico being a fairly
rural state and fairly low
income state, I think we won't
be probably at the forefront of
that will probably, as
policymakers decide to keep like
a paper returns for some time.
Thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Garrett, Vice Cha
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
following up on uh
Representative Garrett's
questions. Um, how are the Madam
Secretary, how is the digital um
licensing. How is that going?
Yeah, um, Mr. Chairman and Vice
Chair Dickson, thanks for that
question. We launched the mobile
driver's license in December. I
haven't looked at the numbers in
the last couple weeks, but
somewhere between 300 and 40,000
New Mexicans have installed
their mobile driver's license
thus far, and we aren't having
any rollout problems. The next
phase is really to get more
businesses to accept it, and
that's just going to take some
time, but I am um happy to
report that the sun part, the
sun port in Albuquerque did
start accepting mobile driver's
licenses, and I believe
The hubs, the the regional
airport near Hobbs as well.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chair. um,
thank you, Madam Secretary. That
is a very exciting to hear. Um,
I'm wondering also if um some
other states have looked at
using blockchain technology for
um things like um
Vehicle titles and and other um
it seems to me a lot within sort
of the tax and revenue sort of
sphere. And I was just wondering
if that's something um that your
department is looking at, um, as
well.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Vice Chair
Dixon, not specifically, um, we
aren't specifically looking at
blockchain technology for
applications in tax or MBD,
although we're with you, we hear
about, um, concepts like that at
our national organizations.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary. um, and just finally,
I want to, you know, extend my
appreciations, uh your
department whenever I have
constituents with tax issues,
um, your department has always,
um been very supportive and uh
worked well with them. So thank
you.
Thank you, Vice Chair Dixon,
Representative Lujan.
Thank you chair. um.
I too want to commend you in all
the work and all the updating
and everything that you've done,
um. I mean, I had an earlier
concern this year and it's just
like you just the response and
the.
The attention that you you give
is, is, um, is one of the best I
just have to say, so thank you
for that. I would also, um, like
to know, um.
With the um MVD uh portion of of
your um your scope of um
Authority
When, um, are you seeing any
increases like in stolen license
plates and those sorts of things
and can you
Respond, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair
and Representative Luhan, thank
you, um, you know, I haven't
heard specifically about stolen
plates or stolen tags as much
and um but what we do and the
directors saying no, we do have
a big uptick in that ends up um
becoming workload for our tax
fraud investigations division,
or if that's also the compliance
program is misrepresentations.
We have a, a really dramatic
uptick in people presenting
fraudulent documents in order to
obtain a license in New Mexico.
And so when, when we get word of
that, we do an investigation and
make sure that the license is
suspended and discontinued and
if necessary, we report that to
law enforcement.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you very much
Lohan. I don't see any other
questions, uh, Madam Secretary,
I want to thank you. We're very
fortunate that you, uh, and your
team uh do such excellent work.
I do want to point out, Madam
Secretary, I think there was a
uh you mentioned it briefly. I
think there's a $1.2 million
dollar aversion last year.
Is that, well, uh, of a of a
reversion across a few different
areas, uh, what staff has shared
on my end, um.
I guess actually up to 1.7
million from the personnel
service PSEB.
You've brought down the vacancy
rate, I think higher, you know,
bringing folks in, so it's not,
it's just a sort of, you know,
part of our job obviously is, is
tracking and accountability. It,
I think there's wide
acknowledgement of the great
service and the work that, that
you and your department have
done.
Um
And the seats to request, I
think they
Duly noted and appreciate the
additional focus here as we sort
of look over the last couple of
years to try and get everything
to the best degree possible.
Um, with that, we'll go to Vice
Chair Dixon for the LFC
recommendation.
Thank you. I would move that the
committee adopt the LFC
recommendation at this time.
OK, it's been moved by, uh, Vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by
Representative Sareana. Is there
any opposition to that motion,
seeing none.
We've adopted that. Thank you
very much, Madam Secretary.
Excellent. Uh, thank you, Ms.
Rodriguez. Thank you, uh, Ms
Tapia, Acting Secretary. I uh
thank you very much. We'll start
with Ms. Rodriguez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
members of the committee, my
name is Julisa Rodriguez, and
I'm the LFC analyst for the
tourism department, uh, to get
you all oriented, we're gonna be
behind tab 4, agency code 418,
uh while you all get there, I'm
gonna introduce everyone at the
table. So we have Monica Tapia,
she is a DFA budget analyst for
the department, um, and we also
have Secretary Lansing Adams
with the agent. Um, I'm gonna go
over the differences in the
reoccurring recommendations
between the executive and the
LFC, um.
If you're looking at a high
level, you'll see that the, the
main difference in general fund
revenue is roughly 650,000, uh,
with the executive recommending
more than the LFC.
That equates to roughly a
difference between the executive
recommending a 3.9% increase
while the LFC recommended a 1.3%
increase. Um, the main
difference between the two
recommendations is in personnel
costs.
Um, so the executive recommended
a 13.8% increase in personnel
costs, while the LFC recommended
a 2.3% increase. Uh, that's
roughly a difference of 659,000.
Um, the executive recommended an
increase for 2 FTE that includes
a human resource generalist as
well as a program coordinator,
um, and other adjustments in
personnel costs across the
programs, um, while the LFC did
an increase of 131,000 and
that's for personal.
Um
Um, those are the main
differences in the reoccurring
budget and Monica will talk
about the differences for the
specials.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
For special executive
recommendation includes 2
million for a litter pickup and
beautification campaign and 2
million for the marketing center
of excellence Bureau, fallacy
did not.
All of their specials um were
recommended by both.
Uh, for language, um, the
executive and LLC did recommend
similar, uh, the language
request for national advertising
is recommended by the executive
and the LFC with the executive
recommendation designating 1
million of the 2.5 million to a
litter pickup and beautification
campaign.
And I do want to mention there
is a technical correction for
the executive recommendation for
bar language for the Enterprise
fund, um, that was meant to be
recommended.
And with that, I will pass it
over to A director Adam.
Thank you, Monica. Uh, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
it's great to be with you all
this afternoon. Uh, my name is
Lansing Adams. I have the
pleasure of serving as the
acting cabinet secretary of the
Mexico Tourism Department, uh,
the, um, stewards of the New
Mexico True brand, which we are
very proud of. Um, we have some
folks from our staff that I want
to make sure to, to introduce uh
Jennifer Savara as our deputy
secretary, Eric Harringer is our
economist.
Cody Johnson is our coms
director.
Aaron Ladd is our marketing
director.
Francine Hopper is our marketing
center of excellence manager.
Um, Jay Bernal is our tribal
liaison.
Holly Marquez runs our travel
trade program.
And Nicole Barker runs our
media, uh, relations team and
then Novella Salzar I saw back
there our general counsel.
They're all here. Ed Graves from
the CEO of New Mexico Magazine,
Joe Cannell, who runs our social
media. Um, so we have a, a small
but mighty team at the tourism
department. So I wanna just kind
of give uh some highlights.
So our vision is to be the
primary destination for
adventuresome travelers. It's a
very deliberate message. Um, it
speaks to the authenticity of
the Mexico true in our
advertising, our mission is to
grow New Mexico's economy
through tourism. Uh, we have 4,
primary programs P 546, the Mac,
which is in New Mexico magazine
P547, uh, program support P548
tourism development and P549,
uh, marketing and promotions, 59
authorized uh
TE, our current vacancy rate is
about 10%, but um,
On the 17th, we should have two
hires which will drop it down to
6.78%. Um, so that's really
important to us, um, just wanted
to give a highlight on
reversions, um.
FY 24 version was, was less than
1% of our total budget.
So to talk about, uh, just where
we are in terms of economic
impact, we continue to have
record-breaking numbers, uh,
2023 was another record-breaking
year we will be getting 24 24's
data soon, um, 8.6 billion in
direct visitor spending, uh,
contributing 810/810 million
back to the tax base, which
we're very proud of and uh
supporting over 93,000 jobs.
Um, New Mexico Tru has been
around at this point for 13
years and so we're very proud of
it.
So I'd like to provide this
infographic just to show, um,
you know, sort of the strategy
here and how it works.
Two primary programs that we
have are our development program
and our uh marketing program.
One is designed to drive demand.
It makes a promise to a visitor
about adventure steeped in
culture that they can
experience, that they can have
here. Um, we engaged in that in
a variety of ways, which I'll,
I'll briefly get into. And then
the other part of that which is
equally important is we have to
deliver on those experiences by
providing quality amenities,
attractions, and access to those
amenities and attractions, and
so you see infrastructure.
programming some of those
things, um, being very much
involved there.
So, what do those mean in terms
of programs. So on the marketing
side, the national marketing, we
continue to work in our
retention markets, uh, that the
strong drive markets like uh
West Texas, Arizona, Colorado,
um, doesn't have as high of a
visitor spend, but has high
visitor volume, um,
additionally, we have expanded
into uh California into Southern
California primarily and some in
the Bay Area, um, a lot of, um,
commercial advertising and then
Uh, a lot of, uh, a lot of
activity going on in the
airports there.
International, this is something
new that we're going to be doing
as a result of the Route 66
centennial in 2026. Uh, so we
will be, uh, partnering with
Brand USA and doing uh
marketing, um, in, uh, Munich
and in London, which is a big
deal for us.
Cooperative marketing, as we're
telling everyone about New
Mexico Tru, making sure that um
when we're driving that
awareness that we're also
working with our communities so
that they're um able to tap into
that and it's not just New
Mexico true, it's a deming New
Mexico or a tier C, um, giving
them, uh, some, some place from
awareness to consideration.
Earned media, that team does a
lot to, to drive stories. New
Mexico magazine, very proud they
won Magazine of the Year last
year, which was a a really big
deal.
Very proud of their work. New
Mexico Tru certified, and then I
travel trade program, which I
hope I have more time to speak
with you all about maybe during
questions where we are really
gonna be working with travel
buyers internationally to try to
get um some of the larger tours,
um, into, and, and the smaller
tours in New Mexico for the
Route 66 centennial and beyond.
And um you were mist in your
packets. If you want to look at
the cooperative marketing uh
awards that were in your
community, there is a document
in there that does have um those
awards.
So on the development side, what
are we doing?
Well, we see, for example, uh
events as being big drivers of
tourism. So we're investing a
lot in supporting uh special
events around the state. We do
have a program for that and
additionally, if you want to see
all of the events that we're
supporting, um, this fiscal year
that you have that, that
document, um, we can help the
smaller events, we could help
the larger events. Um, there's
different opportunities to
engage.
Our destination forward. So
again, the, we're talking about
how do we deliver, how do we
make sure that we have quality
amenities and attractions,
that's going to take
infrastructure and those
investments, we have a program
to support communities and some
of that development.
And, uh, lastly, our, uh, New
Mexico clean and beautiful
program.
Which supports litter cleanups
around the state, about a
million dollars in grants, um,
that, that is deployed out to 67
communities around the state,
um, doing good work.
Wanted to focus a little bit of
time on marketing center of
excellence because it's a big,
uh, I think it's, it's, it's an,
an area of conversation here
with the committee. Um, so in
2023, um, a bill was passed, um,
House Bill 377 that um
essentially established this
marketing center of excellence
within the the department where
we're tasked with coordinating
with other state agencies to
maximize the impact of, of
campaigns, of, um, essentially
the, the activities of the
state.
Um, Francine Hopper, who I did,
uh, introduce before has been
actively working on that for the
past 7 months. Um, we have some
really exciting pilot programs
that we're working on. Uh, we
are funded at about $2 million
this year. Um, however, the, uh,
in, in the LLC recommendation
for this year, there is not an
appropriation, and so there's
some challenges, um,
And how we're going to uh move
forward with that, um, without
an appropriation.
So just to close, um, on some
pieces on the budget,
described by the analysts but
just a um reemphasize. So the
difference in the recurring has
to do with our 200s, primarily
our salaries and and benefits
does relate to two employees,
uh, 2 new employees, and then
also, um, making up some ground
in our, um, unfunded now, uh,
vacancy rate. Um, as I mentioned
in, in less than a couple of
weeks, our vacancy rate should
be a little bit over 6%. Um,
it's important to us that we
Make sure we have uh the
capacity to deliver. Uh, so
that's a, that's a piece, um, as
far, and the LFC I, I don't want
to say it was not supported.
There is um some dollars that
were supported by the LFC to
help our 200s, 200,000 was
requested as recurring for the
New Mexico Bowl. The reason for
that is we do every single year
we see special appropriations
for that. Um, and one year there
was uh a glitch, something
happened. It wasn't, it didn't
happen. The department had to
come in, use its own.
Funding, uh, to support that.
The Mexico owl has been an
important event for the state.
We just want to make sure that
doesn't happen again, 200,000 is
about the average that it's been
funded in specials.
And then lastly on uh special
appropriations, so the 16
million very, very appreciative
of the committee, um, both
recommendations. Um, there's,
there's some differences there,
but very appreciative. 1.9
million for that destination
forward for infrastructure, 2
million to support marketing
center of excellence moving
forward. 2 million for that
litter and beautification
campaign, and a $300,000 special
appropriation for Special
Olympics, which we're very proud
to work with, uh, that
organization every year.
So then the last piece is just
looking at this sort of side by
side table, you can see some of
the differences, um, happy to,
um, discuss, um, any of this
with the committee, uh, it was
kind of a rocket docket there,
but, um, you know, hope that
that makes sense. So thank you
all. I appreciate uh your time
and open for questions. Thank
you. Thank you very much, Acting
Secretary. Great job, and we're
gonna go straight to questions
starting with ranking member
chat with.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, these guys do a great
job. Uh, I wanted to go back and
talk a little bit about House
Bill 377, uh, which was, uh,
passed last year and created the
marketing excellent bureau. Uh,
I'm looking here at the page, it
says they've engaged 25 of 37
agencies in that year's time.
Uh, I think there was 2 million
went with that bill last year
and it was a special one time
appropriation, and uh these guys
are going to continue to do the
job. I, I would like to see that
appropriation made recurring,
uh, I think, uh, if anytime you
go someplace, you go to the
airport, uh you can turn on your
TV, you see them working, you
see them, you pick up New Mexico
magazine, you see them working
and they're pushing our state
forward, uh, that, you know,
we're, we're here to weed
through things, find the things
that
and find the and call out the
things that don't work. I think
that these guys are, are doing a
good job. I think they, they
need funded and I would like to
see House Bill 377 marketing
excellent bureau, uh, funded it
uh.
It speaks for all our state
agencies, and these guys are
professionals at, at making uh
ads and making and putting in,
you know, putting it in New
Mexico magazine. If we have
every agency trying to make
their own ad trying to stand up
for their sale. Uh, a lot of
those people are not
professionals, they're not
professionals that, at doing
that. These guys who have been
given that task and, and I was
I would hope to see us fund
them. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, uh, ranking
member Chatfield next to
represent Luhan and then go from
there. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
thank you to, um, this agency
for all the work that they've
been doing, I think that there
was a missing component, Mr.
Chair, um, for a long time with,
with the amount of um.
Revenues that can be generated
for our state and our and our
districts. I for one, obviously,
you know, I live here in in um
the state capital, and we have a
lot of.
A lot of jobs have been created
because of a lot of the work
that's been done, um, to the,
the tourism, um, economy.
And I'm just gonna say that one
point.
to really, um.
billion dollars direct visitor
spending here in my district or
my in the county.
And um
0, 8.5, 8500 jobs over jobs
created here. I just want to say
thank you. I mean, this is.
No, everybody knows that this is
one of the counties that just
really benefits from a lot of
this work, and I just want to
thank you and one of the events
that I actively participate in
and have since I was a child, is
Arzobra and we we just celebrate
the 100 year anniversary of that
event and and what
What that means to, um, not just
to us here in Santa Fe, but I
mean we reached this is an
international event now. We have
international um.
Artists that come here as well.
I, I think that the importance
of
The, um,
The marketing of excellence, um.
Bill that we passed last year
and funded with $2 million I
think I'm seeing it not just
through what you do with tourism
directly, but I PED is, I'm, you
know, it's all over the place,
all the, the interagency, um,
connections and and um.
Things that you're doing with
that with that program, I just
want to say thank you. I see it.
I think it's something that we
need to revisit, um, so I go
with, um, ranking member
Chatfield has said, I think that
that is just.
That is one of the missing
elements, and, and I think that,
um.
You're producing and I, I, I
want you to continue to produce
and I wanted to make it easy for
you, but just something that we
might want to flag, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Great. Thank you very
much, Representative Lujan. We
have Representative Garrett and
Representative Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Secretary. Um,
Why Munich and London.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative,
thank you for that question. So
we actually did um some market
research internationally to look
at, uh, some of the
demographics, and one thing I
would highlight on the German
market is actually the younger
audience was interested in the
Route 66 road trip, um, in a way
that outpaced um some of the
other markets with respect to
the younger demographics.
There's some other nuances there
too, but um it was a deliberate
decision we made based on some
research that we had done, um,
I'm very
appreciative to this committee
for uh both recommendations do
include dollars to support that
Route 66 initiative. Um, I think
we're still going to be
You know, determining what our,
what our next um effort is going
to be this this year. Um, I am
happy to say that with the 2.5
million that we did have before,
we were able to do a lot of
productions in the communities,
um, the Route 66 communities
that then will be able to put a
lot of dollars just behind those
productions and be efficient
with just the buys, the media
buys. So I think it's still kind
of open as to whether we stay
just with those two, whether we
expand out and um but we can
definitely keep you posted, but
that's where
that came from.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Mr. Secretary,
because I lived in East Asia for
a long time. There's a lot of
money in East Asia, January,
December, even February,
families go traveling around the
world, and um so I just wanna
mention that and the other thing
I want to mention is so many
people I know don't realize that
we have snow in New Mexico. They
have a vision that we're just as
desert. And so, as long as we
get the snow in the snow season,
which I.
we're doing that well every
place, but some places are too
good. I think we have to remind
in our campaigns about snow.
And, you know, we can golf, we
can ski and camping. It's just,
those are just such, we have
that outdoor richness that I
hope we can include in our
efforts. Thank you.
Thank you very much,
Representative Garrett. Next we
have Representative Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'd like
to ask about the Special
Olympics, uh, can you tell me
about the funding, uh, is it
adequate? I know many of us are
huge supporters of that and it's
very important. What does that
look like?
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Sanchez, uh, so really when you
look at the, the funding for New
Mexico Bowl, or I'm sorry, for
Special Olympics, right? That's
for Special Olympics, we have a
special appropriation that is
going towards that, but we also
have money set aside in our
base, so the, the I can perhaps
deputies here, but believe it's
about 600,000 total that we do
spend.
600, 650, 650,000 is what uh we
spend, and that's uh with the
recurring dollars that we have
and this special. It's about the
amount of money that we had, uh,
been spending over the past few
years and I it's my
understanding that it's been
successful. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Sanchez. And next
we have Representative Doo and
then Representative Thank you
Mr. Chair and thank you, um, on
the, um,
I, I, I love the Mexico True
advertisement. And I think when
there was first the decision to
sort of consolidate the
advertisements and uh what's the
name of that program? I
cooperative that a lot of folks
were, oh no, they're gonna take
our our local decision. And but
I think it's been really
awesome, at least for my area
where we have Elephant Butte
Cavalo and I used to have the
City of Rocks and, and now
Boski, you can really see the
buying power and the
intentionality of it.
Do you have, um, data to show
that it's driven up, that that's
brought more people in that are
first-time visitors.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Dao, thank you for that. Um, so
I think the, the proof is in the
record-breaking numbers that we
just continue to see. Um, I
think the other piece of that is
our participation in the co op
program, which has increased.
Um, you know, we were, we're
talking about, uh, skiing, um,
skiing in Mexico, I believe some
of them are, are in the
audience, they participate with
us in our cooperative marketing
program, uh, a lot of
communities, uh, participate,
and I agree. I mean, I think I,
I was with the department when
we
We first started, uh, New Mexico
True, and I do remember that it
was not, uh, the easiest sell,
um, but I think that a lot of
communities have gotten around
the idea of getting behind a
strong magnetic brand and
leveraging that. Um, there's
always, you know, discussions to
have about how to sharpen the
sword and improve the the co op
program, but our outreach and,
you know, has driven and the 2
to 1 match definitely, um, which
we made the decision to do, um,
obviously has, has
helped in terms of a lot of
rural communities being able to
access more, more funds, so I
think the program has been very
successful, um, and I think the
numbers, uh, bear that out.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you for that. And also
the New Mexico True certified. I
think that's been an amazing
opportunity. Um, what kind of
projects do you have around
agriculture tourism. I mean, I
hear the term, but what is it?
Where, where is that happening
and what does it look like?
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Doo, you know, this is something
that the industry has been
really um pushing on us to try
to, you know, make some more
ground, you know, in this area.
I think we do have partnerships
on the event side to work, um,
you know, when it comes to, uh,
New Mexico True certified
products that are food related,
to make sure that we have the
food festivals, we have the
things, we have some, um, we
have someone in the audience,
like Chris Gola, who represents
the wine growers.
Association, trying to work with
him on maybe there's some,
there's some cool things that we
can, we can do, um, to
celebrate, uh, wine in New
Mexico. I think there's some,
some challenges I, I, I don't
want to speak too specifically
to it cause there's, I think
there's some legal challenges,
but I think there's things with
indemnity and and the insurance
coverage that's required for,
for operators to have and there
are other things that I think
need to need some discussion,
but, um, you know, agritourism
is something that is very
important and that we are open.
to um to discussions on how to,
how to make that a bigger deal,
um, in New Mexico. So open to
your thoughts on that. Um, I, I
think that we just need to see
what some of the regulatory
environment is, I'll say too on
the true certified front, um,
the discussion that we're having
and it's, it's a challenge is
that New Mexico Tru certified
really is is about products
right now, right? It's about
products that are made in New
Mexico, sourced in New Mexico.
So we're we're certifying that
something's made here. Um, and
there's been a big call for
experiences, right? How do we
certify experiences? And I've,
I've actually had some
conversations in a lot of
conversations recently about
maybe we need to establish some
kind of a working group to
figure out how we could move
something like that forward.
There's liability issues, I
think from, from a tour
operation perspective, there's
other challenges, but it
shouldn't prevent us at least
taking a look.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and I, I mean, I appreciate you
talking to me about how we can
um promote and protect the hatch
screen chili festival or the
Hatch Chili Festival. Um, that's
been kind of a small operation
of just a few people who are
just really bought in, and
they're getting tired and
they're they need help and I
appreciate you being willing to
help with that, so that they can
build their capacity. Um, I
think it has a huge impact in
the tri-state area, what
percentage of your marketing
focuses on that tri-state area.
So, uh, I'll have to get back to
you on specifically, uh, Mr.
Chairman Representative, um, I
don't know if we have that, uh,
newly available, but I'll say
that, uh, you know, as far as a
lot of that retention, um,
market goes as far as dry market
travel and things like that. Um,
we are still investing heavily.
We see it as very, very
important to us, but I can get
you some more information. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Tao. Uh, next we
have Representative Hernandez
and Represent Duncan.
That was in um.
acting, uh, uh, secretary Adams
and your team. I, I really
appreciate the uh conversations
we've had before for, um, you
know, particularly, uh, in, in
my house district, um.
Uh, Mr. Chairman brings a lot of
pride every time, um, you know,
my, ah, my family or even, ah,
my, my constituents see uh
shipprock, uh, whether it's,
it's agencies or the state
departments, you know, uh,
displaying it and and and using
it in a good way, uh, our, our
traditionally, we, we, we, we,
we, we don't refer to as
shipprock pinnacle, we referred
to as Sabaha.
Sebaha
That's a traditional name.
Uh, it translates into, uh, Mr.
Chairman, um,
the translation is rock with
wings.
And so just, just wanted to make
sure that your your department's
aware of that, uh, and also, um,
Mr. Chairman and uh secretary
does uh how does your your
office incorporate, uh, these
figures when it comes to tribal
communities is is there a
barrier on getting those numbers
or is that, uh, something that
your offices is working.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Fernandez, thank you for, for
those questions. I think, you
know, as far as, um, as far as
the data goes, uh, we do, um,
capture statewide, but we also
do capture, have captured some,
some county level um in the
past. Um, so I'd be happy to
kind of share with you from a
county level what that looks
like. Now I think, um, so, uh,
Jay Bernal in the audience our
tribal liaison, and I hope you
can, you can meet with her. One
of the big things, uh, that I'm,
uh, you know,
Really pushing our department on
is how do we expand our tribal
participation in all of our
programs. And so that's gonna be
a just a, you know, a big um
mission of ours, um, whether
it's destination forward,
whether it's, uh, clean and
beautiful, whether it is the
cooperative marketing program.
Um, we do have travel
participation, but there's so
many, um, you know, there,
there's a lot that we, there's a
lot more we could be doing. Um,
so on the data side, I think
let's maybe have a conversation
about what we do have, and then
we can see what we don't, and
then, um,
You know, as I mentioned, it's
just a big priority right now to
make sure we're maximizing uh
tribal participation in our
existing programs.
Thank Mr. Trevor, that concludes
my question.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Representative Hernandez.
Represent Duncan, then represent
Little.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, for I'll,
I'll answer a question for you
on how well your marketing in
Germany and and the Asian
markets were. Um, I owned an RV
park for many, many years, and I
had the same people coming back
year after year after year.
And, and so your marketing was
doing great because they kept
showing up, kept seeing
different things, um, they, they
might fly in,
uh Houston.
Get the Harley Davidson drive
all the way through and then end
up in uh Las Vegas, so they
might land in Las Vegas and come
down here, so you're, your
marketing efforts were were
certainly doing some good
because year after year, I
would, I would, you know, check
the same people in, and I was
amazed um by that. You, you
never did call me and ask me for
my, my opinion on how you were
doing, so I sold the park.
But, but
Mr. Chair,
acting secretary, um, I think
you're doing a great job with
that, and I, I think, um,
regardless of what market you
hit.
Um, I think you're gonna be able
to bring people to the state.
One of the questions I asked
over and over to these people
that came in from Germany and
and Japan and China was what
brings you back to this state?
Your rocks
Over and over and over again,
uh, they just don't have rocks
like that over there, so, uh,
I'm, I'm with my representative
over there, um, in the shipwreck
area that rock is, is amazing.
So, thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you very much for
Duncan. Uh, next we're gonna go
to represent Little please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Good, good afternoon. Um, I have
two questions, Mr. Chair. Uh, on
the, uh,
Personnel of the FTEs, I noticed
on
Page 2 that they um
And correct me if I'm wrong, but
I'm reading this as there were
two positions that are not
funded or in a uh personnel, uh,
services, um, I'm wondering what
those two positions are, uh, Mr.
Chair, I was reading trying to
um as I'm reading on the in
these in the differences
worksheet.
That these may be force program
support positions. Would you
please clarify what those
positions are. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Representative
Little, thank you for that
question. So, uh, there are two
positions. Uh one is uh HR to
support our HR. We currently
have one, HR sport personnel,
the department is mentioned we,
we, we've grown, uh, in, in, in
scale and scope and so it's
something I think, uh, from a
capacity side, from an
administrative services side,
there's been a lot of need.
For, uh, so listening to, to our
staff, um, that, that's
something that we decided to, to
request. Additionally, when it
comes to tourism development,
we're looking for a, a program
coordinator within that, um,
division, uh, so when I, uh, was
with the department years ago
that development division, um,
was, was much smaller, uh, did
not have as many programs
attached to it for the past few
years, um, that events, uh,
program runs under tourism
Development.
Our destination forward program
runs under tourism Development,
are clean and beautiful program
run under tourism development.
And right now we have uh one
program director and then we
have a program coordinator, um,
and then we do have a clean and
beautiful coordinator, but um
it's just, it's becoming, uh,
you know, we, we want to make
sure we're executing in the
highest uh possible way in terms
of our quality and our
performance. So, those are two
positions that with a lot of
discussion with the department,
uh, we, we
would be appropriate to add.
Thank you, um, and Mr. Cherry
have more, uh, just to clarify,
uh, can you tell me how much,
um, I see that uh the uh
The difference is uh 659,000.
In that area, that's not for
just those two positions,
correct? Can you please, Mr.
Chair, uh, would you please
describe what else is included
in that amount. Thank you.
Um, Mr. Chair representative
little Jennifer Savara, deputy
cabinet secretary for the
agency, um, so of that about
192,000 would support both of
those positions, that's both
salary and employee benefits.
Um, and I have the breakdown of
each if you would like, uh, the
rest of the fending, so about
596,000 is would be to shore up
our 200s, um, currently, we
don't have the funding.
to um support the positions that
we do have, um, this year, we
did do 2 bars, uh, for totaling
of 379,000, uh, to support the
positions that we do have, so
this funding would shore up our
200s in addition to those two
positions that we are
requesting.
Thank you for the clarification,
um.
I think at this point that would
be my last question, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Little. Thank
you, uh, Mr. Secretary. Oh,
sorry, uh representative Brown
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, uh,
Mr. Lansing, good to see you. I
just a quick question,
Albuquerque Balloon Fiesta. Are
you coordinating with that
organization. I'm, I'm looking
at your list of awards and I
don't see anything for the
balloon fiesta, so what, what's
the status there, please? Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Brown, if it's not in there, it
should be, uh, so the balloon
fiesta has been, um, an event
that we've supported through
our, uh, events program the past
few years at about a $50,000
level. Um, we, I'm, I'm
interested, uh, to, to work with
them with the Route 66
centennial coming up now to
figure out with the
international audience there, if
there's, you know, something we
can do that's, that's new and
fresh, uh, typically our day
that we do is Fly to the
nation's Day, which is kind of
like
An international um day, um, and
so, uh, yes, we work very
closely with Bloom Fiesta. We
intend to continue to do that,
and I think that there's a lot
of cool opportunities in the
future.
Thank you very much for Brown.
Uh, OK, I don't see any other
questions. Uh, first, just
kudos, um, I think the committee
is sharing a lot of really broad
uh support and particularly
around the marketing center of
excellence. On that, uh, Mr.
Secretary, uh ma'am deputy
secretary, if we're to look at
that in a special, can we, uh,
sort of look at the
accountability, the metrics,
which is you all are very
data-drive.
And
So that we're um testing out
whether or not and at what level
it needs to be included in, in
other funding sources.
Miss Chairman, absolutely.
That's great and there also,
does that mean that as you work
with other agencies that we're
beginning to sort of uh kind of
create a scope of work for them,
what the bill might be, were
they to sort of see, yeah,
really test it out from that
perspective also.
Mr. Chairman, yeah, correct. I
mean, we, as was mentioned, we
are in contact with many state
agencies right now. There's a
lot of demand, a lot of interest
and, um, a lot of great ideas
out there. That's right. I think
yeah and that's, that's gonna
help us down the road because
hopefully we'll figure out the
right places to put much of the
funding that's going to be
requested as we move into these
times, whether that funding goes
to an agency or whether it
increasingly um goes to tourism
with
Yeah, so we're gonna, anyway,
thanks to the committee for
really focusing there. Second,
um, I, you know, I think it's a,
a point of pride for us as a
committee, this chef is sharing
a 49% general fund increase
since, since, uh, 2021 is great,
you all are doing great work
with that. Obviously that's very
significant. Uh, finally, um,
I'm sure there's, there's a
240,000 reversion in FY 24. That
was sort of alongside that.
$397,000 bar was the reversion
for unfilled positions and was
the bar to fill the positions
that, that wasn't funded. Walk
us through that briefly, please.
Mr. Tay, um, yes, there was
some, uh, some of that was in
the 200s, mainly for the cabinet
secretary position, um, as we
know, uh, Mr. Adams is an acting
physician, so we did revert some
uh funds in our 200s and um the
rest was.
And for the deputy secretary. So
yes, that was uh the main part
of the, the reversion is, um, I
came into this position to the
deputy's position, um, and we
still don't have a cabinet
secretary. Got it. That's very
helpful. Thank you for that. And
so very disconnected from the,
the positions that you made the
bar for.
Correct. OK. Great. Very
helpful. Thank you. Oh, go
ahead, please, Mr. Adams, if I
just, uh, there's a lot of
people that came here just to to
support us. So thank you guys
that did come. anybody who's
here just if you could stand up
really quick, we'll, it's
great. Thank you all for coming.
We really appreciate you guys.
Thank you.
Excellent. OK, uh, we've noted
the focus on the non-recurring
special with that, we're gonna
ask for the LFC and keep on
going.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, I
would recommend that the
committee adopt the LFC
recommendations.
Hey, it's been moved by vice
chair Dixon, seconded by ranking
member Chatfield, any uh
opposition to that motion,
seeing none, we've adopted that.
Thank you very much.
You're trucking people.
OK. Uh, we'll ask Secretary
Garcia.
Greco
And
Um, Mr. Minor.
Great. OK, uh, Ms. Rodriguez, if
you can start us off.
And uh we'll go ahead and get
going. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
So now we're moving on to the
cultural affairs department.
It's gonna be behind tab 5 in
your binders and it's agency
code 505.
Um, I'm sitting with cabinet
Secretary Deborah Garcia Griego
as well as Doctor Andrew Minor,
um, DFA State Budget Division
director who also serves as the
analyst for DCA.
Uh, so you should be looking at
a high level for the cultural
affairs department, um, as far
as the main differences between
the two recommendations.
The executive recommended 1.7
million more from the general
fund than the LFC, um, that's
equates to a difference between
the executive recommending a
6.8% increase in the LFC
recommending a 2.9% increase.
Um, you'll also see that both
recommendations include an
increase of 1.2 million. That's
in anticipation of a
distribution from the land of
enchantment Legacy Fund, um.
And then as far as differences
in the uses, um, you'll see that
the main difference in the two
recommendations is in personnel
cost, uh, with the executive
recommending 1.5 million more
than the LFC, um, that's kind of
carried out throughout all
different peak codes, but um
there's a bigger, there's the
most notable difference is in
the museums and historic sites
program. Um, so that basically
equates the LFC recommending an
increase for personnel costs of
1 million.
Uh, with the executive
recommending an increase of 2.5
million.
And those, that is the main
difference in the reoccurring
budget. Doctor Miner is going to
cover specials.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, uh,
like Julia said, yeah, in the
recurring budget, the main
difference between the two
recommendations is that $1.5
million general fund for uh
personal services and employee
benefits in the museum and
historic sites program, uh, to
ensure that all of our state
museums and historic sites can
support long-term staffing
needs, which, uh, I won't labor
the point anymore as the
secretary will discuss that in
her presentation, so I will
discuss the differences between
the uh recommendations in terms
of.
special appropriations, so there
are a few differences here.
Uh, one is for Nara, that's the
Native American graves
Protection and Repatriation Act
compliance, uh, the executive
year recommends a $5 million
special uh through fiscal year
2027, whereas the LFC recommends
2.5 million fiscal year 2020,
that's only in fiscal year 2026.
Uh, rural library fund
endowment, the executive
recommends a $10 million
infusion into this fund, to the
LFC did not include a
recommendation for that item.
Uh, for, uh, expenses related to
the semi-quincentennial
celebration, uh, the executive
recommended a $500,000 special
appropriation through fiscal
year 2027, whereas the LFC was
uh 250,000 for that same time
period. And then last, uh, uh,
to upgrade websites to comply
with the federal ADA, uh, the,
the LFC included a $350,000
special appropriation here, the
executive had recommended it as
a C2 item that's.
why you don't see it here, but
uh a special appropriation
should be fine for those
purposes. So, uh, that concludes
the differences in specials, so
I will turn it over to Secretary
Garcia Grigo. Madam Secretary,
uh, great to see you. Thank you
for being here. Please feel free
to introduce members of your
team and go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, um, I am pleased
to be joined today by various
members of my leadership team,
including Deputy Cabinet
Secretary Gallagher Roberts, CFO
Greg Geisler and deputy CFO uh
Jean Harris. Um, as usual, I am,
um, pleased that so many of our
friends and collaborators, um,
across the state have showed up
today to support our request and
maybe Mr. Tara, it's OK with
you, they could raise their
hands so you know who they are.
Excellent.
These are the two most well
attended hearings. Thank you all
for being here very much. Um,
so, quickly, um, at a very high
level when my agency does is
preserve, protect, and present
New Mexico's cultural resources
for the education of all uh New
Mexicans, uh, especially our
youth, and we do that through
education, programming,
stewardship, and scholarship,
um, and I, I do want to say that
you can experience all of this
great work at our 16 public.
sites and through our four
statewide service agencies. And
I did neglect him in the
beginning to um acknowledge the
hard work of um Doctor Minor and
uh Ms. Rodriguez, um, they are a
delight to work with. Um, I have
a great partnership with them
and I'm really grateful. So
forgive me for backtracking a
little. Um,
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, just wanted to
highlight a few fast facts I
didn't want to belabor the
point, but, um, just a couple of
highlights, um, last year we
served over 2 million
constituents. We also served
over 700 children. Um, and an
economic impact report by
Southwest Planning indicates
that the agency creates $1333
million in economic impact
statewide. Um, in the middle
column, you'll see some of the
um highlights recently from the
past fiscal year, uh, within the
agency, and I just wanted to um
Highly too.
I'm really pleased that working
with Secretary Props and
Secretary um Herrera. Uh, we
were able to add the baton
building, which was the old uh
territorial capital to the state
historic registry. Um, it's an
incredibly important building
that bears a um important name
on it, and I'm pleased that it's
been added to that registry and
we're uh now waiting to hear
back from the federal registry.
I also want to highlight that
Sarah Zurich, who is with the
New Mexico Museum of Art was
aimed the named the New Mexico.
Art educator of the Year. Um,
and I'm also pleased to say that
on Friday, this is not on our
slides because this was due
before then, but um we announced
that Anne McCudden will be our
new historic sites director. Um,
upcoming, um, we opened an
exhibit at the New Mexico Farm
and Ranch Museum called
Agribility. It is an
organization that works with
persons with disabilities, um,
to bring them into the
agricultural field as a viable
employment opportunity, and I'm
pleased to say in that in March
we will be hosting.
The national workshop for that
uh organization at the Farm and
Ranch Museum. Uh, we also have a
new wild bus, or Wonders on
Wheels program that goes all
around the state. It will be
showing up at Culture Day uh on
February 24th, so please look at
that as well as all the other
great work the organization does
and then of course I would be
remiss if I did not talk about
the opening of the Taylor Masa
Historic Site, Arno historic
site in the fall of 2025. Thank
you, Julia. Um, I wanna say
that, um, you know, I appreciate
that you as appropriators have
numerous demands, um, and
priorities that you have to deal
with. So I did want to take a
moment to thank you, um, for the
recommendation that you have
given to us. I think, uh, Doctor
Minor Angel Julisa highlighted
that for us, um, but I did want
to acknowledge the increases
that you have in the current
recommendation for uh the agency
and, and thank you very much.
They're all very needed. Um, I
always come to you every year. I
believe in being straightforward
and asking uh for what.
I need in an honest and frank
way, and you all are very um
good about hearing those needs
and often are able to find money
to support that. So thank you
very much.
What am I doing wrong?
Thank you. I did wanna highlight
just a few requested ads. Um, I
would, our number one ask really
is around uh moving the LFC
recommendation closer to the
executive in the 200s in P536,
which is um where all of our
museums and historic sites are,
that's the majority of our
budget. Um, we, uh, need this
funding to maintain a, a vacancy
rate of 20% or less. I also want
to quickly talk about Nyra or
the Native American graves.
Protection and repatriation Act
compliance, that is a two-year
request that is funded in the
executive fully, um, it is a
two-year project, so I
appreciate and understand the
recommendation to do half one
year and half the next, but I do
want to flag for you that the
2nd year will be when it's
really critical that we work
with our tribal partners to do
the consultation to complete
those requests. And then last
but certainly not least, um, the
LFC recommendation funds a
quarter million dollars for the
semi-quicentennial
commemoration.
And uh it would be fabulous if
we could get that up to the um
full 5 million. Um, that is
really gonna be used to work
with communities and individuals
around the state to make sure
that we are able to fund a
programs in their communities
that come from their communities
that mark that commemoration in
a way that that community wishes
to.
Um, just a little bit, uh, I
know I'm running short on time,
but I did wanna talk, um, a
little bit more in depth about
some of the reasons that we do
need that increase in the 200s
and P536. Um, I think we have a
really good demonstrated record
of hiring and retention. Uh,
last fiscal year, we filled 138
positions, including maintaining
a 17% promotion rate. We had no
transfers out of our 200s. Um,
the 200s are more than 72% of
our total agency, but
Uh, we also had no general fund
reversions out of the 200s. So
we really are a people-driven
organization and we have
incredibly unique skill sets,
education and expertise that
goes into our hiring, and we're
still able to do this, um,
powerful hiring. Um, the reality
of the LFC recommendation as I
visited with you in November,
we've been proactively managing
our budget situation to slow
down hiring and bring the agency
down, um, slowly and carefully.
But we really are running out of
runway. Um, we are actively
seeking increases in revenue,
which is part of why that
million dollar special that you
funded for marketing and
advertising is so important. Um,
right now, we really are still
maintaining and slowing down
hiring, but it's reaching a
critical level where we are
gonna have to start simply
freezing some positions. So
volume 3 of LFC shows that we
have a vacancy rate of 15.5, but
I would point out that our
funded vacancy rate is -2%. Um,
so there is a
gap there that does need to be
closed, and if we don't get more
of an increase, which you're
gonna see when I'm sitting here
next year as you're gonna see a
vacancy rate that is higher.
It's probably gonna be more like
20, 25%. Um, just to stay within
our budget. And at some point
that will have an impact on
programs and services that we're
able to offer. So with that,
thank you for your patience and
I'm happy to answer questions.
Thank you very much, Madam
Secretary. Thanks to your team
and great to have everybody here
today. Uh, we're gonna go first
to Representative Sanchez,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Hi, Madam
Secretary.
Uh, you probably know what I'm
gonna ask about, uh, I live on
acalde near uh Los Luceros
historic site and uh we've had
lots of conversations, uh, I
just want to give you kudos on
the, the balloon fiesta you guys
hosted there. I don't know for
those of you that weren't able
to see that, uh, they had a
pretty amazing balloon fiesta
which included the Zozobra
balloon and uh the turnout was
really good, uh, lots of
friends.
Uh, from all over including
Oinga and Santa Clara, um, just
wanted to get your thoughts. How
did you think that turned out?
Uh, did you guys, were you able
to make any revenues off of
that?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Sanchez members of the
committee. I, I agree with you.
It was an incredible event. I
always know that something is
successful when I'm seeing it on
my personal social media, so
where people don't necessarily
know what I do and it's coming
up there. Um, there was
incredible coverage, I think the
attendance, uh, blew all
expectations. Um, I will admit
that there were some folks on my
staff that were a little bit
unsure about that event, given
the historic nature of the site,
so I'm really glad that we
worked very closely with the
Northern Rio Grande National
Heritage Area.
Um, along with the shipppo and
work through those concerns. Uh,
yeah, we did definitely see an
income boost that day. So I
think um I'm hopeful that that
project will continue into the
future.
Thank you, Madam Secretary, uh,
I guess in the future, I'd, I'd
probably like to ask the
economic.
Development department to help
uh support that, but uh I'd also
like to ask this committee that
we continue to support this
initiative, uh, the historic
site is, uh.
It's been there for a centuries
and um
I just
I just, uh, it was so great to
see that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Sanchez. Uh,
next, we're gonna go to
represent Pettigroup.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you Secretary. um.
With respect to your historic
sites.
Specifically Fort Stanton and
Lincoln historic site.
What is your investment on those
sites and what all is your
oversight responsibility, chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigrew, members of the
committee. So, um, both of those
do fall within the historic
sites division of the
department, um, the recent new
hire that I mentioned will
oversee that site in conjunction
with uh Deputy Director Barber
and site manager Oliver Horn, so
those are our sites to operate.
I would point out that both
sides are a mix of landowners,
so we don't own either site
completely. Um, I am very proud
of the fact that we have made
the largest investment.
in Fort Stanton in the WP since
the WPA era, we've completely
replaced the water system and
the sewer system, uh, that
resulted in the fire ratings for
those communities improving,
which has resulted in more money
for the local fire department as
well as uh lower insurance rates
for property owners in that
area, which is, you know, is
important given the fire, um,
but there's still a lot more to
do, especially with Fort
Stanton, that is, uh, it is a
big site. It had a lot of owners
before it was transferred.
to the department. There's an
incredible amount of opportunity
that's going to take in a
significant resource investment
at the level that we've been
able to do over the next decade
plus. Um, and I should add that
I'm very pleased with the
direction, um, of site manager
Horn. He's done a great job
looking into the history,
prioritizing and seeking
grounds.
OK, um,
Mr. Chair and secretariat.
I hear that with respect to Fort
Stanton. What about Lincoln
Historic Site and chair,
secretary, do you have ICIPs for
both of those sites.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
members of the committee, yes,
we do have ICIPs for those
sites. Um, I can send those to
you, although I'm sure my deputy
cabinet secretary is getting
ready to give me that
information, um, in terms of
Lincoln, we have, uh, recently
done a massive renovation on the
Tunstall store, including um
foundation renovation to improve
that, uh, site for the long
term. We've made investments in
the courthouse. We've made
investments in upgrading the
visitor center, um, I know on
the
the upcoming list is some work
on the bell tower in the chapel,
so, uh, yeah, we do have ICIPs.
We do have requests and I happen
to know we have constituents
going around the building, uh,
looking for individual capital
outlay as well as those ICIP
requests.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for that. Yeah, at some
point in time, if you could just
send me the individual ICIPs, I
would appreciate it.
Thank you, chair. Great. Thank
you very much Pet. Next we're
gonna go to Representative
Silva, then represent Hernandez.
Thank you, chair. Um, thank you,
secretary. I, um,
First, I want to support
increasing the additional
personnel for uh the museums and
historic sites. I think that's
really important. Very excited
about the Taylor Masa Historic
site that's gonna be opening,
um, and I think the work that
you do in the staffing that's
necessary for museums and
historic sites just go hand in
hand with the tourism, uh,
conversation that we're having
earlier. Um, so just having like
Um, folks that know the site,
love the site and are able to
share that with uh folks
visiting is a great thing.
Um, my one question is, uh,
what's the rural library
endowment fund and how is it
funded? Thank you, chair. Mr.
Chair Representative Silva,
members of the committee, the
rural library, uh, endowment
fund was established in 2019. It
is a non-reverting, uh, true
endowment fund, uh, that sits at
the state investment capital,
um, I'm sorry, State Investments
council, um, this body has made
numerous appropriations um over
the past several years into that
now.
It's just over 30 million, uh,
5% of that revenue is, uh, given
to the agency each year, which
is then sent out into um rural
communities in the forms of
grants. I believe there are 55,
although some members of this
committee saw me mess that
number up in an earlier hearing
uh that receives money from the
every every year, I believe
right now those um dis
disbursements are under 20,000 a
year, it's somewhere between 150
and 20, I can get you the exact
number. And uh
That allows libraries to use the
recurring nature of it allows
them to use it for staffing
along with um other needs,
operational needs. Excellent.
OK, thank you. Thank you, sure.
Thank you very much,
Representative Silva. Uh, next
er Hernandez and Representative
Duncan.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Madam, uh, uh, Madam Secretary,
um, the boss, Mr. Chairman, the
bosque Redondo Memorial at Fort
Sumner is very important to my
constituents, uh, ensuring that
the the story and the the
history of, of, of, of that is,
is, is told from
Especially from the Navajo.
perspective, um,
Mr. Chairman, Madam Secretary,
uh, there's a, uh, request for.
Um
To purchase a heavy equipment.
What is that, uh, gonna be used
for and how will it, uh, tell
the story of, of the memorial.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative Hernandez,
members of the committee, um, so
in addition to maintaining um
the core exhibit as well as um
some recreations of the actual
fort. Uh, we do also maintain,
um, animals, specifically churro
sheep, which we work with our
friends group on and we grow a
lot of the food required for the
sheep sheep on site, and so the
heavy equipment is to tend to
those fields and take care of
the sheep, which are, as you
know, part of the integral story
of the of the
Oscar Redondo Memorial.
chairman, uh, Madam Secretary,
uh, my, my last, um, visit to,
to, to the to this, uh, to, to
the memorial, um, it was closed.
Uh, Mr. Turin, Madam Secretary,
is it still only operated on
certain days of the week?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
uh, members of the committee.
Yes, I believe Baskar Redondo is
open 6, I'm sorry, 5 days out of
the week. I believe it is closed
on Monday and Tuesday. Merman,
uh, Madam Secretary, are you
aware of the cultural
sensitivity that um the people
who practice uh their Navajo
customs and traditions that we
are not supposed to come back to
that place of suffering, and Mr.
Chairman,
Madam Secretary, what is your,
uh, uh, is, is, is your, um,
memorial happened to to help,
um, you know, provide some type
of uh digital uh experience to
members of the Navajo Nation.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Hernandez, um, thank you for
that question and my time in
this position, um, the staff
there along with um Manny
Wheeler, uh, formerly with the
Navajo Nation Museum. I've done
a lot to educate me, um, about,
um,
Navajo cultural practices around
that site. Um, so we did, uh,
when Mr. Wheeler was still at
the museum, we maintained active
communication with him, uh, we
were able to, um, share the
treaty through, through the
process of redoing that exhibit
a copy of the treaty came to
light and we were able to return
that to Navajo and we do through
DCA educate, um, which is a
website that maintains virtual
programs and field trips around
the state were able to provide
those to any classroom,
including those on the Navajo
Nation.
that may wish to have that
service.
My last question, Mr. Chairman,
um, on the, uh, page of, um,
Madam Secretary, the um
The Native American graves
protection and re repatriation
Act, um, this is also another,
uh, uh, critical, uh, funding,
uh, um, that it
Mr. Chairman, Madam Secretary,
uh, with the
with the funding given over 2
years, how will this ensure that
we're ensuring um, Mr. Chairman,
Madam Secretary, that that our
museums are complying to federal
regulations and how we, you
know, this 2 year rather than 1
year, um,
Impact services, uh,
And, uh, for impact the, the,
the, the services to make sure
that we're falling in compliance
to federal regulations.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative Hernandez members
of the committee. So let me
start by saying I'm very pleased
that um state museums are
compliant with Nara. This is to
address the deadline, which was
um, so a year ago a more
aggressive deadline was set by
the federal government a year
ago to comply with the act, um,
the first year of funding will
be to um hire additional
consultants to put revised
policies and procedures in place
to make sure that we're in
compliance to hire.
Um, temporary employees to
complete the necessary
inventories and to load those
inventories up into the federal,
uh, system. Uh, so it will be,
um, the 2nd year when we will
engage uh with the tribal
communities to start the process
of actual repatriation. Um, and
we are well aware of the fact
that tribal communities around
this country are being flooded
with repatriation acts because
after decades of neglecting
compliance with this act, now
suddenly museums are rushing.
And tribal communities
themselves don't have the
capacity to deal with it. So the
second year of funding is
funding for us, but also funding
for tribal communities to
actually come and do the visits
and do the consultation and to
work through their internal
process about how to take those
objects back or if to take them
back. Um, so that is why it's
important that it's a two-year
trajectory because of the time
involved, um, and my concern
with the single year funding is
that we're gonna get to the
second part when we're really
going to start the actual work
doing the repatriation.
And we won't have money.
Mr. Chairman, that, uh, Madam
Secretary, thank you for that
clarification. Um, Mr. Chairman,
that concludes my questions.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Hernandez. We're gonna go next
to Representative Duncan. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um, Madam
Secretary, just a quick
question, and I think I know the
answer, um, but I just want
folks to, um, maybe to get a
better understanding how many
FTEs do you have in your
department?
Uh, Mr. Char, uh,
representative, uh, right now,
it depends on the um
On share, it's just over 500,
but according to volume 3, we
have 470 FTEs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So last
year you, you had almost a 25%
vacancy than if I just take the
numbers as they are.
You filled 25% of those last
year and 24, right?
Uh, Mr. Representative, we had,
um, turnover, uh, in positions,
and again, that's 70% um
promotion rate. That is
Seems correct, but you've done
the math and I haven't. That was
just in my head. I'm probably
wrong, but, but just close. And
can you give me an average, uh,
your entry level position, what
do you pay him? Uh, Mr. Chair
Representative members of the
committee are entry-level
position would probably be a
custodian that would, uh, start
out around $17 an hour.
OK. Thank you for that answer.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. The reason
I asked that, I, I didn't think
the department was uh paying a,
um, you know,
an unbelievable wage, um, and so
I, I can certainly see the need
to um for that funding to be
there and, and to see what we
can do about that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Great. Thank you very
much, uh, Representative Duncan.
Next, we're gonna go to Vice
Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, Madam Secretary, for the
presentation. I'm always
Very impressed, uh, with the
work that our museums are doing.
Um,
Question about the baton, uh,
building, and I'm wondering if
you can explain to me the
distinction of what happens
when the building goes on to the
Federal registry. If you could
just elaborate a little bit for
me.
Absolutely, uh, Mr. Tay, uh,
Madam vice chair members of the
committee. Uh, so when a
building is placed onto the
registry, it um becomes subject
to consultation with the shipppo
either in their excuse me, the
state historic Preservation
Officer, aka the Shippo, either
in their state or federal
capacity. They do serve both
roles and all that really means
in this case, and, and we have
included um GSD in these
conversations. So what it means
is that
When, um, alterations or
renovations are planned for the
building, GSD will need to come
and talk to Chippo about those
renovations to do their best to
ensure that um negative impacts
to the historic structure are
mitigated. Um, so part of the
nomination or part of the value
in the nomination process is
that you put together a report,
a cultural landscape or cultural
resource report that identifies
the period of significance, the
key pieces, um, sorry, key
features of the building.
And that informs that
consultation going forward. So
it enjoys the level of
protection, but I'm also very
clear, you know, coming from
Santa Fe, the Shippo does not
have regulatory authority or or
enforcement authority. So the
shipbo doesn't stop the project
from happening. They just work
with an applicant to try to
mitigate those impacts. So we
have a good relationship with
GSD in the building, um, but it
will just provide some level of
protection going forward,
particularly in the case of, you
know, somebody wanting to demo.
or significantly renovate the
building, there would be a
process by which those
conversations could happen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you. Um, is there a time frame
that you expect, um, to hear
back on.
Um, whether it's, whether it
would become part of the
registry. Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam
Vice Chair members of the
committee, I don't have that,
but I'd be happy to email you
with that time frame. Thank you,
Mr. Terry. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. And I think the
reason that I'm wondering is,
um,
Should we expect if there are
renovations to the building. And
it's my understanding that we
might need to do substantial
work on the building, um
once it's registered,
Is that going to sort of
Change the cost calculation for
this process. And, and the
reason, you know,
I'm asking is, you know, does
one need to appropriate
differently.
Um, before versus after uh the
designation. Uh, Mr. Chair,
Madam Vice Chair members of the
committee, I'm gonna speak
specifically to Baton because
we've actually had some of these
conversations, um, it is, it is
clear to everybody involved that
part of the building's history
is it is an office building and
it functions as an office
building. So by and large, I
think interior renovations,
particularly for office spaces,
electrical systems, those sort
of things. Um, we're all aware
that those are going to need to
happen. Um, you
be looking more at things like,
um, you know, significantly
altering the windows, um, taking
out some of the historic
features and some of the public
spaces. Those are more the
things that you would look at.
So I don't think in the case of
the baton, um, in terms of
pending renovations for its use
to state agencies, you're really
looking at a uh this particular
cost increase there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. I appreciate
that. Thank you very much.
Excellent. Thank you, Madam Vice
Chair. I don't see any other
questions, uh, madam, uh,
secretary, just a really one
honestly again thank you, uh,
to, um, the, uh,
Your reversions were $5000 in FY
24, which is great, you know,
that's, you know, some
reversions are, I think, to be
expected, that's obviously
extremely low, and so when you
talk about sort of the ability
to hire, keep, and promote
within that's reflected here in
the numbers that we see, uh,
also no bars, which is great, so
thank you for that. Uh, and I
think it reflects in a lot of
the support the committee has an
interest in continuing to try to
be the best partner in order
decided to stay in our budget
for right now, we'll ask for the
LFC recommendation, but I think
there's been a few flags, uh,
from a number of members,
including Representative Sanchez
and others to look at specific
areas, so we'll continue to do
that. With that, we'll go to the
vice chair and then ask for
representative Silva.
For the
um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
move the committee adopt the LFC
recommendation. Thank you.
OK, the motion by uh Vice Chair
Dixon, seconded by
Representative Silva. Is there
any opposition to that?
I don't see any, uh, so.
We were done. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
OK.
We'll ask for the uh regulation
and licensing to come on up.
Sorry I got confused there.
Thank you
So you're good you guys.
So I know they're going over
household 10 the other. Oh, that
was secretary and them were over
there.
Great. Uh thank you very much,
uh Mr. Montano, Mr. Martinez,
Clay, it's great to see you.
Thank you for being here. We're
gonna go ahead and get started.
Good afternoon, chair and
members of the committee. Um, my
name is No Montano. I am the LFC
analyst for the regulation and
licensing department.
Uh, agency code 420 located
behind tab 4 in your binders.
To my far left is the DFA
analyst Joshua Martinez, and in
between us is the superintendent
of RLD Clay Bailey, if you would
like to follow along on volume
2, it's located on pages 159 to
168.
The executive's recommendation
for general fund revenue exceeds
the LFCs by 1.3 million, or
2.1%. The executive, uh, the
executive's recommendation for
general fund revenue, my bad,
the last one was overall
revenue. Uh, this one's the
general fund revenue, which is
2.8 million or 14% greater than
the LFCs. The LFC's
recommendation for other
transfers or interagency
transfers, uh, is about 2.3
million.
or 18.5%, greater than the
executives.
Uh, for base recommendations,
the executive uh recommendation
for personnel cost is 1.6
million or 4.5% more than the
LFCs, the fund 6 new compliant
officers in the cannabis control
program, uh, for other costs,
the LFC's recommendations
exceeds the executive by 300,000
or 3.2% to cover increased costs
from the General Services
Department and the Department of
IT.
Uh, the notable differences
between the LFCs and the
executive's recommendations is
that the LFC opted to fund the
requested 10 compliance officers
through Grow appropriations,
which totals to 4.4 million for
3 years, and it's to see how
effective the cannabis control
program is in preventing illegal
activity in the cannabis market.
The executive also recommended
funding the manufactured housing
divisions entire budget, with
general fund revenue while the
LFC recommended to fund it with
the mortgage regulatory fund.
Uh, both, uh, the executive and
LFC have reached a consensus
regarding ROD's performance
measures and looking at
expansions, the executive's
recommendation funds the
agency's request to 1.1 million
for the cannabis uh control
program to hire 6 special agents
and 1 supervisors, uh, the LFC
recommended funding this
expansion to grow
appropriations, uh, totaling 3.9
million through 3 years to start
a pilot program for a special
agent group to see.
efficiently and safely the
cannabis control program, uh, is
with newly gained law
enforcement power. However, this
expansion and grow appropriation
is contingent on the passing and
enactment of House Bill 10.
I'll now send it over to DFA for
their comments.
Uh, good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the board, uh, some
of the things that I would have
to add in that that there is
also with the expansion, uh,
special of.
I believe 456,000 for vehicles
and equipment for the uh law
enforcement part powers for
them. Uh, there's also a
810,000 special that includes
vehicles and equipment for the 6
compliance officers built into
the base for them and that's all
I have an alternative back over
to Noah.
All right, we'll let Clay Bailey
uh do his presentation.
Great, Mr. Bailey, please go
ahead.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you for giving
us the opportunity to come in
here, uh, explain and tell you
what we've been up to and what
we're requesting or asking for.
So most of you already know RLD
we touch nearly everybody in the
state in some ways, right? We
license over 400,000 people. We
cover everything from
manufactured housing to
construction, alcohol, cannabis,
tobacco.
We're over there fighting yeah I
say fighting, we're over there
presenting in House Judiciary
right now. I left that one to
come for this one, for the
cannabis law enforcement, uh, we
do 28 different boards which
include dental.
Oh my goodness, there's 28 of
them. So there's dental, there's
PI, there's several all kinds of
real estate on and on and on.
And then, of course, we have the
cannabis too. So we touched a
lot of different people and a
lot of different ways. So at
times I'm gonna make a lot of
people happy and other times I'm
on a in, you know, upset some
folks. We're in regulatory
business, so we're trying really
hard. I have 8 different
divisions they're the uh ASD
program, the CID struction
Industries, the FID Financials,
the ABC alcohol and Beverage,
the BCD Boards and commissions,
the securities MHD
manufacturing.
And the cannabis control. Last
year, uh, our budget, we've
requested this year is 61,671.
It's a little bit different than
last year. Last year it's an
increase. Last year we were 61
million. The real difference is
this year we're asking, I
believe it is, Department of
Health is going to start
requesting their 2.5 million
that was appropriated from the
time we started Cannabis. So
that's in their budget and it's
out of our budget now.
And I didn't realize I'm
probably supposed to be.
How do you make this thing roll?
Y'all have my slides or did you
get it?
OK.
So instead of the up and down
button, it's a side to side
button.
So the specials we've asked for
this year, the both analysts
went over was 745,000 for
cannabis control division
equipment, uh, uh, 560 for
cannabis control division
vehicles under 91,000 for zero
emission vehicles, 465,000 for
cannabis control divisions, and
that's if in fact we get the law
enforcement. We also have
requested and I know the bar
seems to be a big deal right
now, understand it. We've asked
for which we have every year as
long as I can remember an extra
5.
and that's in the boards and
commissions when we uh use that
for operating funds. That's, but
that's nothing unusual. That's
what we've asked and received
every single year.
To give you a little bit about
what we're doing construction
industries, well, let me back up
right quick. I'm sorry.
I'm still thinking I was over in
the judiciary.
That's, that's another, another
thing, but uh for our
Vacant, we have 300, sir.
We appreciate enforcement also,
but back on, no, please keep
going. OK. We have 378 total
FTEs.
With a vacancy rate of 20.6,
that's 78 vacancies of the 78
vacancies, we have 47 of them in
the process of being hired right
now, which means the cars are
already out there, the
advertisements are out there and
offers, uh, doing job offers. We
still have 31 that we haven't
got moving on, uh, they're in
various stages, maybe the people
just left or maybe they've
turned in their resignation,
they're gonna be leaving soon,
uh, part of them I think 6 or 7
of them are from FID where we're
still building from the FDs
y'all gave us last year. We
started moving forward, that
group is difficult to hire at
best, you know, to find.
The people that come work for us
to have the the knowledge to to
go along with that. So I'll
catch us back up and we'll get
moving smoother now. So in
construction industries, um, we
talk about reversions and that
the secretary that just left
probably need to go talk to her
$5000 that's amazing. So the
only really big reversion I'm
going to have that I feel like
it's really big is from
construction industry it was
875,000. I can explain that. Uh,
last year we got the elevator,
uh, bill, uh, it's our
responsibility. We're gonna
start inspecting elevators. We
were given
the money for the employees, but
we're still in the process. I
got the first employee, the
bureau chief that just started
in January. I don't, didn't see
the reason. I'm real careful
with the money. I treat it like
it should be. I try not to spend
it if I don't need it. We
weren't quite ready to hire the
employees. We're going through
the rule hearings right now,
fixing to have the rules, got
the bureau chief on board and
then soon we'll be advertising
in positions, but that's where
the big point of the reversions,
it came from the 200s. Uh,
that's the explained for the
most part, for the main, the
main of it uh in 2024.
We did, uh, 32,000 permits,
88,000 inspections, uh, CID is
unique in the fact that there's
our like 17 other jurisdictions
out there that have their own,
uh, inspection process when they
falter they fall they lose ins
inspectors we have to step in
and take them up. So we're
constantly moving all over the
place and taking care of it. On
the financials, uh, we're
working really hard. We got 16
new positions last year. They're
working hard to get them filled,
to get their accreditation back.
I think everybody knows that we
lost that a few years ago. So
FID is building back.
up doing a lot of training and
getting them ready to go.
Uh, and they had the decrease
you'll see in theirs and on that
slide there is the fact that
it's um we were requesting MHD
to be put in the general fund
and it's usually out of the
murf. At some point, that fund's
gonna expire and be empty or
close to empty because, you
know, we went to it a lot. So we
asked that to be in the general
fund and that usually comes from
FID from their MEF fund. That's
where the, the one there's a
change there.
On alcohol and tobacco, um, the
only increases that we've asked
are very minimal throughout
everything and it's to cover
the, the do it, the GST rates
and the increases on that. So we
came in mostly on all the
divisions with flat budget till
we get to the tail end of it,
uh, but they're close to hiring
their two new employees of
tobacco, uh, they've got them
out for interview now and those
two positions y'all gave him
last year.
Our program support, or AHR
we've really stepped on it. I've
got a new HR manager and uh
she's really cleaning it up,
making sure we're doing things
properly, filling our files up.
Uh, the, the most important
thing I think about ASD we've
hired 3 in-house programmers,
you know, I think every year
we've been doing these specials
trying to get Salesforce, get
this licensing online. It's
expensive, it's super expensive,
and as soon as they leave or you
get through with them, there's
something you forgot, there's
something you need to tweak,
there's something that's not
working properly. So we've been
able to hire 3.
it saves a considerable amount
of money and they're at us and
they can work for us at our
pace. So that's the one thing
I'm really, really proud with
them and what they've done. We
also have ramped up our
cybersecurity, as everybody
knows a few, a couple of years
ago we got hit pretty hard. Uh,
they're sending out emails, you
know, we train our employees,
we're looking for, you know,
scams and spam, and I mean they
send me stuff much anymore I'm
afraid to even open it because
it looks real, but we're getting
better at it and that's what our
goal is, is to make sure we
don't hit get get hit again on
boards and commissions, uh.
There's 28 boards, uh, we've
completed the last of the
licensing platforms. We finished
that by July 1st. There was 20
more to go, which makes uh the
renewals really quick.
Uh, the, the intakes still on
the new applications are still
things you have to go through
and we have to verify. But for
most of them, it's just renewals
really quick. I think there's PI
and like PI that you got to
still look at the documentation
we look at that because every
time you renew with the PI, you
know, you have to have a
background check and real estate
is another one of them in
dental, I think. But other than
that, the others can really
renew online and do it quickly.
Uh, the documentation available
online real-time now, so if
they're looking to see if they
got their uh their license or
whatever, they can do that
without going through us,
waiting for us to get to it.
Um, the increase, that's one
that we had a substantial
increase of that 500,000 of that
is to upshore and uh budget in
for the licensing, the other
divisions we had already did
that last year. This year we're
doing that, so to keep these
license up to date and license
costs quite a bit, so that's a
half a million there.
300,000 was for the the.
Uh, substitute care advisory,
um, I don't know which way
that's gonna go. I've heard
different directions, so, but we
do put that in for that.
On the securities division, this
is the one I wish everybody
would really look at. I mean,
this is a small budget for my
group there. They're a small
group, you know, their budget,
uh, the request this year is
2,400,000 and they bring in 22
million elected for the general
fund.
Of all my divisions, this is the
one that really brings in a lot
of money for different various
reasons.
Manufactured housing and you
heard me indicate, it shows an
increase on that and that's just
because we're asking and have
asked to put it in the general
fund, treat it just like CID
regardless of where it comes out
this is a function that has to
be done, it needs to be taken
care of. We're going to be
inspected, manufactured houses,
everybody knows, it's some of
the most affordable housing. Uh,
it's quick if you're in a hurry,
they get them out there, they
can move them out quicker than
they do stick built. So it's a,
it's an important role,
important part of what we do, so
we did ask again for it to be
put in general fund to be
treated like CID and the rest of
them.
Uh, for and for uh manufactured
housing this year uh we did uh
6800 permits and 8500
inspections.
The cannabis control as I
indicated, we've got a bill over
there working toward, um.
The increase on it we've asked
to increase our inspector
numbers, uh, they, I mean,
someone called them a compliance
officer, but they're basically
our inspectors, we're trying to
add 10 new inspectors to it, uh,
if we get cut down to 73, you
know, anything we can get is
added. Uh, we've really hustled
this year in 2022, we did 138
inspections, 2023, we did 1,122
and when we added the new
inspectors last year, we got 7
new ones, I believe it was.
We added 2,944 inspections. It's
important we get around and do
these inspections and do the
follow-ups. Um, we're also
asking for general fund and that
would be a 1.9 million
expansion, and then they're also
asking if it passes, only if it
passes, if HB 10 passes that we
get the law enforcement
authority, we'll need 1.1
million to, to hire these folks.
These folks, if we do get it and
we do get this authority, uh,
they'll be certified police
officers. They're not going to
be inspectors that we convert to
law officers, they're going to
be actually.
if anybody in here has dealt
with the cannabis and the
illicit, you understand why we
need it.
We, we just wring our hands all
the time trying to, trying to
make it work and we just have.
Administrative authority over
there right now. So as soon as
we tell them it's
elicit and its criminals were
done and even though we keep
trying to make it, we go to get
injunctions, we get TROs, we
still can't do anything once
it's decided it's criminal, and
we have worked hard at it. Law
enforcement's trying, they're
just overmaxed, overworked,
they're supporting us to, to get
this edition. It's super
important. It's the next step. I
believe I honestly think I'll be
one of the few state employees
you see that's coming in here
and asking you to give me more
responsibility. It's not because
I want to expand, it's because
it's where we're at now. I'm
living the front line on
this cannabis, I'm doing a lot
of it myself. I go out with
them, uh, I'm very heavily
involved with our director over
there. And I see the problems
we're having, you know, we show
up and there's 1500 plants
licensed and they got 30,000 of
them. Uh, law enforcement went
out, we did the, the TRO we went
out and worked with the court in
San Juan County, uh, they gave
us, uh, the, the order to
destroy state police. They went
out and they did it and they did
it willingly, but it took 50 of
their officers out of the
streets for 3 days, and they
can't afford that. They've got
too many other.
Problems, so they're working
very closely with us and we're
working close with them. So
that's probably the thing I'm
most concerned about today is
if, you know, we can get that
expansion we did put in there
that if the bill doesn't pass
that it's a that we don't get
the money, we're not asking for
that money. It's only if that
bill passes, not for the
compliance officers or, you
know, the inspectors, but for
the certified police police
officers. So with that, uh, I'm
sorry I rambled around some but
um what's that? That's great.
Thank you very much, Mr. Bailey,
and uh
There's a lot going on. I
appreciate you going through it.
We'll go uh to questions, gonna
start with Representative
Vincent, then Representative
Wuhan, then represent Silva.
Pig mis chair. Thank you,
Secretary.
Just a couple of questions I had
on your manufactured housing
division, you mentioned, um, if,
if there's a local that does the
inspections, will you allow
locals to do the inspection or
does it need to be state
inspected.
Cheers.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
on the manufactured housing, no,
it's all CID or all MHD. It's by
federal. So no other
jurisdiction can even inspect
them. It's strictly ours.
OK, and thank you, Mr. Chair.
The other thing I was gonna ask
is, you know, we've, we've went
through quite an ordeal in
Lincoln County and we have quite
a few manufactured homes coming
in. What's the, what's the time
frame to turn around like when
when they call you, how long
does it take for you to inspect.
A Mister Chair and
Representative, we try to do it
within 10 days. That's our goal,
um, obviously we've had a, as we
talk about vacancy rates, right?
Inspectors are real difficult to
get.
Uh, you know, they've got to be
knowledgeable. You can't take a
young one that started number
one, you wouldn't get the
respect from the contractors
that eat them up, and number 2,
they don't have the experience
to deal with everything you're
seeing, can't put everything on
a piece of paper, so generally
speaking we're within 10 days we
did do I got to go present in
front of uh state personnel
board. I got them to reclassify
our inspectors. We got them a
little bit of an increase, but
and then more importantly I'm
getting to start them at a
different rate.
We have finally got to hire 5
electrical inspectors. Uh, we
were completely filled out in
MHD and then one of my
gentlemen, uh, retired, got sick
and he left. So now we've got, I
think a matter of fact I've had
2, we got 2 vacancies that we're
working to fill, manufactured
housing is a little bit
difficult uh to get them, but
we're working hard to get them.
But generally within 10 days, I,
I don't think we're any further
further past that if the
inspection's ready. Now, the
challenges we have is, and then
I have this on construction
industry too. Homeowner gets all
excited, calls in for.
inspection and is not ready and
we run somebody out there and
then we get out there and it
fails, obviously. So we do deal
with that some, but in, in even
more so I think with
manufactured housing that
happens sometimes.
Thank you for being
straightforward on that. I
appreciate it. Mr. Chair, also,
um, on the cannabis control
division.
I don't really
I think we saw this one coming.
Uh, as far as you having to go
into the cannabis business and
hire certified officers and
And on the, on the bus that you
did in San Juan.
So you said it took 50 state
police officers off the road or
That they, they weren't able to.
Be in their official capacity,
they were out there doing that.
Um,
Is
You go, you, the RLD going into
the cannabis control division.
Is that the best practice?
You're, you're talking 50
officers and you're asking for
5.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
we're asking to for 10 or 7 to
stand it up.
We still have, it won't have to
be all law enforcement out
there, if, in, in, in the San
Juan case they had to go out
there and seize it and destroy
it. They destroyed it and there
was thousands and thousands of
plants, thousands of them. I
mean, it's not uncommon, the one
that the FBI just went after,
right? We go after that one
wasn't even license, but one of
them down there was licensed for
1500 plants and they had 30,000.
I mean, it's crazy numbers that
come up and when the judge will
finally give us the lead and
then we have to go through the
court system, right? They get do
justice. I can't just go out
there in law enforcement and
say, hey, you're building it,
you don't have a license, we're
gonna destroy it tomorrow with,
with a caterpillar. No, I still
have to go through the court
have to get the judge to give me
the order, give me the, the, the
wherewithal and the authority to
go do it, plus I want that,
right? I don't want anything
getting back sued on us that we
went and we were unjust or we
were doing it just because we
had the ability to do it. But
the law enforcement are dealing
with so.
things, right? I mean they're
dealing with gun violence
they're dealing with fentanyl
and fentanyl's crossing into
cannabis some, um, obviously
human trafficking, uh, there's a
lot of that stuff going on that
goes around with the illicit.
But they have so much to do they
can't spare the resources to
come do it and some of the
locals the same way, right? I
think Orange County may have 12
officers or something like that.
So is it gonna be a tackle in a
job? Absolutely it's gonna be,
but at least with the law
enforcement ability we could
handle the search warrants, we
can do all that stuff in-house.
Now when we go out and if we had
to actually take one of the big
ones down, the really big ones,
state police is going to be out
there. We're not gonna actually
arrest more than likely the
state police is gonna be out
there watching our back while
we're
We're taking care of all the
grunt work, the heavy lifting,
but we still have to have that
authority to be able to do it. I
don't believe we'll ever branch
off state police support us
through this, some of the local
jurisdictions have to, I think
most of them do, so it's not
gonna be that it's gonna be a
win and then like I said 50 to
get it done. It may take me a
week instead of 3 days.
But I'll take my compliance
officers out there too, my
inspectors, we'll go out there,
but we still need the law
enforcement to be able to do it.
Got it. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, and what I was gonna
ask is whenever, whenever you
did that bus where those like
healthy plants, did you have to
or they is that, is that a right
statement? I'm not a cannabis
person, so
let's go ahead, yeah, please a
viable crop or, uh, I thought I
heard you mention something
about uh pesticide.
sides, things of that nature,
Mr. Chair.
Well, Mr. Chairman and
Representative pesticides you
test from testing, right? This
is a group, it's listed, they're
putting it out into the public
and they're not testing for
pesticides, they're not testing
for mold, they're not testing
for bugs and they're not testing
pretty please keep it. I, I
think, yeah, um.
Answer is sort of concisely as
possible, but not to limit and
not to limit any questions at
all. I think just sort of, yeah,
as concisely as possible. So Mr.
Cha, yes sir, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, uh, we believe
they were I don't know what a
true healthy plant is. I'm not
what you would have thought
would have been a Canada's
regulator. Thank you, thank you,
Mr. Chair.
For sure. Any uh any additional
questions. OK,
great. Uh, moving on to
Representative Lohan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
secretary, and all your staff,
uh, and all the work that you're
doing, and we know, you know,
you're, you're bringing in great
revenues for us, but with that,
is it, I'm gonna go back to, uh,
your, is your securities
division, sir, uh, Mr. Chair,
you're saying that this division
brings in over $22 million. Is
that correct?
Mr. Chair and Representative,
that is correct.
And
You have how many FTEs there,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and Representative, we
have 1815 that are employed that
are in the field.
Mr. Chair and
Are you asking for more support
through FTEs in this this part
of your budget, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
no. No.
OK.
Cause I'm just wondering, Mister
Chair, if you had more people
working, how much more uh
efficient you would be, but
we'll save that for, we'll put a
pin in that one, and I wanna
kind of focus on.
Also the cannabis control
division, Mr. Chair, uh, again
there, we don't have all the,
all the tools in the tool chest,
uh, to make it a better, um.
Oh, more, a smoother, uh, run
division, Mr. Chair. Uh, I do
have some legislation there, um.
But how can you go over how many
uh vehicles you would need for
the, for the um proposal you
have for the new, uh, is it a
subdivision for
For the agency, Mr. Chair.
If, if the legislation passes.
So, Mr. Chair and
Representative, if it's for the
law enforcement, we need 7 new
vehicles. If we get the
inspectors, which is a separate
deal, more inspectors would need
a vehicle for every inspector.
So if we get 7 inspectors, we
need 7 vehicles. If we get 10,
we need 2. Thank you. That's
what I was trying to clarify how
many, yeah, thank you, you read,
you, you followed well, so right
now you're looking just for 7 or
7, it would be 7 vehicles and 7
inspectors. Is that correct, Mr.
Chair?
Mr. Chair and Representative,
what we're asking for on the law
enforcement side is 7, you know,
a bureau chief in the 6th, but
we're also asking for more
inspectors too, that's separate.
And so there'd be whatever
number of people I get for
inspectors if we are allowed
them and we get them or however
many law enforcement we get,
that's how many vehicles, one
per person. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. And in the the bill
that's been that's moving
through um the session, how
many, how many FTs are you
asking through that that piece
of legislation.
Just for clarifications, Mr.
Chair and Representative, that
legislation would come with
these 7. Thank you. That's what
I needed to know and Mr. Chair,
um,
Yes, we've had a lot of issues
this division, would you, would
you say having this additional
tool through with law
enforcement would be a deterrent
as well, you know, it would, it,
it would, um.
Well, the issues we're having
right now, in a sense
Mr. Chair and Representative,
it'll sure make things quicker
and more efficient. I mean,
cause that's what we can
dedicate right there at the time
when we get a call, we need to
go look at it, we need to look
at it, you know, go and inspect
it, we can.
So that will make it a lot more
efficient. We also, you
mentioned you have a bill HB
112, that's another one we need.
It's just, it's crucial too, so
we need them both.
You, Mr. Chair, I appreciate the
time.
Excellent. Thank you very much
Representative Lujan. Next we
have Representative Silva, then
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, chair. Uh, thank you,
Superintendent Bailey. I
appreciate the review. Um,
So part of my district is in
Otero County. It's in Chaparral.
It's an unincorporated community
that has about 13 cannabis
businesses cause it's along the
New Mexico and Texas state line.
And so I hear uh from the
majority of businesses that they
actually do want more
enforcement and regulation. And
so that that would help um clean
up and streamline the businesses
that are, that are out there
right now. Um, and so I say that
With all, I say this with my
questions in mind, um.
And I would support uh the
increase in staffing for your,
for cannabis uh control division
staffing. I'm wondering if you
have a preference of where that
money comes from, if it's to
grow or um from I think the
general fund is where the, the
other moneys would come from.
Thank you, Chair. Uh, Mr. Chair
and Representative, I have, I
haven't been picky where it
comes from. Yeah, if you guys
find that y'all, y'all send it
to me and I'll use it
accordingly.
I'm sorry. Excellent. No, I just
wanted to ask cause some people
have a preference. Thank you,
chair. Um, I'm also looking at
um volume 2,
And on page 162 on the
performance measures. It says
the total number of fines and
revocations by each license
type.
And the actuals for FY 24 were
over 4.2 million.
Is that those, that's in
dollars. Is that correct?
Thank you, chair. Mr. Chair and
Representative, are you talking
about the cannabis control?
Yes, now.
Regardless if we had the fine
out there, it's like the one
that just went down that the FBI
took down is a million dollars
fine now whether we collect it
or not, who knows ever, right?
But yes, that was total in
dollars and fines.
OK. And so for FY 25 but it goes
down to 30,000 and then the FY
26 request goes to 50,000.
Um, is that realistic or can,
can you explain the, the
discrepancy there. Thank you,
chair.
Mr. Chair and Representative, I
don't know if I can explain it,
but it would be really nice if
it came down to that, because
that means we're finally getting
control and we're getting them
to where they're playing the way
they should. This 4 million, 3
of that million came from 3
different illicit grows and uh
one of them's out of business.
I, I think they're probably back
in somewhat telling us they're
doing farm crops now, but we
can't go in because we don't
have a law enforcement
authority. The other two, the,
the FBI has just, uh, the FBI
and state police, they shut them
down. Obviously there's more to
it than just.
Cannabis with the FBI being
involved in it, you know,
they're not gonna come just do
cannabis, so, uh, I, I can get
you a better answer on that
because I don't know why it
dropped so much, uh.
I mean, typically a fine can be
18,000, but there can be a fine
that's only 2000 too.
Yeah. Thank you, chair. Uh, and
thank you, Superintendent. I
appreciate that explanation. I
would also like for it to, um,
The lower so that it tells us,
oh, we're having, we have more
of a control over it. Um, going
down on that same performance
measures. Um, the last three
outputs, number of days to
process a manufacturer license,
a producer license, or a
retailer license, um, the FY 24
actuals are 3 days and then it
goes up to between 60 and 15
depending on the year. You also
explain that length of time.
Difference. Thank you, Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I'm gonna let
Our CCD director answered that
one because I won't.
Um, Madam Chair,
representatives, just to be
clear on your communicate or the
question is uh the question why
the target is going down.
Uh, the question is why it's
going up.
better bet of our license, um,
we're doing a more in-depth
investigation by having those
upfront.
OK, so it's on purpose that
we're going from 3 days.
To um process a license.
From a completed application to
uh request of between 15 and 30
days.
Madam Chair, committee members,
this gives us a better
opportunity to vet those, look
at those, and investigate those
applications to make sure our,
our good faith licensees are
those good faith licensees.
I think that's an excellent
idea. OK, thank you. Thank you,
chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Silva. Next we
have Representative Duncan and
then Rep represent Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
Superintendent, just one quick
question for you. Um, when San
Juan County had two big, uh,
operations go down in the last
year and a half, 2 years. Um,
do, are you able to use the
sheriff's departments in in that
as well or is it just strictly
state police.
Mr. Chair and uh Representative.
The locals sheriff's department
can and it San Juan it initially
started out with them going.
Help us somewhere along the line
with the attorneys and things
getting involved and I think
maybe manpower, they stepped
back and the state police
stepped in.
So a lot of times, and I don't
know what San Juan County has
but a blue commissioner in
Torrance County told me they had
12, right? I don't know how many
they really have. They don't
have the manpower, the resources
to do it and still make their
other calls and things. So San
Juan County has been very
supportive of us, but they,
they're not able or equipped, I
don't believe to try to tackle
on something that this size.
OK. Thank you. I, I, I know our
sheriff is uh um he's really
good about those things if he
had the people he'd he'd sure do
it, uh, you know, as much as I
dislike this industry, I'd
almost go to work for you for
free.
Mr. Chair Representative, I need
help.
Be careful with that offer
representative,
uh, OK, we're gonna go next to
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
Uh
Uh, super, uh, Superintendent
Bailey.
Um
Again, I, I, I appreciate
though.
The man hour or the the hours
that you're your officer or
your, your, your, your personnel
uh responded to the community's,
uh, uh, urgency of, of, of, of
the matter in San Juan County.
Um
Mr. Chapman, my, my question is,
On, um,
The, uh
The type of uh
Um, those that are, are, are
doing the right thing, Mr.
Chairman, uh, uh, uh, Super Tim
Bailey.
Oh, how, uh.
What's the mechanism for for
Um, whether
Uh, and, and it was, I, I
apologize, I'm not familiar with
the terminology. I it's growers
or manufacturers, um, and, and,
uh, in the city of Farmington,
we're just seeing an increase of
dispensaries.
Um
Majority of them are actually
maybe the the bigger.
Bigger in industrial ones, was
chairman rather than the smaller
mama, I don't know the the the
the the the the the smaller mom
and pop type type ones, um, and,
and I, I did talk to one that
opened up next door to my
office. Um, Mr. Chairman, and,
and one of the uh concerns that
they raised was having to
travel.
For every, I don't, um, 30
pounds.
To to get it tested.
Into Albuquerque, um, and, and
Mr. Chairman, this is a commute
that has to be taken from
Farmington to Albuquerque,
either every 2 weeks or every
week, um.
What is your office doing to
ensure that, um, you're coming
out into the rural communities
to, ah, to do the to do that
testing services in rural
communities.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
thank you for the question. Uh,
it's a challenge for the rural
communities. Uh, the test and we
don't do. It's a produce there's
a licensing for people that
test. Obviously, most of them
are in the Albuquerque area,
there's some down south, but in
order to, to be in business and
it's a retailer and it's
probably a micro you're talking
about, but they have to have it
tested for various reasons,
right? Pesticides, mold, bugs,
and I don't know the rest of
them and we not, uh, like
cannabis director can tell you
as bad luck would have it, I
don't believe we have.
Avenue on that site. Uh, it's
people that want to come in just
like a retailer wants to have a
license uh uh test lab has to
they have to want it and think
they have the business to do it,
so I hate the fact they do have
to travel. But uh that separated
from what you're talking about
how we come out, you know, we
come out and do inspections, but
we don't do, we deal with the
lab, they have to take a
percentage of it of whatever
they're selling, you know, to
get a a test on that product.
Did that answer you. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman and Super Champ
Bailey.
Again, uh, the, the, uh, this is
regular, uh, people who are
trying to mis chair who was
trying to enter in this
industry, and, and it's the
obstacles of having to commute,
uh, down to, to Albuquerque to
to get the services done and uh
um.
Mr. Chairman, Superintendent
Bailey, the, the, the taxations
on the retail side of of this,
is this something that your
office also regulates.
Mr. Chair and Representative, no
we don't do the decision on the
tax and we don't even collect
the tax.
But Mr. Chairman and
Superintendent Bailey, um,
The, the, the, the other, uh,
uh, look looking through through
your handout, does your office
regulate tobacco?
Mr. Chair and Representative,
yes, we do.
It's under the alcohol division.
Mr. Chairman, Superintendent
Bailey, um, I, I, I feel your
frustration on trying to, you
know, uh,
Identify the, the, uh, the, the
misuse and also the, the, uh,
you know, the unregulated side
of cannabis, Mr. Chairman,
Superintendent Bailey, uh, is
your office aware that there's
production and sale of synthetic
tobacco at our retail stores in
Northwest Mexico. Mr. Chairman
Representative, we are aware of
it, but it's a hemp deprived
derived product that they've
altered, and that doesn't fall
under us. We have no.
authority to even deal with it.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Super Bailey
with legislation be required for
this. The the there's a real
challenge with a Mr. Chairman,
I'm sorry, and Representative,
there's a real challenge with
that because as soon as you make
legis legislation for
Uh, 8, then they change it to 13
and then they, you know, it's
just a constant battle, it's a
chase once you alter it and you
do it from several ways and the
the uh to the cannabis director
could talk with you offline and
explain it to you because he got
me so confused the other day, I
didn't know which end was up,
but it's not a THC it's not a
cannabis delta 9 product and if
it's not delta 9 our our act is
specific to Delta 9.
So I understand your concerns
and they sell it to uh underage
kids and sell it in a
convenience store, they can sell
that about anywhere, so um I
hope that answered your
question. uh, Superintendent, it
was referencing synthetic
tobacco, uh, and, and it's just
the concerns that I have with
the group, uh, the, the, uh, uh,
convenience stores that are
selling it.
OK. Yeah, Mr. Chair and
Representative, we'll have to
get with my alcohol director and
tobacco, uh, Philip Sanchez, and
if you want to talk offline,
we'll gather him up for you. I
think he made it in, he was over
testifying a minute ago.
Executive chairman that
concludes my question. Thank
you. Uh, next we go to
Representative down please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Superintendent. I, I wanna, I
don't know what happened, but,
um, the last time that I did a
remodel of a building was in 19,
and I can say that it has been
such
It's been so much better this
time around, uh.
As far as getting folks out in a
timely way, and then being
willing to like wait a minute,
you know, if one thing's wrong
and one thing with the current
facility, and it's just, it's
much improved, so kudos to all
the folks that are out there
working on that.
Well, Mr. Chair and
Representative, thank you for
that. Uh, I was privileged to
get BCID director for 3 years. I
understand customer service. We
don't always make everybody
happy, but one thing we can do
is try to hustle and and take
care of y'all like our
customers, and that's what we've
worked at. Now, there again,
we're gonna upset some folks
sometimes, but we are diligently
working at it and I can tell you
one thing, I want to talk about
this a little bit and tell you
one thing how I can judge is by
the number of complaints I get
now and CID used to this was a
CID hearing, you know, you came
up superintendent CID director,
and that's all it was about.
Now it's cannabis, so I'm glad
the target is off CID somewhat,
so, but thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, and, and thank you,
Superintendent. Where are my
questions? Oh, I slipped my
paper over. Um,
are you guys responsible for
this new process with the
background checks that started a
few years ago.
Is that you?
Mr. Chairman Representative, the
centralization of the background
checks.
So, so something, it must not be
or you would know. So 2 years
ago you got your background
check done with fingerprints
that were sent by the bure
whatever background bureau
you're dealing with, and you
went to the local police
department, got your background
checks and send in a check. And
now it's like centralized and
sort of what Representative
Hernandez was saying, people
have to travel regionally. It's
not you, you would know what I'm
talking about, Mr. Chairman and
uh Representative, no, we're not
in charge of that. Obviously,
we're trying to get background
checks for cannabis so we can
look at who were given license
to and we do that with PI but
we.
have to get the FBI to give us
authority to do it. It still
goes through DPS. We still send
it if we get the authority for
it. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And then,
um, could you just, I, I, I
think this doesn't sound like
such a gravy train for the state
as what was proposed. What is
the total revenue and what do
you need to adequately enforce
and regulate. Um.
Mr. Chair and Representative on
which division or cannabis or
cannabis
I thought we was gonna go to CID
and give more. No, no, no. OK.
You can tell I came from CID.
Uh, so we're asking for, uh, Mr.
Chairman and Representative,
we're asking for 8 million,
200,000.
That's what we're asking for,
but that includes if we get the
money, I believe.
Yeah, if we get the money for
the law enforcement and the
extra officers. OK, and the
revenue, Mr. Chair,
Superintendent of Mr. Chairman
and Representative, I, what I've
got down is we generated for the
general fund, not taxes. I, I'm
separate from that was 2.8
million.
Billion
2.8 million.
Yes.
What are the taxes? They, what,
what, what part can be taxed?
Well, there's, Mr. Chairman and
um Representative, there's sales
tax kind of like the alcohol, I
don't know how they worded it,
but I believe the tax is coming
in from the cannabis to the
taxes like 35 million one year,
36 less last year, but that's
through Secretary Chaon Clark.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
So it's, it's paying for itself.
Mr. Chair and Representative, I
believe so, yes, I mean, that's
what we get in Texas. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I think I heard a
figure of like 7000 people at
the emergency room over
incidents related to
Um, recreational marijuana, I
don't know how many of those
were on Medicaid, Medicare, you
know, or or what, what, what
that we had to pay for, but I, I
think there's a greater cost
than it's not that simple, but
this is what's in, this is what
it costs the division directly.
Would you agree? Well, Mr. Chair
and Representative, I'm learning
the regulations is not simple no
matter what you do. You know,
it's, it's a challenge, so I, I,
we're growing this industry, the
industry is changing, Department
of Health might have the figures
of what you're talking. I, I
don't know what the figures are
emergency rooms and what's been
overdosed or any of that type of
stuff. OK. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much
Representative down. Uh, next
we're gonna go to Vice Chair
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Superintendent. Um, I
actually just have a fairly
basic question, which is, could
you, um?
Could you remind me what the
security uh division.
Uh, where did those fees come
from? The 22 million that's
generated, is that right? Mr.
Chair and Vice Chair, if you
don't mind, I'm gonna let my
securities director.
Mr. Chair and Vice Chair
Securities and financial are
both a challenge for me.
Mr. Chair, Representative Dixon,
uh, the fees come from a variety
of sources. They come from
securities registrations, uh,
when I say securities, I'm
talking about investment
instruments.
And I can go on another half
hour about what, you know, what
those could be. Typically, those
are registered at the federal
level.
And, you know, if somebody's
gonna sell, say, a mutual fund.
And they register at a higher
level than what the state of New
Mexico. They may just check
boxes as to all the states they
want to offer the mutual fund,
and that's when I say they, the
offerer or the seller of the
security and the state of New
Mexico will uh
Get their cut, as it were, uh,
for the benefit of uh offering
or offering to sell the security
in the state of New Mexico. And
it's similar with most states in
the in the United States. And
like I said, various securities,
you know, especially uh offers
where there's a lot being sold
to potential uh cust a lot of
different potential customers,
and those are gonna
The federal level rarely do they
register directly with us, but
there typically is a fee
associated with uh selling uh uh
a security or an investment
instrument in the state of New
Mexico. That's where the vast
majority of our fees come from.
We do get some penalties
and
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
And that is perfect, um, and
provides enough of an answer for
me. Um, Superintendent, um,
Mr. Chair, uh, could you talk a
little bit about the audit
findings.
Um,
From this past year. Just
wondering if um if things are,
you know, um,
Getting uh fixed.
Yeah.
Mr. Chair and vice chair. I, I
believe we said in the audit
this year, a lot of the things
weren't critical, I mean,
they're all important, but they
weren't as critical. Is there
with the audit people their
self, we're getting it fixed,
we're getting better. I think
we're gaining in every aspect
over there, to be honest with
you. I mean Representative Dall
was talking about CID, I think
all in all we're getting things
in line. But the audit findings
this year there I believe there
were 5 of them, and uh there was
only one that was, I think,
wasn't critical but was
About knowing exactly where a
piece of paper was of what
equipment was there, like
servers and that type of stuff,
so yes, I do believe we are.
Get where it needs to be a truly
believe that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Superintendent. Um, having not
had to do audits, I can
appreciate.
Well, actually, I have no idea
what goes into it, but it seems
very complicated. So I
appreciate that um you're
feeling good and uh moving
forward. Thank you.
Uh, thank you very much, Madam
Vice Chair. Thank you, Mr.
Bailey. I think that we see the
hustle that you and your team
are putting in and deeply
appreciate and and yeah, I think
there's a lot of progress as the
committee has noted. Uh, I'd
actually like to ask Mr.
Montano, that we, with the LFC
recommendation, and it was a
great question from
Representative Silva, sort of
the, the source of the funding,
perhaps less important, the
focus just on getting some very
much.
needed enforcement along with
some other policy changes that
vest you with the ability to.
To have that enforcement. Mr.
Montagno, can you outline
briefly sort of the LFC approach
at this point.
Thank you Chair and members of
the committee. Uh, the LFC
approach for the cannabis
control division is two separate
grow appropriations.
The first one for 4.2 million,
2.4 million would be for the
first year to cover recurring uh
salaries, uh, for the compliance
officers. And also to fund the
vehicles and equipment they need
necessary.
And for the next 2 years, it
will be $1 million to pay for
the salaries of the compliance
officers.
For the uh law enforcement if
House Bill 10 gets passed, it is
3.9 million total uh to fund 6
special investigators and 1
special agent, the first year
will be at 1.6 million to cover
the non-recurring vehicles and
equipment needed for them to
carry out their acts, and the
following two years will be 1.1
million to fund the recurring
the recurring salaries.
Got it. Thank you very much for
that, Mr. Montano. Uh, Mr. Bay,
I think as we go forward, we
want to make sure that um
there's a lot of conversation
between us to sort of match
those because they grow, which
is a great tool, 3 years, be
able to test things out. We want
to match that in order to be
able to sort of uh support you
in the division, um, in work
obviously with the folks who are
on the policy, uh, and I guess
it sounds like that's a good,
well, let me ask you this. Is it
fair to say that that's
a good start, but that there may
that may be a little low from
your perspective, or is that
sort of right in the where you
think that, that you need to be,
uh, Mr. Chair, obviously
depending on how much we go and
how far it goes, it may
increase, right? Where the,
where the challenge is going to
be.
Not just with the personnel is,
but how do we get rid of the
product, right? We're going to
have to work with
Uh, Department of
Transportation, right? That may
be my first goal and, hey, Ricky
loan me some vehicles so I can
move this stuff for a loader or
things. There's gonna be things
as we move forward. This is new
for the whole state, Colorado, I
mean, they got a whole unit and
a whole airbase they use, we
don't need that. I don't
believe, I think we can handle
it without it, but it's gonna be
a learning and a grow as we move
forward with this and a curve
that goes with it. Could it
increase it could, but we need
more inspectors? I don't, I
don't know. I don't, I know this
is a stab at trying to get
it right without going too much
and asking for too much. Does
that answer your question, uh,
it does. I appreciate it very
much. I think hearing from the
committee and I certainly share
the sentiment that this is much
needed enforcement broadly. I
know the speaker has made this a
very big priority as well, and
so I think I wanted to ask
specifically so that, you know,
we don't want to oversize, but
we do want a right size, and I
think that um the knee, be
really careful and if it means a
little
bit more, it seems like that's
gonna be very warranted,
particularly given some of the
uncertainties that are out
there.
Mr. Chair, I appreciate that.
It's just like the elevator,
right? I could have went out and
hired 7 people sitting around
right now, but I didn't want
them yet. I'd rather put the
money back, come back, and
hopefully you trust me enough
that, so, OK, he's gonna have it
ready next time. So one thing I
do try to do with all of you and
I hope y'all know this and
understand it, I will tell the
truth regardless of how much
damage it's gonna do to me or if
it doesn't, you know, so.
Uh, it's a great example, and I,
I very much appreciate it. I
think it's broadly appreciated.
So we'll continue to look very
closely at the grow and, and I
think there, there may be a need
to, again, at the very least,
double check that, and if not
sort of right size potentially
increase. Uh, with that, we'll
ask for the LFC for right now.
Um,
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would
move the uh committee adopt the
LFC recommendation.
Great, it's been most, uh,
seconded by Representative
Rohan. Is there any opposition
to that motion? I don't see any.
We've adopted that.
Uh, great. Thank you very much,
Mr. Bailey. Mr. Chair and
members committee, thank you
very much. Uh, is there anybody
here for public comment?
I don't see anyone, is there
anybody online?
OK you don't see anyone there.
Um,
so we're, uh, we don't have any
working group announcements so
we'll get those early, uh, we
know this is a big week around
that and so we'll have some more
information for folks tomorrow.
With that, we are adjourned for
