Please kick us off.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Amanda
Dick Peddie fiscal analyst with
the legislative finance
committee from the executive we
are joined by Brian Chavez DFA
analyst we will be here analyst
for the entirety of the
afternoon I will be doing some
Judiciary agencies this
afternoon starting with the
Supreme Court
for the Supreme Court the very
small difference in the
recommendations of the LFC
recommendation has about eleven
point six thousand more general
fund revenue then at the
executive and that's primarily
due to a ten percent judge
salary increase included in the
LFC recommendation you'll see
that in the Supreme Court in the
court of appeals in in in all
the district courts when we do
that on Monday.
Analysts reach consensus on all
performance measures and targets
and Brian would you like to add
any comments.
Thank you.
Mr chair of thank you for having
this afternoon and nothing to
at.
Okay great with that I can turn
it over to Chief Justice Michael
E. Vigil to go over his
presentation makes remarks.
Thank you.
We are it's it's an honor to be
here again with you all and I'd
like to thank our analyst is
Dick Peddie and and Mr Chavis
are presenting on behalf of the
supreme court will be our clerk
our chief clerk a Jennifer Scott
and Artie Pepin is also with us
here today in case of any
members of the committee have
questions we cannot answer
you'll have the answer so I'll
turn it over to.
This.
There's a cartoon that thank you
again.
Thank you very much Mr Chief
Justice.
Discuss.
Good afternoon everyone madam
chair members of the committee
the court would just simply like
to think the LFC and DFA for
your recommendations are we are
really grateful for them and
what we respectfully request the
option of the LFC recommendation
and we stand by for any
questions thank you very much.
Thank you very much miss Scott
first we're going to go to we'll
go straight to the committee for
questions and we're gonna start
was Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman Amanda I
just have one really quick
question I know you put there
the two percent raises and here
framework of the judges eligible
for the seven percent increase
because their elected officials
can they still get that.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee Representative Crowder
yes the LFC framework includes a
ten percent increase for judges
in the basin each court in
addition to that seven percent
of their special language in
house bill two that will
increase that so it's a total of
seventeen percent increase for
judges okay and and amended and
you're a.
The associate on the other side
are are they contemplating the
same amount raise or or do we
now.
Good afternoon Mister chair R.
Representative Crowder so on the
executive side we recommended a
four percent increase across the
board which includes judges and
and all employees are all
judicial staff okay so that the
three percent difference then
this is what we're looking at
primarily.
Mr.
Representative Crowder a be a
little more than three percent
because it's about six percent
in the base and then I'm not
sure of the executives
additional planned but the LFC
that I believe seventeen percent
and the executives at four
percent so.
Okay.
I'm assuming of the executives
at four percent then they would
also get the ten percent I mean
this seven percent in the side
B. eleven so I would be at six
percent difference I guess thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Crowder next
we're gonna go to representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr chair that this
question is for this you've just
as well he'd.
We're New Mexico judges right
among other states as far as
food is concerned.
Thank you representative Garcia
Mr Chairman representative
Garcia we were consistently year
after year after year ask for
the act or near the bottom of
the barrel in all respects in
terms of Hey and that includes
this right the media lease
rounded states around New Mexico
and as as many of you know we
have a proposal to trying to fix
that this up session.
Thank you need just is and then
what effect does that have on Mr
chairman and chief justice on on
on recruiting or retaining good
judges for our state.
Mr Chairman representative
Garcia what it what it the
effect has been it over many
years now for several years as
reported by the judicial
compensation commission
the judicial nominating
commissions there's a bacon C.
they receive applications and
for the most part they're
younger attorneys federal
clients that are coming from the
district attorney's offices the
public defender's offices and
very very seldom do we get
applications for judgeships from
It career lawyers that have a
wide variety of experience in
civil matters besides criminal
law.
Mr chairman and you just as with
that has to be quite a big of an
effect if you have a a judge in
apply for a judgeship.
And he has goal while background
just days of.
No right be divorce lawyer and
he has no background on another
criminal cases hello hello that
is a big affected it judge.
Yes thank you for the question
Mr Chairman representative
Garcia we know for a fact that
it has and it first a serious
adverse impact on the business
community and at the economics
of of any county we know that
the business our community looks
to the judicial environment one
in which they are going to be
operating judges handle of St
George's Hanover ninety percent
of all the cases in the United
States that means that they
handle all cases dealing with
the environment with the economy
without workers compensation
with the oil and gas fall with
commercial leases and the full
gamut of civil law it it it has
a very serious adverse effect on
the judiciary and the services
reside in the community what the
judges are work.
Thank you Mr chairman and chief
justice the reason I brought
that up is that I would hate to
have to go in front of a judge
that is a divorce lawyer judge
will use his background is in
divorce courts and now he's
above judges that will have to
pay to have two of.
Be confronted with that
situation thank you she dresses
up thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much
representative Garcia annex we
have Representative Castellano
than Representative Dixon
Representative Castellano please
thank you Mr chairman achieve
just as real good afternoon
afternoon call on June so I
think my parents in the long
lines of our representative
Garcia.
Where you mentioned that you
guys are probably the least paid
judges in the state I guess for
the state would increase help
you bring up the judges building
where you could be at least kind
of somewhat comparable to what
the other just isn't making.
Mr Chairman representative
Castellano what are specific
request the the request made by
the LFC amounts to approximately
three point nine million dollars
our request is for six point
nine million dollars so we're
asking the the legislature this
session to increase the amount
recommended by three million
dollars and that will bring us
we believe into a competitive
pay situation where we're able
to recruit lawyers Center in
their mid careers in the fifties
and and and the mid fifties who
have a wide variety of
experience who can improve the
quality of the judiciary in the
in New Mexico and that that will
also allow us to expand the
services that we provide to our
to the people of the state of
New Mexico.
Okay thank you thank you judge
of justice we Helen Mr Chairman
so I guess it is a concern to me
that and I think as well as
representative Garcia you know
being in a rural community we
it's hard to find anybody want
to take a judgeship if if the
pain is not equal or or
beneficial to our family because
going up and community it's hard
to find attorneys that have the
experience you know I think you
said you get three hundred
attorneys in there to to become
judges and if they don't have
the experience sometimes it the
court cases come out either
wrong or we go to the appeals
court so I think it you know
anything that we can do it I
stand to support the justices
thank you.
A justice we help then sure
chairman.
Thank you very much upset
because that'll next we have
Representative Dixon.
I thank you Mr chair my question
is actually for miss petty and
that is it as we're talking
about the raises in this
category are we just talking
about raises for the Supreme
Court for all judges I am not
entirely sure.
Of course Mr Chairman
representative Dixon so when I
referenced the LFC framework I'm
referencing all courts and
judges are with the exception of
magistrates so what District
Court statewide point of those
would all be eligible for that
the Supreme Court as you all
know overseas the unified budget
so the courts admission is
usually all as one and LFC tries
to recommend in a unified way
with respect to that point
request as well so we'll see all
the District Court on Monday
today the motion will only be on
these courts but the framework
that point.
Thank you Mister chair and
mystic petty that's wonderful I
appreciate that clarification
and my other questions I don't
need to ask because they are in
line with our representatives
Garcia and Castellano so thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Dixon I had to
share the committee thought so I
think we're in a strong place to
go to Representative Sweetser
for our motion.
Should.
Is.
Mr chair
just.
Okay we can hear you now
represents your items.
it could taste urged committee
are mmhm the.
Sen.
Mr Chairman reckons a lot.
Thank you representative Garcia
that was yep.
Representative Sweetser can we
ask you to turn off your video
let's try one more time to see
if you can make the motion.
And that let's try it now so
thank you Mr chair and
thank you Mr state J. S. this I
hope everyone can hear me.
I really appreciated that great
amount of time.
Mr chair which children
understand the most thank you Mr
there is that other is that
better Mr chair it's yeah I the
yes let's try this one more time
it's the it's slightly garbled
please go ahead.
Okay Representative
Representative Sweetser I let's
I I Representative Sweetser is
been very clear let's go to
Representative Garcia for the
motion for the LFC.
Mr chairman I recommend LOC.
Okay I move I representative
Garcia as was.
Is there a second.
Okay it's been second by
Representative Sarinana and I.
As we heard from Representative
Sweetser she was making that
motion for the LFC and also
crediting Mister Chief Justice
for helping inform the the
recommendation so there's a
proper motion a proper second to
adopt the LFC recommendation for
the Supreme Court and is there
any opposition to this motion.
Okay saying no opposition Mister
Chief Justice we've adopted the
LFC recommendation and deeply
appreciate your time your
leadership in the work of the
entire court thank you very much
Mr Chief Justice thank you Mr
chairman and thank you to the
members of the committee
it's been a pleasure to appear
before you today thank you.
Thanks thank you okay the Amanda
if you can now start to stop
please with the court of
appeals.
Different sheets.
Waste Mr chairman members of the
committee the court of appeals
is agency number two fifteen I
did forget to mention at the
start of things for members all
these criminal justice documents
so charts on workload for judges
cases to district attorneys all
those can be found in volume
three pages forty nineteen fifty
six so just a couple mental
information there for the court
of appeals I will go over the
differences again very quickly
and then take it over to we're
gonna peels chief judge of mild.
So
The court of appeals the LFC
recommendation is again it just
a little bit higher about
seventy three point six thousand
general fund revenue higher than
the executive and that's
entirely in the personal
services employee benefits
category again mostly due to
those races the ten percent
raise sort of baked into the LFC
recommendation Ryan did you have
anything to add on to the field.
Mr chair no comment and we can
just kick it over to
Chief judge Miles Hanisee.
Excellent thank you very much
chief judge Hennessey thank you
for joining us here today Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my thanks also to miss
DickPeddie and Mr Chavez I'm
here with mark Reynolds who's
our chief clerk if if if there's
anything he can assist with he's
ready and prepared to do so the
court of appeals respectfully
requests adoption of the LFC
substitute recommendation of a
seven million twenty five
thousand and two hundred dollar
budget this would allow the
court to implement important
salary adjustments and provide
for a modest seventy seven
thousand dollar increase in
operating costs those are
basically to cover two things
and the first is building
building repair issues have
cropped up recently our
buildings now eleven years old
last year twenty four thousand
dollars was budgeted for
building repairs it wound up
costing about seventy thousand
instead.
And our utilities have gone up
about thirty percent in the last
three years so we're requesting
an adjustment to what has been a
static building budget and then
we're of that of that
Increase thirty one thousand
would go to what we anticipate
But we'll wait for that chief
judge yeah I know he was cut off
right there.
Mr chairman the chief judge
can't reconnect I think mark
Reynolds could also commented
the committee need to pick.
Right let's hold tight.
Actually let's that Mr Reynolds
I know when the chief judge
rejoins we can go back to him.
Is there anything that you would
like to add to programs.
While we're waiting.
Mr chair thank you how a check
I'm the chief yes text and see
what the story is but he was
just about ready to tell you
that on that small operational
increased that the LFC
recommendation would allow us to
do thirty one thousand that
estimated to go through to
increased transcriptomic and it
basis or starting a process or
trying to streamline and make it
quicker on one side effect of
that will be that we will have
to pay for more transcripts so
on that very modest operational
increase thirty one thousand
goes towards that that is the
extent of of our requests and
we again I think the the the the
work of the analyst and ask for
the doctors of the LFC
recommendation.
Excellent thank you so much
chief clerk Reynolds.
As we continue we'll see about
that the chief judge rejoining
but first I want to go to
committee questions in is the
well let's go ahead and start
please Representative Crowder
yes.
Thank you Mr chairman Taylor the
Chief Justice mention seven
million and that's a bigger
number that I have on my
spreadsheet the minutes of the
supplemental.
Can mandate explained what that
was about please.
Mr Chairman representative
Crowder I actually don't.
Quite know which figured thank
you judge was referencing my
number for the LFC
recommendations also six million
eight hundred and forty four
thousand five hundred so.
I'm not sure thank you amended
Mr chair amended did you hear
the same number I heard was in a
seven million dollar number I I
did hear the seven million
dollar and supplemental but
that would court of appeals
doesn't have a supplemental
request to my knowledge so I'm
not quite sure but it looks like
maybe already my now.
Mr happens.
Mr chairman of the committee on
Amanda Amanda I thought in our
discussions there was a
Thank what happened in the
publication of volume two not
your actual recommendations
includes the competition with
the mission to so that the
number for the Supreme Court was
sixty eight eighty nine point
six.
The court of appeals was seven
oh two five point two number one
publisher volunteer which of the
ones you're talking about now R.
I have that on my differentiate
as a note I remember the
conversation but maybe
something's changed since then.
Thank you Mr Bevin I I think yes
these are this might be
something that we need to look
into as we go perhaps in the
catch of clean up but the
different states that are
committee has no as
Representative Crowder and and
mystic valley of noted the LFC
recommended budget is six point
eight four four million but we
want to know
There are definitely appreciate
the input and sars noting the
potential difference there.
Thank you Representative Crowder
for for sure noting that
implements back to the states.
Mr chair and committee members
my apologies my internet
completely cut off here and I I
think I think I'm back I hope
you can hear me I apologize for
my sudden departure.
We've got you chief judge thank
you no worries thank you for
rejoining us.
Just as a quick note Mister
Chief Justice a judge the the
numbers we have on our different
states which do show the LFC as
the higher recommendation based
upon the salary increases it's
the six point eight four four.
the million dollar base budget
and so that's what we will be
taking action on either that or
the executive budget
recommendations that the
substitute recommendation okay
didn't and mark understands is
now.
Mr chair just it does not seem
there seems to be some
discrepancy there that this is
not a substitute this is what we
have
so okay yes.
Okay.
Thank you for rejoining us so
let's go back one more time are
there any other committee
questions.
I see representative Garcia
please Sir go ahead.
Mr chairman on the question of
Representative Crowder brought
up on the seven million is that
going to be an issue what he's
asking and what we're going to.
The.
Hold on your side on here
they're going to be a problem
thank you representative Garcia
I don't think that there's a
problem there we do have a
higher recommendation from the
LFC for the compensation.
It should be a note will make
sure that it's enough for madam
chair as well as the rest of the
committee as we move in to catch
a clean up to run this one down
but we are providing a higher
there is an higher LFC
recommendation based on
compensation.
So I think we can thank you for
the question you Mr Chairman for
verifying absolutely thanks for
the question.
Okay
Members I don't see any other
additional questions I'll just
have a quick question for mystic
body before we go back to
to Representative Sweetser for
the motion if we the the LFC
recommendation here miss that is
you've noted the entirety of the
difference is based upon the
slightly higher compensation
package within the LFC
recommendation is that accurate.
Mr chairman members that is
accurate.
Okay thank you DickPeddie and
mystic ready this is although
we're we're taking it up kind of
court by court or level by level
this is a unified judicial
approach that has noted based
and what some of the members of
discussed in terms of
strengthening the criminal
justice system is that accurate.
Mr chairman that is accurate
okay thanks thank you for that
clarification.
And with that go one more time I
don't see any other questions
from the members so I want to go
to Representative Sweetser.
For the motion on the court of
appeals please.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you chief judge Hennessey I
would move the LFC
recommendation.
Okay the motion without the
second amendment your great
proper motion second by proper
second by Representative Garcia
is there any opposition to this
motion.
Okay seeing no opposition.
Mister chief judge we've adopted
the LFC recommendation for the
court of appeals thank you so
much and thank you also to your
chief clerk for being here today
Mr chairman thank you members of
the committee thank you as well
X..
Okay.
So now let's go ahead.
To the administrative office of
the COVID courts this is agency
code to eighteen.
Miss Patty if you can start us
off one more time please.
Mr chairman members of the
committee for the administrative
office of the courts Ryan and
I'll I'll go over an overview
and then Brian and I will
alternate he could write the
code I would like to direct
members you as much as possible
reference your high level it
should be the very first page of
your packet you will compare the
recommendations you notice on
your differentiate but should be
your first page the overview of
the different sheet it looks
very complicated the reason that
there are so many lines in
expenditures is because when we
create house bill two the
legislature appropriate for
special courts services in those
line items so when we get to
that program you'll see it looks
like the executive didn't
recommend anything in those line
items that's not accurate but
the high level data show where
the Executive recommendations
are so good to know as we go
through this.
So.
Overview the LFC recommendation
is about one point four million
dollars general fund revenue
higher than the executive and
about.
Eight hundred and twenty five
thousand dollars last in
budgeted fund balance than the
executive that seems like a
really big gap but most of the
differences in about one please
so the LFC recommendation
includes about one point nine
million dollars in general fund
revenue to replace eighty eight
general fund reduction of made
in FY twenty two during solvency
and again that's the majority of
the difference in the
recommendations.
For performance analyst reached
consensus on all performance
measures and targets
for expansions there are quite a
few expansions that were
requested by the agency the LFC
recommended a total of eight
expansion positions and those
are are primarily for pre trial
services and guardianship
oversight which have been top
legislative priorities.
It does not recommend any
expansions for AOC.
And with that I can let brain
COVID or move on to our first
week of.
Right.
You Mr Travis do you have any
comments before Amanda starts to
stop on the the program codes
yes Mr chair are quick comment
on the expansion on the
executive director of.
recommended suspension however
AOC did have twenty six vacant
positions as of January first
and that's actually pretty
consistent with the last three
months
so the executive you know would
like chaos you utilize the
currents on.
You know I think either of re we
shop of those positions on
that's come from the executive
side.
No that's okay technology thank
you Mr Chavez any other
overall comments will go to
amended to start us off in the
P. code and then we'll
alternate.
Perfect okay stick Peddie.
All right.
Mr chairman members.
Thank you so our first key code
is P. five five nine that's the
administrative support program
the LFC recommendation includes
just over a million dollars more
in general fund revenue than the
executive and this is again
where we see that eight hundred
and twenty five thousand dollars
more in budgeted fund balance
Yes this is again to restore
some cuts that were made last
year for solvency in the base
LFC recommends new HSD lease
costs as a recurring expense the
executive partially funds this I
believe the executive includes
about two hundred thousand
dollars for least cost but then
the executive also recommends a
special appropriation for these
costs.
That's a big part of the
difference in the
recommendations he'll see
recommendation includes about
two hundred and seventeen
thousand dollars in this program
and that would supply AOC
employees with an average of two
percent salary increase so this
is again part of the LFC is.
Judicial salary proposal.
Executive include a four percent
salary increase for judges and
staff but that is a separate
proposal it's not included in
this budget and analysts reach
consensus on all performance
measures and targets.
Brian any comment administrative
support.
Mr chair no comments.
All right I'll move on to a
P. code five six zero.
Executive included two hundred
six thousand dollars more in
general fund revenue then the
LFC recommendation to support a
data sharing platform between
just as partners.
On both recommendations include
funding for the workforce
investment plan that issued the
judiciary's internal
compensation plan.
And both analyst reach a
consensus on all performance
measures.
Sanity Amanda friend COVID.
That program I can go ahead and
move on to the magistrate court
program.
So for key code six.
The LFC recommendation is just a
little bit higher in general
fund revenue than the executive
the LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue to the
program by a total of two
hundred nine thousand or two
percent to the executives one
point two percent.
These are both recommendations
include funding to restore some
general fund reductions made in
FY twenty two.
And that is all I have for
magistrate court right is there
anything I'm.
No comment.
Mr chair members of the
committee we're going to pay a
code six two zero.
the LFC recommendation includes
four hundred twenty four
thousand more in general fund
revenue than the executive for a
seven point eight percent
increase on in the program.
Or the base the executive
recommendation funded base
budget priorities such as
increased funding for the court
appointed special advocate
program and the access to
justice program.
And both analyst reached
consensus and all performance
measures
The Aussie also recommended I
expansions primary for
guardianship reform improved
health services as there were a
top priorities our top
legislative priorities.
Mandy like tending.
Nothing really cat I will just
make a comment and for members
this is where we see that really
funny looking at different sheet
where it looks like the
executive has zero dollars
recommended for things like
court appointed attorneys
children's mediation
The executive recommendation is
just rolled up in those first
three categories so we would be
distributed in the house bill
two it's just not showing the
different state.
yep that that is it as brains
that we reached consensus on all
performance measures and targets
so Mr chair I don't know if you
want to kick it to Mr happen for
more comments or address
committee questions first
I thank you so much.
To both of our analyzed Mr Papp
and let's go to you quickly and
then we do have several members
with questions but let's go to
you first Mr purple thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I would focus on those
are swapped for the general fund
restoration that Amanda referred
to.
It seems like it's not
impossible but a year ago when
we prepared our budget in
September of twenty the state
was facing a billion dollar
shortfall that we're going to
lead to some buyers consequences
for the courts because obviously
but this would have to be
reduced so we budgeted of four
quarters Fund bouncer we had
some funds but we didn't
actually end up coming out of
operating funds in AOC and those
are the fundamentals referring
to that her recommendation LFC
is recognition rather the stores
and that's a significant part of
the difference in this budget we
don't have judges employed by
the AOC so that need additional
compensation is not part of
these budgets but there's
general fund reductions that
occurred with the understanding
we would see you and I hope get
them restored in FY twenty three
budget whether we are really the
reasons for the biggest
difference in that amounts to a
lot in the admin program it's
three hundred seventy five
thousand dollars and jury
witness and five hundred fifty
thousand in the language access
program and I think Amanda
mentioned lose as well are
least.
At our new facility which will
occupy next month was funded
through
funded the attorney general's
office we thought that was a
recurring appropriation it
turned out it was not so we've
lost that money so we have to
replace it in the general fund
and that's been recommended by
LFC certainly admin program
that's really important with
regard to the LFC recommendation
as it comes to you today
and I I emphasize how important
those things are for us to keep
operating there are a very few
items that are not funded in the
administrative programs I would
ask you to consider and those
are mentioned and I Senators
remember all the committee
earlier in the admin programs
three hundred sixty five
thousand dollars for person to
help us
do that reporting center
tracking reporting on that we
get requests from you.
Here are two options and the
legislature and others and are
we have a lot of programs and we
want to build a report that a
few on our operating what we're
doing with the money to get us
so that's not only a change I
would ask the committee to
consider adding three hundred
sixty five thousand those
positions are but certainly the
LFC recommendation are
addresses the needs you have any
and program as opposed to the
executive.
Raphael programs at the same
time Mr chairman now thank you
Mr Papp and I appreciate that
kind of the that the high level
overview let's go directly to
committee questions and then we
can go into there is committee
members have questions on we're
gonna start out with
Representative lane and then go
to Representative Dixon
Representative Gleim.
Thank you Mr chair Mister chair
Mister Pepin
question on page one of our high
level there's a quest that age
is made for Office of family
representation what is office of
family representation.
I don't have your high level but
I know what we this offender
positions all
we are legislation to create
your presentation in office that
handles what does it have to do
with the quality of life for
them New Mexico currently AOC
has about a six million dollar
budget.
For court appointed attorneys
the internet is that we contract
with Representative children and
families in addition what cases
we also get what's called for
the money as a pastor from G. Y.
V. we want all the money and
those operations consolidated in
one place where we this kind of
new Judiciary that picks on
those tasks and others and
we think we have a lot of
momentum behind that we do work
on this for a couple of years we
were to as well up on their it
is a bit of concern to me and
has been for awhile but I paid
attorneys advocated from the
judges that I work with and what
we have a lot of education some
let me travel out of AOC into
the new office of family
representation are we think it
should be outside of the
judiciary in a separate agents.
Thank you Mr chair of the next
question on our our different
sheets I noticed that that you
requested about a hundred and
sixty nine hundred sessions.
But you have about two point
eight million and funded
vacancies.
So I'm just wondering if you can
help me reconcile those two
things are Mr.
Is the first part of your
question noticed I have.
So that you've requested on an
additional hundred sixty nine
new positions to be funded is
that right.
Mr chairman I interject.
I haven't yet that thank you
miss Eddie please go ahead in
answer to Representative lines
question.
Mr Chairman representative lane
I believe what you're looking at
is yes help and
What's going on here is when the
AOC submitted the request
instead of having the courts
request an about thirty three
percent increase for judges
agency requests that funding in
person on behalf of the Courts
so it looks like they're
requesting you know an extra two
million dollars in person
because of the way they
submitted it but really that
should be distributed throughout
the whole point the funded
because the right that does
exist about.
Two point eight million in
funded vacancy that some of that
is because some funds flow
through.
AOC in my district where program
where you see the biggest funded
vacancy those funds flow through
District Court so there's a
little bit of weirdness going on
but they didn't actually request
a hundred and sixty nine
positions there is.
Okay thank you Mr chair that
that that does bring some
clarification here argued was
buy one item I think that
requests are insufficient
divisions hi.
Thank you.
In the Mr chair last question
and just under versions from FY
twenty one there's about a
million dollars and reversions
can help me just understand the
reason for that.
Representative Lente there's a
very good reason why the
reversion is high.
We need to get my mind right now
I know that my chief financial
officer responses that I don't
know if she's allowed to speak
return her on so no the answer
on the spot but should not
answer there's a good reason why
the the versions higher than it
should be I think you were
leases but I I can't quite
remember right now
Representative and.
Thank thank you Mr Papp and
thank you Representative Eli at
this is that the if you have
briefly if you're on and have an
answer to Representative lands
question about reversions please
go ahead.
Yes thank you we did have to re
birds a large amount of
Funding for
eighty are that was ninety eight
thousand and the next big one
was port operations it was
eighty nine thousand because the
items did not provide.
but we have twenty seven funds
and the AOC so those are the
only two large one everything
else is like eight thousand year
five thousand here and it's
because of we always try to
retain a little bit of money in
the fund prior to reversion in
the event that we have and on
out of here invoice that comes
in so for example I don't have
to respond to this and it
employs consent from the
previous year
we needed to have have funds
available at the end of your to
pay that employees.
So we always try to hold a
little bit back because of prior
year invoices that might come in
like not all of the vendors
sentiment by the.
deadline and they're supposed to
be and
that yeah that reversion is
spread over fifteen different
funds okay thank you thank you
Mr chair those are my questions.
Thank you Representative lane
that's going out of
Representative Dixon.
Thanks for chairman.
Sorry I had trouble with my mute
button there
the first question is for miss
petty
could you tell me where the in
terms of the lease money the
special appropriation can you
just direct me to that in our
materials.
Mr Chairman representative Dick
thank I I apologize that was
unclear in the LFC includes the
increase lease costs in the AOC
high level are in HSD recurring
operating budget so if you look
at your high level this first
page item number twelve in
administrative support a read
increase lease costs for new
permanent Santa Fe office I
seven hundred thousand dollars
in the LESC section for
recommendation I was trying to
you know that the executives a
lot smaller because the
executive funds that infection
five.
Does that answer the question.
It it does thank you Mr chair
and mystic petty just to follow
up on the way that the
governor's office funds that are
the executive I apologize with
the executive funds that is that
nonrecurring then.
Mr Chairman yes go ahead.
Mr chair Representative Dixon so
in the executive they requested
two hundred thousand dollars in
their base and then we are we
actually funded on a special.
I don't know the amount off the
top of my head but we have two
hundred thousand in the base and
the special recommended.
Thank you Mr chair Mr Travis I'm
so is the the difference though
that in the special is that
recurring or nonrecurring.
Mr chair Representative Dixon
it's nonrecurring.
Okay thank you Mr chairman Mr
Travis that's what I thought and
so now my question is for Mr
happen which is do you
anticipate your lease costs
changing in the future years I
see I see that this as new
permanent Santa Fe office.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee Representative Dixon
it's a little complicated
question but
No get through this year we are
moving to offices the
administrative offices will be
involved in Santa Fe we're
moving our Albuquerque works
with a large of the art
technology people with offices
in Albuquerque with their
recommendations in our city we
have a recurring funding needed
for the office in Santa Fe we
already have these money in our
budget for the technology office
which will not switch from Santa
Fe to Albuquerque we.
With your request.
Requests for one time money for
office because we weren't sure
how this is going to play out
here in the middle of our the
end of things and that problem
with the initial preparations
for the Santa Fe used from the
attorney general fund so are we
ask for million three hundred
thousand dollars.
Actually all we would need in
one time funding now would be
about a half a million for the
build out in Albuquerque
so that it and that's in the
special the executive actually
recommended the million three.
which is very nice but we
actually don't need all the
money and LESC did not recommend
anything in the special on this
are
we really need to the current
this is appropriation in the
LESC record of seven hundred
thousand dollars if the
committee considered bring five
hundred us servo control one
time for us to get the people
move from Santa Fe to
Albuquerque that would
significantly need other
budgetary concerns but that's so
we'll be fine if the school year
twenty three once you get moved
we have lease money at least if
you adopt the LFC
recommendations in the house of.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
happened that's exactly the
information that I was trying to
earn which is if this is a
recurring expense I appreciate
you know then I feel like it's
proper to plan for it to be
funded in subsequent years as
well thank you Mr chair I have
no more questions.
Thank you very much
Representative Dixon now let's
go to Representative Chatfield
and then representative Garcia
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr.
We my question is for.
Can you tell me inflation we
have a beautiful.
Your house is on the national
historic register.
Built in nineteen in mind.
That makes it a hundred twelve
years old so
we need a little bit of repairs
and the talking with the folks
apparently they.
I have apparently.
Applied to repair crews report
and that is also wise which I
believe is happen there there
funding should be carried in the
in the this budget I don't see
it unfamiliar with the process a
little bit can you help me.
Yes.
Representative chapter the
committee are we are quite
familiar with the situation in
Clayton
we're trying to address it for
awhile it did not make the
capitalist this go around so you
won't see it in the capitol
bill.
We did make a request for
artwork funds which you provided
to the chair of the committee
which includes as a second our
number two highest priority
funding for renovating that
building that I think there
county is contributed to nine
dollars to also renovate that
building were co located
District Court match report in
operating our work we're very
concerned about the facility if
you don't get this program
through the ways I mentioned I'm
guessing it'll be.
Operator the next top priority
our capital funding New Mexico
around
we only have.
Our guys do things that are in
most need that that would
happen.
Mr chair Jerry when we look at.
The.
That thank you very much
Representative Chatfield thank
you Mr Papp and thank you Mr
Representative Chatfield for
highlighting that will certainly
take a note of it as we move
forward.
Thank you Mr absolute.
Okay let's now go to
representative Garcia and then
Representative arms Anderson
excuse me.
Thank you Mr chairman of this
question before Mr Pippen.
And you're all high level paper
we have I see nothing here that
has anything to do with veterans
courts and I think we spoke
earlier in the year and you said
that you have funding and I do
not see any here at and it is
not here I would like to
We we catch up dean of private
included or is that are we there
Mr.
Well
Garcia members the committee we
don't have specific department
in this budget for veterans
point we have ongoing funding
for therapeutic work which is
the umbrella under which
sections point New York worked
and I've been fixed.
I know we talked before about
how we start the sports generate
through
The court works community to get
the support arms got hit
dedication of local resources if
that occurs we can look at
funding we have the state would
indicated generally to the
treatment costs that's usually
the biggest hospital judges
volunteer time as to the the
involved the true cost usually
what we have.
If you have a our community here
at District Court or in the
county of the District Court
which is every County we want to
start a veterans for.
You should I would suggest the
local people to talk with your
support about not doing that but
if you drive by and I I can
protect our robin Runge are
there.
Programs and of but we don't
have a specific request this
budget span funds we spend
active mission about ten million
dollars and thirty eight point
four there is always opportunity
to start work and then she's on
the line and when we get
community participation.
Thank you Mr chairman for bit
been Mr chair what you know we
might want to take a look at
that there I think there's all
four districts I districts that
are interested in starting there
is point and I and I do know the
funding is going to be the
biggest catch to all of us so we
can make note of that thank you
Mr chairman thank you Mr.
Thank you very much
representative Garcia all right
now let's go to Representative
Anderson's.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman I'll be short because
we covered this but I'd still
not sure I understood of
relative to the difference
worksheet my question to the LFC
is short and and to my point
would be in the second in that
middle.
Grouping of where we look at the
other finance uses pre trial
court appointed services
supervised education I look at
that and think all okay so when
the current FY twenty two there
is zero money for all of these
important functions up LFC
remind me again why is it all
zero funding for those and yet
of we is confusing so simple
answer please why is there such
a discrepancy in the funding
numbers.
Mr chair I can answer that very
quickly up Representative
Anderson the quick answer is
that we have a brand new budget
system so what normally happens
is your differentiate has three
top categories where you do see
funding for those person for the
three categories
and then we do it later when we
write house bill two the
legislature breaks up that
appropriation into those line
items the only reason is showing
differences this year is because
we have a brand new budget
system and we didn't have the
information from last year from
the operating budget thank you
for that again LFC of so when I
look at casa at one million
three hundred ninety eight point
six.
I scratch my head and say well
what does that mean the number
is for the current year can you
look at that and tell me where
the number is for the current
year working at Representative
Anderson I happen to have the
bill right in front of me of for
the current year for court
appointed attorneys there's
about six point two million all
general fund and acting House
Bill to.
Thank you I was actually above
that on court appointed special
advocate but of the same thing
applies but six point two
million and how about under what
I'm generically referred to as
costs.
Mr Chairman representative
Anderson so just to clarify for
court appointed special advocate
the current year is one point
three million general fund for
court appointed special
attorneys which you would refer
to a cost that is going to be
that six point two million.
Okay is going to be what was
costs again six point two
million Mr chair representative
Anderson.
Well then my question is this
and I'm gonna get too long an
answer for this afternoon but I
am very discouraged with this
new system because I think it
leaves me very confused about
how much these items are being
funded for in the current fiscal
year how much of an increase if
any there is and so I'm I'm just
registering a very clear
complaint that whatever your
whatever somebody is doing
please don't take this
personally LFC whatever somebody
is doing is not giving me the
information I need to make a
judgment on whether or not I
think court appointed special
advocates for any of these other
important categories are
getting.
Adequate funding the same
funding last funding or more
funding that's my opinion on
this presentation on this of the
difference worksheet if I could
I and and thank you
Representative a quick reminder
Representative Anderson to go
through the chair.
Go ahead.
Thank you Mr chair Mr chair then
one last question is a little
bit the same thing and I don't
want to beat a dead horse but I
see we've got a hundred twenty
six thousand dollars down for
access to to justice and I think
we'll wait that's not much money
Mr Chairman to be spending on
access to justice I'm kind of
big on that why what does that
be.
Question thank you Mr happen and
then they analyst at the it to
help answer Representative
Anderson's question.
The committee and Representative
Anderson
I'd be happy to have somebody
have your go through there's a
multiples Mr chair programs here
what's happening report we're
turning out of the court
appointed special advocates they
are funded in ways that I don't
she but I'm this is not.
What we we're clear on how much
money we get for those programs
you may request for some
increases in those programs some
of which are recommended I think
we'll be making a junior request
a little bit and costs are just
some of the I don't think it's
funded through Project very
small present thousand more
dollars but I do have an answer
somebody come up with you and
talk with you about the funding
levels where they are where
they're going whether there's.
We are pretty well thank you Mr
pavon Mr chairman that concludes
Michael I see Mr Abbey has is
bankrupt that Mr chairman that's
your call not mine I'm done.
Thank you Representative Mr
Abbey David would you like to
add anything yes very quickly.
The way these high levels work
is the rows represent an
increase over the base.
If there's no increase in the
pace with zero that's not shown
and I agree that it's hard to
know what the basis but it it
wouldn't be high level if we
show the base amount would be
five sheets so and I and I agree
that's good information to have
it was just something that staff
will work with members offline
to get that information to the
right research but again we're
trying to do a snapshot of that
change from the base and that's
not intended include hearing
left to do it all for thank you
Mr chairman thank you thank
follow up and thank you very
much for that.
Okay members I don't see any
additional questions.
Do they have just ask briefly.
Your consent at yeah well well
ask everybody to go on mute if.
I don't see any other questions
from members we've noted a lot
of the differences and some of
the different approaches both
around investments in pre trial
services other expansion items
as well as the focus on
recurring costs being part of
the
It's just the recurring budget
versus specials so with that I
want to go down to
Representative Sweetser for our
motion.
Thank you very much Mr chair I
would move the LFC
recommendation.
Okay we have the most.
It's been second by
Representative Anderson.
We'll by Representative Sweetser
is there any opposition to
adoption of the LFC
recommendation for the
administrative office of the
courts.
Okay I don't see any opposition
thank you Mr Papp and for being
here today let's continue on now
to the New Mexico compilation
commission.
Excellent thank you.
Then take petty can you start us
off with the compilation
commission eight.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Amanda
Dick Peddie is still the
compilation commission is agency
code eight two zero eight we are
joined by director Wendy Loomis
using new director the
difference in the
recommendations it is very very
small so the LFC recommendation
includes nine point six thousand
dollars last general fund thank
you executive but that nine
point six thousand dollars is
budgeted in fund balance so
ultimately your recommendations
are the same so you see for your
uses personal services employee
benefits contractual other all
those are exactly the same
there's just a tiny bit less
fund balance tiny bit less
general fund to the LFC
recommendation analysts reached
consensus on all performance
measures and targets and I can
get to Brian for any additional
comments.
Mr Chavis Mr chair no comments
we kick it over to the agency.
I'm sorry.
The committee my name is Loretta
Perella not when you met and
having technical difficulties so
I think when the Albuquerque
Peter I apologize.
Thank you at thank you for
joining us here today we've
noted that and please go ahead
with your presentation.
What is your question what
budget for FY twenty three we
stand for questions.
Okay
thank you very much are there
any questions from members I see
Representative Lane.
Thank you Mr chair just require
just I just want to say how
important of a service that that
this agency offers because they
literally print the laws the
cases agency rules the reforms
and it's all available on their
website for pre for the public
as a lawyer who deals with the
stuff day in day and day out
I've actually gotten to the
point now where I used to use
Westlaw lexis nexis listening
other other services and I just
go straight to the compile ation
Commission website the it's it's
a really great resource and is
encouraged the public to get
management.
Thank you Representative lane
for noting that and for that
price.
Okay and thank you very much
executive director but LA seeing
no other questions let's go to
Representative Sweetser for our
motion.
Thank you Mr chair I would
recommend the LFC
I would move the LFC
recommendation.
Okay spin move for the LFC is
our second.
Thank.
Okay it's been moved and
seconded and second by
Representative understand proper
motion Propst.
Is there any opposition to the
LFC to adopting LC
recommendation.
Okay seeing no opposition we're
gonna adopt the LFC
recommendation thank how much
executive director doctor
allowed really incredibly well
said by Representative laying on
the work to well.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you Wayne.
Okay now let's go forward keep
going.
With the moving now to the
judicial standards commission
this is gonna be agency code to
ten.
And mystic that if you could
take us away.
Mr chairman members again we see
a very small difference in the
recommendations for the judicial
standards commission the LFC
recommendation is about twelve
point two thousand dollars more
general fund revenue than the
executive and the entirety of
that additional revenue is in
the person category and that's
to address some shortfalls the
agency was worried about last
year I will ask if Mr Chavez's
any additional comments and if
not we can kick it to Christy G.
honest Chavez from the
commission.
Mr chair no comment on to get up
to.
This this great thank you Mr
this.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
actually going to introduce our
new executive director who is on
thanking her name is Phyllis
Dominguez and she's gonna just
briefly tell you a little bit
about judicial standards
commission and then I will come
back with the budget requests
that is okay Mister chair.
That's great go ahead executive
director doing this.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee with me also today
our our chair of the commission
to assist those in the vice
chair Dr William foot and if I
may I just like to give a very
brief explanation about the
background of the commission no
we are the only judicial ethics
agency created by the
constitution a constitutional
amendment in nineteen sixty
seven we oversee and investigate
the performance conduct fitness
to serve on New Mexico sitting
justices and judges that would
include the supreme courts the
court of appeals District Court
mentor court judges the
magistrate community in this
civil and probate court judges
we ensure that the public has a
reliable trustworthy Judiciary
the judiciary who upholds the
integrity independence and
impartiality of the judiciary
and they do this by following
the code of judicial conduct we
authorized by the constitution
and statutes to investigate
complaints involving the judges
wilful misconduct in office
persistent failure or inability
to perform their judicial duties
habitual and temperaments or a
disability seriously interfering
with the performance of their
judicial duties which is
which is are likely to become of
a permanent nature now anyone
can for we can file a complaint
with the judicial standards
commission and all matters filed
with the commissioner
confidential and in FY twenty
two today we received a hundred
I verified complaints and those
are written statements that are
substantiated by an oath and
notarized and we received
nineteen verified unverified
complaints those are not
notarized and in FY twenty one
we have received we received a
hundred fifty complaints a
hundred twenty verified and
thirty unverified and every
complaint filed with the
commission receives a thorough
investigation and this first
starts with the executive
director who reviews every
complaint and then we'll refer
it to or send it to a staff
attorney or member.
the staff for first of all to
establish we have jurisdiction
over the the allegations
Staff investigates researches
the allegations in the permits
been
Reporter is with the commission
to determine an appropriate
sanction
If the judges if an allegation
against a judge and involves a
judge's disability or fitness to
serve the commission may have to
house ask for additional
investigation which may include
an independent medical
evaluation and to appoint a
guardian a guardian Adlai item
for the judge which is of course
all funded by the commission our
investigations do take a lot of
time the research statutes case
law rules ordinances we gather
evidence which the police
reports we obtain case files
court documents we listened
hearings we interview
complainants witnesses judges
court staff law enforcement from
all over the state and the we
used to be able to travel all
over the state to do those
investigations but they're not
being done by and hopefully
we'll be able to travel in the
near future yes
And we also conduct depositions
the dismissal of those
complaints only occurs in the
course of the commission after
we have presented you know I
report to the commission
commission determines that I
think should be dismissed if
complaints are not dismissed the
commission may recommend an
informal sanctioned or
disposition through an informal
conference with the judge or we
proceed to formal trials or
hearing on the merits which is
performed with the
at the commission offices and of
course is always confidential so
thank you appreciate your time
and I'll turn it over to misty
on the status to discuss the
budget thank you Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you secretary director briefly
on the that's been out of the
budget I thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee on
judicial standards commission is
requesting the LFC budget
recommendation on this will
restore the four percent
solvency cuts that the agency
did sustain and this is also
going to help the agency with
our two percent salary increases
and I just want to explain that
just a little bit Mr chair
members of the committee so
judicial standards commission is
an independent agency at the
judicial branch so we're not
part of the unified budget so
the two percent salary increases
that are recommended for AOC in
the court would also have to be
funded separately in judicial
standards commission budget we
do rely on and AOC and their H.
R. expertise department as well
agencies so all of our he bans
and complications all of our
employees staff ranges are the
same as a is the in the courts
so in your and salary increases
that are recommended for them
have to be and separately funded
with judicial standards
commission and with that Mr
chair members of the committees
will stand for questions.
Thank you very much Mr this for
that and and and definitely
thank you for for making that
careful distinction okay let's
go to members for any questions.
Okay I I don't see any questions
from members would just I guess
I'd briefly note that the work
that you all do as as the
executive director walked us
through is incredibly important
as we work to uphold the public
trust in our judiciary in in our
system of government so thank
you very much for the work that
you all do it is extremely
important saying no other
questions let's go to
Representative Sweetser for our
motion.
Thank you Mr chair and and I
would echo that Director
Dominguez that was very helpful
and and and it is very important
and with that I would make the
LFC recommendation.
Second.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative Sweetser saying
by Representative Anderson for
ocean proper second is there any
opposition to adopting the LFC
the recommendation for the
judicial standards commission.
Okay I don't see any opposition.
We've adopted the LFC
recommendation thank you to.
You both for being here today
let's continue on we've actually
kind of picking up steam so we
do have our final agency today
so the HSD CO two eighty the
public defender department and
mystic petty please start us
off.
Of course Mr chairman members of
the committee for the law
offices of the public defender
this is again a slightly bigger
agency so you have a high level
it's a pretty good reference for
the differences between the
recommendations.
So for it be of public defender
department or law offices of the
public defender the LFC
recommendation includes about
seven hundred and ninety nine
thousand dollars general fund
revenue more than the executive.
In the base the LFC
recommendation increases the
personal services employee
benefits category over the
executive recommendation to
support twelve new in house
positions.
Both recommendation
significantly increase the
contractual services category to
provide additional contract
contract attorneys in rural New
Mexico and increased
compensation for this contract
attorneys the executive includes
about one million more in the
contractual category then the
LFC recommendation.
Both recommendations support the
agency requests to reduce the
other cost category to
prioritize direct services and
better align the budget.
analysts reach consensus on all
performance measures and
targets.
I am is there anything you'd
like to add for public
defenders.
nothing to add.
Thank this
let's go at who is here from the
law offices of the public
defender yes there are Mr
chairman members of the
commission my name is Tom
Strickler the third I am sorry
my fifth term as the chairman of
the New Mexico public defender
commission and her commission
started approximately ten years
ago are we've been working hard
over this past nearly a ten year
period of time and we bad
incredible progress but we have
so far to go at this time on the
commission in a the census if
you could put that slide up the
commission has a fairly good
statewide representation both
Republicans Democrats
conservatives liberals
progressives it's a good mix of
a of attorneys who have been
involved in the criminal justice
system and who I have a concept
of of what's going on what's
needed you'll see in particular
my vice chairman Ramon Sanchez
who told me to tell everybody
hello as he was speaker of this
house of representatives for for
many many years
and our commission is remained
pretty stable we're starting to
see some turnovers as terms are
expiring we have a very capable
executive committee which also
includes stand banks are
secretary from Artesia
I have had the good fortune to
present to you during the past
five years and to the other
legislative finance.
I committees and
I I often liken myself to a
voice in the wilderness are
crying out on behalf of indigent
defense and our public defender
attorneys and contractors around
the state and I cited examples
that are been from my own
experience what I've seen what
has happened to me as a criminal
defense attorney with now forty
years of experience in the state
and I will tell you that a week
ago we finally received our
works our workload study called
the New Mexico project and we
think the the legislative
finance committee on that.
This work began are signing up
at and we worked with the
American Bar Association a
project of the standing
committee on legal aid and
indigent defense
and this New Mexico project
involves years of hard work
compilation involvement of the
Delphi standard and we have
actually received some
horrifying results from all of
this work study report which all
of you will be provided a copy
of I believe that your staffs
all have them at this point but
it's frightening I again I have
that they've been speaking out
for the past five years saying
that the public defender's
office in indigent defense in
the state is grossly under
funded and I have have warned
that it is a problem that is
going to ultimately costs the
state or town of money and this
report verifies
the city if you can put up on
the screen the the results of
the report.
and and and this this shows you
the cover sheet of the New
Mexico project analysis the New
Mexico public defender system
and workload study.
but the result is that we are
understaffed right now by six
hundred and two attorneys and
indigent defense representation
in the state.
And it makes me incredibly proud
to be the chairman of the New
Mexico public defender
commission that oversees the
public defender's office to
represent the attorneys in the
contractors who were
representing our indigent
defendants statewide.
Because they do so much.
But there's not enough of and
the workload is ridiculous and
it is frightening
it worries may I I I have woken
up in the moment since I saw
this report last week trying to
figure out how do we address
that quite frankly I don't think
they're six hundred and two
additional attorneys we got
higher right now supply again
but that's what or indigent
clients we need to be
constitutionally represented in
the criminal cases against that
back in two thousand fourteen
right after I was appointed to
the commission we submitted a
budget request that increased
our budget from forty two
million dollars to ninety four
million dollars and some people
laughed and scoffed and said
that's ridiculous well I'm
telling you it really wasn't
enough based upon what the
studies now show the amount of
time that should be put into
these cases and that time simply
cannot be put into these cases
the state is going to be in
trouble
because we're not funding
indigent the defense the way
that we should be funding I see
examples of it every day at the
summer more dramatic some parts
of the state or more
dramatically under represented
in other parts of the state and
I have said for five years one
of the beauties of the indigent
defense system is that we can be
part of the solution our
attorneys are case workers are
social workers are staff because
we can gain number one the trust
of our clients and number two
were in a better position to
assess what they may need to
keep them out of the criminal
justice system but we're grossly
under funded we are grossly
underfunded right now our
contractors and
the Sanchez of you to put up the
current contract rates
the rates have gone up a little
bit but quite frankly that's
what we're paying for K. so.
Look at a first degree murder
the attorneys making fifty four
hundred dollars that's the base
rate.
First degree felony life
imprisonment fifty four hundred
dollars how would you like to be
the defendant in jail facing the
rest of their life in prison and
your attorney is going to be
paid fifty four hundred dollars
for all the work he has to do to
defend you to go to trial to
work out a deal to do discovery
to do investigation to do
interviews to go to court to
file motions fifty four hundred
dollars go down the list imagine
if you're charged with a first
degree felony and you're facing
eighteen years The New Mexico
penitentiary in your attorney is
going to be paid seven hundred
and fifty dollars I'm in private
practice I charge seven hundred
fifty dollars dollars to go to
metro court on traffic ticket
violations and somebody facing
eighteen years in prison that's
what their attorneys are
receiving.
We're finding that we're getting
fewer and fewer people wanting
to be contracted tourney's
because it doesn't the the pay
doesn't work it's a volume
practice but it's not fair to
our clients continue to go down
the list second degree felony
nine years in prison seven
hundred dollars third degree
felony three years in prison six
hundred and forty five dollars
four degree felony five hundred
forty dollars for eighteen
months in prison juvenile
offense G. that's kind of
important areas that we can get
them straightened out three
hundred dollars do you have you
are domestic violence three
hundred dollars a hundred eighty
dollars for Mr me.
It's ridiculous I I applaud our
attorneys who take these rates
and and handle these cases but
quite frankly the the defendants
are not receiving any kind of
quality constitutional
representation systemically.
Society is only as good as it
treats the least of its citizens
and this is I will be judged on
how it treats the least of its
citizens that and and and and is
incredibly problematic with that
I thank you for listening to me
I'm going to turn it over to the
chief public defender I'm
actually been about our tool
introduces jaman and also make a
presentation thank you.
Thank you Mr clear at.
We've we've taken a significant
amount of time and so I know we
do have committee questions.
If there's a brief presentation
on the budget please go ahead
with that but I
let's be quite quick about that
so we can dive in the committee
questions I understand Mr chair
with us here our deputies
Senator Sanchez and Randy Chavez
and our CFO Christine keys
I will only add Mr chair and
members of the committee that I
think the work will study is an
important document that was
produced with the again seat
money from from this committee a
request in a letter back in
October two thousand seventeen
and we have been on a long road
was public defender's office
from K. refusal in Lee County in
two thousand sixteen two
thousand seventeen to to where
we are right now with some good
increases and generous increases
from the legislature but it what
the work load study shows is
that what is normal and what we
are used to and where we have to
be is a long way so I ask you to
consider the LFC recommendation
of there are some special
supplementals that the DFA
recommended the that the LFC did
not did not I know that we would
love to get some of those and I
think they're important and we
can use them effectively and
efficiently are so with that Mr
chair will stand for questions.
Thank you so much Mr Bauer let's
go to questions we're gonna
start with Representative
Anderson and then go to
Representative Dixon
Representative Anderson thank
you Mr chairman of the I believe
short of this afternoon
First the.
Mr Clark please give us speaker
Sanchez.
My best and
with that I will go and say I
wish a.
I'm most interested in your
comments about the New Mexico
project work study
I think that it certainly merits
further consideration however as
you know we are in the midst of
of preparing a budget for next
year and it sounds like
improvement is not going to be a
one year fixed.
Serve you
do you believe that the LFC
recommendation.
Mr clear is a.
Good first step going into the
next fiscal year question.
the simple answer is we're under
to Mr clear to go through the
chair thank you Mr chairman I
apologize.
And the sorry Mr Mr chairman
Representative Anderson thank
you for the question I'm I'm
gonna referred over to chief
Baur I I think we have a long
way to go on as cheap hours
indicated every step helps us
achieve would you like to
respond to that question through
the chair with the permission of
the chair if I want.
Shorten Moines please yes
Well obviously it's a start we
appreciate we we believe we
should use every bit of the ten
point seven percent we requested
but we will also use the amount
recommended by LFC and whatever
you end up giving us to make the
start on the jury thank you
thank you very much for that I
certainly recognize the
important work that's done in
your office and the difficulty
of you face in the foundation to
under fund and I am pleased to
hear that do you think this LFC
proposal or recommendation will
be a good first step secondly
and last Mr chairman I simply
wanted to ask when we look at
six hundred and two attorney
short I think to myself well I
could have a lot of jokes about
that but rather than be humorous
I simply wanted to ask you Sir
in the New Mexico house of
representatives chairs at house
bill fifty in in house bill
fifty up pera retirees are
offered the chance to return to
work without taking a penalty on
their earned pension benefits.
If that bill were to become law
do you believe former heroin
employees now retirees who are
willing and able to return to
work what might help you secure
an additional
workforce for the challenger
here in your department
question.
Mr Chairman response thank you
secretary Barry of course thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee it it's an interesting
proposal we haven't looked at it
some of our retirees come back
as contractors actually what
which helped us in in some
really substantial weight so
that might be another way and
we'd be happy to talk to you
about it representative of
whether that's another idea for
us to pursue.
Thank you very much for that
answer and I wish you the best
in the up hill road ahead thank
you Mr chairman thank
Representative Anderson next
Representative Dixon and
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
to Mr clear and Mr Bauer I want
to just take a moment to
recognize the work that you and
the agency does and it's
important contribution
especially as we're talking
about criminal justice reform
and public safety and needing to
ensure that you have adequate
staff and funds
one of the questions that I had
is along the same lines of
Representative Anderson up but
is there a sufficient workforce
coming up
to help with this you know huge
gap in attorneys that are
available.
Thank you.
Well the Miss Mister chairman if
I could have that question
directed to chief our thank you.
Yes please.
Thank you Mr chair
representative from committee
In some ways there is not
Representative and so many of
the lawyers we talk about
lawyers and staff because with
that in the course of course you
have that support staff the work
will study doesn't even envision
doesn't even take into account
the sports up although it
mentions that there needed we
are we would love to generate
homegrown lawyers lawyers from
New Mexico to serve New Mexico
and we're working with the
unanimous cool to do that we are
also actively recruiting from
other states in fact many of our
attorneys to go to rural areas
now are coming from other states
so there are number of job fairs
and and directs recruiting from
other law schools that we do
Also of course the problem is
contract attorneys is having of
contract terms so we're doing
everything we can to recruit new
lawyers and staff if necessary
most of the staff can come from
New Mexico and that's one of the
strengths of our offices is
hiring people locally in these
offices the other thing that can
help these numbers is to cut
down on the ripple coming into
the criminal system because if
we reduce our caseload it's sort
of supplying demand we can
reduce the number of people need
our services then we can provide
better service with the
resources we have and that's one
reason why we occur on so many
criminal justice issues in the
legislature thank you
Representative Mr.
Thank you Mr Baron thank you Mr
chair I think that's those are
some very good points and I just
want to flag for future
consideration that we continue
discussing how to grow that the
pipeline here in New Mexico
thank you Mr chair I don't have
any other questions thank you
Representative Dixon listening
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and thank you to Mr Bower and
the other present presenters in
this interesting topic Mr chair
I just have one comment on this
as an attorney who has worked
with the law office of the
public defender volunteered for
than that on contracts with them
I am ecstatic to finally see
some real data in the study on
the status of the system because
it is dire it just backs up what
many of us have already known
for several years which is we
are on the brink or if not
passed the right of a
constitutional crisis we do not
have enough attorneys that can
defend the people and the Gen
folks who do not have the you
know money available to hire
themselves attorneys and it is
impacting their constitutional
right to especially in urban
rural areas of the state so Mr
chairman I I'm I'm glad that the
LFC budget is a step in the
right direction however I think
we need to do a deeper dive on
this especially with regards to
recruiting attorneys in rural
areas Mr chairman we talk a lot
about workforce development in
this committee and I think
throwing more money for
positions FTEs isn't is is not
gonna solve the problem related
problems can be solved by
figuring out a mechanism in the
pipeline to develop these
attorneys from the bottom up and
send them to areas New Mexico
worry really need them so I
would actually like to propose
you know looking at the the flat
fee system altogether I think
he's flat fees are are.
Are completely inadequate to
compensate an attorney for the
amount of time that goes into
competently defending someone
who who is standing in front of
the criminal justice system so
Mr chair thank you again to our
presenters I'm glad that we're
having this conversation today
but it is far from over thank
you thank you Representative
Hochman Vigil next
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman it very
quickly I'm looking at the
Differed on the total number of
employees versus the FY twenty
two.
Operating budget looks like.
The LFC recommendation issue
showing that they're increasing
the FTEs by twenty six the
executive is increasing them by
fifteen.
And then our spreadsheet shows
the over under out of eleven on
the difference.
What the narrative says there
are twelve million House
position so I want to make sure
that my two numbers are right
there LFC is increasing it by
twenty six.
Are a.
Exec is increasing it by fifteen
and and I've lost that one
employee where the narrative
says we we are one different but
spreadsheet shows eleven instead
of twelve so if maybe miss Betty
could answer that Mr chairman I
would appreciate it asked that
the.
Mr Chairman representative
Crowder that's a great catch.
There was some adjustments made
to this
since October so you are correct
to differentiate number total
we're seeing the twenty sex
additional FTE for LFC and the
fifteen in the executive those
are the correct numbers not the
twelve.
Okay okay so the eleven
differences the correct number
not to dwell correct it.
Thank you Mr Mr only question
thank you so much Representative
Crowder and.
Very good catch and good to know
that the numbers are are
appropriate even though the
narrative was lacking okay any
further questions from committee
members.
I don't see any so let's go to
Representative Sweetser for our
motion.
Thank you Mr chairman and this
was definitely and illuminating
presentation so thank you for
the detail that you provided us
with and with that Mr chair I
would move the LFC
recommendation second.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative Sweetser second
by Representative Anderson.
For the to adopt the LFC
recommendation is there any of
dot opposition to adoption of
the LFC recommendation.
In opposition to the motion
we've adopted that LFC
recommendation Mr clear Mr Bauer
thank you very much for being
here today as a committee that
for the incredible detail that
you gave us in a short period of
time and for the incredible work
that you and your colleagues do
every day.
Okay
Go ahead.
With that committee I think that
that does conclude today's
business.
We just a quick note.
we want to make sure that we
that note that are the public
schools and computer systems
will be having a number of of
subcommittees tomorrow
starting at ten AM with computer
systems will also have our
specials and supplementals that
at noon.
so we'll see folks at different
points throughout tomorrow as we
continue to work through the
subcommittee process really they
really appreciate everybody's
time today and for dive in and
very efficiently on the work
once we got started okay thanks
everybody have a good rest your
Friday and we'll see a number of
folks tomorrow thank you all
very much.
