Share that concludes the public
comment there are no other hands
up in the attendee room.
Madam chair.
Madam chair if I.
I got it I got some constituents
saying that there's an echoing
on the webcast just to let you
guys know because there's an
echo on the webcast manager.
All right we're asking let's
make sure that everybody is
muted and then let's make sure
that Gabby is aware of that and
she can alert our technical
people on this issue.
Right so let's go to the
committee if we could
I do have some committee members
with questions start with
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair in the
thank you later Stapleton for of
explaining this bill just just a
few questions madam chair and
house bill two that we passed
there was two million dollars
special appropriation to taxed
right out I believe it's through
the state board of finance.
Is the four million they're
asking for on the page three
line twelve in addition to that
two million.
Or.
What what happened to the two
million.
A quick question for the sponsor
Representative Stapleton do you
have the DFA secretary with you
as one of the presenters.
Madam chair I have Mr Burciaga I
am not sure if the DFA
secretaries available in
reference to where that money
went but let's ask miss madam
chair if Mr Burciaga director of
the council service is that it's
thank you for we call on him the
problem is is that we don't have
the veto message or any action
message for House Bill to.
At this point we have no idea
what's going to happen with that
bill at this point which is one
of the reasons we needed the DFA
secretary to help explain now.
and what what has happened in
that bill as we allowed for
taxed Representative to go to
the board of finance get up to
two million dollars.
you in lieu of or in case we did
get this so can of this bill
passed.
I don't know we can go to
Representative are we going to
roll Burciaga if you have a
comment on that but I'm not sure
how you would respond in the
absence of any final action
taken on the general
appropriation act.
Madam chair Representative
Crowder and members of the
committee I I apologize I don't
have any further information
you're correct without knowing
what happens to house bill two I
can't comment on this and and I
can't comment on the specifics
of the four million dollars as
it relates to that other
appropriation house bill two at
this time would you like me to
try to get a hold of secretary
Romero.
I think that's a good idea let's
ask secretary if she can join us
and will continue down with
Representative Crowder on other
questions.
Thank you madam chair madam
chairman on section two of this
proposal is talking about the
expenditures in fiscal years
twenty one in fiscal year twenty
to.
And the point five version of
the bill that this is contingent
upon passing that bill there is
not an emergency clause on the
point five version it's gone and
so the soonest they could begin
to spend this isn't twenty two
so I'm wondering why we have the
twenty one language in here.
Even if it was signed tomorrow
it this bill signed and there's
ninety days I believe after the
signing of a bill.
It it's July first and and so I
don't I don't see a reason to
have twenty one in this language
it all seems should be one here
I would appreciate any clear.
Clarification or explanation or
get on that list.
All right I may ask Charles to
step in on this but before I do
Representative Stapleton do you
have a response to that question
this madam chair I would ask LFC
okay.
So let me just ask Charles are
you on I just I just a second
ago.
Right when we look at spending
in FY twenty one we did not
include that as a special or a
supplemental or anything so how
does this affect the general
appropriations act for FY twenty
one.
Madam chair what which part
we're friends again.
Representative Crowder is us in
this bill in the feet bill it
talks about eight to fiscal year
process for spending general
fund money.
FY twenty one is soon to be done
a few months and we're we're out
of that fiscal year right so can
you explain what what that
really means at the end of the
day when there's two fiscal
years identified for spending
and madam chair members of the
committee it's just the same as
your section five special
appropriations because this is a
general appropriation act will
the money will be available upon
and act upon signing of the bill
I think I've been there so that
would allow TRD to for example
and that four million dollars
question to start assuming that
contingency is met with the
other legislation that would
allow TRD to start
getting ready to process to
implement that particular act
with its IT systems is what I
believe that appropriation would
be for so it's just like a
special appropriation that you
all appropriate in section five
of house bill two and Andrea
Representative Crowder's
previous question the way that I
read House Bill to that two
million dollars was a failed
contingency it was contingent on
enactment of specifically house
bill twelve or similar
legislation in the first session
of the fifty fifth legislature
which did not happen so that two
million and house bill two from
my perspective should go away.
And then this four million
dollars would be available if
you if you pass this bill.
Representative Crowder thank you
madam chair and thank you.
Or your explanation Charles
Charles can you help me
understand.
madam chair how we got from the
net the sesame of two million
dollars was adequate while we
were in session and now it's
four million dollars how did
that get doubled.
Not gonna speak for the
department on whether the two
million was adequate from their
perspective or not but that's
what was in house bill two.
Representative Crowder that's
going to be a question for the
DFA secretary this is this is
language and the budget requests
are coming from DFA they're not
coming from LFC and I don't even
believe they're coming from
Representative Stapleton.
Okay just one final question is
is I find it unusual that the
funding is in this P. Neville
instead of being actually in the
cannabis bill why did they pull
the funding out of the cannabis
bill and put it over the bill if
it's for the kind of a school.
Stapleton do you know.
Madam chair but I know that the
see African explained why the
money's up where it is.
Representative go ahead Mr
Burciaga.
Okay madam chair members of the
committee on second state is a
Putting the not including the
appropriations in the cannabis
bill and pass that would be put
in the feet bill was at the
request of the Sanchez.
Yes Sir Representative Crowder
if it'd been in there and have
to come to H. AFC.
You know I should expect your.
I'll be the reason but anyway I
go ahead Representative Crowder
if you've got another question
madam chair just a final comment
I I would like to have a roll
call vote on this one when we
get to the end of it okay all
righty thank you all right
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair
This probably the question is
going to Representative
Stapleton you mentioned in the
beginning of your
all being here you had seven
hundred thousand dollars for all
public safety.
What do you consider public
safety
Representative Stapleton.
Miss madam chair and
representative Garcia the seven
hundred and fifty thousand that
fifty thousand dollars to the
public safety is important
Cation and Paul wrote.
Related to the cannabis
impairment with when offices
stop individuals all take
assessment of individuals all
people all have in the law
enforcement having to do
something specifically regarding
have a bus.
Madam chair representative will
thank you for that my question
how is one of the smaller
communities that are struggling
with funding as it is right now
how are they going to get funded
to of train their people like
say
Representative believes
Department Milan police
department show department that
are smaller communities how the
funded to the saying that they
just don't have the money and
how are they enforced.
Chairman and madam chair and and
Representative gostei I see I am
sure that once the department of
public safety receive this
funding these funds are going to
have to be distributed across
the entire state because it's
not going to be the localized to
one particular area in terms the
cabinet was at.
Thank you madam chair but the
Representative Stapleton do you
know how many Department honesty
to New Mexico.
The state police.
Madam chair I do not I would not
even try to begin to answer that
question
Representative Garcia but I'm
sure when the bill is on the
floor.
You may access question.
Thank you madam chair the reason
because seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars not going to go
very far you know there's too
many smaller agencies that don't
have funding they're very
surviving we're imposing more
restrictions on them and they're
not gonna have a it's gonna be
like of all over the state madam
chair I'm not a funded mandate
that's what is going to come up
being somebody by midges don't
have the money thank you madam
chair thank you operator thank
you.
Thank you representative Garcia
let's not go to Representative
Ezzell.
Madam chair thank you very much
I hope you can hear me okay.
Madam chair I do have some
questions about this bill I
understand that we are.
Going to fund the house
representatives the Senate the
Legislative Council to the tune
of two hundred and forty three
thousand four hundred dollars
but then whenever you add the
rest of this bill and there that
amount.
Comes to six million nine
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars.
And madam chair I thought this
was the feed bill I did not
realize that it was the cannabis
appropriation bill.
Madam chairman
I to have some questions about
this of.
We are fixing to come up on the
end of fiscal year two thousand
twenty one and we are going to
give one million seven hundred
thousand dollars to the
regulations and licensing
department to administer the
act.
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars to the department of
public safety and representative
Garcia just finished talking
about that I'm worried about the
small communities that we are
putting an unfunded mandate on
them with this being in the feed
bill.
Then we're going to give four
million dollars to taxed rate of
to implement and it's for two
thousand twenty one twenty two
to implement that cannabis tax
act in five hundred thousand
dollars to the ministry to pop
this of the Courts to expunge
arrest and conviction records
I'm really concerned about that
so I guess I really need an
explanation about under section
to see about the expungement why
is that in the feet bill why is
all of section two in the feed
bill to me this is a Trojan
horse so madam chair
whoever you want to call on to
explain why that is in here I I
wouldn't I need some answers.
All right Representative we'll
go to the sponsor and her expert
Mr Burciaga I don't see the
cabinet secretary in yet to
issue Representative small.
Sorry madam chair members of the
committee at which she is
receiving a link right now we
have a little bit of a technical
error but she should be on
momentarily.
Okay let's go ahead and go to
the sponsor first and she she
wants to take a crack at that or
risk are Mr Burciaga.
Chair
I'm not sure Mr Burciaga all I
can definitively say.
Why the funding is where it's
located except that all the
funding for this special session
is in this bill.
I'm in regards to.
The Senate and the house and
what is going to happen and then
and the language the policy
issues all those bills in the
expungement bell and the
legalization of the cannabis Act
is located in their own separate
bills I'm I am not sure if
director Burciaga have any
addition to that with madam
chair.
Madam chair and members of the
committee secretary Romero is
now with us.
M. H. M. C. and then ask you to
raise your hand to be called on
I don't want staff interruptions
so let's go to.
Representative
Raul Burciaga and if he has any
comment read us to make comment
and then we will go to cabinet
secretary Romero.
You madam chair and members of
the committee
All of the appropriations in
section two are contingent on
the passage of the cannabis
related legislation
they're included in here as I as
I mentioned at at the request of
of Sanchez not including this in
the original kind of this bill
these amounts these
appropriations were requested by
the executive branch and with
that madam chair and members I
would defer to cabinet secretary
Romero.
All right let's go to the
cabinet secretary of cabinet
secretary Merrill there's a
question by Representative
ease at all regarding the
general fund request within our
the bill a leader restate or
question and then we ask you to
respond.
Is the secretary on madam chair.
Yes okay of.
The secretary Ruth.
Romero I have a question
pertaining to section two of our
feet bill.
My and I'm pretty good at math
the.
We are appropriating two hundred
forty three thousand four
hundred dollars.
For the house of
representatives the Senate and
Legislative Council for this
special session.
The under section two.
We are.
Asking for one million seven
hundred thousand dollars for
regulation regulation and
licensing.
To be used in two thousand
twenty one two thousand twenty
two seven hundred and fifty
thousand dollars for the
department of public safety four
million dollars to taxed rip to
be spent between two thousand
twenty two and five hundred
thousand dollars for that
administrative offices of the
court over the twenty one twenty
two for the expungement.
Have a resting conviction
records for certain cannabis.
Related offenses and I can't
figure out why any of section
two is included in the free
field because that's what this
is.
So madam chair and
representative is that all I
think director of this yeah I
got it explain very you know
that that it was at the request
of the sponsors of the
legislation that funding for the
state agencies that are going to
have to implement the campus Act
included are not be included in
the legislation itself and so
that's why the only other
opportunity the only other place
that we could do that is in the
detail and so that's why we
requested that it be included as
part of the.
You madam chair and secretary
Romero I guess my problem is if
we are coming into executive
session you want us to pass a
bill.
That it does include all the
language pertinent to this
cannabis bill that we have but
even so.
Brought up on the house floor
yet and as I stated earlier to
me is just another a Trojan
horse and I've got real concerns
about this because.
This is was called of the first
of April there's no emergency
clause on here
I see the funding is not going
to be adequate has.
Representative Garcia talked
about to even come close to
helping our smaller
municipalities with either their
sheriff's departments or their
municipal police.
We are handing them an unfunded
mandate this state and you have
to take care of this I am very
bothered by this that all of
this language pertaining to the
cannabis bill is included in the
feet bill I am not against
paying all of the staff that is
here working for us during this
special session.
But my problem is is having all
of this.
Six million nine hundred fifty
thousand dollars added to it and
that's a huge amount of money.
Whenever we.
Haven't even discussed this bill
and there's there in lies my
concern so whenever.
The bill.
Our state in in needs to be in
here and Representative floor
leader Stapleton.
Is kind of.
I'm not saying.
She is unaware of why this
languages put in there I'm just
kind of concerned there can can
you help me further can you
further explain this to him.
Madam chair and representative
Alan and and I appreciate your
concerns you know I think if we
don't if the bill passes and we
don't have funding agencies
won't be able to start the
implementation that's going to
be necessary for.
taxation revenue needs to do
some hire contractors to
just to make adjustments to the
gem Tax in order to be able to
capture all of the the tax
information regulation licensing
doesn't have any funding in
order to start developing on
policies and procedures and
putting everything hiring staff
and doing everything they need
to in order to get this program
up and running by July of next
year GPS well it's a small
amount it's sufficient to get
them started with purchasing
equipment and identifying the
training and start training as
many of local districts as they
possibly can we agree that it's
probably not enough but it's a
start it'll get them started on
the training I'm sure that we
will probably see what the needs
are after this is started and so
will probably come back again
next January which isn't that
far off to really think about it
starter budget request cycle
again in July August you will
see that there may be some
additional costs for in order to
get all of the local governments
are trained.
So the last piece is is the
court you know they made it
really clear to us that they're
going to need at least one staff
person and a contractor to come
in and look at records expense
so these are all costs that we
believe have to be
that we need the funding for it
now to get started so that when
the act goes into effect we're
not sitting waiting to react
we've already got things in
place to move the program
forward.
Madam chair and secretary I
appreciate your explanation but
again I will state we're putting
the cart before the horse you
are a decent you just said in
your statements madam chair and
secretary that it's not that
long until our next.
legislative session starts a
regular one.
That will start next January why
are we working out all the
pieces of this legislation this
a hundred and seventy nine page
bill that I'm just now on page
one sixty three of it of.
Why why are we why are we
putting the cart before the
horse that's my concern right
there who even who even came up
with the idea of this
expungement I cannot I'm I'm
just really flabbergasted about
what we're doing here with the
feed bills.
Madam chair that's all I've got
I'm I'm just very.
I'm not real happy about this
right here.
With all of section two included
in our feeds you and there are
any wrong I I do want everybody
that's up here working.
To receive their pay but
whenever we're throwing all this
other stuff in and put it on the
backs of our taxpayers I really
have a problem with it
especially whenever it's not
even been discussed madam chair
thank you very much for the time
thank you Representative Ezzell
all right let's go
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you madam chair my
question and was of about the
expungement only because of the
issue regarding policy I am
clearly and supportive of that
but it was explained and I just
need clarification that it had
to be included in this component
of the bill to ensure that every
section that was being
considered whether it's in
Judiciary or in tax that H.
segment is going to be paid for
and that's why it's here am I
correct.
And what the my understanding of
this bill is is that obviously
the first section pays for our
legislative costs in the second
section is the general fund
appropriation specifically to
agencies that it requested more
money in light of this bill
passing my my feeling now as an
Charles our role you can correct
me if the bill doesn't pass none
of this is spent right so that's
where we're at.
So so madam chair the clarity
then is the that the money
should be in those components
simply because it provides the
money that's that's that we
don't have to come back and then
say
okay now that the gentle generic
portion of the bill is done the
we we don't have to come back
and say that we need funding for
this component we need funding
for this it's already in those
sections.
That's correct okay thank you
madam chair madam chair I'm.
Get I would just like to share
that the feed is the most
appropriate vehicle for expenses
related to the special session
and the pandemic bust Act.
All right let's go on then to
Representative Anderson an.
Okay madam chair.
Madam chairman I am here.
Representative Anderson I think
we lost you.
Madam chair.
Representative Anderson is eight
C. R. Representative smaller C.
still there madam chair looks
like he dropped off all work to
get him back on all right then
we'll just come back to and
let's go Representative
Herrerra.
Madam chair I lowered my hand I
guess it doesn't show I'm from a
rural district and
Representative Garcia asked my
questions thank you very much
all right Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair so I've
only been in the legislature
down for about ten years and I
am not familiar with any
precedent for including the
types of expenses that are shown
in section two in a feed bill so
my question is for Madam chair I
know she's served a very long
time and probably can answer the
question is there any precedent
for doing this type of
expenditure.
In a few bill.
Thank you Representative Brown I
have seen this in the past I
have seen this in special in
special sessions in the past
I haven't seen it to this extent
but I have seen this in the
past.
Thank you madam chair so I I
strenuously object to the way
this bill has been crafted I
fully support.
Of a truth feed bill I think
it's transparent to the
taxpayers it's all one subject
essentially which is the cost of
bringing legislators back paying
for the lights and for all the
things that are needed to keep
the roundhouse are in action
but I think that what is
happening here and regardless of
whether the Sanchez requests or
not I don't think that should be
dispositive.
I think that this is actually
very highly regular and I think
it's also improper and it is as
I think was referenced earlier
it's a circumvention of the
vetting process for would be six
million dollars plus of of
additional spending and I think
it really does need to go
through the house appropriations
and finance committee as a
separate bill is so I believe
this bill should be by
bifurcated and just do a
straight feed bill and then do a
stand alone bill are at the
appropriation for all the
cannabis related things in in
that particular legislation so I
I just think this is the wrong
way to go and I think it muddies
our process and it truly does
avoid a very thorough discussion
and House Appropriations and we
need to have that on a section
two of the bill and
Everything that's in there and
then finally madam chair I I
believe that the I know that
basically funding was given to
all three branches of state
government make this qualify as
a quote general appropriations
act and that means so I believe
the majority vote is all that's
needed to pass it.
But the part about expungement
of of the rest and conviction
records is really substantive
law and that this is the
supposedly provides funding for
some of those changes to happen
but I to believe that should be
a stand alone bill or at least a
section in
in the the care of this bill
that is a coming towards us I
thank you madam chair.
Representative Brown I'm gonna
ask is Mr Burciaga to pull
samples of similar situations
one that comes to my mind is a
paid bill.
we had chairman learned I came
in in my state there's a couple
of times when that was asked for
by governor Martinez and then
there's a couple times with with
governor Richardson so if you
would I I'd like to have that I
think that's important for the
committee to say that from my
perspective I've never seen it
this extensive I saying some
smaller request come through but
not not this extensive so Mr
Burciaga if you would pull those
samples and those fiscal years
sure what the committee.
You madam chair thank you
already appreciate it thank you
very much.
Let's go to Representative
Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair and many
of my questions were asked I too
am concerned about the small
amount of money reaching our
small departments but I guess I
also wanted to voice my concern
about this huge amount from the
general fund being put in that
the bill we have a provided cash
balances portion of two hundred
forty three thousand which seems
you're very reasonable and then
we have the six point nine five
million in general fund
expenditures broadband and and
so I guess I just want to echo
the concerns of my colleagues
that it does seem very excessive
and it does seem to circumvent
the usual process that we do for
general fund appropriations
thank you madam chair.
All right I still see some hands
up of but I'm going to ask
Representative Anderson are you
back.
Okay we don't send out so I'm
gonna ask a couple questions and
the first question that I have
is for Mr Burciaga where we are.
A request here for two hundred
and forty three thousand dollars
how many days does that equate
to for special session.
Madam chair that equates to five
days that's per diem.
Are in mileage and staffing for
five days.
All right all right then I I
have a question but we're
talking about per day and
staffing for five days and I've
seen in the press it can cost
anywhere between fifty thousand
and eighty thousand a day how is
that fifty and eighty thousand
covered if this is just for per
diem and mileage but Matt madam
chair but let me break that down
a little bit more for example
the house budget of ninety five
thousand seven hundred.
Seventy eight thousand two
hundred is for per diem and
mileage.
for five days
in the Senate of the eighty
seven thousand one hundred about
forty seven thousand three forty
is for per diem and mileage.
The rest of that is for salaries
and other expenses of the house
the Senate and the Legislative
Council Service and for the
Legislative Council Service that
includes I believe around thirty
six maybe thirty seven thousand
dollars for security for state
police
and then other staff that we
have so that all totals up to
two hundred forty three thousand
which is in line with what we
generally said that a special
session tends to cost about
fifty thousand dollars a day.
And but that fifty thousand
dollars that we've used is based
on a number of different special
sessions I'd say over the last
ten to fifteen years are what
it's actually cost I'm not sure
with the eighty thousand dollars
is coming from
it just depends on on the number
of of of days and staff that is
used.
Okay so we take five and divided
into two hundred and forty three
that gives us our.
Are
are there what the press is
reporting on.
Madam chair that's correct.
Just ask you also Mr Burciaga
for those members that don't
actually travel to the capital
are they going to get do they
automatically get travel.
Madam chair of for those that do
not come to the capital they do
not get mileage.
Okay I wasn't sure how that
works if it's just a flat rate
that goes to everybody or if
there's some summary view of
that.
Okay do we have Representative
Anderson.
All right yes yes your hand up.
And madam chair I know I I
apologize I've tried reaching
out to him I think maybe I is
this phone has died or or
perhaps you trying to call in
but we do not have
Representative Anderson.
Okay and I see Representative
Crowder your hand is still up.
Go ahead.
Thank you madam chair I I just
want to follow up with the
secretary on the question and
ask earlier.
In house bill two we are
appropriated two million dollars
and and we're told that was
adequate to to handle of house
bill twelve or something similar
to what we're doing is something
similar and now we've gone from
two million dollars to four
million dollars.
Can this secretary help me
understand why that amount
doubled why ten days ago was two
million adequate in today is
for.
Here Representative Crowder
still actually we started off
with two million dollars but
through the process we have
determined that there that it
was actually closer to six
million dollars for that for
taxation revenue to implement
all the changes they needed that
so we've got some of the tax
bills are going to be.
Approved which they did and so
we have been asking up towards
the end of the session we have
been asking for that increased
by an additional two million so
R. it may have originally
started two million but by the
time the session is over we knew
we needed about four million
dollars to implement the
cannabis Act all right with
thank you for that but it would
just house bill two madam chair
and madam secretary.
On the last year the next last
days were actually passed house
bill two it would pass it to
million I I wasn't apprised of
the need for an additional two
that that never got to me anyway
but I was just curious how I hi
got that high can you help me
understand what did you see in
the past ten days that the cost
of extra two million that you
hadn't seen prior to that.
Madam chair representative
Crowder so the taxation and
revenue department and come back
and and said you know it's going
to cost about three point nine
nine million just to make
changes to our four and five of
the
system thank you for by the
system and so and then they said
that they they said there was
another additional two hundred
eighty three thousand of staff
workload costs that would be
needed for employment yes and so
it was it was at their
assessment during the session
when cannabis is looking like it
was going to ask that they came
up with the the the difference
that they needed additional
funding for the cannabis Act
okay what secretary thank you
for that madam chair I would
like to I will go back and look
at the FY I understand there's
new FIR online with four million
dollar number plugged in and I
will go back and forth along
with two million and do a
comparative analysis and see
what I can find that thank you
for that I would just very
curious on how it doubled in ten
days so thank you madam
secretary
Already at my understand is we
have Representative Anderson are
you on Sir.
madam chair we can you hear me
now.
Yes.
Thank you madam chairman madam
chairman of my technology here
is is less than perfect and I'm
a little unclear because I was
on a rather long rant
and I've got short changed but
if I could I'm gonna just repeat
the end and it is this we are on
the course for a very
disjointed.
Session on the floor that's
because we have separated two
bills that ought to be to be
there on B. two bills all right
one of the more to be just up
the bill and the other one ought
to be the the budding industry
that the governor has challenged
us to to consider Hey even at a
much higher costs the governor
said it's substantially the site
will guess what it's not
substantially the same and we're
not going to know that until we
get to the house for in our able
to measure up the six point nine
million dollars total
expenditure to the bills that's
going to launch the budding
industry and spend the majority
of this money.
I am very perplexed I think we
should slow down.
I think we should slow down take
the feed bill make it into a
regular special session
ordinary the bill then we should
take up the.
Another house committee house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute bill and
put all the the marijuana money
in there exactly I'm not say we
change anything I'm just saying
the original Sanchez who
employer they wore said put it
over there and I don't I'm not
sure Representative Stapleton
was in that decision when Mr
Burciaga says all the Sanchez
wanted it that way well hell
yeah the Sanchez wanted it that
way the Sanchez wanted it passed
both bills and and and boy
they're they're out here and in
a day and a half for a day in
the life is good but the
taxpayers of New Mexico and The
New Mexicans who have who have
challenged us to go slow on this
because this is incredible
reform many promises made and
very little of the downside
being discussed by the Sanchez
which we won't have a chance to
hear now until we see the bill
on the house floor and when we
see that bill on the house floor
it will not be one bill it will
still be two separate pieces of
legislation where we're being
told all no Representative don't
worry about that that's over in
the other bill.
And why if there is gonna be
substantially the same as house
bill twelve was when we left
this session less than a month
ago how come we now it's become
to bills.
How come it's it's the nearest I
can tell two to four million
dollars more expensive and on a
percentage basis that's a lot so
I'm very concerned that we're
being rushed in that today it
would be simply best for us to
say okay let's get that provided
the bill out the door and go on
and let's talk about this other
bill which I still believe on
the concealed contingency I'm
not satisfied that that two
million dollars it's not that
still alive and up stairs on the
fourth floor which may or may
not be side and if it is side
where to set two million dollars
go on the failed contingency I
would like to see further
evidence that we're not over
appropriated by two million
dollars.
So.
Representative address and that
that's a good point and I want
to ask Charles on that
When an agency goes to the board
of finance to actually have to
apply is that correct.
Charles.
You may have.
Left the meeting we still see
his name but I apologize
Representative Anderson go ahead
thank you madam chairman when I
was on the board for the US
which is quite a few years ago
now you're exactly correct that
they just don't get to walk in
and get the money and walk out
but I will say based on the way
the board of finance was
structured under a government
for others
the governor has a tremendous
sway on the board of finance and
it's make up to pretty well
see the outcome of that he might
the governor might desire.
Madam chairman I hope before we
get done today we will give us
some additional consideration to
a provided the bill and that's
the same kind of legislative the
bill that every legislation
every legislature passes as
house bill one.
And that bill is important
because there are people living
on paycheck to paycheck who are
expecting to get paid for the
work for their work in services
so I hope we can get that behind
us and then addressed.
How it is we can try to talk to
the original Sanchez because
they're the ones calling the
shots apparently madam chair.
How they can say we ought to put
it all into one so we can talk
about it all at once not in this
destroyed it.
Past were on that's just going
to lead to chaos thank you madam
chair.
Caller Representative small he's
got a couple comments to make go
ahead Representative small.
Thank you very much madam chair
you madam chair in response to
your direction.
Kind of looking back I know Mr
Burciaga we'll do that in more
depth madam chair I just wanted
to know.
That in twenty the two thousand
fifteen there was four point
three million dollars madam
chair included for the
department of health and over it
believe is three hundred
thousand dollars for the
administrative offices of the
Courts in the first special
session the bill similarly madam
chair in twenty seventeen this
was a regular session but the
feed bill was used to restore
funding that the previous
executive where there had been a
veto for higher education and
other entities and madam chair I
don't know those specific
numbers but obviously that would
have been a very large number
madam chair in the in the dozens
of millions of dollars if not
more
in that special session I I
stand corrected and then finally
madam chair just in the brief
kind of checking in with folks
they are the twenty twenty first
special session did also
included special funding that
year for census operations
and other that was the year
madam of course last year where
there was standing and other
budget adjustments that was made
in the feet bill to various
departments so madam chair in
response to your request for
some more information I wanted
to help find that thank you
madam chair.
All righty and I still would
like to ask that
Mr Burciaga provide us least
over the last.
I ten years what that looks like
in those I mean that's as easy
as pulling up those FIR is but
I'd like to see what those
things were
I cannot secretary Romero your
hand is up did you want to make
a comment.
So madam chair thank you so just
to Representative Anderson's
comment about the two million
and act and dollars that's
included in house bill two right
now we don't feel like that is
that have contingent language in
there that says that it's
contingent on house bill twelve
or similar legislation passed
during the first session of the
fifty fifth legislature so that
first session legislature is
what says we can't use the money
for because no legislation was
passed during that period of
time so we don't believe that
that money is available.
All right with that being said I
don't see any other hands up I
need a motion committee
representative of small thank
you madam chair I move a do pass
on house bill one second.
So motion to take up to two
motion.
All right.
One.
We do have a motion for deep
pass and that was Representative
small Representative Trujillo.
We also have a motion tabling
motion and that was
Representative Ezzell and
Anderson.
So we are not going to
but what we'll go ahead and vote
on the tabling motion first.
A vote of yes means you are
voting to table the bill a vote
of no man's you are voting not
to table the bill so I'm gonna
ask the secretary to take the
role first on the tabling
motions and sits and non
debatable motion.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Allison.
Yes.
Representative Anderson yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative Brown yes.
Representative Castellano.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield yes.
Representative Crowder yes.
Representative Dixon.
No to table.
Representative Ezzell.
Yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative.
No to table.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
to table.
Representative Lane.
Yes the table.
Representative Lara.
No to table.
Representative Sarinana.
Representative Sweetser.
I'm sorry yes to table.
Representative Trujillo no to
table.
Representative Sarinana.
I share small.
No.
Madam chair Lundstrom.
No to table that I'm gonna vote
yes so I can vote in the
majority.
So yes madam chair.
Yes.
So I have one excuse eleven in
the affirmative and seven and
the negative.
Okay what we have is a bill that
has been a table but I'm gonna
put it on the chairs
call at this point and we're
going to go back we're going to
take a look at this bill because
we got to have a feed bill guys
and we got to get this thing
worked out.
So what I'm gonna do is ask
Representative small to go down
to work with Representative
Stapleton and and and myself and
let's see if we can get this
feed bill straightened out here
and what we're going to do so if
we could at this point we're
going to get with small
Stapleton and myself and let's
get this thing straightened out.
So right now the committee is
recessed at the call of the
chair so thank you everybody.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
One.
