Okay here. Representative
President, representative.
I'm here. Great. Alright. Thank
you very much remembers. We have
have a good agenda today. We're
gonna jump around a little bit
just because we know folks in
different committees on the
floor in both bodies. So what
does the program just started
off with 76?
Good afternoon, Mr Chairman,
Members of the communities 76
comments to you from the
microphone on it is OK. Okay,
Please, turn it off the closer
and learn about half gone.
And when the section is over, I
hope everyone enjoyed me taking
one of these and throwing it as
far away from us,
but not when it's on
nothing open. It's gone
So, Mr Chairman, members of the
committee this Bill 76 comes to
you from the Legislative
Education and study Committee,
and that the interim good public
school oversight tasks.
Last year when we had that great
deals 131 up Lord local matches
for everyone in the state.
We made an error in that bill.
Uh, if you'll recall that we've
given every district 30% more of
a state match for three years,
while we can figure out those
matches micro districts we gave
50% more of a local match, and
what that did was it, Uh, it's
screwed up the formula for them
for getting a waiver.
And they most almost always have
to get waivers because they
although they can pass pond,
they just can't raise very much
money.
So they come to the capital
outlay for money all the time.
so by moving it to 50% for the
micro districts, it meant that
they were always going to be 50%
or above, which meant they could
not get a waiver. So this bill
just says for the micro
districts, we will use the old
calculation.
To determine their eligibility
through a waiver.
Perfect. Thank you very much
Manipulative. Um, is there
anybody here who wishes to speak
in support or opposition to
Senate Bill 76?
Anybody online?
Okay. Go to the committee. Any
questions?
Ranking member Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you, Madam
Pro Tim for bringing this bill
forward. Most of my districts
are the micro districts and, uh,
I just wanted to say thank you
and that we really, really
appreciate it. I don't really
have a question. Just wanted to
thank you. Thank you. Remember
our Sean upset Chatfield for
them or some Garcia?
Good question. Thank you, Mr
Chairman, Brandon broken Thanks
for bringing it because you know
my district is really rural, and
this really helps a lot of
people.
In room in Mexico. My mind with
the frontier compared to most of
them, and I really appreciate
this. Thank you. Episode Garcia
sent Chatfield for the motion.
Mr. Speaker moved. Mr Chairman.
I moved to past give you a
little raise their Kate. It's
been moved by represent
Chatfield saying by
representative Han there anybody
in opposition to a do pass on
sand Bill 76, and then
Thank you. Now I'm gonna turn
this off very carefully. Okay.
Thank you very much.
Actually Kate's okay, Let's go
ahead. Madam ranking member
members were on how committee
substitute
For Senate Bill 151.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you. Members of the committee
today I have with me, Mr Chad
Hamill and Miss Allison Nichols.
This bill is taking, uh five
It's delayed, but we ultimately
we'd like to take 5% of the
premium tax.
Health Insurance Health
Insurance Premium tax Fund. Uh
and direct it to the emergency
Medical fund creating this fund.
The money is in the budget.
And with that, Mr Chairman, we
stand for questions. Excellent.
Thank you very much. Is there
anybody here who wishes to speak
in opposition to Senate Bill?
1? 61 51 Excuse me. Anybody here
who'd like to speak in support
of Senate Bill 151.
Please come on up. Carol.
Members of the committee names
Carl Gilmore from Towson. Very
supportive of this bill.
Virgin emergency medical
services or significantly
underfunded
In the state. I've been doing it
for 46 years, and it gets worse
every year.
Thank you. Thank you. Committee.
Thank you very much. And let's
see a number of first responders
who are here in the audience
today. Thank you for what you
do. Thank you for being here
today.
Is there anybody online?
Okay. Well, let's do our there.
more than 50. Here we go. Okay,
We're gonna go quickly through
our online. Uh, we're going to
start first with the village of
Karaoke. Kerala's please.
Thank you. Chairman Committee
members. My name is Deputy chief
Tanya Latin. I'm very in support
of how this house Bill 151 as
amended.
I've been doing this since 1997
And in the last 20 years, my
average E. M s fund act money is
$8000 in 8 2003. It was 8074 and
2023. It was 9134. And that
increase was only because my
calls have exponentially
increased. The funding I get is
less than $12.50 per call.
To be able to buy supplies. Pay
for medical direction. Do
repairs on the rescue and train
people. That is just not enough
to keep us and us like so many
other small departments. We do
not charge for AMs Services. Um
the transport agencies do the
charging. I can't get them at
most medicines for under $12.50.
So one run easily could takes
more than that. I really
appreciate all your support and
hope that this passes out of
Committee Thank you very much.
T. J. Kathy for up to one
minute.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
Committee. This is Chief Cathy
from brutalities Fire
Department. I wanted to show
support for this bill not only
from my department but also from
the six volunteer agencies that
help provide services to our
committee. So thank you for your
time and your support.
Thank you. Uh, next, we're going
to go to Eon Maduro and, uh,
thank you, Mr Chair. Um and
thank you for your time and
consideration of the spill. My
name is Iain Maduro. I'm an E. M
s medical director here in the
state of New Mexico And I am in
full support of this bill, which
is imperative to show and
provide support for our PMS
providers and first responders
who consistently and selflessly
served the community members.
Visitors and citizens of this
state.
Thank you for your consideration
in time.
Thank you very much.
Next. We're going to go to Chief
Smith.
Good afternoon. Thank you. Thank
you, Chair, uh, last Christmas
Fire department as well as
myself as the pirate chief. We
support this bill. We look
forward to additional support
and funding for R. E. M s
efforts.
Thank you very much, Chief.
Next. We're going to go to Pete
Bellows.
Good afternoon chair and
committee. Thank you very much.
Been serving new Mexico, Um, s
for over 40 years and during the
streets of Las Cruces and Donnie
Ana County. Uh,
Only the fund act is very, very
important to the state it it
funds, the purchase of equipment
and vehicles in in individual
departments, and it's gone down
over the last 30 years. The cost
has gone up or fund act has gone
down. Uh, no service right now
against more than $20,000 to try
to conduct business within the
average. You heard, Tanya says
she gets about 8000.
And that's the average cost or
allowance from the fund Act.
each service with monitors
costing $35,000 ambulances
costing 350 to $450,000. It
takes years and years of savings
of the little bit of fun deck we
get right now to be able to
purchase this equipment, so I
urge you strongly to support
this bill and support him s in
New Mexico as it's the front
line of healthcare for lots of
rural New Mexico.
Ladies and gentlemen. Thank you
for your time. Thank you very
much. Excellent. Next, we're
gonna go to Chelsea White.
Hello, everyone. Hello, Mr
Chair. Thank you very much. My
name is Chelsea White. I am an
emergency medicine physician as
well as an M s medical director
here in New Mexico.
And medical director for many
rural and tribal M s agencies in
this state.
This bill is extremely important
to support the AMs Providers, M
s agencies and E. M s patients
that are, um, here in New Mexico
and really encourage you to
And support this bill as it
moves forward. Thank you very
much. Appreciate it. Thank you
very much.
Next. We're going to go to
Justin Drum.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
committee members. Am I
Excited to see this. Continue to
move forward. I am in much
support of this being in a rural
community. It's hard to follow,
Mr Bellows and I echo most
everybody, everybody that's uh
testified in this, uh
Appreciate everybody's continued
support and our
Full support of this bill.
Thank you very much. Okay. We
have three final. Uh, folks,
we're going to do Mateo Garcia.
Hello. Thank you, Mr Chair and
respected members of the
committee. And my name is Mateo,
Garcia and E. M s position and a
medical director specializing in
rural and tribal agencies across
the state of which I oversee
medical direction for 15, plus
agencies from the northern part
of the state as well as the
Southwest.
And just want to express my
support.
Um, for this bill. This funding
is imperative for our ability to
continue to provide the level of
care that we currently provide
and hopefully provide some
avenue to improve the level of
care and reach of care for these
agencies and just want to say
thank you to the representatives
and, uh,
Great senators who brought the
bill forward as well. Thank you
so much. Thank you very much.
We're gonna conclude with Gus
paid Rati and then James
Williams because please go ahead
and interested up. Just did a
find and replace and replaced
all of the all of the pronouns.
Hello, Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Thank you for taking
the time to hear this bill
today. Uh, this is an important
stop gap in our communities
statewide.
I know that the story of VMS
being underfunded is you know
this doesn't fall on deaf ears
here. It's a story you all know.
Well, I want to point out that I
think that not only does the
pundit its current state not
accurately illuminate the need
that the state has. But
expanding. The fund will also
operate, offer an opportunity
for us to collect more data on
what is needed throughout
counties and give them an
opportunity to ask to fill those
needs.
I'm a firefighter Paramedic with
Albuquerque Fire rescue and we
stand in strong support of this
bill. Thank you for those that
brought it forward And thank you
for your time today. Thank you
very much, And we're gonna
conclude with James Williams.
Go ahead, James.
Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Members of the committee. I
stand in full support of this
bill. I am currently a field
provider as well as a member of
the statewide M s Advisory
committee. We see this at every
meeting that we have that EMS
services in New Mexico or
greatly underfunded. This
particular bill will definitely
help us improve the reach of pre
hospital medical care.
Throughout the state of New
Mexico by allowing us to train
new providers and replace aging
equipment. Thank you for your
time.
Thank you very much, Mr
Williams. Okay, We're gonna go
to committee for questions. Uh,
Representative Luhan first.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you all for being here. I think
this is you know, we have some
discussion about this and
getting to understand what
What this fund does. And I think
I'm as I'm looking at the
analysis, Mr
Um, Speaker, uh, goes to some of
the questions I had, um, so I'm
just gonna under the fiscal
implications that was he has
concerns with including
continuing distribution language
in the statutory provisions for
funds because you're marking
reduces the ability of the
Legislature to establish
spending priorities.
Taxation and revenue analysis.
Notes. The estimated loss of
general funding FY 25 is
approximately 0.2% of the
forecasted recurring general
fund Revenue and SB 151 World
slightly increased revenue
revenue volatility. Just with
that said, is our
I understand, and I support what
we want to use this for. I think
it's it's It's a good investment
for our state. Um, but I think
during our conversation I asked
about any kind of cap.
To, um
As I'm looking at the the chart
to the fiscal, the F I R. Um and
it's my understanding. Please
correct me if I'm wrong, that
there's going to be a
distribution of about $11
million each year.
Um
And that's that's A that's an
estimate is there is any way
they of us knowing that that's
going to be like the
The establishment and we're
going to establish a cap on that
or certain amount or up to or
any language like that, Mr Chair
in the future.
Mr Chair members of the
committee representative.
Um it's a physical impact is
about 11 million. Um, I'm not
sure we we tried to look at how
much specifically the health
insurance premium taxes would
generate, Um, that's not broken
out of Don't think charity
breaks that out, at least not in
a form that I could find so I
can only look at overall premium
taxes, so I don't know. Um, you
know what that's projected to
do, but no, we we don't We don't
think a cap is is, um, necessary
here. I mean,
You know, over time. If revenues
you grow, presumably cost but
also grow for E. M s So we want
you know that to be able to keep
up with rising costs as well.
And I would just add to that
that that premium taxes brings
in about 220 million and we're
asking for 5%. And as as, uh
Allison said that you know if if
it does grow
That means that the cost of
doing business for AMs grows as
well, right?
I appreciate that. I think it's
something we'll monitor and it
doesn't seem it seems like it's
probably pretty stable from
From some of the questions and
information I've gathered, but I
just was wondering if that was
something that you know we will
keep an eye on as
I'm looking at the analysis from
LSC. We will be And so, um, Mr
Chair. I just wanted to say, Ask
Foster and on Page one line 21.
And unless I'm and I must be
reading this incorrectly or not,
um, it's saying
Equal to 10% of the net receipts
attributed attributable.
Is that supposed to be 5%?
Mr Chair.
Mr. Chair representative. So
that is for the Law Enforcement
Protection Fund, which was a
change that was made last year
to distribute some of the health
insurance premium taxes to the
Law Enforcement Protection Fund.
I believe
Is that what you're looking at?
Mr Chairman? Uh, Madam
Representative. That is for the
this whole bill has the Law
Enforcement Protection Fund and
the E. M s fund and that's for
the law. Protect Law Enforcement
Protection fund. Thank you. I
appreciate that again. I'm
trying to read through this
really quickly, So I'm trying to
look for the catchment. Look for
that. 5%. Where is that? 5% Mr.
Chair captured.
Sections. C
It was originally 10%. And then
it was amended and Senate
finance and now it's 5% and and
that the formulas that what it
is Mr. Uh, representing members.
Great. Thank you, Miss Nichols.
if we turn to the Senate Finance
Committee Amendment
Which is 0.228100 0.2.
Uh, the first part of that
amendment is striking 10, which
comes on page two line five
and then shooting the unload
their of thank you. Mr
Appreciate that, Let's let's
just kind of what I'm looking
for here. Um, I think this is I
think we need to be doing this.
I think this is forward
thinking.
Um
You know, Commander sponsors for
looking at how we're going to do
this and can continue a funding
source.
In a responsible way. Thank you,
Mr Chair.
Thank you Represent Luhan. Next,
we're gonna go to represent
Garcia, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you. Ranking member
Armstrong. This you know, I was
looking at this chart to put out
With with the garage to handle
becomes chairman, you know, and
I'm looking at Clayton.
Uh, they get $13,000 in the cost
him $210,000 to operate.
How were these, uh
People surviving this
So, um, Um I'm Chad Hamel. I'm
Mr Chairman. That um,
representing member volunteer
fire Chief of the town of
Hagerman, So we are in that
unique position.
And what we found what we've
been doing. We just purchased an
analyst, but we asked for some,
um, appropriations for capital
outlay.
And so we took 500,000 for an
ambulance. And then the 7500 we
get we spending about
Two months or three months, Then
we start using reserve fire
funds and then
Other general funds out of our
community.
Um, we have noticed, or we've
seen two adult services that we
know of that have closed Von
Ambulance and House E. M s.
Couldn't afford. It ran out of
personnel, so they closed their
doors. So
Their closest
Ambulance is, um Santa Rosa. So
That's how we're surviving.
Mr Chairman and
Representative. I'm not. I'm not
questioning what you're trying
to do.
It just It's concerning that the
knees are so brave and what
we're appropriating and not
covering.
Nearly what we need and you know
your rural communities. If we
lose our ambulance service,
we're sunk.
Or we lose our firefighters,
right? Um, Mrs. You know, these
numbers are just just blew me
off because you know, like in,
uh, Las Cruces got 25,000 and
any 12 million
To operate. You know, 90, some
cities can absorb the cost.
But rural communities like yours
and mine did. You can do it. You
know, I go. Uh
Support this.
But to me, Mr Chairman and
representative
It's not quite enough. We're
doing it. You know, we're just
scratching the surface of what
really needs to be addressed
here. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you very much from seven.
Garcia.
Um, I'll briefly ask for the
Picking up on some Garcia's
point. This will not cover all
services in full around the
state. Correct ranking member
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Correct
And but there's in particular in
communities counties where sort
of the tax base is very
Uh then this could provide sort
of essential funding for
essential services. That's
Yes, Mr Chairman and members. Um
it's essential for all MF
services across the state, but
very essential for rule in
frontier. New Mexico. Uh, thank
you. Very remember Armstrong. I
think it'll be good to see how
it's implemented. Um, I know in
Las Cruces You know our
emergency medical, our
firefighters and others.
E. M s services are on the
frontlines of responding to a
wide variety of different
Um
Calls that come their way as
they are enrolling them across
the state. So thank you for
bringing this forward. We know
we do have to be mindful about,
you know, essentially states
support for local services. But
these are critical services and
compliment you for bringing this
forward.
With that we would go. Let's go
to guard represent Garcia for
the most. We have a motion on a
do pass on Senate tax, business
and Transportation Committee
Substitute for Senate Bill 151
as amended motion by
representative Garcia saying, by
represent Chatfield and Robson
Garrett. Is there any opposition
to a do pass?
Saying then thank you very much.
Kate. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you. Let's uh let's go to
represent Vincent. Thanks for
being here.
Members are going to go to house
Bill 240.
Then we're gonna go to represent
Cates and who will be putting on
Senate Bill 216.
And then we'll go to Senate Bill
165 from there.
Represent Vincent. Please go
ahead.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you members of the committee.
Um, this is for the military and
veteran affairs committee. We
met through the interim, and,
uh, this bill did have a
support, letter and
recommendation.
And what it does is, it's making
an appropriation to the Veterans
Services Department to contract
with a veteran police and first
responder, pro post traumatic
stress disorder therapy program.
And I Stanford questions. Thank
you very much represented
Vincent. Thank you for putting
this on in your work on this
legislation. Is there anybody
here who wishes to speak on
house built
240
I don't see anybody. Anybody
online, Okay, I'm gonna ask for
confirmation from our chief
Amanda. There is money in the
growth funds for this purpose,
Correct.
Okay, Great. I want to
compliment Represent Vincent.
You your other sponsors in the
this so we'll have to table this
today. It's a it's a straight
appropriation, but the through
diligent work. This money is
included in House Bill two as
part of the grow two year
appropriations.
Which is great, and that will
give us a chance to see its
implementation effectiveness.
And so congratulations with that
we would open it up. Okay,
There's a motion to table.
Uh, is there any opposition to
that motion?
Seeing then this has been
tabled, but the money is in the
budget. Congratulations. Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Okay. Ah, representing Cates.
Can you come up and is, uh
I know Miss Russell was here.
But we can go ahead with Senate
Bill 216 as amended.
Thank you, Mr Chair and members.
I heard present Senate Bill 216.
It is an odd bill in front of
this committee as there is no
appropriations in it.
Um, it is a companion Bill. The
House Bill 195. It's just
changing, um, and amends the
NMFS to act to make housing and
eligible public project making a
nonprofit housing developer
qualified in CD and allowing the
local government planning fund
to be used for affordable
housing plans.
As well as um, allows funds to
be used to pay for flood
inundation maps and obtain
archaeological clearances with
the soil and water conservation
districts and I stand for
questions. Great. Thank you very
much for present case. Is there
anybody here who wishes to speak
on?
Senate Bill 216 is amended.
Please come on up.
Your microphone's right there.
Oh, sure. Earth members of the
committee. My name is Eddie
vehicle.
Registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico song Water Conservation
districts.
And we do think Miss Russell
skates for getting this
amendment.
Uh, the soil and water districts
are political subdivisions of
the state of New Mexico. We'd go
before the local election laws.
And, uh,
We appreciate this change in the
in the
Bill.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Be home.
Is there anybody online who
wishes to speak on this bill?
Okay. Any committee questions?
We'll go for a motion, then.
There's been moved by Chatfield
second by representing Garrett.
Is there any opposition to that
motion?
Kate. Well, please show her
upset Montoya in opposition.
Okay. Thank you Represent Cates.
Ah, okay.
Senator. Great to see you. Yes,
please.
Really? Yes. Please go ahead.
Thank you for being here.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
members.
With Senate Bill 165.
This is, uh
Really a technical part from
last year's legislation that was
submitted by
Um, Senator Engle.
Excuse me.
And, uh, what happened? Mr
Chairman and members so
The legislation was to make a
And adjustment to the
legislators Retire Room fund.
And it was based on
60% for representing the 60 days
and then 30 for the 30 Day
session.
And, uh,
Based on drafting or what had
happened. The 30 was left out
and all this legislation does is
with the 30 in
And with that I'll stand for
questions. Thank you very much,
Senator Gonzalez. We do have an
appropriation here. Excuse me.
An amendment. I apologize.
Um, this, uh,
here?
Um
The will make sure you get a
copy.
Can we get the sponsor?
Thank you. Thank you for the
staff forgetting this out
Quickly. Apologies. Okay, We
have an amendment here. It's
0.228401 0.1.
And this
This will strike out making the
appropriation and then, uh,
The $25,000 that's in Section
two.
Is there kind of motion for that
amendment, please?
Okay, It's been moved by resume,
Montoya saying, by represent
Figueroa. Any questions on the
amendment?
Any opposition to the amendment.
Okay?
We've adapted the amendment.
Okay, uh, anybody here who
wishes to speak on Senate Bill
165 is amended.
Anybody online?
Okay?
Um, any questions from
committee?
Mr Chair and senator, I
wondered, um
If this bill had come up in
investment and pension oversight
interim Committee
Oh, Mr Chairman and
Representative for Europe with
him? No, it did not because it
came to us late when it was
noted to us that it was just
going to be a technical clean up
from the prior year.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Thank you Represent figure out,
Okay, let's go for a motion.
Okay, It's there's emotion do
pass on and Senate Bill 27
Centerville 165 is amended
second by represent Montoya.
Is there any opposition to that
motion?
Seeing that chair. I just like
to be shown as abstaining from
the vote. Okay, so we have
learned something new.
Ah, Miss Baker is so, um
There, uh, the proper process
for us to follow. You have to be
we've found out
Is we? There's a request to be
excused.
We have to so
Is. Can I have a motion to
excuse or present? Brown? Okay,
it's been moved by representing
one twice second by
representative Armstrong. Is
there any opposition to that
motion?
Okay, that is adopted. Okay.
You're excused from the vote.
Now. Is there any opposition on
the do pass for Senate Bill 165
as amended, Okay.
In. That motion originally was
made by
Sam Garcia and seconded by
represent one twice. Good.
Alright, so we've gotta do past
Chairman members. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, representative.
Okay, Now I see there. We've
got chair Lenti here.
Well, let's go ahead and go to
Sanibel to 17 as amended.
Uh, miss cars. Well, Mr Todd is
great to see you. Go ahead,
please. Thank you. Mr Chairman.
Today I have Senate Bill 217
severance tax bond fund
distributions.
Using the General Fund for
compact Capital outlay rather
than bonding has the potential
to generate long term increases
to recurring revenue.
Send a bill to 17 will ensure
that the benefit is realized by
requiring an annual transfer for
10 years of approximately $82
million from the seven tax
bonding fund to the severance
tax permanent fund with that, Mr
Chairman, I stand for any
questions. Okay. Thank you very
much. Is there anybody here who
wishes to speak on Senate Bill
217 as amended.
Anybody in mind?
Okay?
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. I'm Sarah
Fitzgerald with the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
Just want to say the chamber
stands in full support of this
bill, and we urge to do pass.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Okay, let's go to committee
questions, please. Rob Sanford
in. Thank you, Mr Tear, and, um
Mr Presenter. I just want to
make sure I'm understanding what
the bill will do. They're only
gonna be one set. There will
only be one set of bonds that
will be sold for future capital
loudly. Am I reading and
understanding that correct?
Um, Mr Chair Representative, so
no, essentially the capital bill
this year is using General fund
and not using any of our long
term bonding capacity. So what
this does is ensure that the
savings from not doing that long
term debt for capital this year
flow to the severance tax
permanent fund.
With the essentially the benefit
being that that produces higher
levels of recurring general
fund in the future. Just thank
you and display clarification.
Mr Chair and Madam Presenter.
That means that there should be
more capital outlay funding
available for next year.
Um, Mr Chair Representative. No,
it doesn't. It doesn't change
the expected capital outlay
funding for next year through
the bonding program.
To the bonding program. But
there's another program that
would be available. Madam Mr
Tear, Mr. Chair representative.
There's not another program. Um
there's just in years like this
of high revenue surpluses choice
available to the Legislature to
use cash instead of debt through
the bonding program. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you, madam.
Thank you very much represents
Hernan.
Any other questions Question and
I had just so that we have it on
the record their house Bill 253,
which I'm proud to cosponsor
with chair, Lindy. This does not
conflict with that. Can you
explain briefly? Why, Mr Torres?
Or Mr Absolutely, Mr Chair. So
in HB 253, there is a component
that captures savings from using
general fund this year, but
that's only the short term catch
savings generated from this
year. This bill, on the other
hand, captures the long term
savings as Miss cars well
pointed out from using General
fund rather than debt.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Cars
Well for the front end.
Represent Luhan.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um as we
use as we saw in the previous
fiscal year.
Using the same mechanism. Um
Funding capital projects with
the General fund.
There was language in that bill.
That, um
The to the to the matter that
The projects as capital projects
that we gave money to had to
encumber 5% of their projects.
Ah, spending so speak, and also
they were, um, this capital
projects. Um
We're also subject to the
Um
The executive order of having
their accounts in order to buy
their subdivision or local
government. Is that still
Captured in this bill, Mr
Speaker.
I mean, Mr Chair.
Um do you want me now?
Mr. Chair, Representative. Um,
this bill does not deal with
those issues. But the committee
substitute of the Capitol Outlay
bill that Senate finance just
acted on retroactively struck
the 5% requirement for 2023, and
there's no similar requirement
for 2024, the executive order
from 2013 is what affects the
audit issue You brought up and
that is still in effect and
I know you all are considering a
bill to codify that. But this
bill doesn't touch that issue
either.
Mr Speaker, Gentlemen. Um
So they read. There's there's
been a bill that retroactive
glee influences or affects. I
know it's not in this bill, Mr
Speaker, Mr Chair, but I'd like
to talk about that because
Have we seen that in our
committee yet? Mr. Chair. Thank
you. That's in the cap it so
that no. We have not seen that
We were in the capital.
Okay. Thank you very much. Uh,
let's go for a motion on Senate
Bill 217 as amended.
I'm move. Senate Bill 217 as
amended do pass.
Okay, is moved by. Uh, ranking
member. Armstrong, second by
represent vodka at the auction.
Is there any opposition to this?
That motion?
Saying And thank you very much,
Okay, uh, members were so we're
to our final two bills. Um okay.
Great. Let's go.
Representing Chatfield is going
to do. Senate Bill 160 committee
substitute
For Senate Bill 161.
Alright. Represent Chatfield
whenever you're ready.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Mr Chairman, I have the
Senate bill.
Substitute as amended for Senate
Bill 161.
This and what it does the
sentence.
Finance Committee substitute for
Senate Bill 161 with appropriate
50 million
Recurring general fun.
To the Healthcare Authority
Department to provide quarterly
subsidies to acute care
hospitals with fewer than 30
beds to cover certain revenue
losses. Mr. Chairman, is it okay
if my expert witness
Troy Clarke gives a short
introduction. Absolutely.
Please, Mr. Card. Go ahead.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Mr Chair and representative
Sheffield. This bill is designed
to be what we're referring to as
a bridge or a gap, Bill. You
just left the house floor and
much appreciated thanks to all
of you for passing Senate Bill
17, which provides a long term
Funding solution for our
hospitals across the state. This
looks at our small, independent
rural facilities who will need
funding to stay open and keep
the doors open until the effects
of Senate Bill 17 kick in do the
approval process. And so this
bill provides for those funds.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Mr. Clarke. Um, is there anybody
who wishes to make content
comment?
On the Senate Finance Committee.
Substitute for Senate Bill 161
as amended, Please come on up.
Well, actually, before we get to
that we do have a Yeah, we have
our House Appropriations
Amendment.
This is 0.228409 0.1. Is that
what you have?
For what? One? Okay. Great. Can
we have a motion in a second for
discussion? It
Second, it's been moved by
represent one twice saying by
ranking member Armstrong Um and
committee. What this does this
deals with the appropriation
part in our previous committee,
health and human Services. There
were other amendments, but they
didn't They know that our work
is on appropriations. So this
deals with you making
appropriation.
And, um
On and then takes out that
appropriation. We do confirm
that this is in the budget. We
can absolutely confirm that.
Questions on the amendment.
Represent Garrett, Please, Mr
Chair. This full amendment is
now removed.
We're back. Great. Great
question. Uh, so previous
amendment stays from health and
human services.
Just nine. I see. I miss that.
Is that correct?
Just night.
Okay?
Mr. Chair it? Yeah. Hold on. Ah!
Let's Yeah, okay. Same Garrett
will go to represent Farndon.
Go ahead. That's what I wanted
to ask. Mr. Terry, is this the
document we have in front of us
is the amended version of this
bill is put forth by the health
and human services.
Let's we're gonna work through
that really quick to make sure
that we have everything right?
Mr Chairman.
Uh, I have with me the bill
sponsor now, if he would, he
would allow him to make a short
statement.
Please, senator words great to
see you. As usual. I'm late to
the party chair.
I, uh
The only thing I can tell you,
is that what we were trying to
do is to keep some small
hospitals physically.
Sound.
So that we could keep them in
operation two more years.
Before some of the service stuff
can kick in.
And keep them going.
Mr Chair. I know that there's
many technical issues that can
be addressed by someone else.
But that's the goal of this
bill.
So
I don't know.
Much more than that.
Excellent. Thank you. Thank you
very much. Senator Woods.
Okay, We're, um let's go to any
other questions on the
amendment. We're gonna wait to
adopt the amendment.
Until we can sort of work
through.
Um okay, so
Representative one Toyota,
please. So while we're waiting
on that, do you want to take the
public comment? That's what we
were. I was gonna think that's a
great idea, so we'll come back
to public comment.
If the three folks who are gonna
make comment
Please come back up.
Not clear, but
The villa is right.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Frank Corcoran, the CEO
Sierra Vista Hospital in this
bill is crucial to us to remain
open remain viable until Senate
Bill 17 kicks in, So we
appreciate your support. Thank
you.
Thank you very much, Mr Chairman
and members of the Committee.
Thank you very much for hearing
this bill again asked from
yesterday. My name is Tammy
Chavez. I'm the CEO of you.
making me General Hospital in
Clayton, New Mexico. Our
hospital is one of the smallest
hospitals in the state without
our hospital are people
Forced to drive anywhere from
84, Miles 100 miles to the next
closest hospital, which is also
a small hospital in trouble.
Do you appreciate your thinking
about this? And I hope they do
pass. Thank you very much, Mr
Chavez.
Good afternoon. Um, Mr Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Marco. Guns also
represent McKinley County and
not much to say other than what
hospital associations explained
about the bill. This is a
critical piece of gap funding
for our rural hospitals. We have
McKinney County are dire. Need
this money to get to a place
where we can keep our hospital
open in order to keep our
community alive?
So we really appreciate the
efforts of Senator Woods and
Senator Mundo's and, um,
representative of chattel for
bringing this bill forward. We
thank the committee for their
efforts and ask you to pass it
along with Senate Bill 17 and
other, uh, efforts to increase
provider rate increases are
going to help rural hospitals
hopefully keep their head above
water.
It's really important and we
thank you for your efforts on
this matter matter, Mr Chairman
and members of the Committee.
Thank you very much, Mr
Gonzalez.
Okay, Um
Excellent. We've got that
members were. We're going to
take a pot. We're gonna take a
pause. We're going to consult
the Health and Human Services
Committee to make sure the
amendment is right Sponsors. Mr.
Clark will make sure that
everything's lined up. Um, just
so that we're we don't have to
kind of come back up here and
redo something.
Um
And it may take a little bit. So
what I'd like to do if we can
just sort of pause here, um,
representative dela Cruz. Can we
ask you all to switch? We're
going to go to the House Bill.
Excuse me. Senate Bill 108.
We're not gonna We won't
During committee until we
Take action on Senate Bill 161.
But we wanted to efficient with
time.
Okay, represented daylight
Cruise.
Madam Secretary. Great to see
you. Please go ahead. Thank you,
Mr Temer members. I would love
to pretend that I really know
everything about this bill.
I am the sponsor of the houses,
but I'm just gonna let the
secretary of state take it from
here.
Great. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Mr Chair and
members. Maggie Toulouse.
Oliver, New Mexico. Secretary of
State, Um, representative
Delacruz, having worked with me
at the Burner Leo County
Commission when I was county
clerk for eight years, Uh, just
we have a great trusting
relationship, which I'm very
grateful for it. And one of the
blessings and the curses, Mr
Chair and members of having the
Senate finance chair and vice
chair sponsor. Your bill is that
when they're also having Senate
finance? Uh well, you all are
having House finance. They can't
be here today. But in short, Mr
Chair and members this bill.
Creates a distribution to the
election fund. The election fund
has been an existing fund for
many years. Um, but we've
continued as you all remember
when we spoke during my office's
budget hearing. Um, we've had
challenges over the years of
being able to fully fund our
elections because we've been
doing it through the operating
budget fund and you all have
been seeing fluctuations, uh, in
our operating budget fund
because one year we have one
fiscal year we have two
elections One fiscal year, we
have won statewide election.
This is meant to stabilize that
funding. Um and and at the end
of the day. What we're creating
is a fund that stays and hangs
out at $15 million. And when we
have an election, we spend the
funds necessary to conduct that
election which ranges Mr. Chair
from between 10 to maybe $12
million, And then maybe you have
a covid election or something
Crazy and
You know funds are extra funds
are necessary. Um And so what
would happen then is we conduct
the election and what's
reimbursed back to the fund is
the actual costs, bringing it
back to that 15 million, So it's
not like a continuous $15
million infusion. It will always
be the actual costs of whatever
the election. Uh, costs the
previous election costs that
came out of that fund and lastly
and then happy to answer any
questions, Mr Chair.
Um, this did this bill did pass
as amended unanimously through
both committees in the Senate
and unanimously off the House
floor. And and we ask today for
this committee support as well
and we'll answer any questions.
Thank you, Mr Chair just before
we go on the questions one of
the things that's that's
problematic is that the funding
for these elections have been
into the been put into the
budget of the secretary of
state.
But it's not a separate fund so
this would create a separate
fund that keeps it whole,
regardless of what's happening.
Thank you, Mr Jeremy Stafford
questions
Thank you very much from San
Dela Cruz. Madam Secretary. Is
there anybody here who wishes to
speak on Senate Bill 108.
Anybody online?
Okay. Questions from the
committee represent Luhan. Thank
you, Mr Speaker. Thank you. Um,
Secretary. Thank you,
representative.
It's a great, but I just
An early question.
What would happen and this has
happened before you've
experienced that we have, like
an extraordinary type of
election.
What is that? What is the cost
for that? And is it incorporated
or included in what? We're what
you're doing in this bill, Mr
Speaker.
So So, Madam Turn
representative. It's a very good
question, and that's why the
number said at 15. It was
originally at 20 before amended
and the wise Legislative finance
Committee folks and focus on the
Senate side decided to pare it
down a little bit and see if
this amount works. Okay, Um
again, we can't envision a
scenario that we would exceed 15
million. But in that case, madam
chair
You know, as we always do, we
will come back to this committee
in the following legislative
session and asked for
supplemental funding if
necessary, um and or go to board
of Finance. But again, the whole
goal behind this bill is to try
to avoid having to fill those
budget gaps. Um, with the
limited funding border finance
has for those emergency funds.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
that it's we never know what's
gonna happen with cycle. We have
set cycles of elections and
whatnot. But we always have
other things that come up all
the time. So thank you for your
service. Thank you. For this
bill represents Herndon, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair and Madam
presenter just for for
clarification.
There's been a lot of
conversation about the need and
expansion of polling places, for
example, on native lands, and I
just I'm trying to verify and
confirm that this is not stable
in terms of where you are now,
but it does allow the provision
for growing if that's what we
need to have on our native lands
in terms of other polling
places, Mr Chair
Member, Madam Chair rep. Mr
Chair, Gosh! Darn it, Mr Chair
Representative. Uh, yes. Um so
we anticipate 15 million being
the cost to not only fund a
normal election but to expand
necessarily necessary growth. We
are responsible for funding
additional sites on native
polling places if requested
additional mobile sites of
necessary so it does give us
that flexibility. Mr Chair and
representative for us to be able
to ratchet up
A little bit if we need to upon
that request, and that statutory
mandate
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Mr Chair. I
mean,
Yeah, we're all can know that
you're thank Europe, Sanford and
quite question additional
questions.
I just want to give for the
record. Madam secretary Lfc in
in the appropriations committees
over the last several years have
made deep investments in the
secretary of state's office. Is
that accurate? Mr Chairman? Yes,
and it's been very appreciated.
And so the were thank you, madam
Secretary, this sort of, um
without having to come to the
Appropriation Committee will
sort of be a true indicator and
make sure that it's filled up
too. But but there has been no
short changing in this capacity.
This is sort of just a smoother
system is that
Right, Madam Secretary. That's
right, Mr Chair, you know, as
you know, and you've heard me
say so many times. You know, we
we come before you. We say we
need 11 million. We get 9
million and then we have to
figure out you know, because
we're coming to you with actual
costs. Right? And we come to you
and we say Now we have vendors
that have been waiting for $2
million since the election. We
need to piecemeal that with
supplementals and things like
that.
And we're always robbing Peter
to pay Paul. So to speak, Mr
Chair, and so this is going to
prevent us from having to do
that in the future, which I
think will all be happy about
you all won't have to hear me
whining anymore. Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary. I think
it's well. We have to be very
careful about earmarking in
particular stable revenue
sources as was brought up.
Uh huh.
The think we have. This is a
clear system and one that that
we can support and it's great to
see. I think the strong support
for your office as a whole in
the integral work that you do in
the state, so
We'll go to the motion.
Okay, There's emotion by
representative Wuhan do Pass on
Senate Bill 10 Wait a second by
representative Allyson. Is there
any opposition to that motion?
You get to keep the unanimous
streak. Thank you.
Very grateful. Very grateful.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
Committee members. Thank you, Mr
Chairman members. Thank you. So,
uh now members, um
I want to explain and see if
everybody's kind. I think we
should be okay.
With the amendment that we have
We need to strike number one.
So this is gonna be a house and
a chance. So let's go back. Mr.
Clark, if you could come up,
Senator Woods
Uh um.
Thanks to our committee members
for pointing out that
The amendment. We had
Would have undone what was just
done in the Health and Human
Services Committee.
That's not our intent. We wanted
to act and again, thanks to the
committee members for
recognizing that
So I'd like to move. Uh, I'd
asked for a motion.
For, um
0.228409 0.1 with number one
struck.
Okay. It's been
Okay, So okay. Then let me ask.
We can retract that apologies
Represent Brown can can some
represent brown? Can you make
the motion verbally Stay 23 and
four
Would you verbally, say number
23 and four in the form of a
motion, please?
Alright, we we We won't adopt
the number.
I know, even mentioning. I tried
in our committee staff told me
no.
Okay, and those items are on
page one lines, 11 and 12 strike
making an appropriation to the
Healthcare Authority department.
And in suit and certain lewd
there of creating a temporary
program.
On Page four.
Strike lines 14 through 20.
Yeah.
And remember the succeeding
sections accordingly. Is that
right?
Yes, sir.
Okay. Is there a second? Okay?
It's been moved by represented
Brown signing by representative
like Cruz.
Are there any questions on that?
San friend in please. Thank you,
Mr Chair. So just for
clarification when this goes to
the floor
Uh huh.
Go ahead represent. There won't
be a number associated with the,
uh
These, um, amendments. I just
want to understand how this will
be shown.
I believe that That's the case
We will. The amendments will be
shown there will be an amendment
in context that will show it and
there will be a house
Appropriations and Finance
Committee amendment.
That will that will show these,
um
I don't Yes, that that so there
will be an HFC amendment that
will be shown on the floor.
Amendment that would suggest
that is the amendment that was
just moved by represent Brown
and just for clarification, Mr
Chair, it will have a 202
number.
Uh, I do not believe it won't It
won't have this one. But will it
have one?
I see. Thank you for that
question. Let's get confirmation
on that.
Is that confirmed that it will
not have a t 02? Great. We'll
confirm that. Thank you for the
question.
Other questions on the amendment
representing Garrett.
This is a technical kind of
question, Mr Chair.
Can we do a floor substitute? I
don't know about any I think I
think are my prep. My strong
preference would be to do the
amendment here. Appreciate
seeing Chairman Munoz here, this
will make it clear think the
understanding was that
There was policy work done in
the Health and Human Services
Committee. We would simply act
on the appropriation portion as
we usually do in this committee.
We should do it that way. And I
think the
The verbal amendment that's been
made is
Clear and accurate. Um
So
We could, but we probably would.
We won't. Okay. Thank you. Thank
you.
Any other questions from
committee.
Is there any opposition to
adopting HFC Amendment one?
I don't see any okay?
Um, we've had testimony on the
bill.
Are there any questions on? Uh
The sentence. Finance Committee
substitute for Senate Bill 161
as now twice a minute,
representative Johann, please
Thank you for bringing this
forward another We've had a
robust conversations about our
rural healthcare. Um
I'm just looking at the maximum
grant amounts.
Um as enumerated for the
following hospitals the chart
you gave us and my concern
greatly.
Is looking at Guadalupe County
Hospital with them.
Zero listed beds, can you
Is that because of the need or
How great the need is, Mr
Speaker. I mean, Mr Chair.
Mr Chair and representative.
Thank you. I believe I
understand. The question is on
Guadalupe County. Why is there
zero beds? They have recently
changed to it. Their status is
what is known as a rural
emergency hospital.
In which case there are no
inpatient beds. They do take
care of people stabilize them.
Hold them overnight if needed,
or until transferred to a higher
level of care.
Thank you, Mr Speaker. So that
does go to the fact that they
don't have any beds, and now
they're just an emerging. They
just have emergency care because
they used to have beds And it's
a decline in an indication of
the need. Is that correct? Mr
Speaker, Mr. Chair.
Mr Chair and representative
Luhan. Yes, There's a decreasing
amount of care. So they did have
licensed beds. But now they do
not, but they do. In addition to
emergency care, they still have
outpatient services.
I really appreciate that. Thank
you. This just goes to the fact
of the need. And Mr Mr Chair. I
sat on your subcommittee.
As a chair. We
We spoke with the miners Colfax
Medical Center.
And I just wanted, you know the
dire need and the things that
they're doing that they're
trying to.
In any way. Try to expand.
There's a lot there really
inhibited and there are the only
o B G Y n facility we have in a
rule New Mexico there and I just
want to say this is important.
Thank you, Mr Mr Chair.
Thank you very much for a
percent Luhan.
Represent Herndon. Please, Mr
Chair. I sorry to be late for
this, but I'm want to make sure
that the lines that we are
moving with respect to the
amendment on the document that
here that are here. I don't know
that they coincide with the
numbers after the amendment from
housing, human services. So how
are we confirming that those are
the same lines?
Because I think that they may be
different based upon the
amendments that were made and
how we assuring that so that
we're not mending something.
That's not Yeah, it's a very
fair question. I, uh, we have
the
It's a fair question. I think my
inclination actually is for us
to get a council service
amendment on
So we don't go back on the floor
until five. Let's take half an
hour to get a council service
Amendment.
Uh and we'll make sure that
they're lined up.
So
Ranking member Armstrong. Go
ahead. Excuse me for being out
of the room for a minute, But so
we're not removing the Health
and Human Services Amendment
correct. I would recommend that
we move that dollar amount to
Sierra Vista Hospital. Uh, I'm
trying getting Senator Woods. I
Chairman. I think we're going to
make sure we want to get this
done today. So we're gonna
Pause for about half an hour to
get a council service amendment.
That lines everything up.
Um it's a good lesson for me to
just make sure that we get it
done. So we're gonna recess to
collar the chair.
Please stick very close by
We're on the floor again at
five. Hopefully, we're done by
