here.
Representative Duncan here.
Representative Garrett.
Here. Representative Hernandez
here.
Representative Herndon.
Representative Herrera here.
Representative Little here.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sariana.
Representative Silva.
Representative Vincent
Vice Chair Dixon.
chair small.
We have a quorum. Great. Uh, all
right, we have a quorum, uh,
we're gonna go ahead and uh do
HB 71 1st, Gallegos is here,
would invite you up along with
uh Secretary Greginsky.
And whomever else.
My
OK, please take it away.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
proud, proud to introduce the
early education and care fund
Transfers Act. Currently, the
early childhood education and
care fund annually distributes
an amount equal to 5% of a
3-year average of the funds of
the funds year to end value or
250 million, whichever value is
greater. This bill seeks to
increase the minimum annual
distribution from the fund.
To at least 500 million, an
amount that would allow ECECD
and I have to say that really
slow, uh, to increase access to
service, uh, for 10,000 more
children.
After endowing this fun with 300
million in 2020, we have seen
the fun grow to just over $9
billion to the careful
stewardship of the state
Investment council.
Because of the substantial
growth of the fund, projections
now anticipate distributions
could exceed 500 million by 2028
or 2029. This bill speeds up the
timeline to see these much
needed funds distributed towards
making sure children in New
Mexico are receiving the best
possible education and care from
the day they are born, um, and
at this point, um, I'd like to
have my, my, uh,
Witness, uh, introduce herself
or my uh expert witness, please
introduce yourself and give her
statements.
Good, good evening, um, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, Elizabeth Greginsky,
secretary for Early Childhood
Education and Care department
and just really wanna thank you
for the house Bill 2, that you
took and um put in there the
language about House Bill 71
being passed so that we can meet
the moment and continue the
great work.
that we've built together with
the community, with all of you,
with the governor's vision to
have all of our young children
and their families and the
people who care for and educate
them while taking care of, um,
we've, as we've presented here
before this committee, there are
children in our state right now
eligible for services that we
are not able to serve them, but
with this budget and with this
increase, we will be able to
reach so many more.
Universal pre-K for fours,
universal pre-K for 3 year olds
and getting very close to good
saturation with our home
visiting system, which we know
is the entry point for all
families into this wonderful
system. And then, of course,
childcare, where we want to be
closer to 50% of our infants and
toddlers having access to
childcare, and their families
having access to support and for
our childcare providers to have
those types of revenues so that
they can pay their staff, they
can have the time out of class.
classroom with planning and they
can have good run businesses
that support our families and
support your local businesses.
So with that, I think we'll
stand for questions that, um, I
hope you all have the fact sheet
that shows where the
distribution, um, and then, of
course, you used some of that
distribution, uh, to build the
House Bill 2 for the early
childhood education and care
department.
You don't have that fact sheet,
I can get it. Great, um.
I don't know that we have the
fact sheet up here.
OK, we didn't get one from the
department.
OK, um, let's go for first, uh,
anything else, madam chair?
Mr. Chair, uh, with that, we're
gonna stand for questions.
Right. OK, we're gonna go first
to ranking member Chatfield then
to uh Representative Dao and
keep on going from there.
So, Mr. Chair, my question, Mr.
Chair, is to the secretary and
also to you.
He's my recollection that the
last time we talked about this
number, I brought forth the idea
that I thought doubling the
takeoff of this thing, uh, in
one year was a little bit
aggressive.
And it is my remembrance that we
agreed to cut that in half this
year.
And come back and look at the
other half next year.
And that's what I walked out of
this room thinking we had agreed
on.
And when I look at this bill,
that's not what I see.
So I would give you a chance to
tell me what you remember about
that agreement.
Mr. Chair, um, ranking member
Chatfield, um, that I do
remember you asking me the
question and I thought I
answered that it was um that the
department has done a very good
job of making the investments
last year, the legislature
increased it to 250 from 150,
the year before that it was from
30 million up to 150. I think
each year we have invested, so
I, I don't have the
recollection. I think you did. I
do remember you saying you
thought it was a rapid um
increase.
Right now it's a $200 million
increase over what the
department would get off the
typical normal distribution, um,
as projected, so it's around 300
million. So we asked for 200
million more.
To, to keep, again, the, the
work is happening so.
How about you could ask
and I'm sorry, Mr. Charity.
Well, Mr. Chair, 250 doubles it
what you had last year. I think
uh
We talked about half of that.
That's 375.
Uh, that increases it up to 375,
which is quite a lot, and it's a
pretty big doubling it sometimes
can.
That's the limits of what the
Programs able to put out there
and I, I just think a little
slower is a little better and
you know, I, it was my
understanding that we came out
of here with an agreement last
time to that.
Thank you ranking member
Chatfield next uh representative
doubt and then represent Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Secretary, and I, I.
I'm really worried.
About the workforce situation,
um, representative, Mr. Chair,
Representative and secretary,
um, when you mentioned that we
are going to lower the
teacher-child ratio in infant,
and we are gonna cap group
sizes.
You were gonna get me the figure
on how many new
Uh, how many new caregivers it
would it would take just to
cover the current number of
children currently served at a 1
to 5 ratio or 1 to 6 ratio. What
was that number, Mr. Chair.
Secretary Representative.
Mr. Chair Representative Doo, I
think you asked how many on the
Saturday hearing when you asked
me how many slots we would lose
as a result of changing ratio
and group size because you still
have the same number of
teachers, you just have less
children and, um, our our team
uh wonderful ECCD team did our
good analysis, and it's about
800 less infant and toddler
slots by lowering the ratio, but
then we have the 10 million that
the legislature is giving to
NMFA to build supply.
So we have to do both, we have
to increase access and improve
quality. Mr. Chair and
Representative and secretary,
would you agree that quality, a
lot of the quality is based on
the experience specialized
training degree of the
workforce.
Mr. Chair Representative Doo,
absolutely that is where quality
is and so our um the number of
students, children, to those
carrying credentialed, well
compensated adults. So they're
both important. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you
Representative, like I, there
comes a point with this fund,
with oversaturation in pre-K.
And efforts to build in
Remote areas that there will be
a diminishing rate of return if
we don't address the workforce,
if the growth of the workforce
does not match.
As we grow slots. This has been
a problem for a long time in
pre-K, but if we think about
other bills that pass, one
that's heading to the floor just
recently.
I'm very concerned about this
infant toddler workforce and and
inadvertently creating an infant
toddler desert, child care
desert. I, I don't, I can't wrap
my head around.
These figures
1 $10 million loan for the
private.
Centers
The cost per square footage for
the cost per square foot. I
just, I can't, the math does not
add up. It's just unlicensed? Is
it neighbor and family care,
where are these infants gonna
be?
Uh
And Mr. Chair, Representative
Dao, as I think I mentioned in
my hearing that we do have that
childcare supply and demand
study that'll be completed in
May and you'll be able to see
community by community in New
Mexico, exactly where the supply
is and exactly where we need to
grow the supply. OK. Thank, and
so Mr. Chair and secretary,
thank you. So you're doing it
regionally based on need.
Mr. Chair, um, uh,
Representative Dell, we're
doing, we're doing we have
contracted it out to the low
income investment fund, they are
a national organization who's
done these types of analyses in
other states and in other
communities, and so they're
looking at it, um,
community by community. They're
looking at the whole state.
They're looking at the supply in
our school based in our
community based in our head
starts and our tribal
communities, so that a report
will be available to the
legislature later this year.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you secretary and
Representative, um.
So I'm going to switch back to
pre-K again, which, according to
our, um, I don't, I don't think
anything changed in the two
years are gone, was a commitment
to a mixed delivery model. And I
noticed a shift in your language
from when I was here two years
ago from looking at the local
community, we have these early
childhood regional community. We
have early childhood, uh,
councils in the local community,
and they determine if there is a
gap and even just from the last
cycle last year in the RFP, you
could not do.
ator saturate an area. And now I
hear you shifting your numbers
to statewide and saying we're at
80% capacity in 4 year olds
statewide, but, but still
expanding, but not recognizing
that say Logan and Tucumari have
chosen not to have pre-K or
Honda or wherever it is by
choice, they don't want it,
which is causing the areas, some
areas to be at 250% of
saturation.
And every, it feels like each
year it's like this is our last
time. This is our last
expansion. This is the last one,
but it keeps coming like, do you
perceive that you will stop
expanding pre-K at some point.
And using taxpayer funds to
build facilities?
Mr. Chair, Representative Doo,
um, we do believe that this
about the governor's ask will
get us to where we wanna be, um,
and then again, the legislature
will decide if more funds should
be appropriated based on the
data we provide to you through
our annual outcomes reports and
see if there's more funding, so
that would be a decision,
obviously of the legislature,
um, the last question you asked
was.
Well, I mean
Madam Chair and I don't, I'm not
gonna talk about, I'm not gonna
talk about counties, but there's
some counties where there's 15
births a year where we've built
capacity far, far beyond what
would ever be.
Be
Needed in those counties. Would
you say that's true, Mr. Chair,
Representative Doo, I'm Sandy
Trujillo and her team who ran
the pre-K have done a phenomenal
job over the last 5 years,
really bringing the two pre-K
systems in our state into one,
and part of that work has been
understanding where the supply
is, where the programs are, and
so I would say that that has
potentially been the case in a
very few communities. That is
the work that this department
has done to not have that be the
issue, to make sure that we
support the mixed delivery
system as
whole, we have the saturation
data by school district, meaning
the geographic boundaries and we
can absolutely share that with
the committee staff if you want
to look at that and um so we we
talk about.
New Mexicans, 84% of 4 year olds
in New Mexico having access, but
in our department we look at it
at a very granular level so that
we know that we families have
choice. Thank, thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you. I, I feel
like I'm beating a dead horse,
but when did you stop counting
um the programs that are foreign
and star 5 level and nationally
accredited, when did you stop
counting them as children served
because they're there, the
parents chose it, and they're
choosing to pay for it. And so
we're, you're not counting them
as in, OK.
Did you do that?
From the beginning, we've never
counted them as part of our
denominator because you cannot
access those programs unless
you're eligible for an allowable
activity and the before the
recent years, you had a copay
and they were not free, um, that
was not free services, so it's
different than having access,
and they don't follow the same
standards. So if a family is
enrolled in a New Mexico pre-K,
they know what they're getting,
it's their age of their child,
they're eligible, there is no
other qualifying conditions.
So that's why it's different and
that's why we use and we so we
have never used um.
those in our calculation inside
the department. Well, thank you,
Madam Chair, and I think it's
probably obviously, but you
heard me talking about early
childhood, but I just think that
it is time to look at children
with special needs to create
differentiated rates and to make
sure that their needs are met,
especially when we're
considering peel and um
legislation, and we're not
addressing the ratios, and we're
not serving children in the
least restrictive, most
inclusive setting. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, Doo. Uh,
next we're gonna go to Baca
please.
Like he was chairman and thank
you for your presentation.
I, uh, I did have the, um,
Opportunity to see this bill in
house education uh earlier.
And um
I want to bring up some
questions about it because.
You know, I'm actually very torn
about this from somebody who
supports and and really works to
fund.
Uh, public education.
So talking about do we have the
capacity to to spend the 250.
million dollars more.
And and that's what it, so my,
my questions, um, Madam
Secretary and Mr. Chairman are
gonna to be centered mostly
around.
Money and programs, so um.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, and, uh, Madam
Secretary and uh representative.
According to this, the $250
million would help to serve.
An additional 10,000 students,
is that, that's from your fact
sheet?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, that's correct.
Mr. Chair, um, Madam Secretary,
and what
Setting will these children be
served? Are we looking at in
what is a percentage? I do
concede that there is both.
Um, home settings, childcare
settings, but also public school
settings, that's a particular
interest to me.
Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Chairman, that that's
correct, they would be in in
both those settings. Well,
thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I
kind of need to know as far as
um, it just was last you the
day. Um.
Do we have a plan, and I think
that's really what is the plan
and what types of setting that
we do.
Because I will speak in my own
school district.
We do not have, we have kids on
a waiting list.
In public schools.
And so when we're talking about
and I I'm sure my district is
not.
The only one?
And, and so it is, it is
important to me.
And for others
To find out what is that
percentage if we're.
You know, if we're looking at,
you know, creating and, you
know, 300 to 4000 more seats
statewide.
You know, just, that would be
something that I would like to
hear um.
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Baca, it is about 3000 seats,
um, pre-K, um.
A little over 6000 infant and
toddler childcare.
And, um, probably 1000 more.
1000 more in-home visiting, so.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you.
Um
I'm not, I'm not the math person
here. Um.
But 250 million divided by
10,000 is about $25,000 per kid,
is that correct?
Mr. German, Madam Secretary.
Mr. Chair Representative Baca,
that that is um probably true,
but I just want to say that it's
not a $250 million increase to
$200. I mean, we're changing the
distribution, but that we were
already gonna get 300 million,
so it's a 200 increase over what
we were projected to receive,
but yes,
so that's probably 2000 and
that's both direct service
quality and infrastructure that
it takes to serve those 10,000
more children.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you Madam
Secretary, for your
clarification.
Um
The other day when I, I, we met
in committee and I asked.
What were your reversions?
For the
Um
Fiscal year 23 and 24.
Uh, I have that. I don't know if
you have it, it's in volume 3,
Kelly. Can you, as far as
versions is page 156.
You know what your reversions
are, Madam Secretary
24, I know it was a little over
a million of general fund, I
think in um 24, we also did
revert, um, was it 7 million in
trust fund, but it goes back to
the trust fund.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and uh Kelly,
yes.
Volume 3, page 1.
Mr. Chair Representative Baca,
1.3 for the general fund.
And then the, the total on the
bottom there.
Kelly, can you explain to me
because
For the fiscal year of 23,
there's a 191 million.
Um
For fiscal year 24, there's 69
million, so if you are not
reverting general funds, where
do these, what other funds are.
Um, does the ECCD receive
And as far as the uh those
amounts, I don't.
Yeah
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Kelly Klut
Legislative Finance Committee.
Um, so this is general fun
reversions.
Um, and as the representative
was noting.
For FY 23, that was 823,000 and
then 1.3 million in FY 24. Now,
last year when the trust fund
distribution was changed. We
also updated the statute that
any trust fund money that's not
spent in that fiscal year
reverts back to the trust fund
corpus,
um, so that goes, so the trust
fund has got a corpus, which is
what you invest from, and then
you guys appropriate from the
corpus to the.
You spend money from the corpus,
the program fund and appropriate
out of the program fund. So
anything that goes into that
program fund that is unspent or
anything that is sent to the
agency that is unspent in the
fiscal year goes back into the
corpus for reinvestment.
I mean, and maybe, I mean, and I
if it.
I really just, I'm seeking
clarification here because Mr.
Chairman, Madam Secretary, I'm
looking
To look at capacity to spend
funds, OK, that, that right
there is the bottom line and
that's why.
If we're looking at this, I, I,
I don't have if we have a plan
and we have.
to make small incremental um
increase to this fund, I'll be
the first to vote yes on it, but
can you please, again, and I
mean, if I'm looking at the
wrong page here, page 156.
Is 155? Yeah, just one, it's at
the very bottom 4 lines from the
bottom represented Baca from uh
the
4 lines above the bottom on page
155.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for the clarification.
So then the
The, the what are the numbers on
page 156.
She remembers the kid, so that
total agent.
Of all agencies.
So that's not just ECECD. That
total is the total from starting
on page 154 all the way through
each state agency which is
listed by agency code.
Totaling total reversions. ECCD
by themselves.
are on page 155, and you see it
says 6:11 next to them. Yes,
ma'am. That's their agency code,
so that's their specific agency
reversions. And thank you for
that clarification because I,
when I was looking at that
number, it, it was very
You know, when we're talking
about increasing the 250,000, we
had a reversion of.
69 million, but if that's for
other agencies that I stand
corrected, so thank you. um
Sorry, Mr. Chairman and Madam
Secretary, I, I made my glasses
fog up a little bit.
I.
You got very
You got,
so, um.
My last question, Mr. Chairman
and Madam Secretary and
Representative Gallos.
The, the other big important
piece to me is actually
Home visiting and the investment
in fit programs. So that's an
important part of this. So what
percentage or what amount are we
looking at investing in those
two critical areas because as
we're talking about.
Um,
Connecting students and linkages
to
Both services and support for
families.
Um, that, that's also of
interest to me.
Mr. Chair, Representative Baca,
thank you for that question and,
and I agree and our budget was
about um 16 million for a fit
and uh 10 million for home
visiting, um, is the request to
use the increased distribution
to support.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, in my
last
And it's really my last mile of
these funds of the 500 million
that you are requesting.
What, what, is there any of
these that are
Some of these will be reimbursed
to the
Um, child care facilities or to
the schools.
Are there any direct payment to
families from this fund.
Mr. Chair, Representative Baca,
uh, no, there are no direct
responses.
Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Great. Thank you very much for
representing Baca. Uh, next.
We're gonna go to a vice chair
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, uh.
Madam Chair and secretary, um,
What is the total budget for
ECECD this year, not including
federal funds.
Um, I'm gonna have my.
ASD director, give me the uh the
number of non-federal, so other
transfers, so not tan either.
Just the funding.
That's federal, of course, yes,
I know, just gotta.
Kelly probably has it faster.
And
Mr. Chair and secretary, if it's
easier to go with the the number
that includes federal.
OK, it's about 790.
This year, right?
790 million.
Yeah, 785. So Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, the total
operating budget, including all
revenues, is 785.2 million
rounding, um, of that, the
general fund is 348.1 million,
so about half the.
And the trust fund is about 2,
2500 and then there's 30 million
of 10 of transfers. So when you
look at the other transfers,
well, you don't have this, but
on the different sheets when you
were looking at that, the total
transfers is 184, almost all of
that is trust fund in tan.
Mhm. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, um, Kelly and secretary.
So, I mean, it seems to me that
there's still room.
If the long-term goal is to
replace general fund money
that's going into early
childhood.
With the money that we have
saved in the early childhood
trust fund. We are very close.
To making that goal true.
Is that correct?
Yeah,
go ahead, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, um, so a couple things.
One, we have the land grant
permanent fund, which comes into
our budget as general fund. So
that's what I think 100 and.
79 million this year coming from
the la, so we don't want, we
can't take away all the general
fund because the voters voted to
have the land grant fund our
department, uh, and then again,
we, we need to continue to yes,
build the system which requires
more revenues, what, how much
was the 178178, is from the land
grant, which goes into the
general fun line item, so that
will continue to grow with that
distribution, um, and so I don't
know if I answered your
question, but we don't, we
won't.
We, we would want to see some
investments and then of course,
depending on what happens at the
federal level.
Um, that will change, but.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, um,
and secretary, um,
And one of the things I don't
know that I realized it or
remembered um is that we did
change the legislation. Did you
say last year, so that any
unexpended funds that originated
from the trust fund go back to
the trust fund. OK.
Excellent. Uh, Mr. Chair and
secretary, how do we, you know,
I think that, I think the
concerns about rapid growth, um,
you know, I think it
goes to our desire to make sure
that funds are being spent
effectively and wisely. What are
the ways that we can ensure
That these funds are spent the
best way.
Um, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
um, such a great question, and
important one, and I think our
team um who's here, we have a 5
year strategic plan. We have a
pretty clearly laid out what we
know our job is to do, and it is
to improve school readiness, and
that means that we need to not
have waitlists at our pre-K
programs, we need to do better
for our students with special
needs. We need to intervene
early and really shore up that
fit program and and home
visiting is just that entry
point, that universal touch
family connects.
Dolly Parton's imagination
library, um, but no, but the um
the um that that getting to
families as soon as they know
they're pregnant and being able
to offer those supports, and I
think our team we're we're,
we've matured well as an agency
given that we had 2 years of,
you know, with, with the
pandemic, and we have a lot more
to do, but without the resources
we sit here at this place with
these resources, families with
unmet need, communities asking
for more help. And so we know
that that's our responsibility.
and to be accountable and to be
transparent with how those
dollars are spent, think about
90 to 95% of the funding that
comes into our agency goes right
back to your communities, um,
in, in any one of these programs
and the quality work that we're
doing, so our, our internal.
Support I think it's under 5%,
um, is what stays in the agency
to run the programs. And, and
Mr. Chair and Madam Vice Chair,
if I could just add um with the
money and the funds that we
have, um, there's no reason to
have children on a waiting list.
This is the time to make sure
that those services are being
provided and this is exactly
what this money was intended
for.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Madam Chair and secretary, I
think that's, that's very
helpful. Um, and I wanted to
flag on the first page of the,
the fact sheet that you shared,
um, you know, the return on
investment.
Uh, for, you know, what
What New Mexico.
The benefits that the state
receives and communities receive
um by making this investment,
um.
I, you know, I always like to
look at that and um.
Don't always feel that we give
it appropriate weight. So I did
just wanna flag that, you know,
this investment we can and
should expect um an annual
return, 13% annual returns seen
in in various ways, um.
You know, school readiness,
fewer aces, you know, a whole
assortment of things and so, um,
I'm glad that we've got uh
guardrails in place, uh, a
mechanism for the reversions to
go back.
Um, to the trust fund if they're
not used, um, but I think, you
know, it's valid concerns, um,
about making sure that, you
know, the dollars are spent, uh,
well, so thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Vice Chair Dixon. Next we're
gonna go to representative
Duncan and then representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
secretary.
Um
Mr, my district or I'll say a
district uh is talking about
closing down a school.
I guess I can't wrap my mind
around where all these kids are
coming from.
And I've got a school in, in my
district that's talking about
closing down.
Can you tell me where these kids
are coming?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Duncan, I mean, I would have to
look at the the data in your
community and and what the
births and what the school, the
age of children, but you know,
we do track and use data to
drive our strategy and our
investments so happy to come and
talk more to you about that and
I know we, we have a lot of
childcare centers in San Juan
County and they are um they're
full, they have very pre-K
programs and also in the
Farmington School District, you
know, great pre-K programs, so.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you secretary. Um,
Are we and I think you um shared
this with us when you were here
before. Are we donating money.
Somehow to these individual.
folks that are running these
centers to enlarge them, to
remodel them, to build them.
Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair Representative Duncan,
uh we did receive, um, quite a
bit of federal relief money
during uh for the pandemic, we
did make grants directly to
programs to do that, and now we
have set up with the New Mexico
Finance Authority, the low
interest childcare revolving
loan fund, which has 1.8 million
in it now and then with House
Bill 2 goes through, they'd have
another 10 million that they
could access through low
interest loans.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So what
I'm hearing from you is there
will be no more grants to these
folks.
Mr. Chair Representative Duncan,
we do not, we do cannot make
grants right now with the
funding sources that we have for
um facility. We, we did work
with West. I don't know if
you're familiar with them, what
they stand for, but they're a uh
a community development
financial institution, and it
was again with some federal
money that we gave them and they
make small grants to help people
improve both quality and supply,
uh, but those and, and many
programs in your community have
have applied and benefited from
that as well, so.
The department works through a
3, well, their community
development financial
institutions, so they have
access to other resources, they
have business support, business
coaching that goes along with
those grants.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, but I'm
specifically talking about our
bucket of money right here.
We are not doing that anymore.
So Mr. Chair, just to clarify,
um, we prior to COVID, we did
not do that either, because it
would fall mostly against our
answer donation clause, but the
money that the secretary is
speaking of is mostly from the
Federal 3 COVID bills, and that
was an unprecedented amount of
money that was very stringently.
The feds told us exactly you
have to give it out in these
grants for these things and so
it was very directed about how
that money was spent to the
providers. The agency didn't
really have much latitude in
that decision for us.
Significant portion of that
money.
Thank you. Thank you, Kelly, for
that.
Um
Two other questions and I'll be
done with.
Um
Madam Secretary, you know how I
feel about this, and
I will tell you I would rather
pay mom and dad the money.
That we're spending on childcare
for them to stay home with their
children, probably not gonna
happen.
That's my personal feeling about
it.
Oh
Mr. Chair, at what point in time
are we going to quit putting
money in this fund that is
enormous.
And I'm sure you and I talked a
little bit about that today, so
I don't know who wants to tackle
it, but this is a pot of money
that is obscene.
And at what point in time can we
quit putting money there and
take that money and put it into
our savings account and get to
that 40% that I'd really like to
have instead of.
Well
Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, you and I have
had many conversations about
this, and I think you know what
we're talking about is societal
issues. And so, um, I mean I
would love to say, especially in
my line of work, uh, child abuse
is now fixed and it's over
because we've been able to throw
all this money at it. It's, it's
an ongoing uh way of
Prevention, it's ongoing to
continue to uh keep children
safe.
Um, by providing especially um
in home services, being able to
make sure and you know, I, I
know that you would love parents
to be able to stay home, um, I
don't know that that's feasible
in most families anymore,
especially with the economy the
way it is, I mean, it usually
takes 2 people working if you've
got a two person household like
that, 2 parent household like
that, um, and if not, you see
that they're struggling and so
we wanna make sure if kids have
to go to daycare, that they're
in a safe.
place that they're that they're
learning. I mean, especially at
the developmental age they're
at, that they're perfect for
learning and and things um that
that maybe sometimes they don't
learn at home.
Sometimes it's easy for, you
know, a parent or a grandparent
to put that child in front of a
television set.
versus uh actually working with
them one on one or with a group
of learning to play with each
other.
And there's so, there's so many
benefits to that. And so I would
ask you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I don't
disagree with anything you've
said, you know that, um.
My uh grandson had a, uh
Outdoor experience, his school.
It was an outdoor experience.
They didn't have a classroom.
Uh, and, uh, he absolutely
learned more in that than.
we could have learned, I, I
think boys don't need to be in a
classroom a lot. I think they
need to be outside and getting
dirty and, and doing some things
that that we cannot replace. And
so, therefore, I'm not for
putting these kids in front of a
educating them from the minute
they're born to the minute
they're out of high school, um,
and so I appreciate everything
we're doing.
There's no doubt about it. We're
doing some great things. Um, I
just think at some point in
time, as I said, Madam
Secretary, that needle is gonna
move.
Little tiny bit.
In 4 years from now, we'll have
the same discussion, and I'd
like to see it change. Thank
you, Mr. Speaker.
Thank you very much,
Representative Duncan. We're
gonna go next to Pettigrew, then
Representative Silva.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Chairman, uh Chairwoman, and
thank you secretary. Um.
I think I confused myself with
the series of numbers that we're
going through with our
co-chair's questions on funding.
So if you would please walk me
back through.
I have 348.1 million.
From the general fund.
Does that include the 178
million.
From the land ground.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Pettigrew, 150 from 24.
From what?
Sorry,
I'll like Kelly Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. So
when we were talking about the
348 from the general fund in the
current fiscal year.
The current fiscal year, a
portion of the permanent school
fund is 159.6. So those are
apples to apples. The 178 is the
26th recommendation, so an
apples to apples for that would
be, uh, uh, it's the 15, it's a
151.
0. So I will remind this
committee that when you adopted
the LFC recommendation, you
actually reduce general fund by
$15 million and replace some of
that with trust funds.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Kelly.
So
current year, 348 general fund.
And current year 250 from the
trust fund, the Early Childhood
Trust Fund.
The remainder of that between
Between those two and the 785 is
kind of funds.
Uh, Mr. Chair and, yeah, it's,
um, there's tan and then there's
federal childcare development
block grant. There's USDA
funding for our food program and
there's also um.
The maternal infant early
childhood home visiting from the
federal level also, and yes,
exactly, and, and from the US
Department of Education funding
for our, uh,
Earlier fit for the family
infant toddler, for infants and
toddlers with developmental
delays and disabilities through.
Individuals with disabilities
Education Act Part C.
We have
All those different federal
funding sources that are in the
federal line item, but federal
line and then in the other
transfers, that's where the 31
million of Tanna coming from HCA
to us, uh, and the trust funder
in that sources.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you Secretary so that gets us to
around 785 current year.
What's next year's chairman and
secretary.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigre, I think it's 990.
Listen up.
Yeah.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you secretary. So,
Um
Moving into next year. What
chairman and secretary.
What was the total amount of
reauthorizations you requested.
to go into fiscal year 20.
26.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigrew reauthorizations for
C2.
Is that what you're in our
specials, everything that we
went through, chairman, uh,
secretary with respect to
reauthorizing money for ECEDC.
Riots
And there is a um I I I we can
we can get that to the
committee. It's part of our work
with the um HHS 2020 that we
have some uh C2 is the only one
that I'm, and some reo and
I don't think for any facility.
It's just IT.
And it's under a million
dollars.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you
Secretary. Um,
Inside the grove for 2026.
What would be chairman and
secretary to requests for
authorization.
Outside of the
Representative Pettigrew, we
have the grove from last year
for the infant toddler pay
parity, which is 5 million over
3 years, annually.
Um, but we don't, we don't have
any for this year.
The chair secretary, there's no
section 9 money at all.
And, and, and House Bill 2.
Or EC EDC.
Correct, Mr. Chair,
Representative Pet and
secretary, is there any money
within section 5 for EC EDC.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigrew, there is we had, we
had larger requests, or I guess
what was in our request? Yes,
for um, our special
appropriation, we asked for the
104 million for the childcare
quality pilot.
2, for our family infant toddler
professional development.
And then we asked for a
supplemental for our fit program
uh for this fiscal year because
of the um uh budget shortfall
that we're gonna have of 7
million, a little over 7
million.
OK.
And Chairman and secretary.
On top of the 990, the 106.
a million dollars in
reauthorization.
We want to expand to 400
million. Is that correct,
Chairman, and, and Chairman or
chairman, chairman, the
chairwoman, secretary.
OK. I'll get there.
Mr. Chair represented Pettigrew,
that is the 990, I mean, well.
The 9 we don't want to go above
that, it's the 990 and that 106
that you referenced as, um,
non-recurring.
The 990s, the full operating
budget requests.
Right, no.
You're testing me late in the
day here.
So, so chairman and, and
secretary, just I'm trying to
get clear. So that 990 would
include
Every dollar figure within House
Bill 7160 and I'm just gonna go
67.3 million for childcare
assistance all the way to 25
million for pre-K. Well, so am
I, and that's what we're trying
to do is I'm trying to do the
math equation in my head. So we
have a, we have a proposed
budget of somewhere around $990
million and I don't know why I
just put a B there, so let's go
back to an end,
plus 104.
And 2, which makes 106, so.
Almost 1.2 billion.
Almost muscles. Yes, yes, ma'am.
So, Mr. Chair, the, the 9 990
was the executive
recommendation. HAFC what's
coming out of you guys is about
9:50.
OK. In total, all revenues, and
that includes
400 million from the trust fund
in that 950.
And the specials are, yeah, and
the specials are non-recurring,
which would be outside of that
recurring.
Chairman and Kelly, and I, I
think I understand that piece,
but the specials.
In supplemental add up to about
106, right? Oh no, they, I think
it's like 4 million. No, that,
uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigrew, he's right, the
childcare quality pilot is 104
and the 2 million for fit is the
2 million for fit is
HAFC did not recommend that.
That's in the executive budget.
Yes. So none of that is in the
Recommend a budget that is.
What's coming out of HAFC does
not include that 97 million.
It's only the 4 million for
family infant toddlers, and
2 million of each of 2 million
of of fit and 2 million of of
both. They're all fit, but
they're separate. So that 9.
And 97 million was the executive
recommendation that is not
included in house Bill 2 coming
out of house appropriation.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Chairwoman. Thank you Secretary.
Thank you, Kelly. So,
When I get
This much paperwork tomorrow.
I'm gonna be able to find
somewhere around $950 million
for ECEDC.
OK.
And that includes everything
inside, chairman and chairwoman
secretary, everything inside the
House Bill 71 as well.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigrew.
Because it's a a 400.
And this is increasing it to
500.
There's 100 million.
And that could be, yes, on the
Senate.
I think represent Pettigrew that
half of this increase is in
house fill too.
The other half is not in health.
Thank you, Chairman. I guess I
should have said that at the
big, I think, yeah, it's a good
lesson for me that so uh yeah,
and, and House Bill 71 is
mentioned in half of the
increase is in house Bill 2.
Thank you very much. So.
Chairman, if I understand.
We leave tonight.
And assuming house built to
rolls through, does everything
it's intended to do in its
current capacity.
The Senate has $100 million
extra they could.
Or
It just
What happens to that 100
million.
So, so potentially yes to the
first and Kelly, if you can
answer on sort of the, if it's
unbudgeted and reverts, then
where that would go, please, if,
if you could answer that,
please. You just answered it
yourself, so, um, this bill does
not appropriate 500 million. All
this bill does is increase the
distribution from the corpus to
a program fund, which you guys
can then appropriate out of.
You're appropriating 400 million
currently. Now, if the Senate
chooses to
increase that, um, contingent on
this bill passing, they could do
that. They could also not spend
it. And then at the end of the
fiscal year, it would just
revert back to the corpus, but
that's a decision up to the
Senate.
OK.
I my head wrapped around it to
get to the to the.
question that I
We're looking at growing by over
$100 million.
He unfunded.
For your funded positions were
low right now.
You really
I guess the basic question here
is, you really think you can,
you can.
No.
An additional $100 million.
With
Um
16 months. Representative
Pettig.
We released um, we closed the
pre-K application last Friday.
We have
Forget, I'll get how many
applications we have, we just
released the family infant
toddler, um, uh, requests for
application Tuesday.
And we're about to release our
home visiting application, so
there is great need and desire
and capacity out there, I can
point you to the year of 24 when
with the land grant passed and
the legislature, we asked for
$20 million for pre-K and they
gave us 100 and gave us 109, not
they, you, and we did it, we
expanded and we made that happen
for families and children and
the.
The provider community help. So
yes, we absolutely can, we're
poised, we're ready. The work is
already in motion.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you secretary for that. I have
some concerns with that. I will
close with this.
I would like this department and
every department.
For the legislators that want
the information and actually
have a piece of legislation
flowing through.
every RFP, every RFQ.
That can potentially impact the
legislature or or somebody that
somewhere in their district or
statewide.
Those notifications come to the
legislature.
So that we know
When there's an opportunity to
reach out to people within our
community.
Chairman, I appreciate your
patience with me. Thank you for
the math.
Thank you, Representative Petig.
We're gonna go to Representative
Silva and then I'll have some
questions.
Oh sorry, Representative Silva
and then Representative Vincent
Representative Silva first.
Thank you, chair. My question
was answered.
OK, uh, representative Vinson,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative and secretary.
And also thank you for the
tutorial you gave me the other
day and about 15 minutes. I do
need a bigger tutorial to get.
To understand all this, but Mr.
Speaker, when
Going back to Representative
Baca's question on
Waiting list
Is there a waiting list because
we don't have the brick and
mortar places to put the
children in. Why is there a
waiting list of kiddos.
Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative,
um, I don't said representative
Baca Representative Vincent, um,
you know, I think it's a variety
of factors. Sometimes it is the
brick and mortar, sometimes they
have that and then they're
working to get the workforce.
Um,
But we would have to look
community by community, I do
know I I sit now on the public
school capital outlay, and so
I'm I'm looking forward to
getting more involved there and
understanding how schools are
able to access some of that
funding and then, of course, the
work I think represent pedigre
maybe the
No, you're fine. New Mexico
Finance Authority working with
our community-based sector, uh,
and then that again I'm gonna
point to that childcare supply
and demand study that's gonna
help us understand where we have
supply. Maybe we're oversupplied
with school age and what we need
to do is help renovate and make
those spaces for pre-K or
infants and toddlers. So we're,
we're pretty excited about that
work.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you Secretary. So a community
like mine.
In Lincoln County. Let's go all
the way over to Corona.
Would there ever be a
possibility that there could be
a facility there and kiddos in
that facility.
Especially with all the wind
generation and, you know, they
brought 3500 people in there.
Would that be a possibility, Mr.
Chair. Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Vincent, you
know, absolutely, and I think
Sandy Trujillo here, she's
traveled to so many communities,
sat down with partners, figured
out what, what the need is, who
are the people who can help meet
that need and where are the
resources, so I think this is
the kind of work that we, we
need to be doing and we want to
be doing in the department.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you Secretary. So when
you send your, your folks out
and they're evaluating.
How do you communicate all that?
Do you put it into a spreadsheet
or or do you meet with the
stakeholders in those
communities. How does that work?
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Vincent, such a good question,
um, it's a variety of ways, but
we definitely go out and um
document we we bring the
stakeholders together, um, we
were working in the perimermian
Basin, uh, with a group down
there, um, in the in the Lee
County area because they also
are struggling Carl's bad is a
big Charles uh.
Childcare desert. And so it'll
be different ways and then we'll
do the follow up. We'll help
them figure out whether the
resources are, do they need to
get a license? Is it licensable?
So it definitely depends and
then we have contractors,
consultants who work at UNM who
also are available to help um
programs, um, think about it and
then like I said, that group,
the women's economic
self-sufficiency west, uh, does
the business coaching, business
practice coaching, so we meet
people where they are, and we
figure out how we can help them
build the kind
community they want for
families. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. And just a couple of
hardball questions.
Um, will the provider or the
center.
Just say, uh, well, so will the
provider or the center get paid.
If the parent is on paid family
medical leave. Chair, um
representative Vincent, um,
Billy, I might have to ask, um,
I'm not, I, we, we do like with
a a parent has a is um pregnant
and then has another child, and
then we'll still let them
continue their old, maybe their
older child is in care, they,
they can still continue to have
their care paid for for that
child that's in care.
OK,
so the continuity of care for
the child. We don't want to
disrupt that, um, so that,
that's our goal
once a year.
It just current regulation.
OK, and two more questions, Mr.
Chair. So,
What if the parent was unpaid
family medical leave, would they
still
Would they still be able to send
their child.
Are you guys come or however
that works.
Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, they would still be
able to send their child, we
call that a um a temporary um.
A temporary change, not a
permanent, so in their in their
qualifying activity. OK, thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
my last one is, so if you're one
of your teachers, one of your
workers.
was on
Uh, paid family medical leave,
um, do you have the qualified
subs.
fill their positions.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Vincent, we don't employ that,
you know, these are private
nonprofit, um, for profit
businesses that run the
childcare center, so that's we
don't make those decisions,
that's would you, Mr. Chair,
and, and secretary. So if you
had
If you had a facility, would you
make sure, say there's.
There's just enough teachers.
For the amount of students that
are there are kiddos, the threes
and fours, correct?
Uh
Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, um, I mean, it could be
children 6 weeks old all the way
up to 12 years old, but.
In in that whole range,
depending on this type of
provider, the size, the ages of
children that they're serving.
So in that, in that uh little
school or whatever it is in the
facility. What if one of the
teachers left for 3 months on
paid family medical leave.
And you had to have that
position, how would they fill
that position?
Yeah, you want to do. So, uh,
Mr. Chair and and Representative
part of I think what you're
getting at is how, how are we
going to make sure that that
service is provided, right? And
so, um, so.
The department doesn't have the
facility, but what they're doing
is they're providing the
training, and they're providing
hopefully they're they're
generating uh staff and they're
generating people with the
education level to be able to
fill in the gap and if if and
when that happens.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, but you
don't, don't you and Madam
Secretary and Representative,
don't you
Have some oversight, so they
have to comply with so many
teachers and if they had a
teacher that fell out on paid
family medical leave for 3
months.
They're not in, they're not,
they're not.
In your rules right now, I mean,
they, they can't provide
services.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and uh
Representative Vincent. So what
we, you know.
What we have responded to it in
regards to that is in our cost
model where we do, we say we
already know on state law you
have to give employees 2 weeks'
vacation. I mean not vacation, 2
weeks sick leave, sorry, you
have to pay certain things, so
we build all that into the
model, so if something like, you
know.
We'd have to figure that out,
but.
Generally in our model, we build
in a floater, a person a sub for
every 4 classrooms and for
people to be out of class.
Different businesses handle that
differently. They might have
family members who are qualified
and staff, but I hear what
you're saying. They must remain
in ratio and you know, they,
they have to make sure they have
enough adults to children to
ensure that active supervision
and and good health and safety,
so.
Different programs, some work
with temp agencies or some
things, and you know, we've to
have that conversation of how,
how can the state better support
substitute, just like we do in
the in you know public schools
struggle with this, I think
every day as well, trying to
find substitute release people
to come in, so it would, it
would be a similar thing, but it
would be business by business.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And the
word that I was searching for
and it's happened to me 2 times
this week. I don't know if it's
because we're tired or what, but
compliance, that's where I was
headed compliance. I, I could
see the word. I just couldn't
quite reach it, so the
compliance, so you built in 2
weeks.
Would you have to have another
model if paid family medical
leave was to go through, would
you have to have a model for 3
months.
Possibly, Mr. Chair
Representative, we would, I
mean, depending on what just
like we do with all the state
laws that our childcare programs
are required to follow, we'd
have to take a look at it. What
would it do and yes, absolutely
model.
Look at how to model that. OK,
yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Appreciate the time.
Thank you very much,
Representative Vincent. Uh, next
to Representative Dow for a
second time and then I'll have
some questions.
Mr. Chair, and Secretary
Representative, I'm just gonna
ask you, Representative, we had
a lot of deliberation here. We,
we talked with Charles, Kelly,
Rachel, I, I don't remember who
I was involved, Kelly and
Charles for sure about slowing
the growth of this so we could
really look at the saturation
rates and wait for the study to
come back that they're doing
and, and worrying about the
workforce capacity and rapid
rate of growth. And so this body
was intentional about the
ketchup and cleanup that we did,
and now this distribution is um
is
Is it 100 million more than it's
100 million more than what we
came to consensus in
subcommittees and etc. and so
I'm wondering if you're if
you're even open to amending it
to align it with the.
Deliberate work of this
committee.
Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, you know, I
think at this time I'm basing my
information on what the
department has requested, and by
lowering it, I think that lowers
the amount of growth and we
would lose a year.
And so I, you know, I would, I
would like to keep moving
forward.
Making sure that we, we don't
have waiting list, but we
continue to meet the needs that
are out there, and I know that
the study is gonna come in
after, of course, this session,
but I mean, I think that that
would be a better time to look
at.
You know what those outcomes are
and what those recommendations
are, and if we do need to wrap,
you know, ramp forward or rap
back, that's what we, that's
when we have that discussion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative Dell.
Uh, OK. Um, Madam Chair,
secretary, I guess I first
thanks for the handout, um, on
the handout, what I think I'm
seeing here in numbers that I
think we've got this.
I, um,
Sort of the, the work.
well,
I guess sort of a a good history
for us all and man, I'm sure you
went through this in secretary,
but for at least 2 years, uh,
and Kelly, would you mind coming
back up to the.
Let me ask Kelly first, uh, how
many years has Ella have LFC
working with Chair Gallegos and
other leaders and uh kudos to
the chair for setting this up,
remarkably successful in a sort
of a nationally and
internationally leading way.
Uh, how many years previous to
this did LFC recommend
increasing the distributions
from the early childhood Trust
Fund, because the revenues into
the trust fund were so far ahead
of schedule.
Was it just the last two fiscal
years, or did it precede that
it was just the last two fiscal
years, FY 25, 4 and 25. OK.
And a little bit sort of going
back to that secretary, is it
fair to say at least initially
there was a little bit of
skepticism from the department
around increasing the
distribution, but the chair and
others uh helped sort of, we
understood together that it
wouldn't impact the growth of
that fund and it's ultimate
intention just to reach that
$500 million annual
distribution.
Is that a fair thing to say,
madam, or yeah, Madam Secretary.
Chair, um, I, I think we, um.
We were not skeptical, I think
we wanted to make sure that it
stayed for the intended purposes
as originally constructed, but
we, and I think there was some
concern would it eat into the
corpus, how would it grow and I
think we've all seen that the
returns are very strong, so, um,
yeah, I would say that.
We didn't really have skepticism
about increasing it, but.
How it would be used. We had
some discussions about it. OK,
thank, thank you for that. Um,
and Madam Secretary and uh chair
and Kelly, I think we've already
gone through House Bill 2
includes basically half of this.
Is that in Kelly just to confirm
from the
From the early childhood Trust
Fund.
House built to, as we've done
through ketchup cleanup and
we'll be taking up soon
contemplates half of this
amount.
Correct, Mr. Chair, the original
LFC wreck was for about 290,
what would have naturally come
out with the distribution.
And you increase that 101 above
that.
And so that difference is just
that $100 million kind of still
left in possibility for
appropriation.
OK. Thank, thank you for that.
And, uh, Madam Secretary, um,
I think obviously this is the
you've been at the helm during
some really remarkable years.
I don't know if it's a question
for me or more of a statement, I
think.
Or let me ask you a question,
how important is it that the
next administration and whether
and and has the ability to sort
of continue and, and chart
leadership in this area with the
legislature. Mr. Chair, um,
obviously very important because
the work has to continue, this
is, you know, pretty still young
startup, um, we're doing very
well at, you know, almost 5, but
I think um that these um
revenues, this increased.
distribution will, you know,
give this administration our
opportunity to really put a
strong foundation and a stable
and sustainable department, uh,
and system in place that the
next administration will build
on and and remember the land
grant permanent fund continues
to grow as well, and the
distributions to the department
will increase um in that area as
well. So by 29, you know, you'll
see a little bit more over 500
million, but um.
So I, I don't know if I answered
your question, but it's
absolutely critical because what
we don't want to see is a system
that's not well funded and not
well supported that is doesn't
meet the goals that this
legislature set for improved
school readiness and, and we're
trying to backfill it, you know,
and next another
administration's trying to fix
things, so I think this is our
opportunity to really.
build, build, build that system
and because this is working as
intended, but it's working so
well, this is our opportunity.
Do that for the next
administration. Thank, thank
you, Madam Secretary. Uh, I
appreciate the answer, and I
think um
It is increasingly important for
us within as the legislature to,
uh, I think robustly guide and
particularly given the soon to
be changing administration. And
that's another way of saying,
Madam Secretary, just sort of me
making a statement on behalf of
me, no one else is that the, the
ability to reprioritize.
funds that the state controls
within the ECCD is a prerogative
that we have to hold on to very
strongly, and it's working in
close collaboration with the
executive, but it is, um, we, we
have to hold on to that
prerogative, and if that means
adjusting to some of the things
that the members have brought up
that uh are reflect changing
circumstances, then that's what
we will need to be able to do.
And that this
I think, as Kelly said, yeah.
Number uh quick other question,
Madam Secretary. um, right now,
we're still in a sort of a
declining birth rate situation.
So we have exponential or or
rapidly increasing money and and
decreasing uh uh birth rate, two
ways out of that are sort of in
migration, families with kiddos
coming here, birth rates going
up. Do you think that working
within this, um, one of our sort
of long-term
Legislative goals is being the
best and Madam Chair question
for you fundamentally.
This place for families that we
can maybe be encouraged
families.
You know, even more to sort of
find their place.
Uh, either to start or to grow
in New Mexico because of the
this fund.
Mr. Chair and committee members,
you know, we've talked about
generational poverty we've
talked about uh being able to
move the system, um, New Mexi,
we when we first dreamed about
this fund.
We never thought it would grow
at this rate.
Um
So I think, you know, I think as
appropriators, you know, you're
asking the, the questions of how
this money is going to be spent,
we want to make sure it's spent
wisely, but this is the time
that we have to spend these
funds on these on the the people
it was meant to be spent on.
That's what the vision was, that
was the legislative intent, um,
we've got the money and in 2
years, we don't know, I mean
politically where where things
could land.
If we start showing we can stay
on course, making sure that
these all these systems are in
place. We're gonna change lives
for generations for the for
these young kids, and I stand by
that. I, I believe that and I've
seen it happening. Great, thank
you, Chair.
Madam Secretary,
well said, Mr. Chair, and um I I
think I want people to envision
what the prenatal to 5 system
is, because I think we get
caught and it's pre-K.
Or it's this child and, and I, I
wanna just say like you've
appropriated it the doula
certification to maternal and
infant health, so it
It it seems like a big number,
but when you think about 85,000
children, 50,000 families and
23, 20,000 professionals
benefiting from these
investments. It's not, it's.
It's a lot of people to benefit
at this period of life where it
is very expensive, but the
return is so profound. Thank you
and is the return most important
at that 0 to 1?
And 0, you know, 3.
is the most prenatal to 3 is the
most powerful. And is there a
part of that, Madam Secretary,
that's more important is that
first part or middle or the
third. If we say 0 to 33 years,
any one of those years is more
important.
Mr. Chair, the prenatal to 3
together is the most important
period Madam Secretary, is there
0 to 11 to 2, or 2 to 3 or 2 to
3. You don't think that any of
those are more important than
the others.
I
Mr. Chair, I would say no, it's
the, it's the it's the
collective of that of that
quality prenatal to 3 experience
from the time, you know, you're
pregnant, but actually before
you get pregnant, ideally, but
then through that postpartum and
into into those supports and
services, absolutely, and
there's no
the, the neuroscience, the
developmental science, and the
economic science have all
aligned, and they say, this is
your best bet. Yeah. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. I guess.
For a future conversation, my
understanding is 0 to that
there's no questioning of the 0
to 3, that's 0 to 1 is of
outsized importance.
And
I would like to clarify that we
did talk a lot about incident
toddlers in this committee
because they're underserved, not
because of the brain science
means it's a less.
Important year or more important
year, but because there we have
so much broad coverage of 3 and
4s in school age and such little
coverage for infant and
toddlers. Yeah. Thank, thank
you, Kelly, and I think, I know
I've heard those concerns from
like the members on the
committee have voiced those
concerns. I share them perhaps,
secretary, I was appreciate
Kelly sort of um
Uh, adding and maybe that, I
think that was very much my
question because the
Uh, just to sort of stay again
on the record, if the bulk of
this money
And this money would be
appropriated in 2 years anyway.
We're moving the timeline up
roughly 2 years.
If it, if the bulk goes to the
part of the system that is in
many communities close to
oversaturation while still
leaving that infant and toddler
in whatever way, and I think
there's some creative things
that have been mentioned by the
committee.
Then we're gonna be missing our
mark. And I know, Madam
Secretary, your sense of urgency
is very, very strong. But that's
a place where the legislature in
terms of appropriations and how
we structure those, and this
goes to this session and future
sessions, I think we'll have an
even closer eye to ensure that
the bulk of new money is going
into places where um it seems
like it's gonna have the
greatest return.
Does that sound like a fair sort
of point for us to pursue, Madam
Secretary.
Mr. Chair, and I, I mean, I I
cannot overemphasize the
prenatal period, um, that is
where the language develops and
everything begins in, so I just.
Uh
But I mean sure.
It's, I mean.
Families need this.
We're we're delivering for
families in ways.
That we've never done as a
state.
Why wouldn't we do it?
The Resources are there, the
public and the political will
are aligned.
We have an incredible team.
We use data, we work very
diligently, it seems.
Through people's lives.
talking about here, it's not.
The theoretical and whether
we're fast or slow, we have to
do it together.
The governor's vision we've got
a little under 2 years, it seems
like.
a department, it's doing its
best.
Being as responsive as we can to
the community, we're doing it
with the.
No, thank you, man, and sorry.
Thank, thank you, Madam
Secretary. Thank you for your
very diligent work. Thanks to
your team, Madam Chair, again,
uh, a remarkable achievement to
set up a fund that is now in
this place, um, committee, I
appreciate, we sort of clarified
that half of this is in HB 2,
and I appreciate and, in no way
sort of want to
The, you know.
To
Direct in sort of sharing the
sentiment, Madam Secretary, but
do want to evidence.
The sense of
Some caution that the committee
has in to Madam Secretary, the
overwhelming need to
Apportion the funding, as you
all are doing for us to have a
very strong voice in ensuring
that that's at that the earliest
possible stages as you just
said, so.
Uh, OK, I don't think there's
any other questions, um, we'll
go to Representative Perrera for
the motion.
Mr. Chair, I'm of aue pass,
which I wanted to do about an
hour ago, but that's OK.
OK, great. There's a motion by
Representative Verrera, a second
by Representative Little, um,
uh, can we, is there opposition
to that motion?
OK. Um.
Let's go ahead.
Great. OK. Uh, let, so,
We're gonna go ahead, um,
Well, yeah, I think we'll go
ahead and ask the staff to call
the roll, please. And then uh go
from there.
Representative Baca.
Yes, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
That
Representative Brown, not here.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Dow.
No, and I would like to explain
my vote.
Representative Duncan. Yes, I
would like to explain my vote.
Representative Garrett.
Yes.
Representative Fernandez.
Yes.
Representative Herndon.
Representative Herrera, yes.
Representative Little, yes.
Representative Luhan.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sareana. Yes.
Representative Silva. Yes.
Representative Vincent
to the presenters at a later
date. Vice Chair Dixon. Yes,
chair small.
OK, uh,
Thanks to the vice chair for
keeping a list. We're gonna go
to represent Baca, ranking
member Chatfield, Representative
Dow, and then represented
Duncan. Baca, please, um.
My vote, I voted, I can't say
that I support public education
and funded it properly. Um, your
versions of what did you've
shown that you have been able to
spend the money.
I, I do question the capacity,
but the fact that we're talking
about.
400 million, which is about half
of the request.
Is, is really what did it for
me, but I will be very watching
very closely with the data. I
wish you all the best cause our
kids, for our kids, but I, but
I, as I said, I have some
hesitancy, but
Um, that was my vote.
Thank you Baca, ranking member
Chatfield, please.
voted yes. You've done a lot of
good in my rural communities,
and I, I wanna support.
What you're doing.
We agreed to have.
375 is half, not 400, but uh
When I walked out of here, I
thought the increase was 50%.
Not that house built too was
half.
And I'm just gonna give
everybody the benefit of the
doubt.
I'm going to vote yes.
But where I live, we deal in
handshakes.
And it might be
A lot more money than you
probably expect.
When we tell somebody something,
that's the way it is and
So I'm gonna give you the
benefit of the doubt. I voted
yes. I don't wanna.
The harmless little children,
and I appreciate the work you've
done in my communities.
But uh
Where I come from when you say
half, you mean half.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Rem Chatfield. Next, we're gonna
go to Representative Do and then
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative. Thank you
Secretary. I'm voting no because
you're cutting infant capacity
by 800.
I'm voting no because you're
continuing to saturate 3 and 4s.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, next, we're gonna
go to Representative Duncan,
please. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, I wasn't here through the
summer, the interim, and uh so I
wanna give you a fair shake.
I don't believe you're going to
make it next year.
And I won't be voting for it
next year unless you show me
some solid evidence of things.
I believe need to be answered,
and I think that's why I need to
give you a fair shake. That's
why I voted yes.
Great. OK, thank you very much.
Uh, I uh, can we please, uh,
read out the vote.
The the number obviously, sorry,
the number of the vote was 12 in
the affirmative, 3 in the
negative. Uh, by that amount
that I'm sure we have a do pass.
No.
So
members uh.
Give us just one minute to
switch out presenters.
That's right.
Now I, it's a good.
I
Alright, members, so we are
going to hear um how Bill 181,
uh, presented by Chairman Small.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee. Um, House Bill
181 requires uh DFA and LFC to
jointly develop accountability
and oversight mechanisms for
pilot programs that are funded
through the grow government
results and opportunity.
Uh, Madam Chair, committee,
this, these are 3-year pilots
that test out new approaches to
improving for outcomes for New
Mexicans, um, and Madam Chair,
uh, these, uh, specifically, uh,
we're requiring DFA and LFC to
create jointly and share with
the committee, um,
accountability and evaluation
plans that include identifying
program goals and outcomes.
describing how program
activities will achieve expected
outcomes, summarizing the
evidence or research on the
program effectiveness, it uh
including a performance plan,
uh, including an evaluation plan
to assess the causal impacts of
the program and describing
methods for statistical analysis
and timelines for reporting
results.
Additionally, Madam Chair, uh,
committee, this will require
that in the final year, uh, or
going into that final year of
grow programs that there be uh
an evaluation.
From DFA and LSC that
essentially is uh meant to tell
us uh if and how well it's
working, if it's not working,
and give us uh metrics upon
which to base whether or not we
want to continue funding or not.
Of course, doc uh Doctor
Courtney is here, who is our um
lead or was our lead evaluator
is now the deputy director for
LFC to answer any technical
questions. This is an LFC bill.
Do any members have any
questions? No. Representative
Peter.
Madame Chair, I'll try to keep
it to 2 hours so we can get some
rest tonight. No, seriously,
Madam Chair, and Chairman.
Um
We were talking specifically
about.
Money that was appropriated in
2024.
For the 3-year projects, would
that be correct, Madam Chair
Representative, yes, and for
future growth for the section,
uh, I think it's 9 this year as
well. So for the past and future
grow appropriations.
Madam Chair, and chairman.
To be clear, the Section 9 money
this year is a 3-year
appropriation split evenly over
3 years for each item inside of
section 9.
Uh, Madam Chair, representative,
yes.
Thank you very much. Um,
Madam Chair and Chairman with
The money that was allocated
last year.
That money became available, I
don't remember the time frame on
the bill.
But
Somewhere between June and July,
June 20th and July 1st of 2024.
That'd be pretty closer.
Manager. So
With this legislation, there's
no emergency clause. There's
nothing in here that requires
An immediate action on
everything that was appropriated
last year.
When do you expect to see
The accountability and
evaluation plan for the 2024.
Funding, Madam Chairman.
Um
Madam Chair, and chair.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. I was
asking Doctor Courtney, uh, that
question is you're finishing up
Representative Pettigrew, uh,
the Madam Chair Representative,
the um.
LSC is already engaging with
agencies, including having some
agencies under contract.
Uh, for the evaluation component
of that, we can, Doctor
Courtney, can we get a list of
sort of where the different
appropriations and the agent,
the work with the executive sta.
Madam Chair and chairman, um.
The money that was appropriated
in 2024, we'll go through June
30th of 2027, if I'm correct
with that.
The objectives inside of this
bill.
If we put, if, if they were put
in place.
Quickly
We would be able to get an
update.
On how they're doing.
In the 30 day session coming up
next year, would that be
correct, Madam Chair and chair?
Uh, Madam Chair, or yeah,
Madam Cha represent all,
I don't know if Doctor Courtney
wants to answer.
Uh
Madam Chair represented
Pettigrew. I, I, I think that's,
that's possible, and, um, you
know, our, our analysts are,
I've already been talking to to
some of those agencies that
received appropriations through
the girl last year about their
progress, um, you know, we
worked with, with, uh, with DFA
on this bill, they're, they're
on board and they're um.
I, I think they're, they're
excited to, to do that work and
see how.
How things are are performing.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Chairman. Thank you, Doctor
Courtney. Uh so,
Is it safe to assume, Madam
Chair, that?
The
Guardrails.
are being
Decided by LFC and DFA with no
legislative input.
Uh, Madam Chair,
San Pedro, I, my sense on that
is this mirrors um
The, the measures and metrics
mirror what we had included
originally in Gro last year. Um,
so, Madam Chair, Representative,
I think it's, these were
Very much recommended by LFC to
begin with, or if anything sort
of going back to what we
originally started with.
Uh, now doing it, Madam Chair
and Representative with the
buy-in and requiring DFA and
LFC.
To work together on it.
So it's legislative intent,
Madam Chair Representative, and
now it'll be legislative uh
requirement. Did we pass this?
Thank you for that answer. And
so,
Madam Chair and Chairman, the,
the best thing for somebody that
wanted to
truly dive into that, we go back
to the evaluation tools that we
put together last year that were
vetoed by her.
I don't know what the right word
is, they got taken out.
Well, we'll just leave it there,
how that happened. I'm not
aware. Um, but, um,
We could go back and read those.
And
I'm gonna assume this is gonna
pass this committee, Madam
Chair, if I had my personal
preference.
We would roll the spill.
Bring those
Definitions back for the money
that we appropriated last year.
And have an agreement by this
committee, that those are the
appropriate guard rails for each
of the dollars we spent last
year.
That would be my preference,
understand I'm 1 of 18. Um, but
I
I will say that if this passes
tonight and we choose not to
roll it and take that approach.
That will be part of the debate
on the floor is going through
those and being completely
transparent to
Um, everybody, and then Madam
Chair and chairman.
So the grow money that we have
now.
In House Bill 2, section 9.
You're gonna have those similar
ones, but
I'm not sure, Madam Chair and
chairman.
That we've, that I've seen.
his guard rails for everything
in section 9 yet.
Have they been publicized.
For the for the allocation
inside the house bill too. I
understand we have to go back
and work on, on some other stuff
and that.
Uh, yeah, your old ketchup
cleanup on.
But
Um
The discussions chair and Madam
Chair Madam Chair and chair.
Making sure that that we are.
As as we within this room are
debating the final copy of House
Bill 2.
I think it would be appropriate
that those guardrails were
inside. Those are my thoughts.
I'm looking forward to hearing
if anybody else has similar or
different thought. Uh, we have
Representative Herndon, then
Representative Duncan and
Herrera.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair, and
presenters. So if we, if I look
at House Bill 181 and I'm
looking at section one, and it
talks about new material, um,
madam chair and presenters, it
talks about programs that are
funded by the governmental
results and opportunity
expendable trust, and it talks
about um
This, the rest of the bill then
talks about the process that
should be utilized by any, any
uh project that is funded by the
government results and
opportunity expendable trust.
But Madam Chair, representative
and presenters, how do you get
funded by this trust, so that
you can then go and be, uh,
utilized uh all of these
criteria. Can you please help us
to understand that. Absolutely.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Herndon, uh, and
agencies are able to bring
initial.
initiatives forward.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
the LFC is able to recommend
initiatives.
And Madam Chair Representative
Herndon, uh, members, uh, and
frankly, community stakeholders.
Are able to recommend and weigh
in on uh initiatives.
Thank you and Madam Chair,
presenters, there is there a
deadline for applying to utilize
funds in this expendable trust,
this seems to uh
Justine when you must uh provide
your I mean your stats, but it
doesn't say when you can apply.
So right now I want to apply for
it. Can I do that, Madam Chair?
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, Fernan, uh, Doctor
Courtney, uh, shared, I think
rightly, this would follow sort
of the same um budgetary guide
uh budgetary timelines we have,
broadly, uh, agencies submit
their budgets September the
first.
And so I think these, uh, you
know, by September the first.
Uh, of the year sort of going in
when it's a new request, uh
September 1st of middle going
into the new uh into that next
year.
And Madam Chair, so I think good
for us, whether voting member or
designee of of LFC which all of
us are as HAFC members, um, that
sort of highlights the
summertime to be bringing ideas
forward uh in this area.
Thank you, ma'am, sir. Thank you
presenters. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, Mr.
Chair.
Just a couple of quick
questions. Um, what programs and
projects can you mentioned
communities or other
stakeholders, what can we, um,
what can we apply for?
To follow up with Representative
Herndon's questionnaire. Thank
you,
Madam Chair Duncan,
uh, from my perspective, I think
it's focused on new
evidence-based pilot projects.
That, um, have, you know,
communities and stakeholders
believe have a high likelihood
of success or are backed by a
lot of evidence, potentially,
Madam Chap representative, uh,
things that folks would like to
try out that they have a strong
uh sort of reason to believe
we'll be successful. And then
there's a 3 year period to, to
try that out.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Mr.
Chairman. So, um,
How would, would this
Somebody say, OK, I want money
for the growth fund.
Um, for new alcohol treatment or
homelessness or anything like
that. That's, that was what I
was wondering if you had any
specifics that I could look at
and go, OK, I, I get what this
is and.
Uh, men chair representative, we
can certainly share some of the
past appropriations. There's um
one of the workforce, uh, there
was a uh a $60 million.20
million dollars a year to higher
education, to expand workforce
training and get folks into uh
workforce certificates.
Madam Chair representative, I
think a good answer and also
coming back to Representative
Herndon's, uh, question is, the
sooner folks are in dialogue
with LFC and with the agencies
that they're seeking to support,
the better for building a
program and an idea.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Mr.
Chairman, um, and if those funds
are not expended at the end of 3
years, they go into our
permanent fund and, and then we
can save 10, get that up to 40%.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, Representative,
uh, Representative Ferrera. Oh,
sorry, uh, and just an answer to
the Duncan to the question. Each
year, if there's reversions from
that uh distribution, they go
back into uh the grow corpus,
the grow trust fund, the
interest bearing account for it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
just putting a plug in for our
savings account.
Absolutely.
Representative for.
Thank you, Madam Chair. How much
money is in the growth fund
right now?
And shared with the with the um
Drafting instructions he
provided LFC and, and when
you'll see how it's built to the
projection for the amount and
the growth fund as of now is 861
million 60 861.3 million in the
trust fund.
Uh, Representative Garrett and
then Representative Fernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I,
there's been several questions
on a timeline because um
At the bottom of page 1a, the
division and the committee shall
develop instructions for
agencies to submit.
accountability and evaluation
plan, and it says what has to be
in there. So I don't know if
it's me or it, but when do they
give that? Because I remember
the original ro projects were
supposed to have it, and I think
it was one item out or removed.
But when
Does this shouldn't this come
with the proposal? Can you just
explain the timeline because to
me it's ambiguous.
So I'm sure represented her, um,
on, on, I'm sorry, Garrett,
thank you, it's been a long day,
um, uh, page 2, item B, you'll
see that the the uh agency who
uh receives funding, shall
submit a plan to uh DFA and the
LFC before July 1st of of that
year.
So Madam Chair and
Gentlemen, um, they get the
money.
Before that, but they have to do
some of the accountability plan
by July 1st. Is that correct in
my understanding that then?
Madam Chair Representative
Garrett, probably about, about
the same time, about the same
time they're, they're getting
the money we would expect them
to to.
start coming up with their
accountability plan and their
evaluation plan.
For, for that road map of, of
the next 3 years.
Thank you. And then, um,
I'm concerned, um,
A lot of these projects involve
education, however, LASC isn't
involved, and I feel like an
educational focused program.
Uh, I do believe that the
legislative education Study
Committee should be included.
Uh, Madam Chair, representative
Garrett for the Perth grow,
which is uh it does include the
LESC, uh, LSC and the DFA.
And I guess as Doctor Courtney
informs me that bill is in
Senate education, and I know
there's conversation about
ensuring that there's the
strongest role for the LESC and
LFC along with the DFA.
Thank you. And madam chair and
um Mr. Chair, what bill number
is that?
Senate bill 201.
We'll get that answer briefly.
Yeah, uh, Madam Chair,
representative Senate Bill 201.
Thank you. And then, um,
The, the other thing and, and I
know this is getting weedy for a
bill.
But, uh, on page 2.
Uh, line 3.
Uh, line 10, number 3.
You know, it's just provide a
summary of whether the program
or project is evidence-based
research-based.
Promising or does not yet have
rigorous research.
So some places they definitions
of what that actually means.
It's open for a lot of
Diverse interpretations, Madam
Chair, Garrett, uh, in the
accountability and Government
Act, those do have definitions,
and this goes into uh a new
section of the accountability
and Government Act.
So they're defined there. Great
question.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Could that be provided to us?
Yeah, absolutely. Uh, I really
appreciate it and that is all my
questions. Thank you.
Excellent, uh, Representative
Hernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, um,
Mr. Chairman and uh presenter,
um, I also wanna
go off of that same section that
we were looking at, uh, for
Representative Garrett, um, you
mentioned that the agencies have
to develop accountability plan
and roadmap for the next 3
years, um, has, are, are they
already developing that since
we're already in, in, in the
process of the first stage of,
of, of this uh project, uh,
Madam Chair, Mr. Mr. Chairman.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Hernandez, it's a good question.
Um, they, you know, they, they
could start to start to develop
that particularly if they made a
request for that funds, and
you'll see later on that page
that there is some flexibility
that, you know, we, we'd like to
see.
in the bill, an initial plan in
July, but then of uh continuing
to allow some time for the
development with a final plan to
be submitted uh by September.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Mr.
Chairman presenter, um, I, I, I,
I bring this up because um I
received uh a correspondence
from a constituent, actually
from my recipient of a uh grow
programs and, and, um,
I'm just trying to understand
how I can handle handle the
request and I'm willing to go
offline to talk about the
specifics of, of, of this issue,
um, but they're just saying that
there's uh the agency that's
that's handling it, uh,
responded to the recipient that
is 9800 purchase orders that
they're behind and that they're
just gonna have to wait. Madam
Chair, let we'll go into that
offline, the
Last year, there was um a share
of that went directly to uh
individual districts that
members work to dedicate
separate from the larger 3 year
appropriations. Last year it was
a smaller two-year, uh, uh.
Appropriations that went, that
were dedicated by individual
members, which is probably what
your correspondent constituents
referring to.
Thank you, man.
Thank you. Does anyone else have
questions? OK, uh, yes,
represented her just a comment.
I, I hope everybody appreciates
how valuable this evaluation is.
I, you know, I had an a former
job, the RAND Corporation to do
a study on something. Honest to
God, these studies can sometimes
cost as much as the program, so
it, it is a real gift that you
have put this evaluation, built
that evaluation into the program
because if we had to go, if we
had to outsource that.
I don't think we could afford
it, so thank you.
Um, I just have a couple of
questions. Um,
Mr. Chair and Doctor Courtney,
um,
When we determine performance
metrics and when we analyze and
evaluate agency programs that
are already part of the
recurring budget. What's the
process for that?
Madam Chair, it, it's, it's
quite similar to what's proposed
here where, um, LFC works with
DFA, um, which is, is defined
in, in statute and um and uh
also works with the agency to,
to negotiate those performance
measures, um, and, uh, and
targets which are, are some of
what you voted on, um, over the
last few weeks when Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, and
Doctor Courtney, and I, I
assume, uh, and correct me if
I'm wrong, that part of the
reason.
the legislature delegates that
responsibility to our LFC staff
is because, um, LFC has the
staff that has been working in
those areas.
Um, and knows the agencies,
knows the programs, um, and it's
probably in a better position to
make suggestions on uh
evaluation methods. Would that
be fair?
Uh, and I'm sure I, I think, I
think it is fair and I, I threw
in the, you know, uh, DFA and,
and, and agency staff also and,
you know, among, among those,
those three entities, the, the
experts get together and
And I think come up with the
best, the best metrics that that
uh they can find that that
research can potentially inform.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Doctor Courtney.
Last, um, last question, um,
timeline.
I think we had an interesting
discussion on the, you know,
when the um
Uh, sorry, the accountability
and evaluation plans will be
submitted, and I was just
wondering if there's a
rationale, and I think actually
Representative Hera sort of
alluded to it in terms of how
expensive evaluations can be,
um, and so perhaps we don't want
to require um entities to set up
an evaluation and accountability
program before they even know if
they have been appropriated
money, but I'm wondering if
there's something else that it.
sort of helped make that
decision.
Uh
Madam Cha, I, I think that's,
that's exactly right, and, and
you know, the when, when
agencies are, are, or, or
entities are coming up with
potential requests for, for
growth funds that's, that's
something that they, they should
also be building into kind of
that request and, and that plan,
um, you know, what, what is the
evaluation gonna cost, what
might the timeline be? Um, and
that will also inform, you know,
what, what capacity they might
be able to serve in in that
pilot so they don't uh
overstretch or underst.
Stretch that budget, madam
chair.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Um, thank you, Doctor
Courtney. Uh,
Any motion.
Second
Great. Um, Jackie, would you,
um, call the role we probably, I
mean.
OK, so let the record reflect
that Representative Pettigrew is
in opposition, um, since no one
else, we'll go ahead and call
that good.
OK, members, that'll conclude
our work for tonight. We'll be
uh 10:30 tomorrow, uh, where
we'll get to take up house bill
