On Medicaid there is a hard stop
at two thirty because we will
then be breaking into
subcommittees here in room three
oh seven and three oh nine
they'll be at about a five ten
minute time while staff make
sure the materials in
appropriate places were so today
and Mr Saly is going to
introduce not only members of
the legislative finance
committee team also and grateful
to have you here Mr secretary
Scrase the executive
and we have a hard stop at two
thirty so with that let's go
ahead and turn it over to deputy
director Charles Lee thank you
Mr chairman with me at the table
is RubyAnn Esquibel whose are
LFC analyst for the Human
Services Department we also have
in the audience today rest till
whose come to work for us I
contracted LFC to help out with
the health care issues you in
addition to is ten year health
care New Mexico an LSI is also
the former Medicaid director in
Georgia well we've got a Dr
Scrase and his team Lisa Walker
Moran Loralai
Kellogg and.
Carrier me hope deputy
secretaries
And with that I'm gonna go
through this power point slide
with you there's a number of the
slides that are just
informational only so I'd
encourage you to to take it with
you if you want to really get
into the detail we're gonna go
over just how Medicaid is
financed the basics and also
talk about behavioral health
care just because of its
importance in the system for
both health and and behavioral
health so it's like to so
Medicaid not to be confused with
Medicare which is the federal
health care program for people
over sixty five but Medicaid is
a joint state and federal health
care program for a broad swath
of populations low income
individuals and families that
include the elderly disabled
families with children as well
as with the new a pregnant women
and very very low income adults
without children that's the
newest expansion population that
you Homer hear me refer to.
Today we'll talk about some of
the the cost drivers and trends
what's behind those barriers to
care just because you have
health care coverage through
Medicaid doesn't necessarily
mean that you're able to easily
access services we had a new
report come out on that and then
we'll talk about behavioral
health services.
Just real briefly about the data
and when you're dealing in
health care just know that
trying to get a single data
point to tied to a previous
period is sometimes challenging
because there's always a a
claims like so this is snapshot
data the best that we had
available at the time for this
particular presentation slide
for.
You'll hear this often and when
you're building the Medicaid
budget what are the key cost
drivers wire cost increasing
they're they're gonna be driven
by a couple of different things
enrollment particularly in
managed care of where we're
paying a per member per month
premium just like health
insurance premium
And we call that a capitation
payment and we pay that
regardless of how much a
services that individual may use
sync it's all pulled up into a
big
insurance pool
the.
Issue that we've had through the
pandemic is that we've got a
bunch of people that are
enrolled newly enrolled and we
haven't been able to discern
role people that didn't qualify
anymore because of the the rules
around of the federal government
wanting us to maintain our
efforts picture people have
health care coverage while
they're giving us an enhanced
federal matching rate the other
cost drivers are health care
prices and inflation sometimes
those are built into the
capitation rates when the
department is is building how
much in premiums it's going to
pay sometimes they could be
price increases that are
legislatively driven sometimes
it can be price increases that
the department can build and for
a variety of reasons the M. C.
O. rates again these are
intended to cover all the
medical services administration
profit taxes and then the
managed care companies pay the
individual providers for the
services.
When the state move to meet this
managed care environment from
where the state was paying on a
fee for service basis directly
to the providers based on a
government set rate sheet
the intent behind that was to
basically privatize the market
place for how much services
should cost we never really
fully let the market work on
setting prices and you're gonna
have a big proposal for both
executive and LFC to ensure that
we catch up ground maybe to
where we needed to be with the
the price of those direct
medical services going forward
fee for service this is a much
smaller program that was twenty
years ago primarily covering a
native Americans who choose not
to enroll in managed care
everybody else has to enroll in
managed care
and then how much services
people are using it if an
individual is constantly going
back to the emergency room
they're gonna have a higher
utilization rates and a group of
kids who don't use very much
services of the committee of
membership can change the cost
of care as well enrollment on
slide five.
Again we're approximately forty
seven percent of the population
is covered through Medicaid
Medicaid in some form or fashion
that gives Medicaid a unique
opportunity in New Mexico to
potentially have a significant
influence over health outcomes
for not only half of its
population that are on the
program but the other half of us
who are not through a stronger
provider network and really move
the needle when it comes to
population based outcomes that's
that's very unique nationally.
Medicaid enrollment so who's on
the program so there's almost
three hundred thousand people
that in the expansion of
population that have come on
since twenty fourteen there's
another three hundred thousand
adults and three hundred eighty
six thousand children not all of
them obviously cost the same so
adults and children for the most
part that are healthy are very
affordable particularly when you
factor in a very generous
matching right but people with
disabilities and elderly have a
disproportionate per member
costs that you can see on the
chart on the right side on slide
six.
Slide seven.
You're you're gonna be looking
at general fund primarily with
most of the agencies are dealing
with when it comes to Medicaid
and HSD in particular trying to
take a more of an all funds
world view of it because there
is a key financing components
that come from things other than
the general fund to pay for
Medicaid that includes the
dedicated G. R. T. taxes from
the county supported Medicaid
fund there's another one for
hospitals the safety net care
pool that comes from local
governments the use of a
recurring tobacco settlement
program funds
U. N. M. has a sizeable amount
of transfers that it makes from
UNM hospital that are then
matched with federal funds and
then goes back to the hospital
for a variety of graduate
medical expenses is as well as
other important services other
agencies receive their funding
and their budgets and then they
transferred to Medicaid for the
match the DD waiver is the
biggest one of those so your
general fund appropriation and
in the department of health for
DD waiver is going to be a much
larger spend at the end of the
day once they match that with
federal funds.
There's also very complicated
list of
Line items in the Medicaid
budget that all get rolled up
into basically a couple of line
items and house bill two but
each of those a different
program components within
Medicaid also have different
federal matching rate sometimes
so in the case of paying our
share of prescription drugs for
people who are both Medicare and
Medicaid we're on the hook for a
hundred percent of those costs
whatever the federal government
says we need to claw back so
anytime we see changes in the
price of prescription drugs at
the federal level they can have
you know either positive or
significant a negative impact on
our general fund because we're
not in a matching environment
others can be at the standard
matching rate which fluctuates
year to year based on where
we're at relative to the rest of
the country and per capita
income in other cases the
federal government will pay a
hundred percent of the cost for
Indian health services is a good
example of that so wide variety
of of matching rates that exist
throughout
The program like I said we'll
get into this some more fee for
service these are direct
payments from HSD back to the
providers when they bill for
services managed care this is
where all the money is this is
where the main action is it
within Medicare and managed care
is further broken down into the
into large programs targeting
behavioral health for the adult
expansion population there's
physical health for both the
adult expansion population as
well as the regular program long
term care services that are
paying for things that Medicare
doesn't pay for like nursing
home care or community based
services.
Page eight.
You say coming out of the Great
Recession
some modest increases through
about FY fifteen and then we got
into some solvency years and
spending enrollment peaked in
kind of flattened out and then
we've had pretty significant
increases both to enrollment as
well as cost since about FY
nineteen.
On slide nine.
This gives you an idea about
like I said where all the money
is within the overall Medicaid
budget in about six point seven
billion of it for FY twenty two
of the eight point three eight
billion was in those managed
care programs
the chair line items that we're
paying the premiums for
Medicare part a and B. and the
the club Act for Medicare part
D..
the fee for service programs
less than you know nine hundred
million in this year and the DD
waivers programs at about five
hundred fifty one million.
Within the managed care programs
that exist within the department
physical health at about two
point three long term care this
is the portion of the budget
that I worry about over the long
haul with our aging population
and the expense of this really
important component of the
Medicaid program and then you
see the to behavioral health
programs for sixty five that
includes both adults and
children and then the Medicaid
expansion behavioral health and
two hundred twenty seven
million.
So within each of those slices
of the pie what are we spending
money on this taxpayers on slide
ten this breaks some of it down
so as an example you're gonna
find that both inpatient
outpatient hospital is usually a
really large slice of the pie in
any healthcare spending and
same's true when it comes to
this so you can see outpatient
hospital E. R. urgent care at
about two hundred eighty five
million your direct providers
such as when Medicaid client
goes in access their family
physician at three hundred
twenty nine million
dental and vision at a hundred
and eight million.
And when you come over to long
term care this is going to pay
for a lot of a services that
Medicare may not pay for for
those that are duly eligible for
for some health care that's not
covered in the regular physical
health for people who are not on
Medicare and the big cost
centers within the long term
care portion of managed care are
a nursing facilities.
And a community based option
called personal care and this a
table that was not available
twenty years ago there was a new
thing that the department
implemented to be able to find a
minimum in home care services
everything from homemaker
services to help keep
individuals in their homes and
not need nursing home care which
is a lot more expensive on it on
a per capita basis so pretty big
cost center within the overall
long term care program is for
these broad based personal care
option services.
On slide eleven.
this came out of an evaluation
of the LFC did this last fall so
we've covered you know less half
of the population of the state
but at the same time we know
we've got challenges with our
provider network of same thing
goes with Medicaid so our staff
we're doing it a secret shopper
survey
and we found and that was about
five hundred providers but
recall for for correctly
They're only able to get an
appointment with a primary care
behavioral health providers
thirteen percent of the time.
So real serious barriers that
that Medicaid and the broader
health care system and you'll
see a lot of
recommended spending increases
to try to enhance the provider
network in the LFC
recommendation about a third of
appointments were with primary
care were more than thirty days
out so if you're sick today that
doesn't really do you any good
And we also found that the
directories if you're coming on
to Medicare and Medicaid you
need access services weren't
always accurate so you can call
up your provider and no we're
not taking Medicaid patients no
we're not taking Presbyterian
Medicaid patients or just it was
the wrong number this is a
problem nationally there's some
new things that just came out of
Congress requiring a Medicaid
programs in states to try to
tighten up what does networks
look like so some strategies
coming out of the report for
improving access to care
including strengthening the
network adequacy standards
because what we found at the
time was that everything on
paper looks good in terms of
network adequacy the NCOs
meeting and at work adequacy
requirements but in fact people
couldn't really access the
network so strengthening those
under the next waiver provider
rates to try to induced
providers not only to take
Medicaid patients which
sometimes can be very difficult
in terms of cancellations and
other barriers to getting to
care as well as making it more
attractive financially to serve
half of our population it
doesn't make any sense for us to
be shorting the provider network
when the federal government's
paying for you know upwards of
seventy five percent of the cost
below what Medicare is already
paying.
and then strategies there's a a
number of these that are getting
funded and LFC recommendation to
increase the overall health care
workforce we've had previous
reports talk about the role of a
nurse practitioners and how they
can play in terms of accessing
primary care given our physician
shortage and changes overall to
the health care delivery
standpoint.
And you've got major investments
that you've made like just in
basic health care delivery like
nurse expansion.
So now Mr chairman I'd like to
turn our attention to
behavioral health talk a little
bit about the behavioral health
collaborative which was an
important initiative under the
Richardson administration trying
to get a handle on the myriad of
different behavior health
programs that were being funded
across state government look at
the funding where we often hear
folks talk about that we're not
spending enough on behavioral
health when we're pleased to
spend about a billion dollars I
think that's going to be
surprising to folks and just how
much money we are allocating for
behavioral health and then talk
about some children's behavior
health opportunities with the
funding I think it's important
to also ask the question okay
for spending you know eight
hundred to billion dollars on
behavioral health why are we
seeing better outcomes or are we
seeing better outcomes for that
population is getting the
services and we're seeing all
the effects of those who are not
getting the services on our
streets right in front of us
every day.
Slide thirteen just background
when I state behavioral health
is a broad encompassing term
meeting of clinical mental
health diagnosis issues as well
as substance abuse disorder and
you've got some other
definitions because there's a
definitions that are for adults
in the behavior health system as
well as for for kids oftentimes
will see the coexistence of both
a mental health issue and
substance abuse disorder
sometimes people are self
medicating
with substances to deal with
their underlying mental health
issues.
Just as an example of of some of
the diagnosis in cost and
children's behavioral health
services
when I was in social practicing
social work working in the
behavioral health system yeah
the most common diagnoses CDC
were like ADHD
oppositional defiant disorder
and then once we became
teenagers and got real trouble
conduct disorder PTS D. as the
new kind of catch all raised of
of what we're we're finding
today because we know a lot more
about the kinds of trauma that
kids are experiencing and what
that's doing to both brain
development as well as their
emotional and social well being
your traditional things that you
you think about with like mood
disorders like depression
bipolar disorder
And those likes you can see some
spending that we pulled from a
report a couple of years ago as
well as national prevalence
rates and if those prevalence
rates existing New Mexico which
I don't have data on how many
kids would fall into those
brought
buckets of diagnoses on slide
fifteen.
The behavioral health
collaborative there's a lot of
history of turmoil in the
behavioral health system in New
Mexico at least over the last
twenty years
when the state moved the
Medicaid program into managed
care it also is going to move
behavioral health services
funded by Medicaid into managed
care those behavioral health
Services where then
subcontracted by the managed
care companies to other
behavioral health specific
managed care companies and there
was a lot of infighting between
who ended up being the
behavioral health managed care
company at the low so at the
regional level of many of some
of them were also providers
within that system and they had
more favored status with their
own parent company then a huge
group of of others that didn't
there is pretty significant
people with that transition
there is a lot of legislative
oversight work that went into to
play it all the way to the point
of
of legislative committees asking
Congress in our Congress folks
to to intervene to try to undo
managed care being part of our
behavioral health services being
part of managed care lots of
providers went out of business
during this period of time in
the late nineties there was a
major effort to do a
comprehensive needs and gaps
study in two thousand two that
was led by Pam Hyde and Pam
Galbraith who worked for us for
many years as part of that
effort and that report was
really important because it's
summarized what many people who
are we're in the system or have
family members in the system new
and this is in two thousand two
before the evidence based
movement really gained a lot of
steam but that was.
People had insufficient access
to evidence based care and what
they're saying is we know what
kinds of services really work
through research to get better
outcomes but we're not funding
at a level or they're not
available in any of instances
for people to access them
services were delivered through
a confusing array of
uncoordinated public and private
agencies and providers we have
behavioral health money over the
department of health your money
at Medicaid yeah money over at
CYFD it was spread throughout
without any kind of coordinated
effort and really the system and
how was delivering services
really focused on managing
people's problems not helping
them lead productive and leading
adapt preferred productive
lives.
So the state on page sixteen and
two thousand four created what
was called the interagency
behavioral health purchasing
collaborative it basically got a
council of sixteen agencies
together to coordinate a single
system and they chose to court
to contract with the single
managed care company for all of
these different funding streams
through one contract the intent
was to form basically a virtual
department so all of the
different pots of money would
stay in these different agencies
in the staff would stay there
but all of it would be pooled
into one managed care contract
and that first managed care of
contractor was value options and
then the staff activities would
be managed by collaborative C.
CEO that that wouldn't
necessarily be in charge of the
division but they would be in
charge of trying to work with
all of the divisions spread
across state agencies and you
and law on page seventeen set
out some key responsibilities
for this collaborative you
wanted them to conduct an
ongoing needs and gaps analysis
and develop a plan for filling
it you know where the gaps are
there not enough multi systemic
therapy teams in Roswell what's
the plan to fix that so that you
can stay in their home and I
need to come up to Albuquerque
and because they got in trouble
and with the top with them
juvenile justice under contract
for service delivery and set
standards across these myriad of
different funding streams make
sure that we're credentialing
provider so that's like when a
new provider comes online we
want to screen them to make sure
they're qualified they have a
big committing fraud or anything
like that that process is been
problematic before to submit a
separate budget request for all
of the myriad of behavioral
health services spread across
the agencies which they do that
comes through and Human Services
department budget request and
that's where we track how much
we're spending overall an
estimate quarterly.
Performance reports and an
annual report how are you doing
are you making progress
implementing the plan what kind
of performance outcomes are you
getting and information on
spending and services that were
delivered.
So on page eighteen this we took
this from
that overall budget request.
And you'll see that the vast
majority of behavior health
spending is going to be within
Medicaid but there are pretty
significant pots of money that
exist in the behavioral services
department which is consolidated
in Human Services in the late
two thousands.
but there's not a lot of money
outside of HSD
what I tell every new cabinet
secretary at CYFD is all the
mission critical funding to help
you work with families is not in
your agency so they have a good
working relationship with HSD
because that's where all the
money is
The administrative office of the
courts those are like things
like drug courts CYFD is got
some grant funding from the
federal government as well as
general fund for children's
behavioral health services for
kids who don't qualify for
Medicaid or for services that
are not part of the Medicaid
program the current
administration's that a pretty
good job of
using those non Medicaid
behavioral health service
dollars to try to test out or
stand up new evidence based
behavioral health services that
can then be transitioned into
the overall Medicaid budget.
Slide nineteen.
This is just a comparison of
where the Collett where that
behavior health collaborative
started with the kind of funding
it was dealing with back in two
thousand seven about three
hundred and twenty million you
know now we're pushing a billion
so substantial public
investments in behavioral health
and again right it's it's right
to go to ask what are we getting
for that money and what are some
of the outcomes at the end of
the day.
The slide twenty.
This is just the difference
between behavioral health
funding and and physical health
physical health still dominates
most of the the overall
spending.
And then slide twenty one.
For the expansion population in
particular childless adults
we feel that the Medicaid
expansion provides an
opportunity particularly when it
comes to behavioral health care
for individuals that really
didn't have any other payer
source or that we're heading
like you know generating on
compensated care in the
hospitals.
Slide twenty two here's where
some of the money's going as
just some examples
Outpatient services those would
be like counseling services
you know twenty two million
administration for the adults
inpatient services.
And value added services that
may not be part of the Medicaid
plan but that the managed care
companies work with HSD to
provide as they may be
incentives for making
appointments on time things of
that nature and then pharmacy
spending is pretty significant.
By comparison on slide twenty
three these are some examples of
how the system used to spend
money way back in two thousand
six.
And for kids in particular I
mean there's a lot of spending
in this chart I on out of home
care because most of the
spending and people accessing
the behavior health system at
that time were kids because we
didn't have the Medicaid
expansion.
And kids we're we're spending
fifty seven percent of the money
on out of home residential care
whether that's inpatient
psychiatric hospitals
residential treatment centers
that's RTC or treatment foster
care.
Slide twenty four.
The children's behavioral health
system.
I think of the how the system
operates is really on a
continuum of care from you know
low level interventions and kids
can kids homes in a community
based setting to it out of home
Act care setting like a hospital
residential treatment.
Historically the system is
weighted heavily on
the back into the system or the
more expensive part of the
system out of home care without
a lot of investment on keeping
kids in their homes with their
families and dealing with those
kinds of challenges
this system has also been
heavily weighted towards para
professionals providing a lot of
the services
partly in response to not having
enough licensed staff to be able
to deliver those and so it and
it's also cheaper to do that and
at the end of the day you may
save a little bit on labor cost
and community based services but
you end up paying a lot more for
expensive out of home care and
what what you'll see in the
system is left like I said and
under investment in services for
kids at home that then results
in the child having some episode
requiring.
Maybe even not requiring for a
credit good crisis management
teams but resulting in a a kid
being placed in the queue Care
facility for say seven days and
stabilize their their behaviors
and then transitioned into a
residential treatment center for
six months and then they
transition step they do good
there then step them down to a
treatment foster care for
another six months imagine being
a thirteen year old out of your
home away from your family
for that long of time without
the system working with the
family
to to be able to to help their
child stay in their home that
and it becomes cyclical and it
will happen to the kids as they
age up out of the children's
behavioral health system is to
as well so an example of on page
twenty five.
The behavioral health spending
on just we can track the
spending for kids that are in
CYFD custody separate from all
other kids in the managed care
program they set up a separate
payment right for the managed
care companies to cover that
care
and you can see a lot of
spending on inpatient less so
then what we saw in two thousand
six and a lot more spending on
outpatient services than what we
saw in two thousand six so
something positive is happening
at least with the broader
spending.
Here's some more information on
the the out of home care
spending by the NCOs
for CYFD clients and twenty
twenty one.
The next slide this is just a
list of that continuum of
services from prevention early
intervention and Q. and the
research kind of color coding
what works what's mixed and what
kind of return on investment can
be had for various interventions
to both
the individual client as well as
taxpayers and society at large.
And then finally some discussion
about opportunities in
particular for children's
behavioral health system
enhancements you all provided
the department of twenty million
dollars to work with CYFD for
start up costs to expand
evidence based services and
communities as well as child
welfare prevention and early
intervention services
those capacity dollars could be
used to for training faster
providers to learn how to
implement the evidence based
intervention or to become
certified to do that paying
their salaries while they're
they're ramping up their program
to then transition and bill
Medicaid just some examples of
gaps that we've noted through
our reserves and I think the
department would agree of things
like a program called multi
systemic therapy it's a sport
historically been run in New
Mexico it's expensive because
you've got a team working with
very high need a juvenile's
usually teenagers sometimes
involved in juvenile justice
system
to help work with their families
but it but it's it's one of
those examples of very high cost
but very high returns at the end
of the day same thing with
family functional therapy which
might work better in more rural
communities we keep we don't
have enough providers to put
together a team this is an area
where CYFD could potentially
have its own clinical staff that
are on the state payroll get
trained to do this and then bill
Medicaid and and leverage money
F. F. fifty were part of the
program good behavior game it's
been rolled out pretty
significantly in the in the
schools wraparound services just
continues to be
rolled out statewide the LFC is
been supporting and then a lot
of clinical training in certain
cognitive behavioral health
therapies
And I know that the behavior
hell Services Division HSD is
working on a lot of these and
that's something when we get to
the HSD budget hearing you may
want to ask for a status report
on how that effort is going.
The behavioral health
collaborative does have a
strategic plan it's got four
main goals wanted extricated
behavior health care workforce
developing the community based
mental health services that
really fits in with that twenty
million dollars and then to
focus on substance abuse
disorder and addressing the
behavioral health needs of of
justice involved individuals.
Finally the rest of these pages
Mr chairman and members are
informational it's just more
spending detail on a different
variety of services and with
that Mr chairman I'd be happy to
open it up for any questions.
Thank you very much Mr solely
this is an extensive amount
information you mentioned the
hearing will have that'll be
next Thursday so members this is
a great opportunity to get sort
of a start we're going to go
with questions until about two
twenty five I do want to make
sure that secretary Scrase you
have a chance introduce your
team make sure our members
specially new members have the
opportunity to connect their so
we're gonna go straight to
questions please be brief and
we'll start with Representative
Trujillo.
Thank you Mr chairman madam co
chair and the Charles and
Yeah sorry RubyAnn.
I was looking on page eighteen.
And one of the questions I had
was.
In the.
In the.
Be able health collaborative
agencies on the right graph you
know your usual the spending.
For all of these initiatives and
nothing for the PED.
very small not showing up on act
it's it doesn't show up so what
what was the reason for that now
we can move toward that because
it's between between LA date and
all the statistics are showing
how many kids in the classroom
were really needed the those
supports I would increase the
for not doing it Mr Chairman
representative where you'll see
spending on behavioral health in
public schools is going to be
primarily through school based
health centers and those get
funding from two main sources
wonder some general fund
appropriations and the
department of health.
And to pay them bill Medicaid.
and so it won't show up as a
direct flow through for the
public education department but
there is money flowing out there
for behavioral health services
in the schools primarily through
school based health centers and
then one other piece we have the
other thing Medicaid in the
schools which is primarily
targeted for special education
that we have that component.
Mr chairman of Charles.
What is the anticipated amount
of money that will be used
schools for for in school
Mentoring in health care and all
those things but I guess we're
doing in the community schools
right but what are we but what
about the other schools.
So Mr Chairman representative
schools will have a variety of
different strategies they may
make their school based health
center part of their broader
community school initiative it
could be a standalone and
they're not doing the community
school modeling as well.
Okay.
And and Mr Chairman last
question on page twenty eight.
I think you've heard me in the
past I know David Abbey
the third bullet to the.
The third Madam the right to
good behavior again that's the
pax good behavior game we're
talking about correct.
I'm always being told that it's
really successful and it's only
sixty million now.
Now it's only a less than a
million I believe Mr Chairman
representative but it gets us
for every dollar we spend we
calculate a sixty dollar return
on investment for both
individuals participating
taxpayers and society at large
and and so my question Mr
chairman is we've always been
told it's.
Doing well but we've never seen
any stats.
So that's something Mr chairman
and representative that we can
work with the department to see
what kind of performance
measures they have for that if
they've done any New Mexico
specific research on how it's
being rolled out in New Mexico
but we know from that the
national literature around it's
of of that is an effective
program.
Thank you but I guess my concern
is that national literature is.
The prepared by the company.
Thank.
Sure but let's let's not this
we're going to go on we have ten
more members and only fifteen
Mormon the.
Madam chairman Mr chair
Representative in our they have
on the planet report part but we
haven't had data for the last
two years on that but we do have
a small party thank you thank
you Mr thank you very much of
some Representative Chatfield
is.
Thank you Mr Mr a foster
children pretty much foster
children.
Used to have some of in my home
raise the.
Done pretty well.
They don't have parents.
Video we don't know who their
father was their mother has
abandoned them and as on or is
on the street
Maybe there are so.
I I know that that's a CYFD
issue.
What all those kids or for their
treatment is paid to pay for
through Medicare.
Residential treatment center we
had one loss lunacy was closed
down
hi I'm not sure how the funding
goes for those things how many
residential treatment centers do
we have in the state of New
Mexico Mr Chairman
representative I need to get
back to you but I would on that
will work with the department
but as far fewer than we had a
twenty years ago it is that
something is paid for through
Medicaid or is that paid through
supporters CYFD that's paid
through Medicaid Mr chairman Mr
chairman I I misspoke I don't
mean they didn't have parents I
just made that many of them
don't know their father is and
the and maser mother probably is
not able to care for them
we need to we need to take care
of that it's it's a serious
issue in our state
second question.
If I go down.
District here in Santa Fe I see
homeless people left and right.
What here to the San Francisco
river and look at there's a good
population lives under the
bridge they're.
How many of those is there a
these numbers that tell us how
many of those people need
Services and have any of them.
are receiving Services have
medium need services Mr Chairman
representative I would submit
that if they're living on the
street probably all of them made
some form of services what type
of services will will vary from
if they've got a severe mental
illness that's our underlying
challenge for them to maintain
stable housing whether substance
abuse disorders whether it's a
combination of the two or if
something else
there that's a high need
population that is clearly a lot
more visible that was a couple
of years ago and I know that the
administration is trying to get
a handle on that as well as your
local.
Mr Chairman I'm talking about
mental health services.
Probably most of them is that
your is at the edge of I I would
submit Mr Chairman I guess would
be a significant portion of the
but we do not know that number I
do not know that number Mr
chairman but there might be
other smarter people who do so
Mr Chairman do we have a
facility in the state of New
Mexico to deal with this issue
that has the.
People with the training that
has the facilities that to be
able to deal with it anywhere in
the state of New Mexico.
So there's a number of different
avenues to try to approached
this particular issue everything
from temporary to transition
housing that does receive
funding through the Human
Services Department linkages is
another good example
I think that the challenges the
role of the state versus local
governments over the the
availability of housing
but there's an opportunity with
the new Medicaid uh waiver for
Medicaid to pay for a lot more
that only services what's paying
for now the possibly even like
transitional housing in the
future Mr chairman I I I think
my.
What I'm talking about is not
housing it's more dealing with
the underlying problem of mental
illness and and I would hope
that we would think about that
and look at what it's doing to
our state that we don't have
something there to help these
people to help the.
thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much Representative
Chatfield next Representative
Cruz.
Thank you Mr chairman I have
actually Senator but could be
brief
how do you promote these
programs statewide awareness.
Is critical for people to access
programming.
When I was a brother County
there was a component of
promotion to create awareness
how does the state level because
frankly I haven't heard much
about about the programs Mr
Chairman representative I would
say it's
Not well coordinated from a
state perspective and the that's
a pretty significant challenge
for even when you've got
community resource and referral
agencies and you know it a metro
area just to keep up with the
availability of service
providers and what kinds of
services
so those are that's a a
challenge to be able to figure
out what's available and how to
connect folks to the different
services but usually you've got
pretty astute folks on the
ground level providing direct
services but our level we're not
seeing how it's all connected
chairman I was recently this is
part of what we all do is
canvassing the community.
For elected office and one of
the things that came up quite
often was the fact that it
appeared that that the state
level there wasn't a robust
system for health for
behavioural health care.
And I think that's probably
because I'm seeing these numbers
and looks pretty robust to me
however I don't know that it's
getting to folks on the ground I
would really encourage
a promotional effort to create
awareness I think it's essential
you know we all see these
commercials for right on.
All the time but yet something
as critical as behavioural
health is just don't see
anything thank you Mr thank you
very much Representative Cruz
next we're gonna go to
Representative Sanchez.
Thank you Mr chair several
questions too but I'll keep it
brief
I represent what I really become
the page are provided to the
poorest counties in the state
we're I have a Medicaid easy
enrollment that's higher than
the average in the state I have
a question on slide eleven you
talked about barriers.
the doctors get paid less with
covered by Medicaid.
The rates that are standard for
Medicaid are less than what
Medicare pays and Medicare pays
less than what commercial payers
typically pay a.
Time for hospitals.
So okay but the answers like
through my other questions.
So I guess is there a.
What's the solution for that
You got a it increased
contributions to Medicaid from
our state to fix that what's
what's the use of the both the
executive and LFC
recommendations have fairly
robust wealth they're
significant they're very robust
recommendations for provider
rate increases to bring
virtually everybody up to what
Medicare pays and then the LFC
recommendation for like certain
behavioral health services and
and fit maternal care as well as
positions a hundred twenty
percent of what Medicare is
paying.
My last question Mr chairman
is there something that are
Yes Dr Scrase can do without the
legislature that can required
doctors to see these people are
is are we gonna have to pass
legislation to do that
especially if we increase the
rates were there getting paid
the same amount.
So Mr chairman and
representative of that something
that Dr Scrase can and is
working with the managed care
companies and and how they
regulate in contract with them
and then oversee and hold them
accountable for their provider
networks ensuring that there's
better access to care standards.
Mr chair I'm gonna be watching
Dr Scrase.
Thank you thank you for doing
that Dr Scrase thank you Mr
chair thank you very much for
the sciences inextricable
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr really quickly just
follow page twenty eight on the
twenty million dollars
appropriation to expand
behavioural health into wealth
for services.
trust can you give us
it and how much of that funding
has been spent subject.
Mr Chairman representative I
don't know that any of its been
spent there's been a lot of
planning efforts been going on
all year but I don't think that
they've got to the point of
putting that money out on the
street thank you Mr what can you
give us a description the time
line on that Mr chair.
Mr Chairman representative I
can't the the plan that I
reviewed this last fall with
CYFD we asked them to.
To reconsider and they've been
working with the Human Services
department on that and I think
that something for both of those
agencies when there before you
to to talk about
what kind of the plan of action
is and when you come out of the
session pass it again to see
what progress has been made I
really appreciate that thank you
Mr as I have perfect thank you
very much Representative Lujan
next we're going to go to
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr chair.
I was reading those fast because
I originally thought we were
going to be able to.
To comment on this so I have a
couple comments and and then I'm
gonna ask a couple questions
Google back a little bit for the
for our future perfect thank you
very much
Chairman and and that W. W.
director I appreciate The
presentations can we.
As as you respond in answers
yes as I read the definition of
the expansion population that
includes not not not only things
that happened underneath the
Obama administration but it
it now expands into
legal permanent residents legal
permanent aliens refugees and
asylum he's as well and so as a
as I look at.
slide six and I look at two
hundred and almost ninety
thousand people enrolled in the
expansion.
And other adult group I'd be
curious how many of those
our visitors from the south or
visitors from the north borders
that we have right now and what
that cost is to us and then we
can relate that to
representatives Jack Chatfield
questions with respect to how
are if if we can roll these
people how are we not being able
to deal with their own home.
So that's that's a big question
for me
Second I would like chairman and
and W.
I'd like to know specifically if
Abortion is paid for underneath.
This program right now.
On the reimbursement side this
is we start looking at that I I
really truly appreciate the fact
that we're looking at increasing
our reimbursement rates to our
medical providers robots built
nursing facilities I am curious.
Chairman if if there's a letter
of support for our private
health care doctors and from our
anesthesiologists all these
different organizations actually
say that one hundred percent
actually gets us to the target
to where they're not upside down
anymore because they have been
for years.
On the private providers one of
my comments chairman is as we
talked to some of the issues
that we go through here
on.
The Medicaid side we need to
understand the.
Just because it's Medicaid
agency it's it's it's a
subsidized still on the private
care we have the same issues.
If I want to set a doctor the
point of with my doctor my
primary care provider is sixty
to ninety days it's not just of
a Medicaid issue it's a private
care issue a lot of that goes
back to the medical malpractice
side when we lost so many
doctors left the state because
that so maybe maybe there's
something you can tap touch on
there maybe this is some of the
stuff that we need to talk off
line I don't want to take up too
much time Mr chairman thank you
thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew of the
Mr chairman Representative I
know that blue eyes been working
on the same kind of
a study that we did for the
commercial carriers on access to
care and we'll see if they that
office moves in the direction of
similar to what Medicaid's doing
on enhancing network adequacy
requirements knowing that if
you've got a you know an
adequate pool of providers to
begin with it's not going to
change that appointment time
overnight but long term how can
we collectively worked to get
To strategies to improve that
when it comes to the expansion
population those are individuals
who do not have dependents and
have incomes under a hundred and
thirty eight eight eight percent
of the federal poverty level
very very low incomes probably
part time workers if they're
working
I have to check with the
department on if there's any
other special programs for
immigrants generally immigrants
are barred from public
assistance for five years before
that they can access like cash
assistance or Medicaid but I I
think it's checked with the
department there's any other
special program for that thank
you very much deputy director so
the thank you Representative
that brings us roughly basically
it to twenty five members we
have two four at least six
members who still had questions
I encourage you to to get those
communicate those to LFC again
we're gonna have a full
committee hearing on the budgets
in a month deputy director so
the agency asking about please
see them Mr till these are
incredible resources for us as
members that we can dig into
members will note that we have
the budget recommendations with
the this is an excellent
opportunity we have not been
afforded and well this is an
excellent opportunity to to
think ahead and to be thinking
about what we want to talk about
in a week's time deputy director
Miss ask about thank you want to
take the last five minutes or or
less.
At and I I want to
it asked Dr Scrase to come up Dr
Scrase secretary Scrase if you
might introduce the team members
are here I think you're really
members again some of the
questions that we have will be
connected to either the LFC
oftentimes both the LESC and the
executive participants
secretary Scrase thank you very
much Mr chair members of the
committee it's great to be here
I just to give them proper
introductions right behind me is
carrier me L. R. W. secretary
in next to carry as Alex Caceres
who is our strategic planning
manager and really helping out
with the chairman of our other
W. secretary Angela drawn out
and then Alisa Walker police
selector Moran who's our CFO CFO
and deputy director in Medicaid
next earlier like cannot to log
another deputy director in
Medicaid and next to her right
now Fagus financial management
for your shape I hope I
pronounced your name correctly
okay with a name like Scrase you
get good at pronouncing names I
just want to just make one brief
comment that is that the
Medicaid program in this state
has a very very generous match
rate based on the relatively low
income third from the bottom
among U. S. states and so right
now during the pandemic or
getting four dollars and fifty
cents for every one dollar
general fund what we invest in
that's going to go down to three
dollars and fifty two cents with
the pandemic winds down but over
the course of the past four
years we've added two point five
billion dollars to the health
care state wide health care
a budget based on federal
revenues of two point five
million in federal revenue about
a billion of that will go away
as the pandemic one sound and
then in addition we also channel
the regenerations with other
departments to leverage
automatic.
It for their programs to the
tune of another half billion
dollars so as we go into the
budget season are happy to
answer any other questions
yesterday or other once and
we'll see you next week great
thank you very much Secretary
Scrase thank you to your team
members thank you all very much
again we have the best resources
in our state here from our
legislative finance committee
part of the executive and I
encourage everyone to be in
close conversation as you're
interested okay members and
public we're going to adjourn
this was informational only
we're gonna reconvene in about
ten minutes for subcommittee a
which will be in this room and
then subcommittee be which I
believe will be in three oh
seven or three oh nine excuse me
