Yeah.
Here.
Here, here.
President.
Uh
excellent. Thank you very much,
Jackie. Uh, OK, members, we're a
couple of quick housekeeping
things first, uh, as you know,
when we, we wanna follow up with
information requests, everybody
will have a policy spotlight,
successful school pro uh
practices. This, there is a
request made uh yesterday from
several different members, um,
and appreciate that request
being made, that policy is here.
Uh, members can review that.
Today, um, we're starting, this
is a policy preview. We're doing
something a little, we're, we're
adjusting and refining this year
in order to hear and engage, uh,
more times with priority areas
and creating good paying jobs
that support New Mexicans,
economic development is a very
high on that priority list. I
know for all members. And so
today is uh a policy spot or
it's a policy
preview for economic
development. Presenters and Mr.
Secretary and your team, thank
you for being here today. Um, we
also, of course, have, uh, our
workforce solutions department
who will be heard, please be
brief and we wanna, but convey
the information that you want to
convey, um, set the table for
us, if you will. And then as
members, you know, we're, you
know, want to again encourage
you, dive in, ask questions, uh,
help, um,
Focus us in on the big
investments that we've made in
areas and our opportunities uh
as we go into this budget
session. Um, the, uh, we're
gonna ask targeted policy
questions here. Members, this is
actually an important point.
There may be sort of issues,
may, may, you know, and maybe an
example is if the
In this case,
The many accountability
questions or say a secretary has
been up to your community to
look at an economic development
project.
The secretary will be before us
again for their budget hearing
for some of those more
accountability or other sort of
engagement questions. This is
meant to be a focus on policy,
uh, setting the table for some,
again, some of the big
questions, policy questions, and
investment questions that we
have before us as a committee.
So I want to encourage
to sort of stay focused there,
very targeted uh policy
questions and um
Uh, we, uh, of course, we will
not be taking a vote today.
We're not adopting a budget, uh,
just to be clear on that. One
final housekeeping uh piece. I
wanna thank, um, uh,
representative, uh, or ranking
member Chatfield, uh, can we
please have the skills USA
students in the back stand up.
OK, let's give them a hand.
Uh, the, the, uh, hail from
represent Pettigrew, Senator
David Gallegos's group. I've
been able to visit with some
Skills USA students, uh, from
Donana County today, perhaps you
all, uh, and good thing that
we're at the legis here today
working so that we can see, uh,
of course, this is a great
program. Thank you all for being
here today. Thank you for the
work you're doing and thank you
for the work that you will do in
a particular things to the
educators and the team I know.
With whom,
uh, these opportunities don't
exist. So one more quick round
of applause.
Uh, and it's Lovington High
School. Um, OK, with that, we'll
go wildcat, ah yeah secretary,
we may have planned it just for
the hometown. OK, with that, Mr.
Secretary, please come on up.
uh, your team, please feel free
to recognize any uh team members
who are here.
And um
The
Oh, and we're gonna, we're gonna
go ahead and get started with uh
an overview for our legis that
means this is a way to reinforce
sort of the um a, an approach
and a model for how we can
really engage shorter
presentations, uh, from the
agencies, a lot of questions
from committee members, that
sort of thing. And to that,
we'll turn to Ms. Julisa
Rodriguez to start us off from.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, good afternoon. My
name is Julia Rodriguez, and I'm
the LFC analyst for the economic
development department. Um, so
as the chairman mentioned, the
first chunk of today we are
going to be discussing, um, kind
of like a larger overview of the
department and of its efforts.
Um, I'm going to get us started
by referring to some bullets you
should have in your binder. Um,
it's tighter, titled the
overview of Interim.
that hearing and major
investments.
Um, and then afterwards
Secretary Black will talk about
the current strategies and a um
outlook on the future of the New
Mexico's economy.
Um, so to get it started with
the bullets, um, I'm gonna talk
about major investments that you
all have made to the agency
recently,
um, Rodriguez, just give us one
second so that everyone can find
the the paper.
Just wanna make sure folks have
it. It's uh it's in the handout,
so not in your binder. It should
be on your, um, among the, the
papers at your seat
OK.
Thank you, Vice Chair. Yes, it
should be titled Overview of
Interim Legistat. It looks, it's
a two-page document.
It, it may be on top of your
white binder underneath the
agenda.
It's just a single piece of
paper for committee members who
don't have it, yeah,
there we go it's a single piece.
Double sided for me. OK, all
right, thank you. Thank you,
chair.
Right, now that we're all there,
I haven't started yet, so no
one's behind. Um, so starting
with major investments, you all,
the legislature, have made
significant investments into the
agency both on the recurring and
non-recurring side, um, between
FY 21 and FY 25, uh, the
agency's budget, general fund
recurring, has increased by
90.6%.
Just last year alone, uh, you
will increase the agency's
budget by 31.2%, um, a large
portion of that increase,
roughly 5 million, was
appropriated for the agency, um,
to support their efforts with
their target industries, um, 500
was roughly for personnel and
the remaining was um is used for
a variety of other activities,
uh, the agency has indicated to
us that they plan to use that
new recurring funding on asset.
Analysis, um, more funding for
the university pitch award pilot
program, um, services to support
startup businesses, business
consultation, and also to
support shovel ready projects um
in water treatment and advanced
energy.
On the non-recurring side uh
between the last two sessions,
you all have appropriated
roughly over 100 million to the
agency for a variety of
projects, uh, such as the local
economic Development Act, site
readiness, uh, trails Plus
program and J tip.
So that's kind of an overview of
what you all have done for the
agency in the past couple years
as far as investments, um,
because of those investments,
the agency has a variety of
tools available to help
businesses, um, businesses
expand, businesses that are
relocating to New Mexico, um, in
the bullets I call out a couple
of the most commonly discussed
um tools that the agency has,
such as the local Economic
Development Act, also known as
LIDA, um, as well as the job
training incentive program.
And that's too fun classroom and
on the job training for eligible
businesses.
And I'm sure you'll hear more
from the secretary about some of
those programs and how they
function.
And then lastly, um, I'm gonna
quickly just do a quick overview
of the ledges that we did. Um,
so for all of you who are new or
unfamiliar with the Legisat
panel.
That is a panel that we do
during the LFC during the
interim, that's focused on
performance metrics and um the
agency's action plans, um, so it
gives us time to like really
talk uh with the agency in an
open conversation about kind of
what's going on, um, this past
interim, we did a leg that with
the agency on um their efforts
to grow jobs or increase jobs in
the science and technology
target industries.
Um, so some background that let
that was building on two
previous legisats, one that was
discussing the agency's overall
efforts for job creation, and
then a second one that was on
the status of their 20 year
statewide strategic plan, um,
and in that, in that statewide
strategic plan is where the
agency identifies the target
industries that we will be
commonly referred to during um
that you'll probably hear a lot
in these next couple weeks.
So in that ledger that we
discussed how um employment in
those science and technology
industries represent roughly
6.7% of the statewide total
employment. Um, we learned that
those industries are growing at
a roughly 18% average, um, and
they have competitive high wage
and high wages. Uh, we also
talked about how those jobs and
those industries tend to be
focused in the I-25 corridor, so
that's something like, you know,
when we're thinking about the
regional diversity, that was
something that we
talked about during the legist
stats.
Um, we did highlight how the
agency has been focusing on
supporting those science and
technology industries, uh,
through a variety of their
programs, uh, such as, um, the
advanced energy aboard pilot
program, they awarded 3.4
million to 7 companies, and
they've also awarded 760 to
research.
Faculty and student teams, um,
that are working on like
commercialization projects, um,
and just to close up my points
here, uh, during the interim,
um, the LFC focused a lot on
like analyzing which type of
economic development tools are
the most cost effective and the
most efficient, um, when we're
talking about growing jobs, um,
you know, when we're talking
about tools, we're talking about
tax incentives, um,
infrastructure, targeted job
training, and one of the things
we try to focus on
during the interim was um that
targeted um support to
businesses are the most cost
effective ways to help
businesses grow. Um, we also
wanted to make sure that the
tools that we are using because
we have limited resources are
going to industries that have
the most competitive advantage
in New Mexico in terms of all of
the stuff, wages, regional
diversity, um, how New Mexico
looks compared to the rest of
the country, um, so with that
folk with that was.
that we kind of took while we
were developing the economic
development, um, recommendation
at the LFC. So, thank you.
Thank you, Ms. Rodriguez,
Secretary.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my name is Rob
Black. I'm the uh secretary
designate for the economic
development department, and it's
an honor to be here, uh,
presenting to you today, uh,
about what I think is, is one of
our
Uh, one of the most important
things we can have a discussion
about, and that's how do we
create pathways to opportunity,
to prosperity for New Mexicans.
And in the state that has
historically been had high
poverty rates, um, this is
something I think that is
absolutely core to my team at
EDD and the work that we do
every day, and I'll tell you,
you've got, you've got in the
state of New Mexico has a
dedicated team focused on
building that prosperity across
the state. Um, so I'm
I'm honored to be able to work
with, uh, such quality
individuals.
And I'll start with um what was
mentioned earlier was the, the
additional investment, uh,
significant investment of $5
million into the our uh budget
uh last year by the legislature.
Um, and I want to talk through a
little bit about how we're using
those funds because it was when
it was allocated, there wasn't
directive legislation. There was
that went through the session,
but it didn't get ultimately put
into statute. But we took that
as a guide, as a guide to kind
of thinking about how
we want to use these funds in a
way that we believe can be both
most impactful for the for the
Mexico, but also aligns with um
the goals of the legislature.
So, uh, one of those, and, and
that was mentioned in the
research that uh was done by the
UFC is the need to really think
about how do we target
industries more specifically and
think about how do we do that
based on data. So, um, in the
fall of last year, we contracted
for an additional study.
to specifically look at two
major aspects. One, our
comparative advantage in
advanced energy here in New
Mexico, and how do we leverage,
uh, where we are already, uh,
to, to continue to be a leader
in advanced energy. Uh, that was
a, that's a $450,000 study.
We'll have those results before
the end of the fiscal year.
Similarly, we're doing an
analysis of the 5 different tech
sectors, um, advanced computing,
advanced.
aerospace bioscience and water
and technologies, um, and
looking at again, what are our
comparative advantages across um
With other states across those
sectors, and then how do we
position ourselves to grow those
advantages. And in where we, we
may not have unique advantages,
is that where we should be
spending our monies and
resources. So we're really
trying to take those 9 sectors
that started in the 2021, uh,
state strategy and continue to
prioritize based off of uh new
opportunities.
And, and as we think about what
are new opportunities. Um, how
many of you in 2021 have had
heard of quantum computing.
Or, well, OK, there's 3, there's
some smart people up there,
smart people, uh, 4, all right,
um, and then, but also the, the,
the incredible presence of
artificial intelligence and
what's that, what that means
both to potentially for our
economies, but also for our
national security.
And so I think those are things
that we need to be able to be
reflective towards and and make
sure that we're taking advantage
of those opportunities. And that
speaks to another one of the
grants that was um used by that
$5 million was $500,000 for the
quantum regional innovations
engine, um, application. Uh, we
are um we have uh received funds
from the federal government for
a quantum hub in partnership
with Colorado, but we're
pursuing another
Uh, program, uh, that, uh, Nosak
it in my office and Alex
Greenberg in the governor's
office are helping lead around
quantum that could be
significant investment in New
Mexico around that technology,
and we'll talk more about that,
uh, in the, in our budget
presentation, but I think those
are ideas and and ways that
we've been using those funds,
and I could go through uh the
analysts did a great job of kind
of talking about high level, how
we use those those 5 million,
but it's really again looking at
how do we ensure that we're
competitive and that we're
making investments in
things like, uh, water
treatment, advanced energy and
um science and tech business
start-up grants, um, and, and,
um,
And the quantum EDA tech hub and
with the National Science
Foundation. So, again, those are
ways that we use the additional
resources. Um,
Going forward,
And, and it
It's
I don't know
The AI movement is happening in
real time.
In fact, it's happening at
quantum speed.
And
Thank you, sir. Um,
And, and I, I'll speak to that
just briefly because I do, I
wanna cite some numbers as to
the potential impact on rural
New Mexico, and I cheered
earlier for the Wildcats,
because that's where I'm from. I
was born and raised in
Lovington. Um,
And if we look at a case study
in, in, in Los Lunas.
As the impact that Meta has had
on that community. In 2015, the
annual GRT in Los Lunas was $11
million.
Last month it was $5 million for
the month.
When construction was at its
peak, it was $7 million. Think
about what that could do for
Mora County.
For Sierra County, where other
places that we really need that
rural economic development.
So I think there's a unique
opportunity.
On Tuesday,
At the federal level, $500
billion of private equity was
committed to build data centers
in the United States as a
national defense imperative.
Today, Meta announced 60 to $65
billion to be spent in 2025
alone.
On AI infrastructure.
How do we position ourselves to
make sure that it's not going to
Arizona, Colorado, and Texas, or
Michigan. Um, but we're getting
An opportunity to really uplift
our rural communities with these
sort of investments. So I think
that's, as we think about, um,
What we're seeing in real time.
I probably have a dozen.
Companies that are looking to
put data centers in New Mexico
today.
Um
What we need to be thinking
about is, do we have sites ready
for them?
And that's why one of the
initiatives you'll see, we'll
talk more about later, is a site
readiness approach, which where
we think um will bring a lot of
opportunity to do
characterization work,
understand where we can develop,
what type of industries and, and
what are the, what are the
investments needed either from
the legislature or private
sector to get those sites, uh,
ready to turn dirt much faster
than traditionally. I we'll be
looking at how do we predeploy
those utilities that are so
desperately needed around the
state.
That's water, wastewater or
electricity in a way that
de-risks it from our co-ops, our
water utilities or our investor
owned utilities so that we're
ensuring that when they put that
money in up to a strategic
economic development site, but
there has some surety that
they'll be able to get the
return on those investments. Um,
we'll be talking about this,
this session regulatory
transparency.
Uh, how, how can we move
quicker? And that looks at
building permit data and
construction data for every
jurisdiction, including RLD that
does licenses and permits, uh,
inspections for construction
work. We'd like to see those
that data published quarterly,
on the average time from
application to determination of
that permit. That'll give
managers a much better idea
about where do we make
investments around technology
solutions, human solution, HR um
systems, because
will be able to see if 11
jurisdiction can do a permit in
3 days and another takes 3
months.
Maybe that data will help
improve those systems. And then
finally, uh, we'll be looking at
a couple of bills, uh, building
on the success that we are
around uh quantum and and and
how New Mexico's already
positioned again, we'll talk
more about that in the budget
process, uh, later on today, but
I think there's a unique, unique
opportunity, uh, but it's that
we need to see us today around
continuing to make sure New
Mexico leads on Quantum because
we already are.
Um, what UNim and Sandia and Los
Alamos have been doing for the
last decade is positioned us.
in a very special space, but we
need to make sure that we're
continuing to lead in that. So I
think as, as we think about the
work that we've done with the
the resources that the
legislature has been very
generous in giving to us,
especially as it relates to
technology and and those
sectors, um.
And and where we see uh the
priorities going forward in the
next year, uh, those are
That's where we stand, Mr.
Chairman, and I don't want to
take up too much time on the
presentation to give time for
questions, but I'll pause there.
Thank you, Secretary. Thank you,
Mr. Rodriguez. We'll dive right
into questions. First ranking
member Chatfield, then
representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for your presentation.
Thank you for your time.
Welcome here.
You know, I live in one of the
most rural
And one of the most remote areas
in New Mexico, and I love it
there.
So we have from time to time, we
have also some of the fastest
internet in the state of New
Mexico. We have really good uh
internet out there.
But uh we have from time to time
had people come in and, and, uh,
promote the idea of a data
center and they came and they
went and it hasn't happened, you
know, so I would, I would love
to.
Suggest uh
Some of the northeastern parts
of New Mexico as a, as a
possible site for some of those
things.
We, uh, we like them, we want
them, and, and bring them on.
But I'd also like to talk to you
a little bit about some more
low-hanging fruit about an
industry that we already have in
New Mexico, and that's
agriculture, uh, today on the
east side of New Mexico, we grow
a lot of corn.
And we shipped that corn into
Texas.
And there it fed the cattle that
we raised in New Mexico, so we
ship our calves into Texas.
And then we ship the corn to
feed them into Texas.
And then from Texas, they go to
Kansas to processing plants and
then we buy that beef back into
New Mexico so we can eat it.
It's low hanging fruit. We're,
we're exporting our jobs. We're
exporting our money. We're
exporting our livelihood. We're
exporting our fresh foods. I
know many years ago, I knew the
number of pecans that we shipped
out of the state of New Mexico,
well, we shipped about a boxcar
load of pecans a day into China.
This has been a long, you
probably know those numbers
better than I do, and it's, it's
been a long years ago since I
saw the number, because I was
involved in some of that, but uh
I think
Let, let's keep them here. Let's
shell them, let's coat them with
sugar and then send them to
China
and, uh, as you well know, we
have a gummy bear plant that
produces 3 million pounds of gun
bears or whatever down on the
down on the border. We need more
of that, we need to produce it
here in New Mexico, and I would
hope that some of your programs,
uh, have got some money saved
back for processing plants for
beef, chicken, uh, veal, uh,
those types of things. And also
for our
products for, for, uh,
You know, not only pecans, but
the, the hot we produce onions
by the truckloads if you guys
see those onions coming through,
they're, they're New Mexico
produced, and those are jobs,
those are, uh, those are in, and
when one of our other greatest
uh economic uh factors is
tourism. They don't come here to
see most of our cities. They
come here to see our little uh
farms and villages and the in
the places in New Mexico. So
what say you, sir?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Chatfield, uh
thank you for that and thank you
for the pecan acknowledgement,
um, as, as my family was pecan
farmers, uh, down in southeast
New Mexico, um,
I, I'll start with uh on the on
the processing side, that is an
opportunity for things like
LIDA, which could be used to to
uh help fund that sort of
infrastructure on, uh, you know,
meat processing other types of
economic-based jobs where we're
creating that revenue here that
then is sold in New Mexico, but
it's sold outside of the state.
So we have some of those funding
mechanisms where there's an
opportunity for that
development. And I, I salute the
legislature for passing the
ability to
New Mexico-based meat
inspectors. That was multi-year
effort, um, and I applaud you
for that because I think it
helps keep that processing and
lower those costs in here in New
Mexico. We also have our healthy
foods program that's based out
at EDD that's been that was
driven by this legislature to
fund local grants and help
identify those gaps in the
supply chain, and, and then
align where our small farmers
can actually then produce and
get to market, whether that
through our school lunch
programs, our senior centers, or
others, so that we're getting a
real win-win. So we're building
both economic development, but
also improving health uh here in
New Mexico. So, um, we're very
committed to to building our,
our ag and our value added ag
component. It is one of our key
sectors at the economic
development department and
appreciate your comments today,
sir, sir, thank you. But thank
you for being cognizant of, of
our existing programs, like I
say it's kind of low hanging
fruit, something we could.
Pump up and we could uh increase
it, uh, exponentially with very
little effort. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, uh, ranking memberm
Chatfield, next we have
Representative Garrett and then
Representative Baca. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you Secretary
designate black.
You know, I learned something
from President Trump who
probably people know I didn't
vote for, but um he, he is a
master at Montras. And I think
all of us in this spills on what
representative Chapfield just
said, we don't know the good the
good things about our state
ourselves. I've been involved in
quantum and many things for
several years, so I know about
it, but we have to go and send
these messages that you've just
repeated.
Over and over and over again,
whether it's pecans, corn, you
know, all these things because
that's the backbone of
attracting people as an
educator, we have some of the
most innovative education
possibilities in our state, and
yet too many of our leaders
constantly do the mantra. We're
number 50, actually, if you
analyze
If you break it up, that's not
true, so I want to thank you for
starting with that emphasis, and
I wanna encourage every single
one of us. I'd like a list from
the economic development
department of Montras to repeat
in our social media to our
friends and neighbors. I'm very
serious because words have a
vibration that's powerful and
too many people in our
leadership in various
categories, only do the negative
mantras, and they don't do the
positive.
incredible things that we have,
um, which I heard from all the
350 students today, incredible
activities going on. These kids,
I want them all to be elected
when they're 21. But thank you
and I'd like a list of the
positive mantras we need to
start doing. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, next we have
Representative Baca, then
represent Luhan he was chairman
and thank you for your
presentation. Uh, I'm gonna be
kind of very quick and very um
direct. So I was very pleased to
look over the numbers that uh
from your uh overview.
Now, my question is this, you
can get back to me on this is,
OK, of those jobs that were
rejected.
How many have been actualized,
OK.
Um, of those companies that have
been invested in or created.
How many of those are private
versus kind of more public
sector.
And then also, Mr. Chairman, how
many of those?
Are still have their doors open
today because when we're talking
about making an investment,
we're talking about putting
state dollars into the
businesses.
We want to make sure that
We also provide supports that
they are able to keep their
doors open and sustain
themselves.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, my next
Question and uh secretary
designate, uh in my district, so
I very much know and appreciate
what Meta has done.
My, it's more of a comment is
that when we have industry such
as this. And as you say, Meta is
going to be getting into the AI
and the, the
We also need to make sure that
we collaborate with our
different agencies because
Whether it be the infrastructure
needs and whether it be as far
as running utilities and water
and power out to these sites, I
think with without the
infrastructure, without the
roads, I mean, right now.
Um, in that, in that Laudes in
that area, we have meta, we have
Amazon.
And we have one way in and one
way out of town.
And so we're looking at their
community coming up with $30
million to build a second or to
the shortfall between them.
We want to make sure that we are
also working with and targeting
and say, hey, we have this
coming in here, can we be,
instead of working in silos.
Can we kind of make sure that
we're also following up with the
Uh, with those other agencies.
And, and Mr. Chairman and
secretary, this is just more of
a thought too.
It's what we talked about
outdoor recreation. I said it, I
said it in an interim committee,
I also don't want us to forget
about some of our athletic
facilities and how
Those types of things.
If we support our
Athletics or teams in our
performing arts. I don't care.
Then that also is creating
economic development. We have
stadiums, we have theaters,
where we don't have, we're not
fully utilized because we have
not
Made that investment. So as some
of the money that we've talked
about.
I would really like to see
directed into some of these
others, as I said, any, any
activity that brings families
together, brings our communities
together.
I support. So Mr. Chairman,
thank you for that.
Thank you. Next we're gonna go
to Representative Luhan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary designate, uh, this is
a
It's always good to hear from
you and and and where we're
going in the door, and we are
moving in the right direction
for our state, but there's
always more to do. Um, I'm first
going to.
Uh, bring up the healthy food
programs, uh, that you brought
up. I mean, it's doing to two
very distinct things and and um.
You know, it's the hunger
initiative and the agricultural
um.
Paired together and how uh we're
building the economy of that.
Can you tell me in the budget
what the request is for that
program, Mr. Chair.
Mr Chair members, my name's
Isaacro, the deputy cabinet
Secretary for the Economic
Development department, um, the
LFC, I'm sorry, the agency
request for healthy foods was
3.2 million, um, executives
supporting a $2 million budget
for that and LFC is a
is not recommending
Thank you Mr. Chair, I, I took a
little bit deeper dive, and I
just like to say I, I was under
the.
The impression that there is a
um a federal um influence on
that budget item on that line
item and I came to understand
that that's not true. Um, so I'd
like to further address that
when we get to our our um our
specials, um, Mr. Chair, cause I
believe that's in the special
request in LFC didn't um.
I didn't I didn't put anything
towards that, but I think, um, I
took a little deeper dive and
that's what I found out. So I'd
like to address that at a later
time, and I think it's a really
important, um, part of our
budget that we need to continue.
Uh, the other thing I wanted to
bring up, Mr. Chair, and we're,
we're bringing up, um,
We're engaging with our
stakeholders and we're all
working together in
collaboration and and and
bringing public and private
sector together. how is that
reflected?
the budget or how are you um
How are you doing that so that
we're making sure that the
private and the public sector
are coming together to work on a
lot of these um these uh funding
incentives, Mr. Chair. Mr.
Chairman, Representative, uh,
thank you for the question. Um,
we have, um, a variety of
divisions within economic
development from film to outdoor
recreation to Main Street to um
I'm, I know I'm gonna forget
this, and I'm gonna get in
trouble by my staff, and they
should get, get mad at me on
this. Um, but our Office of
Technology, uh, and strategy,
um, all of these different
divisions have advisory groups
that we work with directly. So
when we're, when we're scoring
the grant applications through
the uh the Office of Technology
and strategy, the science and
strategy, uh, we're utilizing
community members and, and
advisory boards to help score
those grants are.
Uh, the, the healthy foods
program is a great example of
one that's really deeply
integrated into the community
and has been for years. Um, so I
think we've done our best to
really try to lean in, but, um,
frankly, there's always, as been
said, there's always work to
continue to do in this space and
be better. Um, I had the
opportunity to travel with our
cabinet secretary for in
American Affairs, uh, to the
Zuni Pueblo to uh the Navajo
Nation in the last couple of
months. These
opportunities for me to go
directly and make sure that
we're talking to our tribal
partners. Uh, we were also
represented at Oke Oenge. So we
really want to make sure that
we're developing those
engagements and, and being out
there. And um
And I'll say even, and I've got
a, we've got field teams that
thankfully, uh, the legislature
has supported on our economic
development side. Um, we have 6
different regions around the
state. We have two
representatives in each, um, and
they are the eyes and ears for
us in the community. Um, and
I'll share, you know, last
month, or sorry, not last month,
last week, I was in Hobbs twice,
Lovington Roswell, Senator
Teresa and Santa Fe last week.
And that's what our team's doing
all the time, because we're
focused on really ensuring that
we're delivering for the
citizens of New Mexico. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate that. I also like to
say that the legislators have
been
The legislators have been very
engaging in in uh in in that
intersection of of
collaboration, especially in and
that um development of our
energy sector, um, the last
thing is, uh, you talked about
when we were at UNM during the
interim, um.
Very specifically of how we do
build our economy and that's
through.
The specific um.
Focus on our infrastructure and
our water.
And
We know that that's, that's
where we want to really be
focusing on, but without, if we
are not um working closely with
our electric utilities, electric
cooperatives health and
broadband, um, and, and the
like, then we're not gonna be
able to achieve those things.
How, uh, can you give us an
update from when you presented
on that and how we, it's
reflected in some of these
dollars, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the uh for the, the
question, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Lujan, um,
I, I, you're absolutely right.
The future of New Mexico is
based around electrons and
molecules of water.
And, and how are we deploying
those effectively and
efficiently, uh, and building
for the future, building for
climate resilience going
forward.
Um, but also ensuring that our,
our kids have a place to work
and stay here in New Mexico, so
they don't need to go to Arizona
or Texas to find the jobs.
So what we're doing around that
is, and it gets to this idea of
how do we think about
infrastructure and and deploy
it. So that gets exactly to the
site readiness work that we need
to be doing. The legislature
funded us, um, with a, uh, a
pilot on that last year, where
we reviewed over 30 public
sector sites, uh, to, it's it's
a high level evaluation. We're
looking at, um, we've did 3 in
Roswell, we're all over the
state.
Around what are the things that
could be invested in this site
that could make it more
developable and site ready, so
that when a developer does come,
they're ready to go.
So, we'll, the, the, the site
readiness bill we're bringing
forward the executive authorized
24 million, I believe the LFC is
has authorized 35 million. The
idea would be to do that site
characterization work in
partnership with our local
communities, counties, EDOs,
tribal nations, and pueblos to
to identify those sites.
And then we'll understand how
does this site need water,
wastewater. What's, we know
what's, we've characterized as
to what's the best opportunity
for it because it's unreal. It
might be this type of
utilization as commercial or
industrial use.
And then we can analyze it and
those funds could be then used
to do traffic studies, housing
studies, environmental review.
So again, we're getting that
those sites ready to go, to be
developed.
Pairing that then with once
we've done the characterization
of the site, there'll be a 2nd
bill, our utility pre-deployment
bill, which will allow for
utility once we've certified a
site.
To go to the PRC for an
expedited review, 6 month
expedited review to pre-deploy
that electric infrastructure.
So it allows us again to get
quicker to market at de-risks
the risk to the the co op, the
investor owned utility, or water
utilities. And the second piece
it does is it ties in the NMFAs
PPRF, the public infrastructure
loan program, and we expand that
to include co-ops, so that they
can be part of that low that
loan program so that rural New
Mexico isn't left out of this
economic development
opportunity.
Thank you. That is, that is,
that's quite expansive, and I
appreciate that explanation. It
really helps us as we're, we're
looking at, um, looking over the
over the complete overview of
what, what is in the budget
right now. Um, and it, and I'll
have an off conversation with
you because I see adjustment of
of.
Of funding in different places
and I can only assume it's
because you have this plan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative Hunt.
Next we have Representative
Duncan, then Rep Silva.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um,
Most of my questions are going
to be surrounding just getting
some information from you. Um,
being new on this committee, so
Mr. Rodriguez, you talked about
asset analysis in target
sectors. Could you explain that
a little bit for me?
Yes, uh, Mr. Chair, that was in
reference to what the secretary
had just mentioned at the
beginning of his um presentation
that was tied to the additional
recurring money that the agency
received during the last
session, um, he just mentioned
that there's two analysis that
the agency is working on. One is
for the competitive advantage of
advanced energy, and the other
one was to define technology
sectors, um, and those two
analyses from what I understand
are being done this fiscal year.
OK. Thank
Mr. Chair, so there's 2
Um, you're, you're working on
currently?
Mr. Chairman Representative,
that's correct. We're currently
in process we have, uh, we're in
study on two separate studies,
one, is looking at the 5 sectors
of advanced computing, advanced
energy, aerospace bioscience,
and water technologies.
And that's looking at um our
competitive, the competitive
situation for us here in New
Mexico with our assets,
liabilities, workforce, um, what
are the investments we could
make to be more competitive.
And then the second one is
focused primarily on advanced
energy. Uh, we are a leader in
that space, um, and what are,
what are our opportunities to
continue to lead and make
additional investments to to
grow that sector.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
could you tell me a little bit
about the landing enchantment
Legacy Fund.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I'm gonna ask,
uh, I'm gonna, um, ask for an
assist from my staff on this
one.
Mr. Chairman, members, uh,
representative, the line of
chairman Legacy Fund is a uh
recurring funds now that
transfers to the outdoor
recreation division of the
department, um, for, for
grantmaking and, uh, program
support.
Um, thank you for that, Mr.
Chair. So how does that uh
correlate with the rills Plus
program or are they two separate
and do, do they, two different
things, Mr. Chairman, uh,
members and representatives,
they're, they are two separate.
Um, approaches, rills Plus,
which currently has $10 million
in it, that's specifically for
expanding and growing trails
across the state, um, the
Outdoor Legacy fund, um, I'll,
I'll probably.
That my staff to, to confirm,
that's focused on um
On for youth programs. OK. OK.
Thank you. Thank you for that
clarification. I appreciate
that. Um, just one other quick
question for you and then I'll,
I'll be done. Well, 2 actually.
We've got 35 million to create a
framework for assessing
potential economic development
sites, and I'm always concerned,
you know, it seems like I-25
gets him.
Um, and, and I'm always
concerned about the rural parts
of the state. Um, is there, is
there anything in that?
Um, 35 million that, you know,
would push it out to the rural
parts of the state.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
um, there's nothing specific in
the budget, uh, allocation that
says it has to go to rural or
urban. Um, what I would say is I
think we've learned a lot from
the investment that the
legislature made last year
around the site readiness work
we've already done, and we have
that initial report and it's,
it's very, very insightful. And
again, we did, I can't remember
2 or 3 different sites in Hobbs.
We did 3 in Roswell. We've done,
what we will do is go to, the
idea would be we would provide
As the state and EDD.
Uh technical resources for local
counties and cities and tribal
nations.
to come to us to say we have 20
contiguous acres, one landowner,
uh, that we think would be great
for development in our
community. We would then go and
do the characterization work to
say, um, based off of your
workforce, based off of your
location. These are the types of
uses we think would be best
suited for this location in your
community.
And then, uh, and we here's the
recommendations on investments,
on infrastructure, on
What sort of reports research
needs to be done. Again, it
could be housing study, it could
be an environmental review, um,
all of those sort of and that's
would be part of that. Um, the
idea would be with that site
readiness approach is we will
have in what you'll see in the
legislation is an advisory
board, uh, that helps direct EDD
and review of those
applications, um, but we will
actively work to solicit um
input from around the state, as
someone from Southeast New
Mexico and
Realize you're in the Northwest,
but we have parallels, um, it is
very important to me that we're,
we're looking at how we are
doing this in our, our, our
With our local communities, but
our rural communities, because I
do think um we can provide that
technical support, um,
That then the local community
gets to to define what it is
they actually want.
That's not up to us. We can say
this is what's most competitive.
But it's up to that local
community to say, yeah, we don't
like that, but we think this is
something that you've identified
as well that we would like to
invest in.
Thank you, Mr. Sher. I
appreciate that. I appreciate
you from a small community cause
that's, that's home still
probably in you. Um, and then
I've got a strange question
here.
Um, tourism departments get, get
50 cents for every vehicle in
ATB that's registered in the
state.
How come? Why doesn't that go to
Rhodes?
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, I will leave
that question to the legislature
to answer that one. I don't have
an answer. OK. Thank you, Mr. I
knew it was a strange one. I'd
love to have an answer for that
someday. Thank you for playing,
and we can go back and see at
least when it started. Thank
you, Brooklyn Duncan. Uh, next
we're gonna go to representative
Silva and then Representative
Pettigrew.
Hi, thank you, uh, secretary
Designate Black and Ms.
Rodriguez, um, chair, thank you.
Uh, I have a couple of questions
and I want to preface this with,
I want all of these things to
work.
Um, I represent Las Cruces, but
also part of um all of
Chaparral, which is the largest
unincorporated community in the
state of New Mexico and um and
it sounds to me like the
economic development work also
really relies on infrastructure,
but also environment, uh, for
communities. And so I just wanna
to couch my questions in that
context. Um, I want these things
to work.
And also to uh build off of what
Representative Baca had
mentioned.
Um, if I could just dig a little
bit deeper of the um jobs that
were created through LIDA,
I would love to know how many
last beyond 12 months, um, like
that's per like that particular
person. And um and then of the
2359 employees that were trained
through JTIP. Um, did this
result in higher personal income
for those people after they were
trained.
So I'll start there.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, I'll start with
the second one on JTI, um,
My assumption, if they took that
job, was that it was moving to a
an income level that was higher.
I don't know that we can we
track to what their income was
before. So I wouldn't be able to
give you that data, but if
they're being hired into a new
job. The hope is that they're
not going down, that they're
actually improving their
situation. And what I will say
the the average jobs that were
being funded by JTI in 2019,
we're around $21 an hour, and
they're over $24 an hour.
now. So we, and, and we've
really shifted from, you know,
looking at things like call
centers, which didn't really
have a pathway to prosperity for
those those individuals to the
types of industries we're
talking about today, that really
do have much higher wage
opportunities, and that's where
we've really tried to focus our
LIDA investments, as well as our
JTI investments.
Excellent. Thank you. I
appreciate that.
Um, also, um, in terms of the
data centers, I want to be
supportive of, of those ideas as
we're building out um our all of
our industries and moving into
tech and um what I know is that
when data centers move into
communities, uh, they tend to
also increase the utility bills,
especially electric bills for
households in and around the
data centers and so I'd want to
make sure that we're not nickel
and diming our um
Um, our residents who are
benefiting in one way, but then
also having to pay out of pocket
in another way, um, and, and
we're becoming more arid in New
Mexico and so making sure that
we have contingencies as data
centers use a lot of water. Um,
so just, I, I don't know if you
have a point of view or if
you're thinking about those
things. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Representative, um, those are
really great points, and I
think, um,
I'll start with water. I'll
start with the last one again.
Um, the most of the data centers
I'm talking to today or have it,
and it's hard to say that, you
know, me is an old data center,
they're still building it. Um,
but the ones today are either
are typically closed loop water
systems, um, or other, they're
using other types of
technologies, um, to do the
cooling. So the water
utilization for several of the
companies I'm the state is
talking to today is the
bathrooms and the k
in the commissary. Once they've
filled the water in the closed
loop system. So it's very
different, typically what water
use than than historic. We're
talking to, you know, many of
these data centers want to
build.
Renewable energy to support
those. They're using new
technologies to clean the panels
that are industrial robots that
clean the panels not using a lot
of water that has been done
historically to keep the
efficiency of the panels.
And as it relates to increasing
rates, typically when a an
investor owned utility gets a
large scale economic development
project. It actually spreads the
cost of infrastructure needs to
a bigger pot, so it actually
tends to reduce the cost and
impact on uh residential
customers. So we think it
actually would do the opposite,
then drive up their costs. The
challenge, um,
as we continue through our, the,
the, the evolution and energy
Transition Act is we are going
to need to upgrade our utility
infrastructure, our, our
Our transmission lines, our
smart meters, all of those sort
of things are going to take
investment. These sort of
economic development
opportunities, create revenue to
make those investments and
improve the system, um, in a way
that doesn't impact our existing
ratepayers as significantly.
Great. Thank you. And then,
sorry, my chair, um, my last
question is um around site
readiness because in a place
like Chaparral, um, we, there's
a large cannabis industry
because it's right on the New
Mexico-Texas border and um there
are other cannabis businesses
that want to move in, but they
can't because they lack the
infrastructure, the community
lacks the infrastructure because
the, um, the water pipes aren't
big enough. And so, uh, for, for
business, uh, zoning. And so,
um, just thinking about how
we're doing more site readiness.
I'm glad to hear that those
things are in, uh, are in the
bill and they're line items and
also, um, wondering, I just want
to clarify, are those are the
sites in the site readiness bill
already designated or is that
just general sight readiness
that any community could apply
for.
Chairman representative, um, we,
they are not there.
It's completely open. We will
set some criteria as to the size
and scope of what we would want
to do in that analysis. It needs
to be at scale so that we're
able to um um make those
investments in a way and use,
use the, the resources
effectively. Um, so,
Please don't hold me to this,
but it would be, you know, 2
contiguous acres or 50
contiguous acres would be kind
of a baseline where we would
say, if you meet this criteria,
we can do the site analysis with
you. Um, but, um, this, the city
of Las Cruces has already come
to talk to us about their
industrial park and wanting to
get, make sure that we get that
on the list for evaluation. So
it'll be an opportunity for us
to really collaborate with our
local communities, and I would
look to, you know, all of you to
help make sure that we're,
we're, uh, doing our job.
um to get out there to work
with, um, developers work with
cities and states to to identify
those opportunities. Excellent.
Thank you. I appreciate it.
Thank you very muchative Silva.
Next, we're gonna go to
represent pet group, please.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you
for the presentation. Um,
First off, I do want to say
thank you for your team being
there for the site visit in
Lovington. It's the beginning of
January.
Very
Hopefully continues to remain a
promising.
Uh, Outlook.
Um
Chairman, I have a few questions
that do not have to be answered,
you can.
Meet, email it to all of us or
you can choose to answer
whatever works best.
Uh, one of the first things we
talked about or that was talked
about were the target
industries, industries that we
have right now, and we're
economic development is looking
at.
I'd like to know what those are
versus the 9 sectors and what 9
sectors.
You talked about from the 2021
strategies.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, I'm gonna
Try to get this right and if my
team can help me out, if I've
missed one. So the um advanced
computing energy aerospace,
biosciences were all part of the
9 sectors, and then then uh oh,
I'm getting an assist right
here. Um, my, my staff is
expanding apparently.
Um,
uh, intelligent manufacturing,
global trade, obviously that
gets to the importance of the
border region, um, sustainable.
and value-added agriculture in
film and television.
Perfect. Thank you. What sheet
are you looking at?
Uh, Mr. Chair, representative.
Just one of my documents that
I've had from past couple of
months of working, I always
forget the sectors. Thank you,
thank you, Chairman and thank
you for that. Is that
potentially one of our legisl
steps that I could go back and
find. Yes, I can send it to you.
This is from a cluster analysis
that we did during the interim,
so I didn't go through the
chair, Mr. Chair, um, and that's
on the website, but that's also
on the economic development
statewide strategic plan.
They're pretty easy to find on
the website as well.
Thank you very much. I, I can
find it from there. Um.
Chairman, uh, secretary.
I think my second question.
Run me if you can briefly, and
if not, we can do this offline.
One of the things you talked
about is startup industries.
Let's say
I'm a small business or I, I
have a concept.
Initial investments gonna be
around 10.5 million or a million
to 1.5 million, 250 to 350,000
and, and, and materials and with
the return and we have a game
plan for the return on
investment year one, year 2,
year 3, so on and so forth.
I've tried to go through the
economic development web page
and figure out, OK, how do we
get from point A to point B and
find how we get assistance from
economic development, and that
is not a simple task.
Can you help me through that?
Mr. Chairman Representative, uh,
yes, we can help you through
that. Uh, our hope is that in
the next year, uh, we will be
updating that website so that it
is much easier when the process
because I, I, I share, uh, I
share that that concern. Um, we
do have, we have
And we, we, we're doing some
amazing work.
Whether it's, uh, we have a
small business loan program that
is funded by the federal
government is $75 million that
is specifically targeted to the
types of industries helps buy
down, uh, make their loans much
cheaper, partnering with, um,
the, the private sector banks,
um, we have, uh, that's also
there's direct loan programs
that support that. We're in the
process of hiring an
entrepreneur lead in our office
of Science and tech strategy and
technology. Um, so,
And then, so there's a variety
of and even within the various
sectors, whether that's uh
through our our our Jedi
program, whether that's through
our, um, uh,
The outdoor recreation film,
there's, we have, we have folks
who are consulting and
supporting uh those various
industries as they grow and,
and, and, and start up. So, um,
but I, I hear your concern and I
share your concern that we can
do a better job of presenting
that information. The
legislatures invested in us as a
state to make sure that we're
creating these pathways for
folks, we need to make it easier
for them to to to follow those
pathways.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you
Secretary. You know, uh,
probably each of us have
departments that we work
exceptionally well with and then
departments that maybe not so
well.
One of the things that Secretary
Chardon Clark is amazing at.
His constituent services.
She has people in those roles
that
We can call
We know their name, they answer
their phone and we can get out
of the way.
I can connect my constituent
with their constituent services
person.
And all I ask at the end is not,
not for the solution my
constituent wants, but for a
solution.
And at the end of it, let me
know that that's done, then I
can talk to my constituent and I
can close it out on my to do
list.
I think it's something that each
of our departments could
probably be better at and, like
I said, her department does
amazing with that.
From
Corporate income tax, personal
income tax, motor vehicles.
You name it.
She does a great job with that.
So, just, just a thought on
that.
Um, as we get closer to, to
start going through numbers.
Chairman, it would be really
great.
With the new initiatives that
you talked about.
And, and, um,
Moving forward, pushing forward
with the budget.
To identify, this was not my
idea, but I'm a really good
person at hearing somebody
else's good idea and taking it
and running with it, um, to
identify the bills.
You will be sponsoring or
supporting the get that budget
to where you want it to be.
Let us know what those bills
are, so for people that like to
do the deep dive, and read the
bill and compare it to the
numbers and then be able to come
back and ask good questions when
we are at that time.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
uh, that's a great suggestion,
and, and we'll make sure that
we're engaging with you, uh,
and, and any of all of the
members who are interested in
that, and, and, and that.
What I would say is what you're
doing is, is R&D, uh, to rip off
and duplicate.
Yes, yes. Well, like I said, one
of my colleagues, um, made that
suggestion earlier and I
I was waiting to see if it came
out as a question and it didn't,
so I'm, I like, I'm really good
at that. Um.
My colleague, uh, representative
Chatfield talked about rural
districts and, and being from my
neck of the wood, you understand
that you
If you're in Lee County, you
went there on purpose.
It's, uh, you don't go there by
mistake, or if you did, it's a
long way out of your way. And uh
so I do appreciate the efforts
that you continue to do in rural
districts, I think some of my
colleagues may feel like there
could be more, and, and having
those one on one conversations
with the legislators.
Understand where your efforts
are, Chairman, secretary would
be, be great.
And with respect to that, one of
the pieces of legislation that
I've been working on for a
couple of years now. I think we
actually make the docket this
year, um.
Just for our department
secretaries to notify us as
legislators.
Of
Opportunities that are coming
up.
In our statewide or in our area.
So, you know, you're gonna issue
a grant.
There's an opportunity for a
competitive grant.
get this out to if it's an NGO
base or if it's private based,
whatever it is, get this
information out so they can go
compete for.
Once the grant is completed.
Or that that selection has been
made.
Let the legislators know who
that selection company is.
And when they're going to issue
the actual grant application for
whatever it is.
Healthy foods initiative, you
pick one, there's tons out
there.
But we don't know that.
Now there's some of us that are
really, really good at that.
There's some of us that are
still 5 years in.
Still trying to figure out this
whole thing.
OK. I, I see the money. I know
where it's going, but I don't
see the process that helps me
get my constituents.
Access to it.
So, that, that's a piece of
legislation that, that, that I'm
trying to get put together with
a great group of people that
support
Support us, uh, from legislative
council on from the Republican
office trying to get that piece
of legislation, right, that,
that doesn't make it too
onerous.
But
Makes us as a state government
communicate with the people that
represent the constituents.
So that we can get that
information out. Just letting
you know what's coming down the
road from my side.
Chairman, um,
Very specific question that you
may not have the answer for, and
I'm, I'm more than willing to
wait for an answer when, when
you have it.
I would like to know when we
look at things from an overall
economic developments. The
average investment dollar per
job.
IRBs subsidies, you name it, the
state of New Mexico dedicates.
Versus the actual.
VRT return or any other return.
To that, so we invest $10 we get
$3 back or we invest $10 we get
$20 back.
What is that average? How are we
doing year over year and are we
reducing or increasing that gap
depending if it's positive or
negative.
How is the department pulling
that together. You have that
number off the top of your head,
that's great. If not, I'd love
to hear it at some point.
Repres, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, um, I will start
with saying congratulations to
the legislature for putting
money in the budget, actually do
that sort of analysis from the
LFC. So there is now money to
start to look at the economic
impact of investments in a way
that gets away from just looking
at what was the return to the
state directly in tax dollars,
but the overall economy. What,
how did it impact the economy
because I think from an economic
development side, that's really
really important.
Um, so we don't have that data
today because we haven't had the
tools, but going forward, uh,
thanks to what was in the feed
bill, uh, we should, you as a
legislature will be able to do
that analysis. Um, as it relates
to some of the other kind of, I,
I, I will look with work with my
team to see how we can get down
to what that value is per
investment and per the the wages
coming back. But again, what
that looks like on the
multiplier impact to the
economy, and, you know, do you
think about
and the dollars that came in and
JTI or meta.
What it's done for the
restaurants, for the whole
community there is very
different than what you would
just see as it relates to those
jobs, right? So, I think you
have to have a a more thoughtful
approach.
And we're getting the tools to
do that, but we're not probably
where we need to be yet.
Thank you very much for that
answer and thank you, Chairman,
for uh your patience with me.
And, and for the 10 years I sat
through economic development on
different corporations and
sharing a few of them.
Looking at things from not just
the individual.
How much do we get back in PR
and PIT or or this, but how that
trucking industry, what it did
in fuels, what it did and in
groceries, what it did, all
those different pieces and how
you actually look at that. And I
know it's a, that's a huge ask.
With respect to what it is, but
I am curious about it, you know,
2 years ago, Chairman, we sat in
Las Vegas, New Mexico, and the
state of New Mexico hired an
actuary to come in and give us
some updates on some of the
things that we're investing in
that we should continue to
invest in and things that we
shouldn't.
Actuary was very crystal clear,
you can go back and watch it on,
on, on the video.
But the last thing you should
invest in this film.
But yeah, we continue to push
that. So I would be curious
about
What our return total return,
total investment in film, and
what our return is and, and how
that's gonna change or grow,
whichever is the right way to
look at that.
With respect to that. Once
again, that's a long term uh
question that, that if you want
to speak on it just briefly now,
but bring us back more data I'd
love to have, Mr. Chairman, we,
we will talk about that somewhat
in our next presentation on the
budget. So if, if it's OK, we'll
do that. No, that's perfect
right there.
Um, and we'll have and
representative just uh we'll go
back to you. We have 7 more
members with questions. I have
one last comment.
With respect to that.
Secretary, one of the things you
talked about was the future of
New Mexico is an electrons and
water molecules.
Let's not forget that the
hydrocarbons pay for that.
Thank you.
Thank you. OK, we're gonna go
next to Representative Dowd, and
Representative Herrera, then
represent Ferndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Hello,
secretary. Um, OK, so I, I have
questions from the two handouts
first, um, on this one, the 23
to 1 rate of return and the
dollars are there on the the
economic output.
How, how many different
companies
Did you invest in and are they
broken down by county?
Um
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
I'm sorry, I don't think I
understand the question,
and my apologies investment
profiles on what that's just a
profile. It's not, it's a, it's
a, it's not a, it's meant to be
specific to New Mexico. It's,
it's more of a trying to
illustrate a point. OK, all
right. I would like to know on
the initiatives like JTI, like
ya, the Lia
Leda Lida, um, the outdoor
equity fund or the, the
innovative outdoor recreation.
fund, things like that.
Site readiness. Can we get a map
of what it looks like by county.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, I think we can
work on that, yes. OK. How far
could that go back?
Mr. Chairman, our
representative, I
Would
I'm only started since
September, so I'm not sure. I a
little longer than that,
Mr. Chairman in this role I've
only been here for since
September, so let me, let me
check with my team and I'll see
what, what, uh, what we have
available opportunity wise. OK,
thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and um thank you
Secretary on the back page on
page 2 of this handout, um, on
the office of strategy, Science
and Technology administering the
5 grant program support, support
science and technology business
startups, OK.
So I have Spaceport America, and
I have New Mexico Tech.
Um, when I was touring New
Mexico Tech, one of their
research sites, they, I can't
remember what it was, but they
said there was a change in the
criteria that they are now.
Ineligible and I don't remember
if it required a federal match
or could not be part of a
federal match. What, what
changed? What are, what are the
criteria that would create a be
a barrier to one of our research
institutes from applying for
these.
Uh, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, I need to get
more specific because we have a
variety of different grant
programs, uh, whether that's on
the energy side, whether that's
on the broader technology side,
water side, they have different
criteria for those. So if we
could, uh, if, if, um, you could
connect me with the individual
who who was applying, we could
dig down and find out what that
barrier was or that challenge.
But um I just don't know which
program they were applying for.
OK.
And then, um, OK, things I've
written.
You had mentioned, Mr. Chairman
and secretary, in your
presentation that you want to
study the response time for
permitting to figure out if
different agencies or if, if
other people have better
practices or quicker response
times.
A study for that. I mean, like,
are, are there other states that
have implemented a like, can't
we just say the average you need
to respond to someone. Time is
money. We're trying to do this
business can't we just put like
a time limit on response times?
Mr. Chairman Representative,
that is a great question, and
that's kind of how I always, you
know, as many of you know, I was
the president and CEO of the
Chamber of Commerce for the last
6 years, and this is one of
those initiatives I was trying
to push from the chamber side.
Um, it actually isn't a study.
What this will do is require the
planning department in Las
Cruces, to publish the Average
time from application to
determination of a permit.
And make it and we're gonna put
it on RLD's website.
Every county and city and RLD
publishing that data quarterly.
It's not a study, it's actually
transparency, so we can see.
What I also understand from
working from the chamber of
commerce side is, um, you can
pass legislation and you can
pass regulations to try to
Do good management.
But you can't, you can't
legislate good management.
But what this does is it
provides a tool for uh folks
like myself who administer
government programs to say, I
had no idea it takes me 6 months
to get that thing done.
Um, I've got 5 different people
touching it. Maybe it should be
2. My, my data intake is
terrible. It helps me to start
to say, once I see, I've got a
problem, because a lot of, I, I
would argue many people don't
think they have a problem.
They just hear her complaining.
businesses.
We're gonna give them a tool to
be able to say,
Um, why can Riodoso do it quite,
way faster than Roswell or vice
versa.
And I think that transparency is
what will drive.
Uh, improvement.
If, if you create a deadline,
there's always a way for us to
say, oh, your application wasn't
complete, we're going to toll
the time until you reapply and
then we'll get a new deadline.
So I think
That's harder to manage. We just
want to be something very clear
and concise that provides clear
information to the public, the
developers, and to the managers
that how their systems are
working. So,
Mr. Chair and secretary, I'm
very, very interested in what
you're saying. We have to get to
a solution. I've seen bills
introduced to create third-party
inspectors because there's no
local inspector in the
community. Those bills die
because they're opposed by the
union.
Um, I've seen bills to, I mean,
there's been all kinds of
varieties to remove regulatory
barriers and if this gets us to
the factual data, let me give
you a real life scenario. If
there's not, and this is true to
most of our rural communities.
There is no local inspector
cause there's no money for a
local inspector. Then it falls
to CID and I, I could do this
through a zillion industries,
but I'm just using the example
that constituent brought to me
recently. So then the electrical
inspector comes once every 2
weeks to the town, and they
inspected 150 canned lights. No,
it was over 150 can lights. I
don't remember the number of
outlets, um, family bathrooms,
blah blah blah. This isn't like
no sheet rocks up yet, and there
was a
switch where a toggle didn't
have a piece of wire between it.
It's like, I don't know, like
some sort of safety talk uh
piece between in an inside a
light switch. I don't know
foreign to me, but they didn't
pass, so they wait 2 more weeks
for them to come back.
Jobs shut down, crews on hold.
Is this what the purposes of
this?
Mr. Chairman Representative,
yes, this in part is exactly
what we can get to is um CID
will also have to report.
The timelines as well.
So we will understand how long
it takes for that inspector to
go out from application to
determination or that that that
uh permit. So it, it applies to
the state. And when we're
working with, uh, the RLD uh
lead on this, and he's working
with us on the bill. Um, so we,
we're gonna hold ourselves
accountable at the state level,
but we also want to make sure
that our counties and cities are
publishing that information so
that um their constituents can
see that, as well as again, I, I
want to rein
Force it. We should know this
information anyway, but it, by
knowing it, we can be better
stewards of the process and in
the better customers or have
better customer service. OK. Um,
thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that. I, I will talk to
you more about this offline, but
there's, I mean, you could do
this in almost every industry.
Like there's no um timeline on
when an MCO has to give a
provider, uh, how long it took
them to determine if there's a
pre-existing condition, and we
have
hospitals closing over lack of
reimbursement. So I mean we do
this everywhere, and that has a
huge economic impact. So I'm
very interested. OK, so on, I'm
gonna focus on rural economic
development because I know
there's people that need to get
on and yeah, we have a number of
other folks out and we'll have
the, the budget hearing where we
will actually, we'll adopt a a
budget recommendation following
and I wanna know and thank chair
uh G Gallegos from the commerce
Committee. Uh, thank you for
being here. We know you've been
very patient with us. We deeply
appreciate it.
Also want to recognize ranking
member Joshua Hernandez, uh,
members, one of the new features
we're doing this year is
committees of jurisdiction, uh,
having the chair and the ranking
member inviting them at their uh
to present uh briefly to the
committee. So, um, with that, go
back to you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, and I'm, I'm trying to
Where this is where we're
talking about policy, right? OK.
All right, so this is the reason
I want to know where you're
spending the money is because I
feel that either the
restrictions on the perimeters
around the grants or the um the
size and scale of operation and
what it would take for to entice
any company is prohibiting those
dollars from reaching the rural
communities. Um, I can't prove
that, so I, I would like to know
the data, but I can tell you
about my district, which is
similar to most of the districts
in my region are most
state and federal land.
Um
Mine includes a lot of tourism.
We have Elephant Butte and Kavia
Lake, which together represent
the most visitation in the state
to state parks and um we have no
minimum pools that, that
elephant be Dam is the last
remaining dam that was not
designed with a minimum
conservation pool after elephant
Butte Lake could be dry to 0.
And after that construction,
they learned that ecologically
conservation, evaporation, there
needs to be a minimum pool. We
don't have that. And so, um,
that's, we can't develop the
development, infrastructures,
parks, benches, things like that
because it fluctuates. We can't
pave roads, we can't build boat
ramps, and so it, it's pretty
primitive. Um, we have a lot of
minerals, those minerals are um
a lot of rare minerals, and we
haven't mined a new mine or
permitted a new mine. I mean, we
could literally be wealthy, but
we can't permit mines. That's a
policy, it's regulation that
we've set in statute through the
copper rule. Um, and there are
hunting, fishing, and the Gila
and the bas.
risky, but, um, because we do
not have healthy soil and
healthy water circumstances, we
are not, you know, we're at risk
of catastrophic fire. So they
pretty much all of our
industries that were
historically in my county have
government regulations, rules,
policies, either state or
federal, that are prohibiting us
from being able to create
economic prosperity for our
people. I want you to know that.
Um, I want to back up
Representative Jack Chatfield,
who's talking about the healthy
foods and
Um, let folks know that I
believe there's $3 million for
helping our USDA meat
inspections, all these people
who've been getting investments,
private investments, um, using
their, their savings, um,
applying for federal grants and
receive funds to get their USDA
meat inspection. I think we have
7 now in the state, have now
received new regulations with
very, very high price tags on
the how they do water waste,
composting, and other climate
smart practices, and I think
That they are now in jeopardy.
of sustainability.
Uh, correct me, Representative
Chatfield, if I say something
wrong. So, so we were looking
at, and I don't know where it
falls, but in addition to the
healthy foods, we want to
sustain what we're investing in
meat, um, with the meat
investments and hope that you
guys will look at that. Um,
where do you put, what category
do you put the Magdalena
Observatory, where does that
fall?
Represent or Mr. Chairman
Representative, um, I'm not sure
that I understand the question
other than is it a tourism
activity or is it a
science-based activity? Do you
consider it science and
technology?
I
I need to understand.
I don't understand
it's what Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair
and secretary. So what VLA is to
like radio waves and I know this
is not my, I'm an early
childhood educator, so this is
not science, math is not my
thing. What VLA is to radio
waves is what the magnatory
observatory and the new
development is to optical, uh,
so looking far, far into the
universe to see things and um
Anyway, so
I, is that
I don't know which category it
falls into, to, to bring
economic development dollars to
the completion of a project that
is important for jobs, long-term
jobs and enrollment at the
university. Mr. Chairman
Representative, I think it
depends on how we're thinking
about it. If we're thinking
about it as a science and
technology economic driver, um,
that would be something that
would go within our, probably
our Office of Science and
strategy technology. Um, if it's
a tourism-based approach, that
would be something that Lansing
would be uh like
I should.
Colin Lansing, uh, the secretary
for tourism, so I, I again, I'm
trying to understand the
question, but if, if it falls
within the context of additional
research, um, how we're
leveraging workforce to support
science-based economy, uh, those
sort of investments, those would
fall, those would be economic
development within the context
of advanced, you know, science.
Mr. Chair and secretary, do you
put space industry and new space
industry into what category to
put space and new space industry
into.
Space and pace and aerospace,
OK, all right. OK.
I just, I think I need to brag
on our um space and I think just
a quick reminder we have still
5, I think we'll have a few
different.
Yeah, the more we can sort of.
dive in on the questions and.
Just time is precious.
OK, I'll conclude. Thank you,
chair.
Thank you.
Uh
Next, I'm gonna go to Repent
Verrera, then Representative
Herndon, and then Representative
Brown. Thank you, Chair. Uh,
thank you, Secretary. Good to
have you on board. Appreciate,
uh, appreciate your department
very much and uh this is my 4th
term, beginning of my 4th term,
and when I came on, I remember
talking to Alicia Keys and
saying, you know,
I'm gonna ask myself how I help
you? How do I help create 100
jobs in my district, you know,
and, and I'm in the northern
part of the state, it, it's,
it's hard. We don't have
four-lane highways, you know,
I've been down to, uh, the Meta
plan. I've been to the turbine
plant. I understand you need
rail, you need uh airports and
you need, uh, you need 4 lane
highways. If, if you're really
gonna, you also see need water
internet and then electricity.
OK, so
So that's the basics, but you
also need that stuff, and in the
north, you know, the Rio Grande
and the charmer went through my
district. It's the size of
Massachusetts, but saying that,
you know, I mean 3 years ago we
had a lot of success, uh, when
we did the water security Act
and the resiliency Act. I went
out to my community. We had a
lot of town hall meetings and we
brought in 30 million the next
year in water trust fund grants,
and I figured, well, probably 15
million went to buy this stuff
and another.
15 million went to, you know, do
the work. So I, I try to do that
as as a member of this body, how
do you figure out what's
happening at the state level,
how do you translate and get
that information out to your
people, and, and um we are
struggling, we're struggling in
in the north, and it's, I, I
understand why. I've been on
around long enough to understand
why it's, it is so difficult,
you know, creating 10 jobs is a
big deal, and we're all in the
upper part of our state. I can
tell you.
that. Um, I guess, I guess my
question is, do you have?
Uh, I just talked to one of my
mayors today, and he went
through a litany of problems and
and I was listening to him that
I would like to get you together
with the mayors of Taos Chama
and Espanola, as well as the two
counties, so that we can start
on a regional plan, because we
really don't have one and they
all said they would be willing
to do that, so I will be
inviting you to my district to
do that. I just would like to
know, do you have kind of a, I
know you're doing the analysis
now, I get it. I know how long
that takes, but once you have
that.
information. Do you have goals
for different regions of the
state, and uh particularly rural
regions.
So,
um, Mr. Chairman,
representative, we don't have
specific goals at this time, uh,
as it relates to this. I think
it's going to be dependent on
what comes out of the site
readiness analysis work, um, and
so, but I also would say we, we
probably aren't as good, uh, we
do have goals within the context
of our state strategy document,
we're gonna be updating those
soon you'll have an updated
version of that within the next
hopefully couple of weeks that
that the team has been working
on. um, that we are really
looking at and
hourly setting, holding
ourselves accountable uh to, to,
to deliver for New Mexicans. Um,
but as it relates to the site
readiness work and that kind of
regional strategizing, um, right
now we don't have specific goals
to that.
And just one more question, I
think, uh, Mr. Chair and uh
secretary, we are gonna have to
work, I think with BLM and the
federal, if this is possible,
we've got to free up some of
this land, I think 80%, maybe
90, I, I'm not sure of the of of
our area in my, in my, in my
district is owned by the federal
government.
So I'm working now to try to do
a transfer of 25 acres from BLM
to
To a county so that we can build
a a rehab center that's almost
turned key if we could just get
that land. So I'll end with
that. Thank you Secretary. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you very
much. Next we're gonna go to
Representative Herndon and then
represent Brown.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
thank you, Mr. Secretary
designate, I have just 3 policy
questions I'd like to ask you
about. I think number one is is
it's definitely uh impressive
that the general fund recurring
funding for uh economic
development increased by 90.6%
over a period of four fiscal
years. And so in looking at
that, um, one of the things my
first policy question is helping
these families who are trying
to grow economically within our
state. There's been a lot of
conversation about the growth
and the use of guaranteed basic
income. Is that a policy
initiative that economic
development is embracing.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, it is not
something that we as a, as a
department have
Uh, are, are implementing.
Uh, I think that would be a
policy choice for the
legislature.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Mr. uh
secretary Designate, you're
saying that if we told you to
implement it, that would be the
only way it would be
implemented.
Uh
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
uh, that requires funding, uh,
you are the, the appropriators,
um, you are the ones who set the
law, um, so our job is to, to
help implement, uh, implement
that law.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr. uh
secretary designate as we look
at, uh, we talked a little bit
about rural New Mexico and uh
helping them to grow
economically, that's highly
impressive. I totally support
that. So I'm also looking at
these low-income communities
within our, within our cities
like the International District
in Albuquerque and you talked
about uh housing investment and
healthy food investment in the
rural communities. What about in
the community like
The International district. How
is that a policy initiative that
you are implementing?
Mr. Chairman Representative, I
think uh in a couple of
different ways, and our
regulatory transparency bill,
and I, you know, I've had
multiple conversations with
Senator Stewart. Uh, it's her
district. She is um very
concerned about how difficult it
is to get housing through the
planning process in Albuquerque.
We want to create the ability to
see how long it actually takes,
what are those barriers. So I
think we're trying to get to
that um a lot of that is done at
the, at the, at the local level.
I know the governor spoke about
the need to improve, uh, our,
our zoning in and planning
processes in the state of the
state, uh, last week. Um, so
again, I think those are, those
are, I guess it was this week,
it's, it's been a, it's been a
long week. Um, uh, but I think
those are initiatives that
I, I know the governor's very
passionate about, um, that we,
again, I think could help. We
could start to help with doing
as part of our site readiness
work, doing those that uh
housing.
An impact analysis work in
advance so that a community will
know what they need to do, uh,
before some before Netflix
starts, so before a major
employer comes, they'll have an
idea where could you be putting
your capital investment dollars
or capital improvement dollars
to make sure that that housing
is ready.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr.
um.
Secretary designate. I, I guess
my specific question would be,
has there been any funding
directly implemented into the
International District from
Economic Development department.
Mr. Chairman, Representative, I
would need to go back and look
at our records, um, as to the
cause as you've seen, we have a
variety of programs, uh, that,
um, from our outdoor equity
program taking youth to uh the
outdoors to healthy foods
programs. I need to look at at
what
That analysis, but I have to get
back to you on that. All right,
thank you. And Mr. Chair and Mr.
Secretary Designate, I have one
final policy question as we look
at the adversity sometimes
facing our families,
particularly the primary
breadwinner in a family when
they're unable to work is the
paid family leave policy, a
policy initiative that the
economic development department
is embracing to help families to
make sure that they stay
economically viable when it's
necessary.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative,
again, uh this is the policy
setting body. Our job is to
implement the, the, the work of
that the legislature provides
budget for and and legislative
guidance for, um,
The so we have not, it is not.
I, I was, I'll stop at that. Um,
that is something that if the
legislature sees fit to pass
that, um, while it wouldn't sit
in our department based off of
the current draft legislation,
um, our job would be to make
sure that it's implemented as
government, implemented as
effectively as possible.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary Des.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you,
Representative Hernan. Uh, next
we have Representative Brown,
please. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My question is for Ms.
Rodriguez, um, we, we, you were
talking earlier about.
Uh
The employment.
Uh, rate that we're seeing in
science and technology jobs. And
did I hear you say there's been
18% growth in that, uh, figure,
Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
yes, that was, we pulled those
numbers during the interim, I
believe it was for our alleged
stat on the science and
technology industries. I have
the numbers somewhere in my
binder, but we did call the next
codes um for each of those
industries and
to tell you I couldn't tell you
off the top of my head how far
back we went, but we did find
that the average um growth for
those was um 18% and that was
between 2019 and 2023, um, with
the largest growth being in the
aerospace sector. Oh, OK, yeah,
and, oh, OK, um thank you for
that and Mr. Chair and Ms.
Rodriguez.
I know you can't probably
predict the future, but the
trend line, it's, it looks like
it's upwards uh for these uh for
this employment sector
basically.
Um, do you think we are far from
cresting on that increase. I
know it probably depends on a
number of things, but do you see
this continuing for, say,
another 5 years, that would be
my question, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, uh, representative,
that's a great question. Um,
it's probably a better question
for our economists, but if I
were to give my sense on that,
um, it's tricky when we're
talking about employment growth
in those sectors because those
sectors are fairly small as they
are, we, I like I mentioned,
it's 6.7% with the largest being
the aerospace industry, um, so
any growth in those industries.
It's pretty significant when it
cut like on the percentage side
because they are fairly small to
begin with. Um, I think
Based on what we've learned in
the interim, um, with all the
investments that the agency and
that you are making with the
science and tech industries. It
is, it is going to be like it is
going to keep increasing. I
would think so. OK, thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much for Brown.
Uh, next, we're gonna go to
represent Hernandez and then
represent Vincent.
Like
sorry, uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, and I appreciate the
conversation we had before, and
I'm looking forward to more
conversations, um, you know, uh,
throughout my term and uh my
question is, uh, there's a
federal policy, uh, well, I
don't know if it's still a
federal policy now, but, um, I
was involved with the uh
agency working group, um, for
coal impacted communities that
was set by President Biden.
And uh it was an initiative to
uh take a look at, uh, you know,
um, how, how we could
We, um, vitalize these, these
communities where uh the closure
of, of, of the power plants have
happened.
And so, um, what is being, uh,
is, is there any type of
coordination happening, uh, in,
in that sector, and um, you
know, I always see all the time
the amazing, uh, you know, uh,
ribbon cuttings that are
happening and I'm like, you
know, we, we're, we're, they
My understanding is that there's
a a federal tax credit uh for
coal impacted communities.
Again, I don't know if this is
still uh intact, but, um, the,
the other question I have is,
um,
I just want to bring up
workforce housing, uh, in, in a
rural community, uh, you know,
we, we get a lot of these
contractors and there's, is, is
there anything, uh, being, uh,
uh, helped in, in that area to
uh ensure these projects, uh,
get completed on time, um, and I
really, and, and, and on the
topic of housing, uh, I really
like what Governor Polis is
doing right now, um, just, uh,
30 minutes.
north of my of of where I live
at in Shiprock, uh.
He, he's, he's investing money
into a wood mill.
To uh to build manufactured
modular uh homes, so thank you.
I
Mr. Chairman Representative,
quickly, I'll try to be quick.
Um, yes, we are focused on, on
the impact of um communities
that, uh, especially in our coal
communities, um, that is a big
focus of kind of the update of
our economic strategy work. Um,
I know that my team has been in
the, the Northwest conducting
community meetings, really to
understand how, uh, how we can
best intercede with economic
development opportunities. What
does that look like? What fits
for the community?
Um, but it's, it's, it's
devastating, and uh, and I, I
appreciate that. Uh, as it
relates to the housing and
workforce housing, um, I
mentioned that I was in Roswell
last week. One of the reasons we
were there is we have a leader
project that we helped fund, uh,
built wise, uh, which is a
manufactured modular, it's a
modular home, uh, company, when
they're up and running in full
speed come uh June, they'll be
able to produce 4 homes a day,
plus a tiny home a day.
So we're talking thousands of
homes that will be able to come
out of that.
Manufactured here in New Mexico
in Roswell that can be used, uh,
throughout the state of New
Mexico. So, you know, those are
the types of investments that
we're making from the economic
development department using
LIA, using JTI to drive that
sort of engagement. And then
again, I would refer back to
what we're doing on the
regulatory transparency work, to
say how can we make sure that
our, our agencies are, are being
timely, uh, in, in getting those
inspections done so that we're
not delaying projects.
Great. Thank you very much, Mr.
Secretary. Uh, next we're gonna
go to representatives.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and uh
I appreciate you guys being
here. I just want to start a
conversation and I'll be
respectful of everybody's time
cause I know that Representative
Gallego says get Nancy over
there, she's ready to, you know
that we had a lot of devastating
fires in uh Lincoln and Otero
this year, as well as, you know,
a lot of of communities have
been impacted throughout the
state.
And I want to start this
conversation because I haven't
heard anything about logging.
Or sawmills or bio plants or
anything like that that
Would really help us get to the
root.
The root cause of this problem
and the mismanagement of our
forest and our state lands.
We're not, we're not putting
enough money, we're not putting
enough effort into.
Stopping these devastating
fires and, you know, watching it
on TV is one thing, but being in
your district and talking to the
people that have been evacuated
and there's nothing, there's no
place for them to come home to
because their home is gone.
And the root, the root problem
is we have all this timber.
And there's so much fuel loading
in these forests.
And then we get such arid dry
conditions, and then, you know,
the wind's gonna blow in New
Mexico.
And then we, we never learn our
lesson, it just keeps happening
over and over and over.
And you'll, you'll see me
running quite a bit of
legislation, this session
regarding wildfire and Mr. Chair
and and Mr. Secretary, I'm
wondering in your economic
development in any of your
sectors.
Have, do you have anything to
address these problems and and
possibly start some smart
logging operations to where we
can get.
We could get companies to come
in that either want to start or
that are already in existence
and get those, get those
companies to where we can start
doing some public private
partnerships and getting our
forest in our, in our stateless
and um.
Mr. Chairman Representative, uh,
thank you for that question. It
felt like you just threw me an
underhanded softball. Uh, I met
with Mayor Crawford maybe a week
and a half ago with his team,
uh, they brought 7 or 8 folks,
some developers, specifically on
that. Um, it's an area where we
think there's opportunity not
only in uh Lincoln National
Forest and, and, and in state
lands areas, but throughout our,
our, uh, mountainous areas. Um,
we are, uh, Lita would be again
a
a very important tool because we
can help with the
infrastructure, we can help with
leasing of buildings, we can
help um build that structure.
Um, we can't do the equipment,
but we can do the physical
structure for, for sawmills, and
we, uh, I think, you know,
there's the, the muscular, uh,
Uh logging facility, uh, timber
facility that's been dormant for
a long time. We've continued to,
you know, be prepared to
support, uh, trying to bring
that back online, but I think
there's other conversations that
the mayor's having and um we're
very engaged in those and very
supportive of what they're
trying to do. That's very good
to hear. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Appreciate the time. Thank you
very much, Representative
Vincent. Vice Chair Dixon.
00, I apologize. Representative
Little, please.
Thank you, Mister Chair. I'll
try to make this brief. Um, so
earlier this week, um, uh, and
thank you for the presentation
this morning or this afternoon.
Uh
um, earlier this week, uh, there
were a group of us who met with
tribal leaders from across the
across the state.
And what they described to us,
Mr. Chair, was the uh the the
reality of, of making up for
lost time of trying to bring
economic development to their
communities, and so with that in
mind, I'm curious as to how,
how, what type of outreach,
specifically with specific
tribes you're able to have what
might be the barriers that
you're seeing for um they want
to ice, I see and I, we hear
that they want to have these
relationships and so some of
them have been doing more than
than uh maybe some others and
that also leads to um that also
Has a factor of the
infrastructure that's available.
The roads and access, we hear
about the proposal out in the
Northwest, uh, northwest corner
of the state with railway
railroads. So, um, those types
of factors are huge and they are
not minimal, uh, they're not
inexpensive, uh, challenges to
address, but how, how
are, how is the economic
development department, uh,
Reaching out and I guess my
question too, because I'm not
aware, is there a tribal liaison
established for economic
development department.
Thank you, Mr. Chair Mr.
Chairman Representative, um, I
mentioned earlier that I, that I
visited umuni Pueblo and, and,
and, and the Nabo Nation and the
representatives who joined the
delegation to O Oinga, um, it's
an area where we're, we're
trying to lean in, uh, on that,
um, and I'll, and you ask kind
of what are the things that are
that were being elevated. So use
an example. I think it's Fort
McKinley, is it Fort McKinley
that's in Zuni. Um, I'm blinking
on I maybe miss.
Misrepresenting the name, um,
but Old Fort.
Old Fort up there, um.
Port Wingate, thank you. Yes,
sir. I appreciate the, the, the
assist. um Fort Wingate is now
in uh uh in the the Pueblo's
land, and they're really wanting
to understand what can they do
with that? How can they use that
for economic development.
Our site strategy work, our site
readiness work, we'll be able to
go and help do that analysis
with the with the tribal
government so that we can bring
in, you know, experts to do that
analysis for them, identify what
are this opportunities? What are
the investments that would take
to get you to a place that it's
usable. Uh, we also discussed
with them our trails Plus
program because they're
interested in maybe um
sustainable tourism,
environmental tourism, um, but
That needs to be aligned with
the values and and locations.
that the tribal community would
want folks who aren't part of
the the community to be, uh, so
that's, that would require that
level of coordination, but they
were also very interested in how
can we support them in those
sorts of efforts. Um, so I think
those are the types of
conversations we want to have,
but we also want to get those,
make those conversations.
More, um,
um systemic or intentional. Um,
one of the pieces that we're
planning on doing this year is
bringing together a panel of
tribal economic development
experts.
To meet with our staff, like our
entire economic development
staff.
To say, here's what we need.
Here's what works from your
department. Here's what doesn't
work.
Because we need, we need to make
sure that we're hearing when
we're doing well, but more
importantly, when we can
improve. And so those are the
to ensure that we're engaging
effectively, um, with our tribal
partners.
Thank you so much for that
response. So just one follow-up
question, Mr. Chair, is uh uh do
you currently have tribal
liaisons, and if so, how many?
Mr. Chairman Representative, uh,
we do have one travel liaison,
uh, it's uh Keegan, and she's in
the western region of the, of
our, I can get your contact
information. Thank you and to
again uh one final question is,
uh, do you plan to bring on any
more because as you know,
tribes, tribal lands are all
across the state as well. And so
I'm wondering if there are plans
to uh identify some assistance.
to those in southern New Mexico,
northern New Mexico, uh, the
central area. I understand the
need in the Northwest area.
That's great, but there are
regional differences even in
the.
Capacities that each
Each nation has, so.
Thank you Mr. Chairman
Representative, uh, we currently
don't have plans to specifically
add more tribal liaisons, but we
do have plans to ensure that our
programs are, are relevant and
accessible to the tribes and
pueblos, and I don't think we've
been in as intentional about
that historically, as we would,
as perhaps we should. So it's
more about how do we integrate
everything we do, not just
having an individual, but that
we're doing it intentionally
across our entire portfolio.
of benefits and and and
resources.
Thank you very much. Thank you
Secretary. Next, uh, we, we,
we'll conclude this portion with
Vice Cha Dickson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, uh, Julisa and secretary
designate for their
presentation. Um, I'm gonna try
to keep my questions really
short and I think that answers
uh can be equally short, um, or
relatively short. First
question, uh, Mr. Chair, um,
secretary, can you tell me kind
of the difference in longevity
for a community between
relocating a large company to a
community versus.
Building and industry ecosystem.
Mr. Chairman Representative, um,
if I'm understanding you that's
kind of the longevity, um, I
think, uh, when you build an
ecosystem.
You're creating a, a variety of
tendrils and support entities
that support that ecosystem.
That is much more grounded and
often uh naturally fit to that
community, whereas if you bring
a large company in, they may
leave and and and have you had
the chance and the time they
were there to build an ecosystem
around them. And part of what
you want to do when you're
thinking about economic
development and making it sticky
by these industries, um.
Is it's the broader sense of the
workforce. So if you bring one
company in that has a very
specific workforce. It's hard to
get people to come here because
if they get fired or they get
laid off, there's not another
job like that.
So they go somewhere where
there's an ecosystem that they
could jump between companies
that really supports that. So
again, it both creates a a
stickiness when it's when you're
developing that ecosystem at a
local level, um, both from the
business side but also from a a
work, a human resource side.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
um, thank you. That was, um,
really exactly what I was
looking for and I wanted to tie
that into um the strategic
sectors that we've all discussed
and and some of the fast growing
ones, um, like aerospace and
space, um, and uh quantum and
advanced computing and I see uh
Mr. Chair that uh Mr. Greenberg,
uh, from the governor's office
um is here and I have a couple
of questions relating to
quantum. So I was wondering if
you might be able to, to join.
But please come on up.
And the reason, um, you know, I
want to focus on this is because
um as our LFC analysis has
talked about, uh, these sectors,
the science and technology
sectors have a very high uh
growth rate right now, um, and
also tend to be high paying, uh,
with, is that correct, uh, Ms.
Rodriguez, would you agree?
Uh, Mr. Chair, yes. Thank you.
Um, and so, uh, this question
actually is for Secretary
designate black really fast. Um,
how many staff are in economic
development department.
Uh
I believe, uh, Mr. Chairman
Representative, we have 7274
authorized FTEs and we
About 66 currently in place.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
And how many of those staff
members are devoted to um
science and technology sectors.
Specifically to the Office of
Science strategy and technology,
I believe that's 2, and we're
hiring a 3rd.
Excellent. Thank you. 2, for
those 4 very fast-growing, uh,
sectors actually, and it's more
than 4, I just sort of
consolidated. um, Mr. Greenberg,
um, I'd like to hear just a
little bit about quantum
because, you know, that's
something we heard about during
the interim, um, and it fits
within uh our strategic where
New Mexico has a competitive
advantage, um.
What are other states doing
right now to attract and support
quantum as an industry.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Representative
Dixon, thank you for the
question. Uh, other states are
starting to prepare large state
um financing packages in order
to try to incent R&D and private
companies into their space, most
notably Illinois had a $500
million state package passed
earlier this year in Maryland
just announced their intention
for a $1 billion estate package.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Greenberg. Are they only
doing that or are they also
doing other things, um, like
growing the workforce,
supporting their academic
researchers, are there other
things that states are investing
in to support those sectors.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee met Representative
Dixon, yes, uh, you know,
obviously having right now there
are 3.
Uh, open positions for every
single quantum qualified
candidate, and the average job
pays about $125,000. And so
there's a a extreme motivation
to try to prepare the workforce
to fill those jobs that are
already available, um, and you
need the faculty at universities
in order to train the students
and from a variety of uh CTE
training, graduate, postgrad,
and PhD level education.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for bringing up the CTE because
this is something that I was
unaware of until recently. Um,
am I correct in thinking that
some of these jobs in quantum
actually can be in rural and
frontier areas and even um some
of our oil and gas workers are
appropriately trained to work in
quantum, Mr. Chair
Representative, absolutely.
There's a couple of companies
that I think of most frequently
in the quantum space, about 80%
of their workforce does not
require advanced PhD. There's a
really promising company.
Uh, called Maybelle is worth a
couple $100 million in Colorado
aren't able to the north, um,
and they have somebody with just
a high school education, doing a
lot of meaningful work and
problem solving. If you have
HVAC skills, if you have welding
skills, if you have a general
problem solving and mechanical
skills. There's a place for you
in the quantum industry.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Greenberg. Based on your
research um of what other states
are doing to support a quantum
industry. How much would you say
the state of New Mexico would
need to invest in the next 1 to
2 years to be competitive with
these other states, and just
thinking about quantum, not, not
talking about aerospace space,
biosciences.
Um, clean tech. Mr. Chair
Representative, uh, the
interesting thing about Quantum
from my perspective is that New
Mexico has core competencies,
meaning things that we're better
at than anybody else in the
world because of our R&D base
here, because of the potential
access to customers we have and
when compared to the
semiconductor manufacturing
industry, something that if we
want to try to compete with
Texas or Arizona, we would need
to spend $20 billion on and
never really catch up to what
they're doing. A couple $100
million would provide a
significant differentiation for
us in New Mexico that other
states would
be able to replicate.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair. Thank
you. I was really scared when
you said $20 billion because I
was thinking that's, that's a
little too much, but a couple
100 million, um, certainly is a
is a sizable investment and is
that an investment, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Greenberg, that the state
could do, let's say over a 10
year period.
I'm a representative, but I
think over a 10 year period that
number is likely to grow in the
next couple of years. I think uh
a couple $100 million would set
us on the right direction. We've
been as a state, uh, preparing
our application for what's
called the NSF Regional Engine,
which would give uh New Mexico
$160 million over 10 years as
part of that exercise, we've
activated and uh reached out to
stakeholders and provided sort
of a 5 to 10 year roadmap for
what a fully comprehensive
quantum ecosystem would look
like, um, and we can get there,
I think with a series of tax
credits, direct investments, and
additional federal.
support. Um, I, I think the one
thing I'd like to underscore
very quickly is that there's a
huge national security
imperative for reaching what's
called utility scale quantum
computing before anybody else in
the world, because one of the
obvious areas that it could
impact is effectively creating a
skeleton key for the internet,
which would make financial
services data very vulnerable
healthcare data very vulnerable,
any type of government data, any
type of blockchain uh
application very vulnerable and
so we can't be second to utility
scale of quantum computing and
so there's likely to be a lot of
additional federal support. The
first quantum benchmarking
initiative was actually
Uh, originated by the first
Trump administration, there's
likely to be a lot more support
in this one.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I'm
gonna wrap up um with a request
that um our legislative finance
Committee staff and economists,
uh, work with the economic
development department to really
assess what type of an
investment this state needs to
make now.
Uh, to grow these industry
ecosystems and if we were to
invest $100 million.
What type of an economic impact
would we be looking at versus
$500 million. What type of an
economic impact um across the
science and technology sectors.
Uh, now that we have the at
least the money for the software
to be able to do this. Uh, so
thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
Vice Chair Dixon. OK, uh, Mr.
Secretary, don't go too far, Ms.
Rodriguez, of course, great Mr.
Greenberg. Thank you committee,
really appreciate folks digging
in, um, madam.
Chair and Mr. Ranking member,
uh, Madam Chair, we'll ask you
to come up or.
Yeah, Mr. Ranking member, come
on up, um, members were, we're
gonna adjust the order for uh
moving forward. Uh, I, I wanna
deeply think uh both Che
Gallegos and ranking member
Hernandez. You'll see on our
agendas that it says ranking
member Mason, that was
incorrectly identified on um the
website we fixed that ran
ranking member Hernandez, uh,
came back to the
or or is here, I deeply, we
deeply appreciate you being
here, same, Madam Chair, uh,
thank you for your patience.
You've heard
um, and members were doing this
again, we're working to be in a
fair way 5 minutes for each or
sort of however the two want to
divide it as a way again of of
sort of sharing and more trying
to more closely connect our
standing committees with the
work that this committee does.
Uh, we'll see how it works,
appreciate feedback.
This won't be sort of a question
and answer piece, but more uh
just direct feedback from the
chair and the ranking member
with that, Madam Chair, thank
you again. Please take it away.
Thank you, sorry about that, uh,
short update on economic
development policy initiatives
with budget implications.
Economic development that
results in new business or job
creation typically has budget
implications due to factors such
as increased tax collection.
Tax credits and other economic
influences. So I think I will do
so I what I think I'm gonna do.
I share with the committee with
the interim economic, actually
it's called the Rural Economic
Development Committee during the
interim session, um, focused on
and how the information we
learned in the summer will
affect the commerce and economic
development Committee this
session.
Uh, during
During the committee, we heard
from business owners, large and
small across New Mexico. We
heard from restaurant owners,
physicians, manufacturers and
small business owners about
their concerns ranging from
taxes and uh PF PFML
legislation. We heard about
policies and laws that have.
Had positive impacts on them. We
heard from employees that were
benefiting and we heard from um
we heard from some unintended
consequences of well-meaning
legislation. Commerce effects
workforce policies, so we held
hearings at NSU, San Juan
College, uh CNM to hear from
students and faculty about their
needs to bolster their success.
Uh, we also had hearings at
Burrell.
medical school to hear from
medical providers about their
obstacles and why so many of
them are leaving the state.
We also discussed how tax
credits could help them in that
situation.
We heard from RLD as to how more
resources are needed to help the
cannabis industry. So many New
Mexicans have invested in these
new businesses that they are in
jeopardy of losing their
investment if guardrails are not
put into place.
Now, as we transition from the
inner to this session, the
House, Commerce and Economic
Development Committee is
committed to giving businesses
the voice they are requesting.
As the chair, I have, I have
asked that any bill that impacts
businesses in New Mexico,
whether they are tax measures or
insurance matters or any other
similar piece of legislation be
referred to our committee, so
that those bills can be viewed
through the lens of business.
We want to give them the
opportunity to be heard. That
does not mean we will always
agree, but we want to give them
a forum. The members of the
House Commerce Economic
Development Committee this year
are myself, representative
on, on you, you, I can never say
her name.
Sorry, thank you, uh, Mason
Armstrong de la Cruz, L Lentte
Matthews, Murphy Padahon,
Serato, and my uh partner here,
Josh Hernandez. We are ready to
work with this committee and
with members to in all members
to improve commerce in New
Mexico, and I have kind of just
a funny little spoof for if uh
my assistant would put it on
real quick, Patrick.
That we would lighten the load
after hearing it.
So I'm, I'm not presenting any
type of insurance agency today,
uh, but I did want to, I think
just stress the point that um.
Economic development touches so
many things from infrastructure
to um uh the medical field, um,
mental health issues.
Uh, it affects uh small
businesses, um, schools, you
know, if we have good schools
and plays, all these are
intertwined and so I want to
really stress that because it's
so important to get it right and
so I know there's so many bills
that sometimes we put together
and what we talked about during
those interims is sometimes how
we need to tweak some of these
things. And so I'm hoping that
we have the opportunity to do
that. Also during the interim,
we had the opportunity to
to many different locations, uh,
and places throughout New
Mexico, uh, we went to
Farmington. I had never been
there. The outdoor recreation
area was beautiful, um, just
there's so much that New Mexico
has to offer, and so I think as
legislators, it's important to
go visit different communities
and really see how we can help
each other. And with that, uh,
Mr. Chair, I'm gonna hand it
over to uh my uh my uh friend
here, uh Josh Hernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So I'm just
gonna go have some comments on
the session priorities for EDD
for this year, uh, starting with
site readiness of site readiness
is something that um is huge
across our
can we not, I'm always, it
always sounds like I'm yelling
with this microphone, um, OK, so
site readiness, um, huge thing.
states like Virginia are giving
hundreds and 100s of millions of
dollars, um, and attracting
thousands and thousands
of jobs by having those site
ready, uh, shovel ready places
for businesses to move into the
very first thing that they
announced, um, is that they were
giving 125 million for 23 sites,
uh, attracted sun microsystems,
um, well over 1000 jobs to
Virginia, um, right off of the
Chesapeake Bay, beautiful spot.
Um, we need to start investing
in this or we're going to be
left behind. Um, we already have
this, you know, stagnant.
Um, population limit uh amount,
uh, we have businesses that are
leaving and this is a huge way
for us to get started on
bringing business back, bringing
people back, um, or people who
have never lived here before.
Um, utility plea uh pre
pre-deployment.
I don't know why that was so
hard, um, in talking with
developers, both commercial and
residential in our state over
the last 2 years. This is the
number one gripe that I keep
hearing is that it's taking P&M.
36 months to get basic, you
know, infrastructure to a site
that they're trying to develop.
It's hurting business, um, new
businesses that are looking and
talking with site selectors.
This is another huge thing that
without the speediness of
utilities to their place. Why
would they come here when they
can go to Arizona, Texas, and
have utilities in the ground in
4 to 6 months. Why would they
come here and wait 36 months?
Um, regulatory transparency, I'm
sure you guys all know why
that's important. Um, the one
I'm excited about is quantum
computing, me as the nerd of our
body, um, so quantum computing
is a huge step forward in how
computing works. Uh, it's always
been ones and zeros. Somebody a
while ago figured out how to
make the same bite represent a 0
and a 1 speeding up.
Computing exponentially and it
um with the growth of AI and
machine learning and everything
else. Um,
It's at the forefront right now
of federal government is paying
attention, Federal government
has tons of incentives that will
match whatever we put into it at
a 4 to 15 to 1 ROI, um, but the
more important part of that is
you're bringing business in,
you're bringing um highly
skilled workers or bringing
PhDs, um, and actually I was
talking to Alex a minute ago
about it and um he had a cool
stat that says there's not a
single significant quantum
company in the United States
that does not
employ at least one UNM graduate
because we have been at the
forefront of quantum for over 50
years now. Um, and UNM was one
of the, you know, leaders in
that, in the beginning and have,
you know, have all the program,
have all the education, so it's
a, it's an impressive thing and
we with this investment, um, and
with the federal government's,
you know, reinvestment, it could
be a game changer for New
Mexico. Um, and
I, I was doing some research and
it's something that I've been
following, um, Google, who we
all know and love or hate,
depending on who you are, um,
their projects willow, which is
something they've been working
on since the 90s, um, just made
a huge stride. They have their
first working um quantum
computer somewhere in California
that um.
The problem that happens is when
you have ones and zeros and then
you have some that are ones and
zeros at the same time and it
errors out. Well, as they're
growing their data set, it's not
erring, and it's the first, um,
it's really the first one that
is not airing at such a large
scale and it's like you may or
may not be techie, but it is a,
it is a huge thing in the tech
world. It is in headlines, it's
Wall Street Journal front page
kind of thing. So, um,
The quantum computing thing also
because of
Because of breakthroughs like
Google's Willow, you know, 2
years ago, nobody was paying
attention to it. Now the feds
are paying attention to it.
They're putting money and
resources to it. Um, and if we
don't act now, I'm worried that
in 2 years, it's going to have
passed us by and it's gonna be
located somewhere else, um.
So, I will stop rambling, but um
I think that this quantum
computing thing really could be
a game changer for our science
and tech areas in this state. So
thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Ranking member, uh,
this is great. We appreciate it
again, we appreciate your time
and uh this is uh, yeah, really
appreciate your time. Excited
to, to start this out and
appreciate you all doing it.
Thank you for having us. OK,
members, we're gonna go to 2
budget hearings, uh, we have
EDD, uh, we also have, uh,
Secretary Nair and the Workforce
Solutions department. I know
that she has staff up here from
Albuquerque, um, so we are,
we're gonna get through the
budget, which is great, uh,
we'll ask Mr. Secretary, well,
actually, uh, Madam Secretary,
do you have staff from
Albuquerque who are up here as
well, Mr. Secretary.
Yes. OK. So what we'll go ahead,
uh, please, we'll start with
economic development department,
uh, was Julia to come up.
Um
We'll ask our uh some members
this will be our um first sort
of
Uh
Little bit more extensive budget
hearing, although we've had a
good start already.
Um
Do we have our DFA and we have
our DFA analyst.
Uh, and members, I just to be
clear, I misspoke at the
beginning of the meeting, we are
gonna be here in the budgets. We
will adopt uh budget
recommendation today. This will
be, this won't be the final,
this is just the start of
things. This won't be the final
budget that sort of there there
were better way to say it, there
will be the ability to make
changes to the draft budget that
we, the budget recommendation
that we adopt today, there will
be ample opportunity that's one
of the big reasons we're holding
it the first week so that
economic.
development is part of right
here at the forefront.
With that said, we're gonna go
to Miss Rodriguez, Miss
Rodriguez is gonna, uh, advise
us which agency code where to
find that, walk us through the
different sheets and then, um,
uh, please identify that your
counterparts the DFA analyst.
We'll go ahead. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, just
to reintroduce myself, Julius
Rodriguez. I am the LFC analyst
for the department. Um, so to
get you all started, you are
going to be going to tab 4 and
it's agency code 419. Um, you're
gonna see a packet that looks
like this. It's pink and it has
a lot of great information that
we're gonna walk you through,
um, while you get there, I'm
going to introduce the people
that are sitting here with me.
I'm so
Um, as Mr. Er I share, thank
you. It is yellow.
Thank you, vice chair. right,
while you all get there, um, so
I'm joined today by Secretary
Rob Black, who you all just
heard from, um, also to my left
is Isaac Romero. He's the new
deputy cabinet secretary and
also former LFC. I just want to
plug that and um you also have
at the end of the table Joshua
Martinez. He's a DFA budget
analyst, so he's the one that
worked on the, uh,
recommendation.
Um, so to get you all started,
how it's going to go, is that me
and Joshua are going to go
through the different sheets and
they're gonna go through the
packet. We're gonna break it
down by the overall um agency
and then kind of go into more
detail, um, into each of the
different program codes, um,
after Joshua and I talk about
both the reoccurring budget, um,
and also the non-recurring
special appropriations. We're
gonna pass it back to the agency
for their um remarks.
So if you all are ready, um, I'm
gonna start us off on page 4.
Um, it should be your different
sheet, um, so while you get
there on page 4 just to call out
that at the top right corner,
you're gonna see page numbers,
um, for anything that's economic
development related in our
inside of our volume 12 and 3,
those are great tools and have a
lot of great information.
Um, so starting off with the
agency as a whole, um, the
executive recommended 150.7,000
more general fund than the LFC,
um, so the executive recommended
a 3.3% increase while the LFC
recommended a 2.7% increase.
Um, you're also going to see
that both recommendations
reflect, um 2.26 million, and
that is from a distribution from
the land of enchantment Legacy
Fund. Um, I will call out the
the two recommendations have
that amount in different line
items, um, one is in other
transfers, and the other is in
other revenues that was just a
difference in the
recommendations as to how we're
treating the funds, um, so we
will be voting on that. Um.
As far as the differences in the
uses, um, you're gonna see that
there are differences in all
categories, so differences in
personnel where the LFC was
actually higher, and that is
mostly due to staff increases
for the Office of strategy,
Science and Technology.
In the second line item for
contractual services, uh, you're
going to see that the that the
uh executive uh recommended
more, and that is primarily for
an increase in the New Mexico
Partnership contract.
And finally, in the 3rd line
item, that's for the other
costs, you're going to see
general differences in total
recommendations for travel IT
subscriptions and all that.
Um, OK, so moving to the next
page, page 6. This is for the
economic development division,
that's one of the programs that
we're gonna be discussing.
Um
For this
Program, the LFC recommended
67,000 more than the executive,
um, for the general fund. Um,
and that difference is mostly
due to personnel costs, so the
LSC recommendation includes
personal funding for an
entrepreneurship coordinator.
And also for two program
officers for the Office of
Strategy Science. I, I think we
have a question. Are you?
Yes,
I am on page 6 right now.
Madam Vice Chair, um, there,
there aren't page numbers that
we can see and
If I could also make a request,
Madam Vice Chair, um, and Ms.
Rodriguez, if you are referring
to the budget, can you name the
line item?
Um, so actually, thank you, Vice
Chair and Representatives. So
I'm actually looking at a sheet
that looks, it's like the stiff
sheets, um, at the top of it, it
should say economic development
and the P code.
is 512. It's just, um, so, so
members know there is, if you
can find it, it's kind of like
where where's Waldo? Uh, there
is a page number, um, on the
side, uh, that you can.
Uh, look for, but yeah, you can
also check the P code number in
the top left.
Um, and if, as you move forward,
just go ahead and uh
Remind us each time of where we
are.
OK, thank you.
OK.
Thank you, Vice Chair, and our
apologies. Those are very small
page numbers. I will go a little
slower and I will make sure to
call out where exactly where I'm
at. So now if everybody is on
page 6. Thank you so much. Um,
I'm just gonna quickly go over
the differences again, um, the
LFC's recommendation is 607,000
more than the executive, um, and
that difference is primarily in
personnel and an operational
costs. So in personnel, um, the
LFC recommended more because we
are recommending both an
entrepreneurship coordinator, as
well as 2 additional staff for
the Office of Strategy, Science
and Technology, um, while the
executive recommendation only
includes an honor.
Enrepreneurship coordinator and
then an additional increases for
insurance.
Um, and then you'll also see a
difference in the other line in
the other, and so that's like
the other cost category which
are more operational costs, uh,
with the, um, LFC recommending
slightly higher and that was for
additional funding for travel
like staffing staff travel IT
subscriptions, um, for this
program code, um, this is the
economic development division.
I'm gonna call out that both
recommendations are, um,
maintaining a flat budget for
GTI.
tip receives roughly 6.7 million
in the recurring budget every
year.
And as far as performance
measures, uh, the analysts came
to a consensus on all
performance measures and
targets. Um, I'm gonna pass it
over to Joshua, and he's going
to talk about the film.
Um, program that's on the next
page, tiny number 7, and that P
code is 514. It should be on the
next page directly.
Thank you,
members of the committee. So,
uh,
Or the film industry, the
executive recommended 5000 or
0.2% more from the general fund
than LFC uh for operational
costs.
In the base, the executive
recommended 5000 more for
operational costs such as travel
fees and subscriptions, both uh
recommendations kept contractual
service and personnel cost flat,
uh, compared to FY 25.
And for performance measures,
both analysts did uh reach a
consensus on all performance
measures and targets.
And with that said, I will pass
it back to uh Mr. Rodriguez, so
she could talk about uh.
Product support, uh, which is
P56 526. On the next page should
be page 8.
So program support the P code is
526.
Um, quickly those differences,
um, the executive recommended
roughly 670,000 more general
fund, um, the main difference,
as I mentioned before, is
because the executive is
recommending $600,000 increase
for the New Mexico Partnership
contract, uh, the current line
item for that contract is
roughly 1 million, so that, uh,
recommendation would increase it
to 1.6 million.
Now preserve the outdoor
recreation division, which is uh
P708, uh, the executive
recommended 61.3,000 more from
the general fund and LFC, the
executive recommended an 8%
increase in general fund revenue
while LFC recommended only 2.8%
increase, while both the
recommendations included 2.3
million for the anticipated
distribution from the
Land of enchantment Legacy Fund,
but budgeted the amounts in
different categories like we uh
had explained.
In the base, the executive
recommended a recommendation
included 95,000 more in
personnel cost to backfill
non-recurring funding for a
marketing coordinator position,
uh LSC did not recommend an
increase in personnel funding
based on actual expenditures and
on personnel costs and in in 24,
the sufficient savings from uh
funded for vacant positions, LSC
recommended 33 points, I mean
330.
33.7 more than DFA for travel,
IT and subscriptions.
Uh, LFC did recommend adding the
following language for outdoor
rec.
Uh, the other state funds
appropriation to the outdoor rec
program for the economic
development department includes
$2,260,000,700 for the land of
enchantment Legacy Fund.
Uh, I know both analysts reached
a consensus on all uh
performing, uh.
performance measures and budget
targets.
OK.
And the last program code, um,
now to page 11. So this program
code 709.
Um, not huge difference, but uh
the LFC recommended a flat
budget for the creative
industries, uh, while the
executive recommended an
increase of 14.2,000, um, and
that difference is all in
personnel costs with the
executive recommending slightly
higher.
And again, uh, the analysts
reached consensus consensus on
all measures and targets. Um,
that is all the reoccurring
budget for the economic
development department, um,
I do want to move you all
forward a couple pages to page
4.
Page to page 16, um, it's a page
that has a lot of boxes and
tables. Um, these are all the,
the recommendations for the
special appropriations.
Uh, we will not be voting on
this. Um, this is purely
informational, um, to provide an
opportunity to ask questions
about the differences, um.
Any changes or votes on the
special appropriations happened
during a separate hearing for
for them, and you'll be doing
that with Joey Simon from the
staff from LFC.
Um, so I'm gonna talk about some
of the similarities. Um, so
overall,
The executive recommended 50
million in special
appropriations, and that
includes one appropriation
through the roll, uh, the LFC
recommended 87 million through
the special appropriations.
Uh, some of the similarities
include
Funding for the outdoor equity
fund, um, slightly different
with the executive coming in at
2.5 and the LFC coming in at 3
million.
Uh, some other similarities
include sight readiness. Uh,
you'll see that the executive
did is recommending 24 million
through the grow for sight
readiness, uh, while the LFC is
recommending a special
appropriation of 35 million for
similar psych characterization
and pre-development assessment.
Um, as far as differences, there
are a significant amount of
differences between the
recommendations for um special
appropriations, uh, you'll see
that the executive is
recommending funding for the
healthy food financing program,
uh, for Lita.
A startup and programming costs
for the film academy, um, as
well as funding for grants for
underrepresented filmmakers, and
those are all that um
appropriate or recommendations
that the LFC did not recommend.
On the LFC side, however, we are
doing um an additional 10
million for trails Plus.
Uh, we have funding for startup
grants, uh, sector grants.
For advanced energy.
We also have additional funding
for the research university team
pitch award pilot program that
the agency manages and
administers as well as, as well
as um funding for a research and
research development and
deployment fund.
Um, and lastly, funding for
marketing and trade shows. Uh,
so those are some of the
differences between the two
recommendations for specials,
um, just to reiterate, today we
are only gonna be taking action
on the reoccurring budget, so
those are all the different
sheets, um, we're not taking any
action on the specials.
And with that, that concludes
our presentation. Uh, thank you
members. I'm going to pass it
over to the secretary and the
deputy.
Mr. Chairman, um, members of the
committee.
Thank you for your indulgence
and, and questioning today. It's
been a wonderful conversation.
We will try to go through this
quickly out of respect for you
and, and the cabinet secretary
following us, um.
And, and I'll have
Isaac moved the the slides
towards, um, so, uh, Isaac, and,
and we, I, I would love to ask
for my team, uh, who's here with
us to stand. We won't go through
everyone as out of respect for
time. We have a great
representation of your team
that's working every day to make
sure we're creating those
pathways for New Mexico.
And uh we could go to the next
slide, please. I, I think, um,
part of what I want to start
with is our mission. And that's
to improve the lives of New
Mexico families by increasing
economic opportunities and
provide place for businesses to
thrive. That's core of what we
do every day. And I think I want
to stress that investing in New
Mexico's economic development
isn't just about creating jobs
and increasing GDP.
It's about strengthening the
very fabric of our communities
and our democratic institutions.
When we support economic
development and we create hope
for families in New Mexico.
It gives them a sense of
belonging to their community, it
gives them a sense of engagement
with their community and it
holds our democracy together, as
well as our communities. It's in
times when we've seen economic
Downturns or or or where our
communities don't feel
empowered, that we see social
unrest within the United States
and around the world. So I
really do believe that it is a
moral imperative that we create
pathways for prosperity for our
fellow New Mexicans. Um, and
that's what we strive to do
every day at the economic
development department.
Our divisions that help support
this work, um, I'll list them
here. We'll go through all of
them, but uh it's important to
note that, you know, whether
it's our leader program, our JTI
program.
to our outdoor rack, um, they're
all out there trying to create
those pathways to prosperity and
opportunity for New Mexicans. I
wanna also highlight that we
have 3 divisions that we support
administratively, and that's the
outdoor, sorry, the, the uh
The military-based planning, the
border authority and the
spaceport uh authority. So, uh,
for example, I sit on the, on
the chair of the board for
Spaceport. Uh, we're very active
with the Border Authority. Um,
but we're trying to become more
engaged with them as well and
support them so that we better
integrate those important
Efforts within the context of
our overall economic strategy.
Um, I'll jump now to Lita,
again, trying to be very quick
on this because we've had a good
conversation today. Um, and this
is just a quick summary, again,
this is 2019 over 13,000 jobs
have been supported across the
state with economic output
expected to exceed 40 billion
over the last 10 years. Um, the
fiscal impact of those 68 active
projects that we have currently,
um,
Where, where we have a project
participation agreement. Um, the
return on those investments of
tax dollars to the state is more
than 600%. So we believe that
Lita, um, is one of those places
that it really does, uh, drive
value back into uh our state.
Um, it was mentioned by the, the
analysts around uh and on that,
that leader piece was around
someone on the site readiness,
we'll get to that. I'll, we'll
cover that at a later slide on
JTE, um,
This is a, again, this is a
program that's been around I
think since 1972. It's one of
the best recognized job training
incentive programs in the
country. Um, we've since 2019,
the program has assisted 221
companies with hiring and
training for an individual,
again, our hours have gone up
from $21 to $24 an hour on
average, uh, for GTI grants, um,
as we said, um, neither the LFC
nor the executive recommended
additional special preparations
and if
26. Um,
Our next one is Main Street.
We're not asking for additional
funds in this because we want to
make sure that when we do ask
for funds, we've got
shovel-ready projects. We've
been getting the money out
incredibly effectively. The
team's been great, but I'll, we
won't talk about that too much
today, just out of respect for
everyone's time. On the healthy
foods program.
Um, this is, again, a newly
created uh has a healthy newly
created healthy food financing
fund. Uh, it has been a priority
for the governor and as well as
the legislature. Um, we also saw
through COVID the impact that
our, our broken food chains had
on individuals on costs on our
farmers and ranchers' inability
to get meat processed, etc. So,
um, these funds help build a
more resilient food and
agricultural supply chain. Uh,
in our first two rounds of
grants.
EDD rewarded uh awarded 330,
sorry, 33 grants, but we had
over 152 applications, um, and
we're finalizing our third round
of grants for that right now.
The executive recommended 2
million for the healthy food
financing program, uh, the LSC
did not provide for any renewed
funding for this initiative.
Um
Our Office of strategy, Science
and Technology. We, we talked a
lot about this, uh, earlier, and
what you'll see here, this is
the breakdown of how those,
those that $5 million was
utilized that we discussed
earlier today. So those are the,
the number of figures and where
they went, uh, so you have that
as a reference point. So we'll
just go ahead and jump.
Um,
And, and we've talked quite a
bit with, with, with Alex is
much smarter than this on me,
uh, around the quantum
technology aspects, um, but we
do think because of what UNM has
brought to the table, CNN is
working on a uh a technology at
at CTE training tied to quantum.
One of the things that, that's
really important about Quantum
is you have to keep things a
really, really, really cold.
I mean, like, to zero cold. And
what that means is plumbers,
pipe fitters, HVAC, those are
those skilled trades are gonna
be very, very valuable within
the quantum computing, as well
as the PhDs that are turning out
of, of Sandia, or sorry, out of
UNM. And the reason we're so
good with UNM is there's been an
agreement with Sandia National
Labs, who has a quantum fab,
that is one of the only in the,
only in the world that our PhD
It's our interning with and
working with. So when they come
out, they're uniquely
competitive, and that's part of
the reason that New Mexico's
ecosystem for quantum puts us to
be frankly, the Silicon Valley
for quantum computing, if we
make the investments today on
film, uh,
The message for for film and
television producers, uh, tell
us is one of the things that is
so good about New Mexico is our
stable environment, our
regulatory environment, the
stable incentive programs
they've invested physical
infrastructure in the state.
We're building a we've built a
really, really strong workforce
training programs, uh, the just
this last week was announced
that Albuquerque was the number
one place for making movies in
the country, and uh as far as
small
Santa Fe I believe was number 2
or #1 for small, small, uh,
markets in Las Cruces was, I
believe, number 7 in the
country. So we are being
recognized nationally as a place
for film and television and
growth, and the average wage is,
uh, average median wages, again,
this is, I think really
important is 39% has increased
39% since 2019, but we're at 36,
over almost $37 an hour for
films. So it does.
have that impact to our families
and our communities.
Program support, um, so the New
Mexico Partnership is, is really
our marketing arm. I heard, we
heard a lot earlier, we need to
be telling the story. We need
those snippets about how do we
tell the narrative about what's
great about New Mexico. New
Mexico partnership is a big part
of that.
Um, and, and how we, we, we tell
our story uh around this, the
Um, and, and how we, we, we tell
our story uh around this, the
country, and, um,
So, so I think that's one area
where uh there the executive had
a has a recommendation, and
there was an LFC recommendation
on that piece as well. We do
think investing in the Mexico
partnership is very, very
important. Um, also within our
program support is our Jedi
office, our justice equity
diversity inclusion programs,
um, and they've hosted, uh, that
will be hosting two annual
business summits, including our
black and Hispanic business
summits, um, they also uh help
support business incubator
programs.
So that those those startup
business programs, uh, the Jedi
program does an amazing job
helping support those
entrepreneurs.
Uh, outdoor recreation.
Um
This is an area where again New
Mexico is, is uniquely
competitive and is, is punching
above our weight. Um,
The law was that was that
created the division passed in
April of 2019, uh, and it is
something that we see, uh,
really having an impact,
especially as an opportunity for
our rural communities. Um, New
Mexico's outdoor economy is
growing faster than the rest of
the country. Uh, we now have
29,000 people working in some
aspects of the industry with a
$3.2 billion impact on the state
GDP, uh, both the executive and
LFC support increasing funding.
To the ORD.
Um, let's go ahead and jump to
the next slide. Creative
industries division, uh, this is
another legislative effort, um,
to build a more diversified
economy by investing in growing
our strong existing assets
because we really do have uh a
we're a unique space from our,
our tribal communities, uh, and,
and, and others, um, at the
history in Santa Fe, uh, Taos,
we have amazing artisans and
creative and creative
industries.
Um, this division is helping
support them with tech technical
support with grants, uh, to help
them bring those small
businesses to scale and, and,
and build those dollars back
into New Mexico.
Uh, the LLC recommended for CID
is flat and the executive sports
a modest increase of 14,000 for
personnel. And then we'll move
on to uh
Our season priorities. I won't
stay on this because we talked a
lot about this earlier again out
of respect to you. So let's go
ahead and jump. Well, this will
get us through really quick
slides if you have questions on
it. We're happy to, to go more
deeply, um, and then additional
priorities, um, we have, uh, and
we've been working on the, the
state economic strategy update,
we provided a high level last
fall, um, but we have been
continuing to work on that
effort and
I wanna recognize um
On our team,
Lucero Mutucci, who's been
leading this effort, um,
As part of the report that we
will be releasing, hopefully in
the next couple of weeks that
we'll update this. She has
brought in uh resources to the
state of Mexico from the Harvard
Tubman Center, as well as the
Harvard Growth Lab.
We're the we're behind Wyoming,
we're the 2nd state that the
harbor of Groth lab has worked
with on economic strategies and
growth. So bringing that level
of, of capacity uh to bear in
New Mexico, um, we're really
excited about that effort and I,
and I, I, I want to recognize
Kaylin's good work there. Um,
and it's additionally, we're
building in, we talked about
goals and how do we set goals.
We're building in those sort of
accountability so that we can
say these are what we want to
accomplish.
This year and in 10 years as a
state, can we get to these
places and start to track that
on our website.
Built metrics to that so that
you, as, as, as the
appropriators can say, these are
valuable goals we should put
resources here and here because
we think these are, this is
something we need to do, and the
tactics align. So that's uh what
we're trying to do from EDD
going forward is to help uh set
up that, that sort of metric.
Uh, and then next slide.
And this is the speaking to uh I
jumped ahead on Kayla here. Uh,
so this is, again, we'll be our
update will be coming out in the
next couple of weeks, much more
detailed in the high level we
were able to provide in the
fall, and then, uh,
Let's go ahead and
And then, uh, kind of EDD
resources.
We have a variety of programs
and and resources documents, our
toolbox is really, really
helpful. We have it in Spanish
and in English. It provides a, a
short list of all of the
different incentives and
programs for the department, uh,
can be very, very useful. Uh,
the other thing I would suggest,
and I, and I will actually work
with my team to make sure every
one of you are on this. We
produce a really, really solid
EDD newsletter.
And it has the things that uh
Mr. Chairman, that uh
representative Pettigrew was
talking about, uh, grant
application deadlines,
opportunities for funding, and,
and we probably and, and the
same thing for our outdoor
recreation division. It's an
amazing newsletter. Um,
We'll get you on those notes
that we don't want to spam you,
but it's a way for you to have
that information that you can
share with your constituents,
and, uh, you know, that'll make
you look really good cause
you're giving them information
they need and we want to make
sure you have that information
easily accessible. So if you're
OK with it, we're gonna make
sure that we get your emails on
those resources, so you start
getting our newsletters uh both
uh the variety of newsletters
and publications that we put a
shot because I think you'll find
them invaluable.
And with that, uh, these are our
division directors and program
directors for, for EDD, uh, they
work for you in the state of New
Mexico and uh with that, I will,
will stand for questions.
Awesome. Thank you very much,
Mr. Secretary. We, uh, go
straight to questions. First, we
have Representative Silva, then
Representative Garrett, and
we'll keep going from there.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you
presenters, um.
a really quick question on, uh,
the New Mexico Partnership
contract, what would the 600,000
do for the year?
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman Representative, um,
that would help, uh, both
provide administrative and
staffing support as well as
marketing, but it primarily be
looking at marketing, um, out of
state, so helping us show up at
trade shows, uh, helping with
branding of, you know, as
business recruitment.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Uh, next we
have Representative Garrett,
then ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and secret
other question also on the
Mexico partnership when the
governor took a bunch of people
to Taiwan. It was paid for by
the New Mexico partnership. The
implication is it wasn't state
funding. Is there any funding
other than state funding that
supports the New Mexico
partnership.
Um
Mr. Chairman Representative, I
need to double check that. I
know that they have the ability
to receive private dollars, and
they do from time to time, um,
from my time at the chamber, I
know that that many of my
members helped support the the
partnership, um, and most of
their board of directors are a
private sector, but I, I
wouldn't want to misrepresent
that answer, and I don't don't
have that off the top of my
head. Thank you, just if that
could be clarified. Thank you.
Thank you, Garrett, remember?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, you
know, I can't, uh, help but
notice that the legislative
Finance Committee's
recommendation for healthy foods
is nothing, uh, so I don't know,
staff can speak to that, to not
work well or we still have money
or?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
thank you for the question. Yes,
you're correct. The LSC
recommendation does not include
funding for the Healthy Food
financing program. That was
because of the time when the
recommendation was being built,
um, we were under, there is
another USDA federal grant of
533 million over the next 5
years, and actually I'm gonna,
I'm, I'm not sure if it's 3 or 5
million that 3 million over the
next 5 years, that is also for
healthy food financing.
Um, and that funding will be
used for a market study on that
industry and also to build out a
loan, a program for grants and
technical assistance, um, the
LFC recommendation took that
into account when building out
the request or the
recommendation.
So, do we, um,
Sorry, I, I can't think of your
name.
Julia.
Uh, do we, do we not uh fund
some programs right now that
actually provide healthy foods
or or.
Maybe not buy the foods, but
fund those programs or somehow
assist in those programs.
Yes, we do, and from, oh, Mister
Chair Representative, um, so
here in this slide you'll see
the healthy food find and fund,
um, if you look at the 3rd box,
um, you'll see that the AI 25,
um, H HFF does receive 250,000
from the EDD from EDD's
recurring budget, um, that is
already existing, um, and it was
a special, um, so there is
funding for it, but it's a
matter of if the program's going
to get additional.
State funding for FY 26 on top
of the federal funding.
So
I'm looking here at 6.1 million,
and I'm hearing federal funding,
uh.
3 million over 5 years and 0
from the legislative finance.
Uh
Or from, yes, from the LFC
recommendation. So, uh, I'm
thinking maybe we, well, Mr.
Chair, can we revisit this a
little bit sometime, I think you
remember Chatfield. We will have
a working group, uh, uh, that is
dealing with economic
development in your we
absolutely can flag this as one
of the issues for them to
address. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
OK, next we're going to go to uh
Representative Lohan, then
Representative Little. Thank
you, Chair. I'd just like to
echo what represent um ranking
member Chatfield said, and I,
I'd like to be part of that work
group to address the New Mexico
healthy food finances to my
knowledge, it's.
It's a, it's a very healthy, uh,
process that's going on, and I
think that there's two steps
that we need to separate what is
going on there to understand it
better, um, in regards to the
federal grant that was awarded
to us, we should be.
Maybe even growing what's going
on here and getting there, there
is a lot of um need here as
well, so we need to take that
into consideration, um, my
question, Mr. Chair, is gonna
go, um, with that said, um, go
to the quantum technology. Can
you, uh, Mister Chair, um,
tell us, um, what are the needs
around, you mentioned the the
cooling temperatures needed and,
and that sort of thing. What are
the water, um, sources needed.
And also broadband, how does
broadband come into play with
the with us make ensuring that
we get to these goals, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
um, I don't believe waters is a
a big aspect of quantum
computing. Again, it's really
about um creating a very, very
cold temperature, uh, for those,
the processing that takes place.
Um,
And
I'm, I'm sorry, I forgot the
second part of your question.
Broadband broadband,
um.
I think broadband as well as as
we think about these data
centers around the state and
it's the avail availability of
those data centers being located
in rural New Mexico.
And absolutely imperative that
uh that our broadband and fiber
connections are strong, that
we've got redundancies. Um,
those are an abs, I mean, they
should be considered, I would
argue an essential utility. Um,
the other beautiful thing about
quantum, and we talked a lot
about, you know, the scale and
and the power needs that it
takes.
On AI and on traditional
supercomputers.
The calculations you can do on
quantum computing versus the
vers based on energy usage is
exponentially less. So it is
much, much more efficient if we
can get to where we can on an
industrial scale quantum
computing, it will save us.
Gigawatts of power.
Thank you. Thank you for
expanding that. We, I think
that's, that's a relative to
everything we're talking about.
We're not talking about that
that component, and I think we
need to expand upon that what
what savings, energy wise and uh
which is equivalent to cost
wise. So, as we're furthering
our conversations, we should
include that. Um, I have a
question Mr. chair in volume 2
of LLC, um.
Books on page 15 page 155.
On the outcome, the dollar
amount of new investments in
technology-based companies as a
result of the Office of Science
and Technology Programs. I'm
looking at FY 25 budget, and I'm
looking at FY 24 actual, which
is $116 million and then FY 25
is too, can you, um, Julisa, if
you can't, if we need it, uh,
expand that conversation later.
Why is there that big of a
discrepancy is that due to the
New Mexico?
The contracting things we have
out to check.
So, OK, so that let's see, we're
talking about the foreign direct
investment as a result of.
Office of International Trade
Efforts, that's
Um, I'm looking at um 1, page
155. If you look at the
performance measures. I'm sorry,
I didn't say that. And you're
looking at the outcomes. I think
it's 1234567 lines down.
OK.
And you'll see that the there's
$116 million FY 24 actual and
then we're budgeting
and then FY 2 million and then 2
million. Was that just a
contractual thing? I just wanna
understand, Mr. Chair
Representative, thank you for
that question. So this is
reflecting, um, so one of the
One of the items that the office
of strategy, Science and
Technology collects is follow on
funding to companies that
receive some type of grant or
assistance through their through
their office. That's um that's
what it is. Thank you for FY 24,
um, based on the amount of
funding that was out there for
those companies, it was roughly
1.16 billion. So that number is
like a 1.1 a follow on
investment, yeah.
Thank you. And that's
I think
You can ask. That's fine. So.
On to, you don't have to, OK,
and then I just last thing is
our creative economy, um.
And I know we'll get to when we
talk about our specials, uh, we.
Is it correct that you ask for
is a 100.
$42,000 Mr. Cho.
Mr. Chair,
Representative, uh, you're
speaking about the creative
industries division
specifically. That's correct,
Mr. Chair.
So the, the agency request for
that was 490,000. The executive
is supporting a an increase, uh,
is supporting that
recommendation and the LFC is
supporting um 476,000 for that
division. Oh, so that's OK, I
think I was looking at the
specials, but uh thank you,
thank you for the clarification.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Han. Uh, next we
have Repent Little, then
represented Pettigroup.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, my
question is on the program
support on page 8,
you, I understood that the New
Mexico Partnerships contract was
increased uh to a total of 1.6
million. Can you, and I see the
explanation below on the base,
but um what might that be for,
uh, can you expand on what that
includes. Thank you.
Mr. Chair Representative, this,
this goes along uh with
Secretary Black was discussing,
um, that's for trade shows for
us to get out and recruit
businesses, bring attention to
the state, uh, for
Creating jobs here.
And the context that will add
here is are the current
recurring budget there is
900,000. We have pulled from
other sources to make that a
million currently.
Mr. Chair. Yes.
Rodriguez
representative, um, so although
the LFC recommendation did not
include that 600,000 in the
recommendation, I will call out
that.
We are recommending a special
for 754 marketing and trade
shows, um, so I do just want to
mention that. Thank you.
Thank you
Great. Thank you, Representative
Little Representative Pettigrew,
please.
Thank you, Chairman.
I'm conflicted because
We walked in knowing that we
weren't voting on. And so I
would have asked for a whole
bunch of different questions.
Chairman, I would request the,
that the
committee that you're gonna have
that representative Chatfield
asked for, I would like to.
be part of that.
Um
And
I would like to get
clarification as we defined.
The Legacy fund.
Earlier today.
is my clear understanding that
the legacy fund has also been
used to purchase land and
property in the state of New
Mexico.
Am I accurate on that? The data
I have shows that uh
representative uh Pettigrew
Committee, there's uh the
Trails Plus going through EDD is
not related, so none of the ED
EDD funding is eligible. There
is a small $2 million
flow through from the legacy
fund to the game and fish
department that is used for
species of greatest conservation
need has not been used for any
purchases of any property, uh,
so this doesn't touch EDD at
all.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Uh, OK. Uh,
I don't see any other questions.
Oh, sorry, Representative down,
please.
And representative her and, and
I the committee, I wanna again
thank everybody, thank the
audience, Madam Secretary Nair,
thank you, especially in your
staff committee, we want to get
through the questions. We want
you to be able to represent your
districts and so, uh, you know,
we'll take the time we need to
take, uh, Representative Do,
please go ahead. Thank you.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and thank
you for the presentation. Um, on
the outdoor recreation on the
request is that in addition to
the legacy fund transfer? Is
that what that represents?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
good question. So when you're
looking at the outdoor rec uh
outdoor recreation, that 2.26
million is how much the agency
is going to get, uh, for the
land of enchantment Legacy Fund,
um.
There is a small increase
compared to what it received
last year. I believe it's
roughly like 300,000.
But yes, that's the land of
enchantment Legacy. That's the
full amount. Thank, thank you,
Mr. Chairman and thank you, um,
when I saw the Legacy Fund and I
looked at the purpose, the
conservation uh and improvement
of our forests, our land, our
water, um, I guess I envision,
you'll have to explain to me
what you're doing with the
legacy funds because I
envisioned it being for things
um related directly, I guess
this economic development
directly to workforce around
protecting and preserving our.
Public lands, private lands,
public or, you know, whatever,
uh, state and federal, um,
improving trails.
vegetation management, uh can
you tell us a little bit about
how you've utilized those legacy
funds.
Mr. Chairman Representative, so
the, the trails Plus program
helps fund uh building trails,
expanding trails in our, uh,
outdoor areas, um, and so that's
been directly, uh, and we try to
tie that in where it could have
a significant economic impact,
because if you create a
trailhead, uh, in a, in, in near
downtown Tnessee, you've got
such amazing hiking and and and
activities that drives people
there to, to be active, but it
also gives access to the
outdoor.
that maybe if you didn't have
that trail, it wouldn't be
there. The other thing we are
trying to think for thinking
forward with the, the, the
outdoor, the the trails plus
program is how do we utilize
those funds and thinking about
trails that we're building
wildfire resilience into that as
well. So that's part of it. And
then there's the outdoor equity
fund, which funds uh youth
programs with funds, other
support efforts where, um, young
people who may not have access
to the outdoors, uh, the
These programs help support
that. So, Mr. Chair and
Representative, just the
expansion of the current
programs that you already had,
and I'm, I'm asking this
because.
There are a lot of programs in
fire mitigation, reducing
catastrophic fire, improving our
soil and water health, that do
not require a four-year degree.
And um it seems to me that we
could build our next generation
of folks that want to be out in
the land doing conservation,
farming, ranching, etc. If we
could create uh like these
paraprofessional trainings and
I'll use one example that I know
is a huge bottleneck in our
state, and it's the
archaeological surveys, and Mr.
Chairman Secretary, we think
about these archaeological
surveys as being only being
eligible.
to be done by an archaeologist
and nearly every archaeologist
is deployed to um the Vegas area
to try to um provide
stabilization and recovery in
the Hermit's Peak Caf Canyon
fire area, but there's a
paraprofessional training that I
think could be really
interesting for 4H and FFA and
Environon students and maybe
even college kids and club kids
that can be um, you can be a
paraprofessional and work under
archaeologists with 6
months of training in the field.
And I, I, Mr. Chairman
Secretary, I was wondering if
you guys have looked at
initiatives like that or seed
collecting or and trail
maintenance is an easy one and
it makes sense and and a lot of
core groups do it, um, but have
you looked at things like the,
the heavy equipment operators
and the things that we need a
little bit outside that there's,
it feels to me like there's a
lot of people that in that they
go and get a degree in a
business, not knowing all the
job openings and all the
opportunities there are for.
contracts or like in RCS or
federal contracts. Mr. Chairman,
Representative, uh, is so
fortunate that Secretary Nyer is
following me, uh, because that's
really, you know, the workforce
side, but I will say that we
work very collaboratively with
her team, uh, as well as higher
education, uh, so that we're
aligning those sort of
opportunities. In addition, um,
we've been a lot of conversation
and this some of this has spun
out of of the fires in Rioso.
In collaboration with Secretary
Kinderine and Ener because she
manages the forest, uh, and what
are the opportunities for us to
both look at that economic
development opportunity while
building wildfire resilience,
building, uh, opportunities in
those rural communities, uh, as
we look at how we make our, our
forests, uh, less susceptible to
catastrophic fires. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you. I, I,
I'm, I've been having this
conversation with cultural
affairs as well, cause I know
there are
recipient of legacy funds and
thinking outside the box of what
even kids who aren't in the
forests and aren't in the
outdoors and aren't fishing and
camping to know that they don't
have to be an archaeologist,
maybe they enjoy history,
cultural diversity, underserved
populations could really have a
career filled and meet a
secondary need that we have to
protect our, our precious
outdoors. Um, I know that he
loves not my, not the reason I
have anymore, but now
representative Trosses has that
just in the, um, wild land and
Urban interface, the WUI in
around Silver City is 146,000
sections of WUI that has every
federal and state requirement
met other than archaeological
surveys. And they average around
1500 acres, um, that they can do
because that's how many, how
much area a single archaeologist
can cover. OK, so, um, I don't
want to take it on that, but.
It's a big bang for the buck.
Um, on the trails, what I keep
seeing in these reports, you're
saying, someone kept saying at
the end that the two agencies
concurred on the performance
measures, and I pulled out this,
I looked through a couple of
these looking, I don't know what
performance measures they
concurred on. And if it was
good, like they, they agreed
that in the past we met the
performance measures and we're
moving in the right direction,
like, what does that mean, Mr.
Chairman, Secretary?
Uh, yeah, Julia, if you could
walk us through the performance
measures. This is a process, um,
that is a joint LFC and DFA with
the agency agreement ahead of
time to identify performance
measures, I think that's enough.
I just didn't know if they were
measuring them and said, yeah,
we agree they're red, they're
green, they're yellow. But so
they, they created performance
measures and
then for committee, great
question, that the uh
performance measures are agreed
to by the legislature and the
executive agency and then
tracked over time and there's
obviously a give and take in how
those performance measures are
set.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And then
where do we find them? Yes, Mr.
Chair, Representative, um, it is
in your packet. It's on page 12,
um, and our apologies, normally
when we go through performance
measures, we're just trying to
share that we have come to a
consensus, but they're all
listed in that packet and also
in your volume 2, the only
difference is that your volume 2
won't have the DFA, um.
Recommendation and they won't
have the consensus, but
Um, they're all here and um they
are actually really insightful
and we do collect the agency
does an incredible job of
collecting data that it then
goes into the into the
recommendations and and thank
you, Mr. Chair, Secretary, and I
don't know who, who answers this
question. Are we also able to
ask questions about those
performance measures.
And can we, we also can work on
performance measures uh here or
uh thank you, yeah, uh, please
ask away about the performance
measures,
a lot of the like setting for
next year's budget or perhaps
changing in this year's, it's a
fair question to ask. It's um,
so fair questions to explore for
sure either way.
OK. OK, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Um, could you give me
the definition of underserved.
Underserved populations that
you'd be targeting with the film
industry funds, and then I guess
there would be a performance
measure that you have a
baseline, how you determine
they're underserved.
How did you
determine that. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative, uh, undisturbed
are more rural areas that were
focused around the state and
making sure that we're engaging
those communities as well.
Thank, thank you.
Thank you, Miss, Mr. Chair. So
the, so the money for the
projects for the film are for
rural areas.
That represented Mr. Chairman,
representative, that's how
we're, that's how they're
tracked and differentiated. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And so
this is, so the 5% differential
was not enough.
Was, did it, um, Mr. Chairman
Representative, I think I know
where you're, you, it's um part
of what this is, uh, also
targeting is those um smaller
independent filmmakers who may
not be able to get a production
done otherwise. And so, uh, that
5% might be something that a a
paramount or an NBC or a Netflix
gets because they filmed in a
rural community, but these funds
are really targeted for New
Mexico filmmaking.
in rural communities.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Mr. Secretary. Thank you.
OK, I think that answered my
question. So,
I
Where are the, the indicators
for that one that where, where
exactly are the indicators for
that?
I'm I'm trying to learning
process here.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
that's not a current performance
measure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Secretary, why?
So I'm really just learning I
don't have a, an opinion on it.
I'm just trying to use something
I thought would be an example.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
no, that's a phenomenal
question, um.
So kind of two pieces. One, if
that if that request did get
funded, um, the reason, OK, the
reason it's not in there right
now is because that's not
something that agency is
currently tracking because
there's not a special grant
program for underrepresented
filmmakers, if it were to be
funded.
This legislative session, then
we could have the discussions
about adding that as a
performance measure, and that
would happen after the
legislative session, if that
makes sense you and Mr. Chair
and, and secretary. I think, I
think I'm asking these questions
this may be more procedurally
about the committee because I'm,
if we're going to, I still don't
quite understand what Gro is,
but.
There's an appropriation, so
somehow someone has determined
there's an unset need. So I'm
assuming that there was baseline
data that drove to this.
That says this would result in a
different outcome. So I guess I,
I assumed that there would be
some baseline.
Performance measures that you've
been looking at and saying they
got this, they did not get this.
I, if there's a short answer by
somebody.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
as, as you get feedback from
your constituents. That's where
you hear there's a need. Uh, we
hear this from the film
industry, from our, our local um
colleges in Mexico State
University, others, um, that are
helping support film and
television around the state, uh,
that this is a need and so
that's where I, my understanding
is that's where that original
came last question I still think
it's procedural, Mr. Chair and
secretary.
Or maybe it's some uh there's
another time for us to ask this,
and you can explain it to me, so
you can tell me. We'll go in
offline if you, if, if this is
an offline question, I, I need
to understand. So does this
become a grow money with the
non-reoccurring but not new
money or is this, how, how do we
differentiate the difference
between what is going into the
budget.
You're shaking your head, vice
chair like you understand what
I'm trying to ask because I
don't even know what I don't
know.
Mr. Chair, so I think, uh,
Representative, what you're the
distinction between
non-recurring and grow is that
grow funds are usually given for
programs that have the potential
to become recurring or there are
program that an agency might
have wanted to be recurring, put
in their recurring budget, and
the legislative, the legislature
is saying, you know what, we'd
really like to see the results
of this program before it is put
in.
your recurring base budget.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary. And it's, it is
exciting to see and hear from
folks who have good news.
Appreciate it.
Thank you. Uh, next we're gonna
go to Representative Herndon and
Represent Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
have a clarifying question for
uh Miss Rodriguez. So when we
started, uh, when you started
talking about the different
sheets, and we look into the
personnel services and employee
benefits. There was a request
apparently for a marketing
personnel $95,000 was the
difference, but there, I mean,
it's really important to be able
to advertise the great outdoors
that we have here, get tourists
to come, that helps our economic
development. Why did we not want
to, to fund that position.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
thank you for that question. So
for the outdoor
Recreation program, um, the
agency requested 95,000, and
that was because the position
was previously funded through
federal funds. Um, we maintained
a flat budget because we were
looking at the overall personnel
like vacancies for the agency,
and we found that there is some
additional funding in there that
they could theoretically use to
backfill that position if
needed. Um, so we took into that
account that, thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Declan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My
question may be a question for
you.
Um,
If our budget is, let's just say
it goes up 4%, um.
It is, and we vote on that, then
as it goes to the Senate side or
as we massage that it could
potentially go up to 6% or 4.5%
or something like that. Is that
correct?
Great question, yes, they, what
we passed from here goes to them
and it can either increase,
decrease, and that's part of the
work to align as we go through
the session.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Appreciate that. Yeah,
absolutely. Thank you.
Uh, OK, so, um, I guess.
Thank you all very much
extensive hearing. I think we're
all we're learning a great deal,
uh, members, what we're gonna do
now, we're gonna go uh and to
adopt a one of the
recommendations. It, it's either
the LFC, it'll either be the
legislative or the executive.
The practice as members will
know it's, there's roughly
$150,000 recurring difference,
very small, particularly as
we've grown this agency very
significantly. Uh, I think is
director Seli and a number of
other folks have noted the
bigger differences and Mr.
Secretary, we talked about it
here are in the non-recurring
and the specials, um, our first
hearing on specials is uh
Uh, the 4th of February, I
believe it's next to uh coming
Tuesday, whenever that is, not,
um, so that, but we are hearing
specials here and again in our
training, uh, in the back in our
packets here, we see the
specials that the LFC
recommended, the executive has
recommended and if they overlap
or not. Um, so, uh, that said,
the committee we adopt the lower
general fund recommendation.
As a starting place.
In large part of Duncan sort of
to the as we build the budget,
the one of the toughest things
we can do is go over before
we've done a lot of the fine
tuning. Again emphasizing that
hearing early our approach is
one that allows for changes as
we go through the process, but
we will, we'll ask for the vice
chair to make a motion. It will
be for the lower general fund,
um.
Acknowledging all the things
that that the secretary and
others have acknowledged and the
committee's excellent questions
have delved into with that,
we'll go to the vice chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I would
move that the committee adopt
the LFC recommendation uh for.
The economic development
department.
Is there a second?
OK, it's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by ranking
member Chatfield. Is there any
opposition to that motion?
Kate, please show representative
Pettigrew in opposition to that
motion.
Oh, did you?
Oh, OK, sir.
We're at the auction. OK, so
we've adopted that, um, thank
you all very much and thank you,
Ms. Rodriguez.
OK, uh, we'll have a quick
change out here at the table.
For 6, 6:31, yeah.
Uh, where our staff is passing
out our
uh our workforce solutions 631.
This is updated from what was in
the.
Yeah, yeah, and members this is
updated from the binders. So
please use the handout that's
being passed up.
Oh, OK. OK, thank you.
All right.
OK. Uh, thank you all very much,
um.
We will go to Miss uh or, or
Doctor Mercer Garcia.
And um, Madam Secretary, great
to see you. Thank you again for
your time.
Uh, Doctor Mercer Garcia, please
start us up. All right. um, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
my name is Rachel Garcia. I'm
the LFC analyst for the
Workforce Solutions department
with me at the table is uh
Secretary Sarita Nayer of the
Workforce Solutions department
and my DFA counterpart, Simon
Miller in one of his last budget
hearings, um, on behalf of DFA.
Um, we're gonna be talking about
the workforce solutions
department. It's agency code
631, the packet looks very
similar.
Um, if you want to look in the
volumes of workforce solutions
in volume 2 is page 290.
Um, and I have good news for
you. Uh, there are very few
differences in these budget
recommendations, so this should
be relatively straightforward,
um, overall, the LFC
recommendation for the workforce
solutions department totals
134.1 million, um, and the
executive recommendation totals
134.8 million. The difference is
$730,000. Um, the general fund
recommendations, um, are.
identical amounts, uh, the
federal funds recommendations
are identical amounts, uh, the
difference is that the LFC
budget uh budget recommendation
uh includes uh a net difference
of 730,000 less, um, mostly in
the use of uh transfer revenue,
um, out of two funds that are
essentially penalty and interest
funds that are that are similar
to fund balance and the LFC
recommendation on budgets a
little bit less there in the
unemployment and, uh, insurance
program workforce technology
program and labor relations
program. So if you'd like, I can
go pe code by P code, but those
are the big differences. The
other big difference is where
the two recommendations budget
apprenticeship programs, but the
amounts are the same. So both
recommendations, budget, uh,
9.67 million for a registered
apprenticeship programs, the LFC
recommendation budgets that
amount.
Within the employment services
division where it has
historically been budgeted, the
executive recommendation pulls
that money out and creates a new
program code, but overall the
amounts are the same. Um,
Uh, the other thing I'll point
out regarding the overall
recommendation is that both
recommendations maintain the
transfer from the workforce, uh,
I'm sorry, the workers'
compensation Administration,
that's historically been made um
to fund apprenticeship programs,
uh, both recommendations reduce
that amount to 750,000 because
the WCA fund is being depleted,
but backfill 250,000 from the
general fund to maintain the
apprenticeship amounts. Um,
that's the high level summary of
their.
recurring budget, um, if you
would like, I can go ico by peo,
but it sounds like you're good.
Um, then what I will do is turn
it over to my counterpart Simon
to talk about the non-recurring
again, you're not voting on that
today, um, but we're sharing
informationally and they are
also very similar.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee.
Um, he gave me such a nice
goodbye yesterday I should have
just gone out on top, but got
another week, so you're stuck
with me.
Um.
Anyway, sorry, uh, like Rachel
said both recommendations are
very, very similar. This is a
very large department, lots of
responsibilities, um, oversee
unemployment insurance for the
state. They connect job seekers
with employers.
Um
They
Uh, investigate and enforce the
state's labor laws and that, you
know, that just scratches the
surface of, of what they do.
Um, it's a big budget $125
million budget, uh, but only
about 11% of that is from the
general fund, mostly funded by
federal funds.
Um, both recommendations are
just a small general fund
increase, 1.9%.
Um
For non-recurring, uh, you, you
have in your packet there. I
don't know what page, but it,
it'll show you the non-recurring
recommendations. They are
Uh, all very similar. There are
a couple of items that the
executive puts into the growth
fund recommendation that the um
LFC recommendation, uh,
recommends just as a, a regular
special appropriation, but the,
the amounts are comparable, so
where you all decide to fund
that, um, uh, it's at least
they're both comparable amounts,
um, or FY 26.
Sorry, I'm losing my voice.
Um
One difference in non-recurring
is the executive has 500,000 for
the local news fellowship
program, which provides paid
fellowships for um
Aspiring journalists around the
state and uh it
In theory, is it, uh, not in
theory, but it probably is a
good recruitment and retention
tool for uh uh journalists in
aspiring journalists in rural
areas. So the executive has has
a small appropriation of
500,000, and that would, uh, the
department says that would last
about 4 years, funding 12
fellows per year, um.
been funded through junior bill
money in the past. So the
executive put forward a special
for that and um the LFC did not,
the LFC did not put funding
towards that, um, that, that's
really the only
Difference of, of, of note.
There is one other that I would
add and call to your attention
the LFC recommendation
includes
3 35 million um to implement the
paid family medically that is
contingent upon passage of such
legislation, so there is
contingency language there, but
it is included um within the LFC
recommendation. That's the the
main difference in the specials.
Great. Thank you both very much.
Um
OK, uh,
And of course,
yeah, we know,
Madam Secretary, we'll go to
you, um.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I will
go super fast because I'm
between you and the weekend. Um,
I don't know. OK, there we go.
All right, so I'd like to start
of course by thank my team who's
here today, my deputy secretary
Marcos Martinez, my CFO Joanne
Chavez in my budget director
Steve Riggs, and of course, my
two great analysts from LFC and
DFA, um, and I'm gonna have to
bribe Secretary Props again to
get a really great panelists
like I did to get Simon, so um
when Cecilia left, so.
Um, just really grateful for the
support. Uh, so I always start
with some data for you. Uh, this
is the latest, uh, November 2024
unemployment data, we can see
that we're sitting at 4.4%,
which is uh about the same as
the rest of the region and uh
1.1% um higher than this, uh,
country as a whole. And then the
graph on the right is regional
over the year employment growth,
uh, again, November to November.
and we're at 1.4%, which, as you
can see is the same as the
United States, a little bit
lower than some of the states in
our region doing better than
Wyoming and California and um
some of the folks, other folks
in our state.
And uh sorry, I don't have newer
numbers for you, the December
numbers don't come out until the
28th.
Uh, this is my favorite graph,
hopefully by now your favorite
graph, the estimated employment
gap. So the bottom, the orange
line or the red line is telling
you the number of people who are
unemployed and looking for work.
The blue line is telling you the
number, estimated number of job
openings and the difference
between the two is what we call
the employment gap. This hit its
worst peak in around July of
2022, uh, at about 38,000, uh, a
little more than 38,000. Uh, you
can see we've now cut that in
half. The gap is.
19,444, still not great. We'd
still love to see those lines
much closer together, but as you
can see from the orange line on
the top, that decrease in the
gap is due to more people going
to going to work, so it's a good
thing we're moving in the right
direction, more work to do.
Oops
I want to give you just a couple
of updates from our last
performance evaluation from the
LFC, uh, one of the areas that,
that um had some room for
improvement was the RESEA, the
reemployment program that takes
the people who are most likely
to exhaust their unemployment
benefits and gives them
intensive case management. You
can see that in uh the previous
fiscal year, we at quarter 1, we
had 2,875 participants and we're
now up by 926 participants in
the first quarter of
program you 24, which is fiscal
year 25 here in the state. Um,
so great improvement there, uh,
the temporary assistance for
needy families career link
program also an area that came
under some um scrutiny, you can
see that we are um almost
tripled the number of
participants and uh quadrupled
the number of hires in that
program again, love to see those
numbers higher, but with 10 of
rolls at an all-time low, we're,
we're happy with that progress,
and then we uh got to cut the
ribbon on some new locations in
Socorro and uh.
consequences, you can see me in
that picture with uh Mayor
Heckler from TRC and uh that was
uh a great in order in order to
serve those smaller communities
and in Title III, which is
Wagner Peer, that's the big
front door employment services
for everyone. We saw 14%
increase in participants year
over year and an even stronger
uh increase in priority
participants that include
veterans and people with
disabilities. Um, also, we
rebranded, so the places in your
community is former known
formerly known as workforce.
centers and nobody really knew
what that was or now called
America's job centers and
hopefully everybody knows the
word job and both uh businesses
and and people looking for work
will know to come to us there.
And, uh, the last picture on
that slide is um from our
cabinet in your community in
Riodo, so we saw over 1200
people in 12 different American
job centers uh during the fires
and floods in Riodoso. So it was
a great chance for our rural
programs to shine.
Here's a little bit of our uh
larger fiscal picture. So, um,
in this past in this fiscal
year, uh FY 25, we saw the first
distribution from the workforce
training and apprenticeship
funds. So thanks to everyone
here for passing that. That was
$5 million you know, the, the
one difference, um, one of the
differences between the exact
and the LFC was recommending a
new pe code for additional
transparency. I get it that
there there may be some sort of
general dislike of new P codes,
but uh, really the only reason
we
asked for that is because you
all made such a substantial
investment in apprenticeship,
and we want it to be able to be
very visible in our budget, um,
but that, that is your call.
Um, we also made a great a lot
of great progress in reversions
thanks to this team and program,
so we reverted uh less than 1%
of our budget last year, down
from a high of uh before my
time, um, we were reverting $1.3
million which was unacceptable.
And then we've also uh secured a
lot of competitive funding that
we're excited about, uh, $5.9
million over three years for
these uh state apprentice
expansion formula competitive
grant, um, that would actually
be perfect for someone.
the forestry and archaeology
programs that you were
mentioning uh Representative Doo
and uh also I'd be happy we have
a, a piece of that that's out to
RFP that I'd be happy to send to
you, Representative Pettigrew or
any of the members of the
committee, so you can forward
that to your community. Uh, we
also received $1.5 million in
private funding for powering
climate and infrastructure
careers grant, so that's going
to some sector planning, clean
energy and climate change, and
then uh we received also private
funding for 20 of $250,000.
to form an office of new
Americans, um, which is doing
all things at the intersection
of work and immigration and
especially helping people who
are here and authorized to work
connect with their, um, best
opportunities and on that note,
um, I want to mention that we do
have some legislation, uh, it'll
start in the Senate, um, but
hopefully make it over here.
It's called the immigrant
Healthcare Workforce Development
Act and the goal of that is to
get folks who are here legally
authorized to work and have
training in the medical field.
field s in their home country,
quicker paths to come work in
the medical fields here includes
um some expedited licensure uh
thanks to some great cooperation
from both the medical and
nursing boards, so hopefully you
get to see that soon. And uh
also just grateful for the grow
money that we got last year, um,
and putting that to good use.
Um, because our, our
recommendations are so similar,
um, I, I did highlight some of
the non-recurring requests, but
as you can see, um, almost all
of them were included, so thank
you to that. I'll see you for
that. Uh, the unemployment
assistance payments are a very
small amount. It's just to
address a technical issue where
um our our systems were not uh
registering part time employment
correctly in the administration
of the uh disaster benefits for
the uh modifiers and
Uh, the federal government is
making us repay an amount that
we overpaid to beneficiaries,
but we don't think it's morally
correct for those beneficiaries
to have to repay us, so we're
asking for that money and we're
asking that to come out of our
out of our own unemployment
fund, not, not other state
funds, not general fund. 750 is
for a labor force and, and I'll
go through the rest of these,
um, really quickly, but I also
just want to mention here that
we do have uh another bill that
is starting here in the house,
um, for, uh, unemployment
insurance. What we
realized during the the Riodoso
Roswell and Las Vegas, um,
situations that all happened at
the same time was that there's a
difference in the way we treat
people who are under federal
emergency declaration from the
way that we treat other kinds of
emergencies and the net result
is the people with the federal
disaster declaration, so the
bigger disasters have to observe
this waiting week, so they have
to go one week without
employment before they get
payment.
As opposed to other disasters
which weirdly like in Las Vegas,
they didn't have to wait because
I had the authority to waive
that. So we just want to close
that loophole, give the
secretary the authority to waive
the waiting week in disasters.
It, it seems like a pretty easy
one, but
So, uh, labor force
participation. I've talked so
much about this in so many
committees that I'm not going to
spend a lot of time here, but,
um, the point of this slide is
that we don't know why people
aren't working in this state at
the same rate as they are in
other states. Um, and part of
that is because the way that the
federal government surveys that
that it doesn't give us a lot of
insight.
Um, so we've asked and LFC has
recommended um uh $750,000
non-recurring request to try to
figure this out through surveys,
community engagement, um, we
know that if we had everybody
working at the same rate as they
are in other states, we would be
able to close that gap real
quick in our state, and um we
want to be able to target
policies that do that.
And then, um,
pre-apprenticeship, very
grateful for the additional
$600,000 targeted towards STEM
pre-apprenticeship. Um, this has
been a great program serving a
lot of sectors and now with
between safe to or grow money in
in this money we're going to be
able to meet a lot of needs all
across the state. So, um, again,
happy to answer questions on all
of this, but just trying to go
fast.
Um, aligned case management.
This is um the situation where
every workforce program in the
state is using different
computer programs, different
case management tools, um, we
want to be able to ask you one
set of questions when you walk
in the door and you never have
to answer those questions again,
even when you go to different
agencies, right? That's the
dream. So, um, we have requested
750,000 in one time money uh to,
to fund the people and processes
and then we have a $2.2 million
dollar tech request in.
the C2 budget.
Um, the local journalism
fellowship, this is the only one
that wasn't funded, um, is, uh,
Simon mentioned, you know, this
has been a great resource. I
know that when I'm in rural
communities and I've been to, I
think all of your communities,
um, over the past year, I, we
get amazing coverage. We get a
lot of contact from people who
hear about us in those local
papers and so we have supported
this initiative that um uh
Senate Majority Leader Peter
Worth and Senator Steinborn have
put money into historically, so
that's why we asked to to just
build it in the budget.
shouldn't have some certainty
for a few years to come.
And then intensive case
management for out of school
youth again grateful that LFC
agreed this was a priority, but
basically, you know what these
charts show you is that um in
general in the United States,
uh, as a whole, they have a
higher percentage of especially
men who are out of school and
don't have a high school um
diploma and are not in school,
that group of folks are um
working at higher rates in the
rest of the country than they
are here. And the same is true.
of different demographics of
women as you can see there. So
the goal is to reach 400 youth
who face significant challenges
to graduate high school and
secure the skills they need to
get a job with intensive case
management, we'll put this out
to bid, but there are a number
of excellent programs out there
that we know can can get the
job.
That's it.
Awesome. Thank you so much,
Madam Secretary. Thanks to your
team. We've got, uh, we're gonna
go straight to Representative
Brown, ranking member Chatfield
and represented Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Madam Secretary. Um,
so I'm looking at the um high
level for this agency.
And um I think we all noted that
under the executive
recommendation under
non-recurring.
This is line 70 on that page,
um, there's a a special being
proposed for a family medical
leave Act contingent upon, as
was mentioned on legislation
passing. Um, so LFC is
recommending, uh, Mr. Chairman,
35 million and uh the exact
recommendation doesn't, doesn't
give us any number there. Could
someone explain uh why the exec
is not asking for that special,
at least here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, uh,
Mr. Chair Representative, all,
um, uh, outline the LFC
recommendation and then
certainly you all uh can address
the executive. So that is a
contingent upon passage of a
bill that has not passed. It's
essentially a placeholder and it
would not be appropriated if the
bill does not pass, and so I
imagine the executive did not
request it because it is not uh
currently a law or a program.
Yes, thank you so much. Um, uh,
yeah, I'm, I just think it's,
um, and again, contingency on
passage is very important, but
um if legislation passes, if we
take the LFC rack and we're not
voting on specials, I understand
that today, but um if we take
the LFC then it's, it's in
there. It's in the budget. So I
just, um, I just pointed out
for, for uh information. But let
me, let me go to another, and
this is very short, um, Mr.
Chairman, um.
Madam Secretary, you talked
about some organizations that
are helping our uh our youth to
get into employment. Have you
heard of an organization called
JAG stands for jobs for
America's graduates, um, this
organization is really focused
on helping students who are at
risk of dropping out.
And what it tries to do is get
them to look, uh, and prepare
for a meaningful job
opportunities, so I'm just
curious if you had a chance to
visit with that group, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Brown, absolutely, we already do
a lot of referrals to Jag and um
of course we would have to put
this bunny out to bid, but I I
think um their their program has
amazing track records, so thank
you.
Yeah, thank you. And then just
finally, um, this organization
might be open to probably be
very pleased to receive some uh
junior money or whatever can be
done for them, but I was very
impressed with uh the
conversation I had with the
organizer that or the the lady
who runs it, so I just mentioned
that, hoping to be helpful.
Thank you.
think you representative Brown
next ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, you
know, I've, I've been aware.
Cabinet Secretary since back
during the COVID days uh that
there was a transfer went out
each year from the unemployment
fund.
To the apprenticeship fund.
And uh, is that true?
Mr. Chair Representative, it's a
transfer that's historically
gone from the workers'
compensation Administration fund
to the workforce solutions
department, uh, and it has been
used for apprenticeship programs
historically.
That's what I'm talking about,
and I may have called it the
wrong name.
But I know that we all pay
unemployment insurance and um I
suppose that's where that money
comes from.
It doesn't come from there? Um,
so, Mr. Chair Representative,
the money comes from the
workers' compensation
Administration, which, um, their
revenue comes from an an
assessment, uh, for workers'
compensation administration on
payroll, so it is also sort of a
payroll tax. I say we pay it,
that's because I have a payroll.
Yes, Mr. Chair Representative,
that is correct. It's a payroll
tax. Thank you.
So, um,
It funds apprenticeships, which
is great. I think, I think a lot
about apprenticeships.
How many?
Different
Companies
Have apprentices working for
them.
That
are eligible for this program.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Chatfield, that might be the one
apprenticeship stat that I would
have to get back to you on would
be the number of employers, um,
but we have over 2000
apprentices in the state and,
um, everybody's eligible to to
participate in it if they wanted
to if they um employ people who
are in an apprenticeable fields,
so something where we have an
apprenticeship program, um,
there are no limitations on the
types of participants. I wanted
to hear everybody's eligible,
all the
employee hers, uh, they're not,
they don't have to be certified,
they don't have to pass some
specific thing, uh, before
they're eligible to hire an
apprentice.
Mr.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Chatfield, sorry to to
interrupt, uh, they, uh, we
register apprenticeship
programs, and those are usually
run by a program sponsor and
then they connect to the
employer. Anybody can register
an apprenticeship and any
employer can participate in a
registered apprenticeship
program, but I don't wanna, I
don't want to make it sound
like, you know, you call us
tomorrow and you can get a full
apprentice. You do have to
connect with the registered
apprenticeship there's over
2000.
Registered across the state in
various industries.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Chatfield, yes. Thank you,
ma'am. I'm at peace, uh,
as to the people that do not uh.
Um
Why as to the question why we
have so few employees, uh,
people that are employed in the
state of New Mexico compared to
our, our population. I suggest
that you look at the cliff
effect that means that if you
are receiving free childcare for
the variety of things that we
try to provide for people to
keep up, keep up the quality of
life in this state, and you get
a job, you lose that, you lose
all the things that you're
getting for free now, and I
Challenge you
To check how much money you have
to earn at that job to equal all
the programs that New Mexico
has.
Uh, I challenge you to look into
that. It's possibly.
The the clip effect being the
source of the reason that more
people are not out there beating
the street trying to get a job.
Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you very much, uh,
remember Chatfield, next
representative Duncan, then
represent Wuhan and Ger.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
secretary, we've talked in
Farmington before and so I was
just wondering if you could
follow up on a on a conversation
we've had there, um, on your
ETA, um.
How many of those workers have
been helped from that. Can you
tell me that? And then follow
part B of that would be, we've
cut um employment in half,
unemployment in half in the
state. Does that account for
those who had to leave the state
because of the
ETA Act and go to another state.
Thank you.
Chi small uh representative
Duncan, thank you for those
questions. So, um, as to the
ETA, uh, is, is you all, I think
know in round one we helped 599
displaced workers with um one
time funding to get go through
all the costs that uh cause it's
expensive to lose your job, um,
and then in phase 2, um, 248
workers have received a wage
differential, so they were back
to work full time in New Mexico,
but they're making far less than
they did before.
and so that's what the wage
differential program was, um,
and then we have uh 17 currently
in training, 5 registered, uh,
actually this just might be a
little old, but um, and we have
entered into an agreement with
San Juan College, um, for about
$2 million for them to do really
intensive outreach to these
folks. You know, one of the
challenges in this program is we
can't just give the money to a
business in Farmington or in
Kirtland or anywhere, um, they
have to use the money for.
Um, these workers. So I want to
give the, the, um, you know, the
partnership with San Juan
College is shot, but don't be
surprised if you see me come
back here next year and say we
want to broaden the scope of
that to be able to help
employers in those communities,
even if they're working with
other individuals because um I
want to see this money deployed
while I'm still here and I'm I'm
a little concerned.
Um, as to your, uh, a second
question that decrease in the
estimated employment gap, um, is
pretty much all attributable to
people getting work.
Here in New Mexico. OK, thank
you, Mr. Chair. One follow up on
that, um, did that include any
of the workers, you know, during
that last year when they knew
they were gonna get laid off.
Did that include any of those
workers that left the state.
In that last year.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Duncan, no, nobody who left the
state and you know, unless there
was a misstatement on their
part, um, got any of the rounds
of benefits. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. What if they stayed in
the state and they went ahead
and left P&M or the mine, for
example.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Duncan, if they left for some
reason other than the closure,
then they were not eligible for
any of the programs, and we are
still holding in reserve some
money for the 60 so people who
are doing reclamation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
secretary.
Thank you very much
Representative Duncan. Uh, next
we have Representhan Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you for being
with us and you know, a million
thanks to you and all the work
that you do and um all the
reporting you've you've done for
us quick questions is looking at
your slide on page 14 and the
gaps in the.
The progress we're making. Can
you, um?
Comment on or give us
information on what is getting.
People were on an incline. What
is getting us back to work?
Especially women, as I'm seeing
there's a higher incline.
there for women, Mister Chair.
Um, yeah, she's in the bonus
slides. Yeah, thank, uh thank
you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Lujan. Yeah, I
put some, some bonus slides in
the back that I didn't go over
for time's sake, but that's
that's where the one you're
referring to is, um, so,
The question was what is getting
folks back to work, I mean, part
of the, the reason we need to do
this survey is cause we can only
really speculate. We know that,
um, the the availability of
early childcare has been a
factor because our labor force
participation rate for um
parents with children under 6 is
now higher than the national
average, so we know that that's
one reason why we've gotten, um,
some help. We also know that
when the um incredibly generous
um pandemic benefits.
stop being available, which was
back in in 2022, um, we saw an
uptick in employment, um, so
those were uh first Trump era
benefits that that came out and
were in some cases people were
making more than uh by not
working than they were by
working once those fell off, um,
we did see some people go back
to work for that, um, and then
we also know that um, you know,
after the pandemic, it took a
lot of people time to be able to
want to go back to the
workforce. A lot of people
sought training during that time
and now.
They're ready to go into the
workforce. So those are some of
the reasons, but again, once we
do this survey and study,
hopefully we'll have more
concrete data. Thank you for
your insight. I think that that
was important valuable insights
for us to consider as as time is
is moving away from the the
pandemic to consider that and in
your survey, how many, how many
individuals were surveyed.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Lujan, the survey
is what we're asking for money's
going on right now. Uh, no,
we're asking for money.
Yeah, to have, OK, I'm sorry,
not right now, but to have to
have happened and then my, my
other question is, um, we
related to the youth engagement
and workforce and our
disability, uh, population and
engagement and workforce, can
you comment and give us any um
kind of if there is a progress
report on that. I, I fully, um.
Adhere our our support, our
youth getting into these our
work programs, um, I know that
on the PED uh budget side with
our schools.
Participating in those efforts
as well, but they were using the
Ser funding.
And how is that transitioning or
transferring to what you're
doing, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Luhan, you know,
we have a higher percentage of
people with disabilities at all
ages in their state than the
national average. That said, we
also have that population
working at a slightly slightly
higher um rate than in other
states, so our disability
community is large, but is
working as much or more than in
other states, um, specifically
with regard to uh the Esther
money I I'm afraid I'm not, I
don't have a lot of details on
that, but what I do know
we have, um, we got to
collaborate with the Governor's
commission on Disability to put
together a really robust
disability employment Awareness
Month in October. We're gonna be
doing that again this October,
um, but it really brought us,
brought to light for us, um, how
we really have to put people
with disabilities front and
center in all of our programs,
even though we are not DVR, we
are not the division of
vocational rehab, the need is
greater than what they're funded
to do um by the federal
government and so I think um
what what I can offer.
is our commitment to to really
step up in the disability
employment space, even though
it's not necessarily our agency,
um, we, we understand the need.
I really appreciate that, Mr.
Chair, and also just, uh, the
program Cape, which is uh the
the youth in just uh with
disabilities in workforce as
well. I'm happy to pass on some
of that information to you and
what is going on nationally with
the what they're doing. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, I think, right
quick.
Um, yeah, we'll get to the
specialists when we get to the
specials. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much
Representative. Representative
Garrett, please. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. Um, the number one
thing that I'm getting letters
about is support for
pre-apprenticeships. So looking
at page 5, grow your tooth, or
grow your 3. I just need to
review what we did, um, Mr.
Chair Representative Garrett, so
this fiscal year FY 25 is grow
year one.
And then grow your 226 and then
grow your 327, as I understand
it because of the way that grow
was structured, there didn't
need to be like a
reappropriation of that money,
right? So we automatically were
getting the um 600,000 in FY 26,
the 600,000 that is in both the
exact analysy recommendations is
additional.
OK, thank you. And then my
second question on Bro, be
proud. Is there any, uh, data
collection of people that as a
result of visiting that truck
and testing the 16 things
they're actually entering
apprenticeship programs.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, we have the the data
set up to do that. I didn't pull
it for this, so I'd be happy to
to get back to you on that, um,
but the great thing is we're
probably the only B pro be proud
program in the country that is
set up to collect that data and
um what's also great is, you
know, those kids who saw a lot
of the kids are seeing it in
junior or sophomore year. We're
gonna start seeing them go into
the workforce or, you know,
hopefully someday we'll be able
to track where they also land in
in higher ed.
and um be able to give you a
much better picture of that
investment. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, and, and yeah, we look
forward to following that. Thank
you very much. Thank you. Thank
you, Representative Garrett. Uh,
next we have Represent Pedigree.
Thank you, Chairman. I just have
a few clarifying things.
Um
determine the, the first thing.
We talk about greater than 2000
people in the Apprentice
program.
What percentage of those
Over 2000 are non-union.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Pettigrew, both the number of
apprenticeship programs and the
number of participants in them
split about 60, 40, 60% unions,
40% non-union.
Chairman, uh, Secretary, can you
give me an example of a
non-union program.
That submitted their apprentice.
For non-union organization that
submitted
Their program to you and maybe
what some of the nuances are.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Pettigrew, um, the independent
electrical contractors actually
runs probably the biggest
apprenticeship program and that
that's a non-union shop, um, and
they do electricians work, um,
and they're, they're their
standards for program submission
are the same as, as everyone
else's, um, and we also have,
um, Kelly Fire up in uh
Farmington is one of our um
oldest apprenticeship programs.
Um, we have also a number of.
programs in fields that don't
even have unionized workforce,
so catharsis Media, um, is one
of them that I can think of off
the top of my head that does
digital media that is, uh, you
know, that's not really a the
world of um unions. So there's,
there's a lot of robust
non-union participation.
Perfect. Thank you.
Chairman, last year there was a
memorial introduced by several.
Members on both sides of the
aisle, I think, representative
Little was one of them, sending
and uh representative Montoya.
Uh, sending them a memorial to
DC with respect to the cliff
effect.
Um, I don't know if that will be
reintroduced this year, but
Chairman, uh
Secretary, how would you, how do
you feel about that?
Did you get a chance to review
House Memorial 25 last year. Uh,
Mr. Chair and uh representative
Pettigrew. I, I'm sorry, I'm not
familiar with it, but I will
tell you that starting in
January of 2020.
3 last year, no, 2024 was last
year, yeah. Um, the, the, um,
administration for Children and
Families ACF has been bringing
together states to talk about
how to address the cliff effect
and um Secretary Greginsky,
Secretary Armijo and I went to a
national convening and since
that time we've been in a
working group, so I, I think you
will be seeing from um the
healthcare authorities, some
proposals to address the cliff
effect, um, by, you know, making
sure that that that's not such
a.
stark choice between employment
and benefits and also the
transitional TANF program is one
piece that I'm familiar with,
and that one gives a one-time
payment for like fixing your car
so you can go to work, you know,
some of the things that you just
never get to save up to to make
yourself work ready when you're
on benefits, um, and it's also
been the focus of the economic
domain of the children's
cabinet, Governor Lin Grisham's
Children's cabinet, which our
department chairs, so we are um
heartily engaged in the cliff
effect conversation and and
hopefully you're seeing.
some legislation from that this
year from some of the other
agencies.
Perfect. Thank you so much for
that answer, Chairman, one last
question or maybe two,
On page 3 of
Um, the presentation we talked
about.
The gap of number of unemployed.
Mhm.
Can you give me a bird's eye
view of how many one.
What the definition of
unemployed is.
And 2, how many fall on and come
off each month.
It's
What's the variability month by
month, I can see the graph, but
I'm just curious how many people
fall off the they, they were
considered unemployed, but we
got past.
Whatever the definition of
unemployed is. And so now we
don't count them anymore and
maybe about how many total?
we have in the state that fell
off Mr.
Chair and Representative
Pettigrew. Um, let me take that
sort of one piece at a time, um.
Oh yeah, we could do that one.
That's a good idea, um, let me,
let me address that first that
go through these slides, um, the
Number at the bottom of that
first chart, the, um, let me go
back.
OK. The bottom number that you
see in the square November 2024,
43,000 people unemployed. Um,
that is a measure that the
Bureau of Labor Statistics, uh,
the federal government, um,
provides and uh that is the
number of people who do not have
a job and are looking for work.
Um, it is not, you know, you
don't check in and out of being
unemployed. This is also not the
number of people receiving
unemployment benefits. That
number has been is is sort of
south of um 10,000.
So it's, it's a small
percentage, it's usually less
than 20% of the people who are
in the unemployed number.
Um, whenever you see the
unemployment rate, so this year,
this month I think November 2024
is the number that I showed on
that slide, so 4.4% the the
month before it was 4.3%, so
that's the amount that it's
changing is that 0.1%, which
We can probably do the math and
tell you that it's uh what, 400
people.
Masked
OK, so, um, so if you, if you,
every month when you see that
unemployment number, that is
that big number at the bottom
that is not the number of people
again that are on unemployment.
That's the number of people who
are unemployed and looking for
work, and that's a Bureau of
Labor Statistics, um, number. So
then to go to these slides, um,
the bonus slides in the back.
Um, we, we kind of tried to, we
get this question a lot, so
we've come up with this metaphor
of uh the stands, which are the
people who are not in the labor
force at all. Uh, the bench who
are people who are unemployed
and looking for work and then
the fields, the people who are
employed and of course everyone
wants to, you know, we want more
people on the field. We'll take
more people on the bench though,
if that means they're coming
down off the stands. And so, um,
When we look at that number,
those numbers a little bit more
deeply, um, you can see that
there are people who are moving
that, that top arrow from not in
the labor force at all to the
bench to unemployed and looking,
and those people are new
entrants, um, people who worked,
but not for 12 months, and then
people who haven't worked for
even more than 12 like we look
back a year and they still
haven't worked even beyond that.
And you can see that we've been
getting better in pulling those
people from the stands onto the
bench, so that makes our
unemployment number bigger, but
we don't mind because they're
We're getting more and more
people doing that each year, um,
or, you know, between 24 and 23.
And then we have people who are
employed, but then they lose
their job, right? And that they
also go from the field to the
bench and um those are, you
know, either job leavers, so I
wanted to leave my job or
involuntary separations, the
federal government calls that
job losers. We don't like that
word, so we call it involuntary
separations
the federal government calls
that job losers. We don't like
that word, so we call it
involuntary separation.
And so, um, we, we also see
Those numbers moving in the
right direction, right? Fewer
people voluntarily losing their
job and fewer people losing
their job involuntarily. So, um,
that these numbers kind of give
you a sense, I think of the
questions that you're asking.
Where is the unemployed people
coming from? And the good news
is they're coming from all the
right places. Um, the, the less
good news is we need more of
those people off the stands to
come down onto that bench and
and that's why I don't mind when
the unemployment rate ticks up,
if it means that more people are
looking for work than were
before.
Chairman, I really appreciate
that cause
I'm color blind.
I didn't know there were words
on this. Oh, there aren't on
that. No, they're there, and now
I see him, but yeah, the, the
black words with the background,
I had no clue that there was
anything on either one. I don't
know if
you, you got a saturated version
of that. We can get you a
version with the less opaque.
That's beautiful. I can, I can
see it now and I'll be able to
find it and I would not have
asked the question if I didn't
known that that was on there.
Thank you very much for your
time. Thank you, Chair.
Thank you very much
representative Pettigroup.
I just have one question, um,
the,
the creation of the new P code,
this is sort of a new uh
relatively new thing that I've
seen.
Doctor Garcia, is that just
generally sort of
caution about creation of a new
pe code. Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, the LFC, uh,
guidance and direction to
analysts is typically um not to
consider organizational
reorganizations, they tend to do
things like inhibit your ability
to track money over time,
inhibit your ability to track
performance measures when they
move around in our systems we
kind of lose historical data and
often this is not specific to
workforce solutions, but across
state government.
We often see when new programs a
P codes are created, additional
administrative costs. Now
certainly you as a committee um
could choose to deviate from
what is kind of the standard
practice and guidance, there may
be a reason to do so in this
case.
That that really helps me
something in this case, maybe
we'll want to consider as we go
forward, really appreciate the
clear uh.
Explanation. OK, members, we're
gonna go now to uh the vice
chair for a motion, and then um
I have one quick announcement
following that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
would move that the committee
adopt the LFC recommendation.
It's been moved by Vice Cha
Dixon said by Representative
Mohan, in opposition to that
motion. Please show represent
Pettigrew in opposition. OK.
members, that's that, uh, we are
gonna pass out and for those who
are not here, uh, you'll get an
email for the subcommittee
assignments that'll begin on
Monday, so again, the weekend is
off. That's really the only
announcement. um, thank you all
very much for really excellent
first week of work, um, and
we're on schedule, if not, maybe
just a little bit ahead where we
can continue to really dedicate
time to the priorities that the
state wants us to focus on and
that you.
are bringing forward. With that,
thank you all so much. Talk to
everybody soon. Have a great
weekend and be safe.
Did we take the exact
