As.
Members this is meant to sort of
go back through to the beginning
when we first began meaning
it'll be noting the changes
other actions that have been
recommended.
We.
will look forward to adopting
these changes this morning
members I don't impose
anticipate us making additional
changes today this is sort of
what you know we're right at our
halfway point more less and
we're going to be of course we
know that the Senate will be
able to have the chance to
address the work that we've done
we're sending them capacity to
do additional work with and so
this is mostly a chance to know
changes that have been made
recommendations that have been
made
As we go through this package
and with that I will turn it
over to either Mister Mr Valdez
to start taking us through and
then we'll go between Mr Valdez
in our LFC staff.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Hey the first item that need
action on is a public school
support.
recommendation from from the
workgroup.
And I think H. two.
Thank you Mr rose Mr so we can
ask you to go through this at a
high level please our public
school work group just saw this
has broadly adopted it and we'll
just Mr solely to walk us
through.
Yes Sir Mr chairman I'll point
out some highlights in HFC
scenario of online for almost
thirty two million for the at
risk index there's an additional
one million that would be tied
to that for the
that feminine hygiene products
coming from the public had
reform Fund.
You'll note on lines five
through eleven the changes that
are assumed in the budget for
extended learning line eight
would be the new K. twelve plus
program from the
The in the SCG line ten would be
for the eleven forty ours the
details around that policy is
not a question before you this
morning that needs to be worked
out in the legislation that
would need to be passed to put
these in place but that that's
the probation that are set aside
for those purposes there's a
number of other legislation
whether you do that separately
or in consolidated that would
also need to to pass to
effectuate changes online
sixteen for the
EA minimum salary increases at a
cost of fourteen point five
million there is a principal
responsibility actors seven
point nine million on the line
below.
you'll see.
I also like to highlight the
employee health insurance
contribution increases at a cost
of almost thirty two million
online twenty one that will also
require legislation and that's
enough funding to bring
educators contributions for
their health care in line with
what state employees and other
local government employees
contribute for their health
care.
The overall increase for the SCG
from the general fund which it
does include in this scenario Mr
chairman the increased
distribution from the school
permanent fund will go directly
to the SCG in this scenario
bringing that total SCG to three
point nine billion or an eight
point eight percent increase
over the current fiscal year.
Okay let's let's pause there
And actually can you let's let's
continue just with a quick upset
explanation can you believe
briefly touch on the career
technical education component as
well the career technical
education if you look on the
next page lines ninety eight and
one thirty five you've increase
that from the LFC recommendation
to forty million dollars
combined general fund and public
school public at reform Fund.
Correct thank you Mr Slee for
going through those updates
thank you to the workgroup
members let me pause there for
questions from committee
members.
Okay I don't see any questions
over Representative Montoya
thank you Mr chairman of real
quick which line was it for the
for the dust increase what was
that now so
this is where we are thank
Representative Montoya we're on
the public schools we're right
now that's what he's said I miss
there is no need As yes got it
on that thank you lines that
thank you Representative monthly
that's fine sixteen on our first
on our high level.
Mexico thank Representative
Brown please.
Mr chairman I just a quick
question line forty eight refers
to out of state tuition and are
just curious what that what that
is all about Mr chair thank you
Mr Chairman representative brown
there are some students that
live on the order yeah I think
most of them may attend in
Arizona
where it's closer for them to
attend school and the other
state than it is for them to go
to the New Mexico School and
then the state reimburses that
other school system for the
students thank you thank you
Representative Brown percent.
The.
Thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew what
this is our last workgroup so so
we're gonna be taking this both
individually and then we'll go
through and will adopt and whole
I think is the in is it is my
intention if there are specific
questions about components will
take the time to talk this
through.
The.
General maths.
One million online fifty we
talked about in structural Jr
instructional materials fund and
then that leads us back up to
line nineteen.
Four
one nine to twelve million
dollars with respect to that
this is specifically for for the
C. tex side the CTE side.
Our other instructional
materials that.
would be included that need to
be added to the Senate they are
specifically Chairman what are
the.
Mr Chairman representative
through the twelve million is
the increase to the amount it's
already in the SCG for maximum
flexibility for all
instructional materials and
including education technology
they're buying online
the legislature stop
appropriating money to ending
instructional materials fund
which had some parameters placed
on it that the school districts
we continually want lifted and
so legislature's getting
districts maximum flexibility by
putting the SCG there's a total
of fifty five million
that's in the SCG that's
earmarked for instructional
materials with Chris Mr
chairman.
Chairman thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew ring
member of some.
Thank you Mr chairman what this
be the proper place to ask about
language
or should I wait
Thank you remember Armstrong
in terms of language regarding
the public schools this is the
proper place to us thank you Mr
chairman so I wanted to make
sure that the year got moved for
the schools that are in four
days already
I had been told that the the
date got moved so that it didn't
affect three schools that were
already in.
All sunny knows.
Mr Chairman Representative
Armstrong those schools were
grandfathered in with the
language is written before you
today thank you Mr chairman
that's all thank you
Representative Armstrong
Representative Lujan please.
Thank you Mr
I'm just going through this now
looking at the behavioral health
money on.
Seventy six page to health and
behavior health curriculum is
that different from line one oh
seven the behavioral health
support.
And I'm seeing that we don't
have any funding point in any of
these Mr chair.
Right as it somewhere else that
I'm not seeing it Mr Chairman
representative there is an
increase for school based health
centers which I find behavioral
health interventions were set
and what is that we're gonna
health budget
with an increase of three
million in their special
appropriations that you'll have
you'll see in a little bit for
purchasing
Google behavioral health vans as
well that was a topic of
discussion for LHS Senator.
with those bands be so specific
to the schools Research yes the
school based health centers Mr
Chairman representative thank
you thank you very much
Representative.
Okay members I don't see any
other questions we're gonna ask
for a motion to adopt the public
school work report.
Mr speaker I move that we adopt
the public schools support
workgroup report.
Okay it's been moved by by our
Dixon so I Representative
Sarinana there any opposition to
adopting the public school
workgroup okay please show
three members in opposition.
Okay that let's.
Let's do that and we're going to
save all the other explanations
until after we go through the
rest with that we and please to
ranking member Armstrong is what
we're gonna adopt this now.
first Representative Pettigrew
then ranking member arms thank
you chairman and and I
appreciate all the effort that
was put in to putting these
numbers together I just want to
reiterate.
Having a goal of.
Forty hours without having a
target on what we're teaching to
makes no sense to me funding
something just to get us the
number of hours with that.
The goal in mind.
creates a problem for me.
Chairman over the last a full
well with this budget now five
years we will have grown the
budget for public support system
by fifty three point seven
percent and I haven't seen the
changing in our educational
system to support that I do
support what we're doing with
respect money for teachers and
for instructed structure most
staff for what we're doing for
CTE side of this I support all
that but with the what I can't
support this growth in the
system this under performing and
setting targets the numbers and
hours that has no object to it
thank you thank you
representative Representative
ranking member Armstrong thank
you Mr Chairman just a quick
note that I I really I voted
against the eleven forty hours
in the beginning all voted
against it now a lot of my
schools don't like it
they didn't like the extended
learning didn't opt into that
and now it's being mandated I
they just don't like it but I
appreciate all the hard work
thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much remember options okay
members we're going to continue
on we're going now turn we have
here in our large sort a large
packets
we're going to go to other
recommended agency adjustments.
Permanent director page nine.
Thank you Mr well this.
And I I think I might ask Mr so
we the start talking this
through work through.
So members what we're going to
see here
These are many.
As of course we've heard every
agency here over the last
several weeks these are gonna be
the updates that have come from
that work and so we're we're
gonna want to go through the
sufficiently as folks have
questions on pieces will take
those up will look to adopt
these recommendations after
we've gone through the entirety
of these recommended it just
means.
Mr Chairman saw work through
this worksheet and just so you
know that there's a supporting
documentation behind each one of
these
For more detail based on what
your initial action was and then
the changes to that are on this
where should I go through so
these are really drafting
instructions for staff to go and
prepare the bill for you the
first change you have not taken
up legislative building services
to make this a general
appropriations act we recommend
you it adopt the LFC
recommendation with an increase
of two hundred thousand that
would bring this agency in line
with the other legislative
agency budgets that you and
acted in house bill one
just real quick that go down the
line an additional fifty
thousand for the judicial
standards commission for salary
benefits same thing that we you
asked about the one FTE for the
court of appeals and a hundred
thousand.
A. O. C. at two hundred twenty
one thousand for supervised
exchange visitation the district
attorney's representative my
Toyota would be spread for each
of the actual district
attorney's together a raise of
five percent
On top of that what to get him
in the back of the bill the
Attorney General of the fifth
district attorney was the only
district attorney after the
action that you took
that was below the current year
budget and this will bring them
above that in thank thank you
very much let let's sort of go
will go through will stop there
I want to pause to see if
there's any questions from
members.
Percent Pettigrew.
Thank you chairman online twenty
okay let's we're sorry
Representative Pettigrew we're
just going line one through one
through this at eight we just
we're doing these first first
few pause and then we'll
continue okay I don't see any
questions line one through eight
these as Mr Saly said include
the mainly focused on the
justice related I do have one
question some look at the
district attorney's I do.
We give them one hundred thirty.
A thousand in February the
requests for thirty.
that's what we're that's where
we landed.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
okay please continue on Mr
chairman when you review the
department of finance and
administration there were some
differences when it came to
funding for salary benefits and
some of their divisions address
that with four hundred thousand
here and the committee had an
interesting closing cap on civil
legal services of extra two
hundred thousand
that's separate from which
you'll see in the special
appropriations Mr chairman of
the governor had requested
increases for their staffing
cost at five hundred thousand
you the committee had initially
taken the executive director for
the department of information
technology which was
significantly below the LFC when
it came to cybersecurity this
would restored three of the four
million on top of the executive
director for cyber security and
then you had a workgroup look at
coming closer on the secretary
of state that six hundred ten
thousand for their collections a
cost.
And then tourism and economic
development increases of two
hundred eighty four thousand for
staffing and then increasing
economic development for J. to
the incubators and their Film
Office right let's pause there.
I don't think questions please
continue you the committee had
taken the executive on the
medical board and the board of
nursing one of those
recommendations I was actually
below what their actual costs
are so that a bump the
recommendation is to use other
state funds which is the source
of revenue for these agencies to
close the gap for some of their
cost related to I. T. and other.
Cultural affairs you heard a
plea from the department of for
their custodial staff another
museum cost of four hundred
thousand
energy and minerals and there is
a detail high level if you
wanted to if you're interested
and agency of increased to one
point three million for mainly
oil conservation and state
parks.
there's a move in specials to
fund the inter tribal ceremonial
Commission through a special ed
DFA and then allowing this to be
reduced and I think there's
legislation working its way
through to make that change to
have the funding go through
local government to DFA.
Office of state engineer for
cannabis enforcement oversight
activities and hundred fifty
eight Commission indefinite hard
of hearing some of their
revenues not coming in as strong
and recommendations to replace
that with general fund is a
hundred fifty thousand.
And inferred early childhood
education.
I guess I'll stop there and then
we can probably go into more
detail on some of these next
ones Mr chairman if you want
yeah that that sounds great so
let's uh members any questions
going through the commission for
the deaf and hard of hearing.
Representative Pettigrew.
Chairman by first question would
be online twenty.
Why are we putting cannabis
enforcement oversight activities
in the office of the OSCE.
Mister chairman Senator.
These the grow houses use a lot
of water and they need permits
from the engineer for that water
uses my understand.
The chairman and and director
this is more permit based not
enforcement base.
Well they go hand in hand a
permit
comes with the allowance of the
amount of water rights and then
the state engineers is must
ensure that committees are using
the amount of water rights that
they have the rights to use.
And this was an exit this is
Susan that they drive the LFC
wreck which was higher but this
was in the executive recommend
to you know let's see this was
requested by the internet.
Chairman one last question
Just respected all of this I see
several different the state
descriptions on the side for PS
and be and and come back through
this and I look at these
requests and many of these
departments.
push money back and are asking
for it again so I'm not that
confuses.
That confuses me thank you know
and specifically line twenty
seven Mexico Environment
Department asking for exactly
what they transferred out.
The twenty twenty two.
That that makes no sense to me
I'm not sure why we would budget
something like that and then
give them the ability to
transfer in use for other
purposes thank you chairman
thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew next we
gonna go Representative Lujan
and Ruth.
Thank you Mr
and just to address that was
looking at one twenty seven as
well and purposes and and just
as a no I think we're going to
we've stopped at line twenty one
I was gonna go we're gonna go
through and.
Thank you Mr sensitive land of
the state engineer one hundred
and fifty thousand that's for
the FTEs Mr chair is that
correct yes thank you Mr from
thank you very much for them
Lujan Representative sent off
of.
Thank you Mr chairman by
nineteen EMNRD so is that the
level in here for yes yes
Charles can you point to that.
See page twenty six.
Mr Chairman.
Okay members packets bottom of
it so themselves safe page
twenty six.
Right.
Great thank you Representative
seven.
Any other questions before we
continue.
Casing Charles can you go to
Think it's remote sorry
Representative Garcia.
That.
Okay but let's let me ask Mr so
we need to go through aging high
level and then we're going to
turn to the sheep to look at
the.
Mr over aging that
recommendation coming back to
you is to add a million dollars
for the aging network.
Okay and now let's turn to that
high level.
The page thirty one.
Okay one page thirty one is in
the far right the million to the
aging network being increased so
this is line seventeen correct
and Mr Chairman this is
accompanied by an eight million
dollar special appropriation to
the ageing Department that
addresses of their wide range of
activities they're trying to
provide more services right
thank you Mr having we'll get to
those later yes Representative.
About the.
The bridge Division brought up
is because you know in good
committee we've talked about we
in this region and you know and
I don't know for million dollars
for the what they need and I
don't know how to up a little
bit but there's no reason why.
Senior citizens have to
distribute on services thank you
Mr thank you very much for thank
you versus Mr I this is a
thirteen percent increase so
combined with the eight million
dollars in effect this would
make almost a twenty five
percent increase in funding
available to them next fiscal
year.
This is a very significant
expansion and representative
will will recall of course that
the Senate will take this
legislation I think the the
budget up here shortly as well.
Many other questions okay let's
continue our chairman I turn
your attention one page before
that early childhood on page
thirty.
This is a.
You recall the executive had
recommended sizable increases
for this department but through
nonrecurring specials where as
LFC recommended that the money
from the constitutional
amendment go into this the
department's operating budget
and the main differences were
how much we're being funded for
pre K. which the constitution
funded and how much was
available for childcare
assistance I just turn your
attention to the prioritization
at HFC scenario has for moving
closer to increasing child care
assistance particularly for
infants and toddlers
so you'll note on line twelve
rather than overhead fund that
into services online thirteen.
The department received an extra
fifteen million in the latest
congressional appropriations
bill for child care assistance
the recommendation is to swap I
of that out and let them have
the rest for child care
assistance.
And then you will also see on
page line seventy one Mr
chairman the recommendation to
accommodate the executive's
priorities is to adjusted
distribution from the early
childhood Trust Fund two hundred
and twenty five million to
accommodate more childcare
spending as well as some for.
The early childhood system
coalitions which was a priority
for the department with that Mr
Chairman a happy to answer
questions.
Thank you very much so the okay
members
we obviously we had a of lengthy
I think very good hearing with
ECECD.
Here we see an adjusted
scenario.
Any questions from members.
Okay I don't see any questions
right I thank you for the great
work on this and turn your
attention back to simpler
changes starting on page nine
back to that table Mr chairman
well sorry Human Services
noticeable.
So let's go to.
Thirty eight thirty two.
So if you recall during your
hearing
the initial action was to take
the LFC recommendation but the
department had a new Medicaid
forecast come out after the
executive an LFC recommendations
were made that forecast provided
significant savings
opportunities for both
reinvestment or use in other
areas of the budget this
scenario would bump up the rate
increases for hospitals and
rural FQHCs by six and a half
million online for.
There's an additional revenue
that was not built into the
project projection that is built
into our revenue projection for
stronger gross receipts taxes
that are used to partially fund
Medicaid so bringing that extra
money and
online seventeen frees up
general fund so that's why it's
a negative.
There is a desire to back fill
the use of the health care
affordability fund online
eighteen so that's a cost to the
general fund of twenty four
million.
And then there was a
recommendation to offset some of
that by using one time tobacco
money that's available online
nineteen.
There is also included a
recommendation online thirty to
build in funding for
residential these would be
community based crisis
management in transition
services for individuals.
At a cost of five hundred
thousand.
On the next page thirty three
an extra seven hundred thousand
for HSD is income support
operations that some discussion
on specials about that yesterday
same thing with child support
enforcement increasing that by
over a million
and then expanding the local
behavioral health collaboratives
so totaled savings of twelve
point nine million hello the LFC
recommendation which allows you
to provide many of the other
items we've discussed Mr
chairman.
Okay thank you for going through
that
And with the updated projections
and so re prioritization based
upon the hearing Kate any
questions from members here.
Can see any.
Okay let's continue that we can
really go back to page nine Mr
chairman.
Additional guardianship
guardianship slots fifty PC
online twenty six of three
hundred thousand
the divide the Environment
Department again as prioritized
staffing or funding they think
they can fill those positions
now will continue monitoring
that for you Mr chairman the
office of Family representation
this is a new office trying to
project what it's costs are
going to be for doing a
dramatically different kind of
approach for the services has
been a challenge but there's an
extra four hundred thousand for
that your call in the CYFD
budget there were minor
differences funding the S.
additional FTE that the
department of believes it needs
and what need to work hard to
fill but this extra three
hundred thousand combined with
what you've already done in the
budget would allow them funding
for fifty additional case worker
positions in child protective
services crime victims of an
issue four hundred thousand for
sexual assault services a
hundred eighty eight thousand
for small business development
center partnerships the Santa Fe
community college to work with
New Mexico tech the compensation
numbers you see before you we've
reconciled these with DFA to
tighten up what each one would
cost in those of the adjustments
I'll talk later you'll have a
chance to look AT the opioid
settlement appropriations in
detail and then there's two
other changes in the special
section one is an additional
five hundred thousand for study
to analyze the financial
provider market place and put
impacts of expanding Medicaid
eligibility and the other is
adjusting the severance tax
permanent fund transfer to pay
for many of the items that
you've got increases and
specials that you'll see in a
little bit.
Okay thank you very much
we're gonna go to Representative
Lujan representative Garcia than
Representative setting up.
Great so.
Representative Lujan please
chair so that
the last two things that those I
think you just said Charles the
study is that the Medicaid study
we talk about thank you and
that's.
Okay great and then is there any
adjustment for the town of.
Yes where's that Mr chair.
This so the child can we go back
to HSD.
There is an additional seven
hundred thousand in general fund
for the income support office
there were no adjustments from
the LFC recommendation for the
use of tanap which already
included an increase for the
cash benefit as well as the use
of tenet for
child welfare prevention
services and CYFD from the free
that pre K. funding and then
some adult higher education
adult basic education increases
as well ten there is increased
there okay thank you Mr thank
you very much.
Next representative Garcia the
numbers of setting up thank you
Mr chairman on online twenty
nine of wavy.
the the one three hundred
thousand dollar for fifty
positions.
That would my math to read it's
about six thousand for position
we're going to do six thousand
positions Mr Chairman
representative Garcia with the
additional three hundred
thousand plus what LESC had
already recommended in your
adopted budget that we those two
amounts would allow them to hire
fifty additional FTE Mr chairman
of these are.
What is the vacancy rate.
With CYFD now.
Fill the vacancy rate how are
they going to hire fifty more
people.
Mr chairman that's going to be a
significant challenge that
they're going to need to meet
they made a pretty state
that was their top priority in
this budget three of funding you
funded it so monitoring their
ability to fill at those
positions will be of importance
this text interim Mr chairman
to digest content online because
they get to read this full high
fifty one of fifty more people
they can do what they got
another one more thing Mr
chairman but after that funding
if they don't feel fifty
positions.
if they don't do a budget
adjustment to spend it and
contracts are on other things
than it would revert back to the
general fund.
Thank you for the thank you for
thank you very much
representative Garcia next
representative of setting up
then Representative accrues.
the department department so I
went to the high level right
page.
Okay that they needed the
business operations operations
improvement they needed money
four million two in order to get
money from I have the I. R. A.
and the B. I. L.
to get millions for water
funding.
Is that anywhere in here.
I believe representative
Sarinana there there are a
number of specials for the New
Mexico environment department
that might be specifically that
are focused on that match this
is just this is for the record I
think so I think yes and we'll
go through that when we get to
the special.
Absolutely thank you
Representative daler Cruz thank
you Mr chairman under thirty
crime victims reparation
commission
that includes funding is the
additional funding specifically
specifically for sexual assault
victims.
Mr Chairman representative yes
thank you Mr thank you very much
Representative LA Cruz okay go
briefly to Representative Lujan
for a second time and then
Representative someone please
thank you to different times or
Mr creative again with the
garment
Department
on that four million dollars in
going into the specials for is
any of that.
Going to be able to use for
operational Mr chair.
Mr so late we're we're not yet
to the specials Mr so if you
want to answer that just sort of
high level and we go to
resentment.
Mr Chairman representative of I
think when we get to the
specials we should address the.
So nothing it Mr chair nothing
in the recurring for additional
operational for that gentleman
there this recommendation for
the app Environment apartments
and eleven percent increase for
the general fund and I would
know thank you Representative
Lujan we're adding an extra two
hundred fifty thousand here as
well recall the LFC
recommendations was actually
higher than the executive
recommendation Mr chair create
that but I think we really need
to be paying a little more close
attention to that move and
second what representative
Sarinana talk about that four
million dollars for for
incurring all the work that's
going to be needed in that in
that department thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much
Representative Montoya thank you
Mr chairman a.
Follow up on the the question a
second go by Representative
Garcia and that is we have a.
We've had several requests for
more FTEs
even though
a lot of money was reverted this
last year and a lot of money was
moved to the category of just
other.
And I have a concern Mr Chairman
about that practice
it appears as if just we we Fund
all these FTEs and then we have
more FTEs then more money and
then just with a request to DFA
within within the department
that dollars can be just
transferred without really any
legislative oversight whatsoever
annual report that we get is
that the at the beginning of the
next year and that shows how
much money was move to some
other department without really
even giving anything back to the
to this body
or even LFC in the interim and
let me just I'll just ask for a
quick comment from Mr Abbey and
it will go back to unless you
have a but I do have a good.
Generally the Mr Chairman
generally they don't have
authority to move money to
another department we're not
allowed to another department
but within the department
towards other expenses and it
just seems like if we're over
funding in every department
there be no reason to use this
to transfer to another
department for over funding
FTEs and then they can just use
the money as a as a P. bank
without any oversight on our
part and really no report other
than what we get and it says
move to and other categories we
don't know what that category
what those categories are.
and so Mister chairman I I.
I believe I'm probably gonna
introduce legislation this year
that will ask DFA since the
request have to go through DFA
if they're moving money if
they're allowing money moved
where those dollars went so we
could have further oversight not
just us but the legislature I'm
just really concerned about that
practice and I'm really
concerned.
That we don't fund all of the I
mean we fund all these FTEs.
And there's a lot of money left
over and then we're and we've
heard several departments talk
about.
Needing more.
FTEs it just it really just
doesn't make any sense to quote
Randall Representative Pettigrew
that doesn't make any sense to
me and I think we we need to get
if we're gonna be an oversight
body we need to have oversight
thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much.
But Mr so a place just to
clarify for the committee the
there is a budget adjustment
request process where an agency
can move money between the
categories the appropriating
within a program usually not
across programs and usually not
across agencies would agency
does submit that budget
adjustment request to DFA LFC
also gets a copy it has a ten
day window to review that
and the director does have
statutory authority to object
but not to stop the objection
raises it to the level of the
committee the committee holds at
a public hearing that delays the
implementation of it but it does
not stop that we do have a
monthly report that we give to
the LFC showing how money is
being how budgets are being
adjusted throughout the interim
and then that results in the
final report that you're seeing
in in the the last page but that
is a concern that the.
That's happened regularly
monitors how much money is being
moved out of those categories
for other purposes and what are
they spending the other money
on.
Thank you Mr chairman just
appears as well after the fact
after they've made decisions and
I I don't believe that is to me
that is we are seating the power
of the legislative body to the
administration and I and I think
every legislator should be
concerned about that thank you
very much month by
Representative Allison please.
Thank you Mr chair.
I don't know if this is the
appropriate time passes so Mr
chair but we have a bill that
passed the department of energy
for energy committee and that
was so.
Relative to the San Juan
generating station clean we had
ask for five hundred thousand to
be of.
Allocated to the department of
energy and also to and
How how is how is that process
it's kind of similar to what
Representative Montoya is
asking.
Where does that get included in
the budget after the bill was
passed there for next year's
budget.
Thank you representative Allison
the we'll have to see the
details I think it's house the
one forty two yes thank you so
Representative what will look at
the details of house bill one
forty two we see a number in for
instance we funded additional
money for EMNRD in a few areas
including their energy
conservation and management
division that might be
applicable to house bill one
forty two but these
these were recurring.
changes that we've just gone
through across those those
programs so it's not yet tied to
any specific bill thank you Mr
chair thank you very much for
percent also.
Okay
I don't see any other changes oh
sorry Representative Brown
please.
Thank you Mr chairman I'd like
to just touch on the subject of
creating technical education and
asked the question Mr chair of
the panel how much of the money
that's been scheduled is in
recurring.
How much is in nonrecurring Mr
chair.
The way back to school so Mister
chair yeah I'm looking at the
high level for public schools
support it's the second page of
the page in our package.
One seventy four sister
technical education and nothing
is provided there but that's a
recurring section is my
understanding so nothing
recurring.
I flip the page to page three
line ninety acre technical
education and there's the twenty
million but it's nonrecurring is
my understanding and then
further down on the page one one
thirty five for technical
education there's twenty million
not quite sure if that's
recurring and non recurring so
just the impact of the question
Mr chair how much is recurring.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Brown those are
technically nonrecurring
appropriations but career
technical education is one of
the allowable uses of the at
risk funding and you've increase
that another thirty two million
in this recommendation and
that's up to about over three
hundred million now
on a recurring basis in the SCG.
Mr Chairman Mr so we so
appreciate that doesn't mean
it'll end up there though I
think our school districts need
to know that they have of source
of funding for protect that will
be there in the years to come
and if it's a one time shot
which with a nonrecurring
portion here is and I don't
think that gives them the wrong
way that they need and the
assurance they need that they
can start ramping up those
programs so Mr chair that's just
my observation I just wanted to
share it thank you very much of
the round think we should also
point out that there is an
additional set aside in our
public school capital outlay
budget so there
what will closely monitor how
this money is drawn down over
the next several years thank the
strong likelihood is that it'll
take multiple years but will
will closely monitor it for
sure.
Representative Representative
Trujillo.
Thank you Mr chair this quick
I'm looking at page fifty the
higher a department I don't see
anything in the same I just
can't see it the what did we end
up doing with opportunity
scholarships.
Mr Chairman the higher rate
Hackett is not in this package
because you've already taken
action on it but you did
increase the opportunity
scholarship in your Friday
action six twenty three million
recurring and then you've got a
nonrecurring appropriation that
we think close the gap with some
guard rails on how they treat
the bridge scholarship.
Thank you Mr chair so the guard
built specifically do what.
Not paid Mr chairman for the
bridge scholarship for lottery
students.
Rick Scott to ship in more
recent those were historically
institutional financial aid
resources used for lottery
students.
Okay thank you Mr thank chair
thank you Representative
Trujillo okay Representative
Lujan and then we're gonna wrap
this up because we set out to go
to the specialist.
Thank you Mr chair just to
address the H. E. D. and the
opportunity scholarship it's we
we did increase that Mr chair
but also the guardrails
I had asking questions and
in my question my concern with
when we were in our as a
committee was that this would
decrease access for first time
students which we saw a ten
percent increase during this
past a fiscal year my my
question was answered I got some
information this could those
guardrails to potentially
tender nine thousand students
new students coming into the
first time here as college
students so I just wanted to
note that and say that maybe we
need to take another look at
that Mr thank you thank you
we've adopted that subcommittee
workgroup.
Okay I don't see any other
questions.
We're gonna go ahead and and
asked for a motion to adopt our
recommended HSD adjustments from
by Terry Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
that we adopt the.
HSD adjustments.
K. to move I I stared six and
seconded by Representative
signing on a thirty opposition
to that motion.
Please show Representative
Montoya in opposition thank you.
Okay now we're gonna go to page
forty one this is the
recommendation for opioids
settlement appropriations
there's a spreadsheet on page
forty two Mr chairman.
That if you look at the proposed
FY twenty fourth opioid column.
That's the proposal before you
on how to use the twenty million
that the state expects to get
Virtually on a recurring basis
for quite some time from large
settlements there's.
New Mexico well the they've
already received.
A hundred and fifty million for
the last six months or so so
it's alright there are
expectations of more what is the
idea of using the non recurrent
Fund built in about a hundred
fifty and and Representative.
Spending level of twenty million
per year a sustainable given
morning received respect to for
sure.
Right thank you for that
explanation so members before we
go into this and a big thanks to
a by projects and others who
work closely on the specific.
Based upon the fund balance were
sort of confidently saying that
we will have twenty million
dollars annually from this area
to put into programming for for
the program that we're going to
go into so even though this
isn't a guaranteed every year
will.
New money will come into it.
We're we're confident that this
is an amount that we can budget
every year at this point.
Okay Mr fully can you walk us
through briefly
just real quick the
recommendation is for three and
a half million for medication
assisted treatment through the
department of health and it also
includes a focus at those types
of treatment modalities for
tribal areas in HSD
really a focus on using this
money for evidence based health
interventions including
increasing the linkages housing
supports there's a million in
HSCs recommendation there's
another part of nonrecurring
money out there as well
expanding the the screening
brief intervention and referral
to treatment for substance abuse
disorders at two million
and expanding the certified
community behavioral health
clinics at one and a half
million this would also allow
for using
the opioid money instead of
general fund for a safe care
which is an evidence based home
visiting program for families
involved in child protective
services as well as boosting
funding specifically for the
plans of safe care for
drug is exposed in addicted
babies
piloting wellness rooms in
schools using some of this also
for infant mental health and for
child care assistance which
provides that service for kids
that are at risk of are in
foster care due to Drug issues
as well as providing some money
for provider training and a
child psychiatric hospital Mr
chairman.
Great thank thank you very much.
Turn two okay we're gonna go to
Representative and then ranking
member Armstrong percent Lujan
please thank you Mr and I want
to say thank you for those that
worked on this these are these
are really
The best uses here but I have
one question I have on.
Legislation coming forward to to
look at how we can expand of the
opioid
program into safe site use
centers is this would this be
included with any of this
language we have provided here
like the the programming if if
it were to pass Mister chair
Mister chair representative that
would be need to be in the
departments being operating
budget for public health is
where they do those types of
activities but it's not included
in this list thank you Mr chair
so.
There's not an appropriation to
the legislation as it stands I'm
just asking with the language
available here would it be able
to be used for any of these
programs Mr chair.
Mr Chairman harm reduction
through state so I think it'll
exchange is not one of these
items.
Thank you Mr thank you
Representative Lujan ranking
member Armstrong thank you Mr
chairman I see on line twenty
the childcare this is an
additional five million.
Can you tell me the total amount
that goes into childcare systems
and is this for public and
private this is Mr chairman the
child care assistance program is
mainly operated by child thank
you take care agencies its pre
K. when you get the schools
involved and yes this is in
addition an additional five
million dollars and I think with
the scenario with federal funds
and all the different revenue
sources were up to almost two
hundred ninety two million
dollars.
For child care assistance.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I don't I'm all for child care
assistance but I don't know is
this an expansion or how do we
know there's there's not enough
there for the need Mr Chairman
the Representative Armstrong to
Department as ask for money to
do a rather large twenty plus
percent rate increase for
providers to make revenue
available to pay their workers
frontline workers more they have
an assumption of six higher
resumption and what we're
funding in the budget for
enrollment growth the LFC is
been recognizing that there may
be enrollment growth pressures
for infants and toddlers but
there should be decreasing
enrollment pressures for pre
school age students since we're
finding so much more pre K. and
definitely for school age
students and for funding a lot
more after school program almost
some years close to half of the
state of the of the children on
this program are school aged.
Okay thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much for a
ranking member Armstrong percent
Garcia please.
I thank you Mr chairman unlike
three you have for medication
assisted treatment for Preble
members needed to opioid
you know I matter Mister chair I
have of ten chapters in my
district and all the people
there are crying for help
because opioid addiction in the
reservation is huge and you know
I don't think that a million
dollars and cover the needs for
these people out there well we
have to chapters of a decision
to you lose a hundred thirty
five chapter in the evolution
and not including my my Pueblo
that I represent their crying
about it too because the the old
food edition is huge everywhere
not just in the mix it is.
with that Mr chairman on money
nine you an open up some clinics
for you have a.
In the five hundred dollar
expertise can you can be located
at or are there going to be any
clinics
reservation lands.
Mr Chairman
Representative Garcia many of
these clinics behavior health
clinics already exist all across
the state including in many
rural communities
there are new standards that the
status setting and this money
will help
work with those clinics to meet
the higher standards to make
sure they've got comprehensive
services that are available for
the people accessing them and at
those sites of an a motion based
you know in my whole district
that covers six counties and I
will have one clinic internals
comics maybe the in the county
of Bernalillo I do did you know
I don't cover the city but a
line areas don't have this
the facilities and we really
really need to look at these
issues because the the addiction
problem is everywhere not just.
Thank you Mr Lee's thank you
thank you very much.
Representative bila Cruz thank
thank you Mr.
Gentleman this is a fairly
worthy list as far as I can tell
but how was this list of
activities derived.
Mr Abbey please.
We've seen this opportunity four
months looking at the funding
command it it really came in the
November December in significant
ways so it wasn't general
inflected in the agency budget
for.
So Mister chairman.
You know for for almost a month
now you working on base agency
budgets that go a long way to
addressing the state's health
care needs with the for example
the Medicaid budget is up eighty
five million for rate increases
it's a strong budget
recommendations for health care
then along comes this opioid
funding and and I do all these
these amounts as icing on the
cake of already robust budgets
for health care mental health
provider rate increases so LFC
staff have my own this funding
for a while it was not requested
by the executive it was not
recommended by LFC the last
couple weeks staff came up with
a kind of a broad list of
everything we could think of
thinking about the based budgets
where they were we're extra
money might help like link
linkages for example being in
there you heard a lot of
conversation like you just isn't
enough LFC at a million for
linkages and and that was an
increase over five hundred
thousand but there was many many
members want to grow that so
this was an opportunity for LFC
staff to recommend to your
chairs and leadership additional
funding that could supplement
was what was already a strong
base budget recommendations so
was LFC staff working with your
chair vice chair.
She was chairman largely came
from your staff correct the menu
did that I would action of
projects did not thank thank you
Mr Slee percent of the cruise
this it came through our
discussions we did have a
working group for this as well
in addition to the other pieces
in consultation with our office
staff a number of these ideas
have come through in the
hearings have been put together
by the workgroup as far as
allocating specific amounts to
individual programs thank you Mr
chairman as I said I think it's
a really list I was curious I
was direct thank you thank you
very much for Santa Cruz okay
Representative Garcia for the
second time and we're gonna go
to adoption.
I do want to clarify one thing
my question are not directed LFC
staff when we go to doing a good
job in the I really appreciate
that do you have a question of
coming from a constituents as to
what happened but not directed
to anybody particularly thank
you Mr and Representative Garcia
members it is important for us
to raise questions here that
that is a core part of our job
and so so we that that's a very
important part of of the state
of what we do okay with that
we're gonna go and ask for a
motion to adopt the
recommendation for opioid
settlement appropriations.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
that we adopt the proposed order
opioid revenue spending plans
okay it's been move I stirred
six and second by Representative
a cruise there any opposition to
adopting the settlement
appropriations.
I don't see any opposition so.
Okay now members turn to page
forty four.
Mr Chairman these are just
technical adjustments and
languages just wants that are
needed to make the bill accurate
with what you had wanted to do
an example of that is on line
for where house bill three had
adopted a higher revenue amount
and the transfer from the techs
and Revenue Department we need
to reconcile that and attacks
and Revenue Department part of
the budget.
There was language in the Ms in
some cases where you adopted the
executive that I didn't have the
language and recommending that
you need a language like for the
transfer and Fund
R. LD.
There was language that may not
have made it into the LFC
recommendation that needed to be
in there
There was language Fleck for
early childhood that needs to be
a house bill two to account for
the distribution from the school
permanent fund.
That's in there there is
language that was part of the
public school work group
that did not make it on that she
not backsliding on the amount of
instructional time being
provided.
And then there was language that
should have been attached to
certain appropriations because
they were not being made from
the appropriation contingency
fund.
On page forty five you can see
another one of those with
economic development that was
brought in from the executive
but the and should have been
using our phone in the LFC
recommendation.
clarifying in the the language
was incorrect in your higher
education department packet that
the department can use though
funding from last year for both
work study for students in high
demand agree fields as well as
for the community college and
regional industry recognized
credential programs
And then making sure that the
language for the stem students
is limited to stand.
With that Mr chairman it
happened and in interviews.
and then you've also got a memo
a separate memo for the
department of public safety
before you that out a request
that you take action on its part
of this spreadsheet this just
you took the LFC recommendation
but the analyst worked with the
department to recommend some
changes within the existing LFC
funding recommendation between
different programs.
No dollar change overall for
department of public safety.
With that Mr chairman members
this is a cage fifty four in our
packets.
Okay thank you for those
Representative Montoya please.
Thank you Mr chairman
I was looking I understood that
for the the NCOs was adopted a
would that be on this I I'm I'm
not seeing it it's Mr chairman
it's on the HSD Richie in your
packet.
And there okay thank you Mr
thank you Representative
Montoya.
Additional questions regarding
technical adjustments.
Regum member option thank you Mr
chairman I was curious if there
was a under higher ed for in in
MDA with that being in this
packet or in another Mr Chairman
if you made a change to that it
would have been in the higher
end packet that you dropped it
on Friday these are changes from
that adopted a package that look
out over the weekend okay thank
you Mr thank you for.
Thank you Mr chairman Charles
one twelve on that page forty
four.
Tell me what that language does
as far as in the description
regarding eleven forty right
that's what I know what we had
discussed in the workgroup of
not backsliding if you're going
to increase the amount of
instructional time there's some
districts that are above that
amount they're still outstanding
discussion on how much could be
used for professional
development
and I think there isn't.
Some discussion between the
chair of this committee and and
house education that that was
not the intent of that bill to
allow districts to go backwards
but it's to help them move
forward with meeting and eleven
forty requirement so thank you
Mr chairman and my question
really is so what you're saying
in this thing is a one that this
the the model of how that was
going to be addressed as far as
ours are the is still something
we talked about right what
you're saying Mr Chairman is
really about let's say that I
have a love in sixty right now
so this language to basically
say is I cannot cut down to the
eleven forty that would be
maintaining the current counters
that correct Mr chairman
chairman Representative that's
correct.
Thank you Mr thank you very much
it's about.
Okay I don't see any other
questions so we'll ask for a
motion to adopt our House
Appropriations of finance
committee technical adjustments.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
that we adopt the house
appropriations and finance
technical adjustments
recommendations.
Right there's a motion.
Okay it's been moved by by your
Texans by Representative
Sarinana thirty opposition to
adopting are recommended
technical adjustments.
Saying none there.
Page fifty six Mr chairman this
is the time where you put in the
transfer authority in case
revenues come in short giving
the the governor a limited pot
of money to be able to make
appropriations hole before
needing to call you in for a
special session of the hands
happy to answer any questions.
Thank you very much any
questions on this Representative
month with.
Mr chairman actually I'm
wondering I know this last
year's GST moved a hundred
million dollars to back fill
shortfalls in the public
education health insurance fund.
this was not this provision that
we pass every year with the that
in use that provision to do that
correct no Representative mind I
look into Mr Abbey Mr Saly to
confirm that the answer is no
okay so Mister chairman I I
guess I would ask what authority
by what authority did GSD have
to be able to move a hundred
million dollars to backfill
shortfalls in the public and
employees health insurance fund
that that thank you
Representative Montoya that's
not part of this what we're
looking at if there's any brief
answered this is something I I
think we'll the entire committee
is intent upon taking up in more
detail as we go through the rest
of the session and into the
interim.
But but and so it's not part of
of this transfer authority I'd
we.
Maybe that's me
the EDD is an item of interest
for the committee thank you Mr
chairman so we will take it up
this session and in the interim.
Hi.
Go Mr Saly there there is
a supplemental in a special
appropriation trying to help
close that gap for the public
employee health care benefits
plan what's been going on is
that department doesn't have
enough money in that account and
they've been over drafting it
without sufficient funds which
is illegal.
Okay so it also appears to be
somewhat illegal for them to
spend that money without
authority some thank you Mr
chair thank you very much for
that month with Kate
Representative Chatfield.
Is this as we every year yes but
this year it's been over we have
Representative Sheffield this
this does not concern that this
is not the source of the
discussion with the General
Services Department so this has
nothing this authority has
nothing to do with that
conversation this.
I believe Mr chair there's been
several other places where
appropriations have been made
that did not come through the
legislature through a special
session which should of our
current
multiple type of things like
that happen this year this does
not have anything to do with any
of those.
Representative Chatfield enough
thank you but we will take those
others up at another time
Representative Chatfield yes
thank you Mr chair at the.
Hey I don't see any other
questions will ask for adoption
of transfer authority.
Mr chair I would move that the
committee adopts the transfer
authority recommendations.
Okay it's been a motion by by
our Dixon second by
Representative Lujan is their
opposition this motion.
Baso Representative run
opposition.
Kate continuing on.
The gentleman if you want to
turn your attention to the
special spread sheet that looks
like this.
So Mister chairman for every
agency budget hearing
you've also had supplemental in
addition about what their
special request what the special
recommendation was for LFC and
exec you've had multiple public
hearings to review those
recommendations and on
Saturday your workgroup adopted
what's before you I don't know
how you'd like me to proceed if
you're thank you Mr so I we
we've had as Mr fleas thing
we've had to the.
Multi our public conversations
around these specials I think
what I'd like to do is we can
certainly open it up to any
questions from members
Mr sleep can you what I'd like
to do is if you can give us an
overall total.
and also sort of some of the
changes that have been made to
or that the sum total that have
been made to the initial LFC
recommendations.
So.
I need to go to the search.
Mr Chairman the major changes
that you have before you just
made another a change in your
adjustments the severance tax
permanent fund is it eight
hundred fifty million transfer.
So if you look at the totals
with all the transfers it
doesn't give you a good idea
about what the change was but
even pre spending from LFC by
how much would you say David
specials do you have the special
session
Well about twenty million.
Sixteen right.
Right.
Okay members and we and I know
that these will be available the
the weekend we've we've had mall
we've had to pull on camera
hearings about our specials
we've heard from the executive I
would stress also that as we
send this over to the Senate
they there is additional
capacity for them to at least
consider recommendations around
the specials and appropriation
recommendations this was the
largest area of difference
overall in terms of dollar
difference coming into this
session we've made up some
ground and that's where we are
today Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr appreciate the
process and everything I just
wish we had more time to digest
this and I just wanna put that
out there that I understand.
But I don't understand I'm you
want to this committee you know
I'm not I've I've been into you
know as a new HFC member I just
wish we had a little more time
to digest this so that we can we
can go through the process a
little bit more I just I just to
say that because it's a little
frustrating I just want to put
that out there for on the record
to say but I appreciate the time
that everyone is spent on this
but I just feel like
as a new member and a lot of us
are new members on to this
committee that.
I just wish we had more time to
digest and to go through things
as as this process is going on
thank you Mr.
Representative Pettigrew them
access setting and.
Thank you chairman and
Director to understand the.
out of section five.
This list of forty three
projects.
That are different from what was
in the original budget is only
different by.
Sixteen million dollars.
That whatever chairman Mr
chairman Representative I think
that the net change out thirty
five an increase spending.
That right.
Three point thirty four to have
position he's looking at the.
I don't and those are the
authorization Mr Chairman
I think you might be looking at
the language only items that
were.
I think is the next thing to
take up and those are requests
from agencies to extend the life
of an appropriation from the
prior fiscal year.
Thank you thank you thank you
representative Representative
setting on Mr Chairman so.
So between and in eighty so we
do do we get enough for them to
have funding so that they could
leverage
with I the I. R. A. and the B.
I. L. do we have that funding in
here at I guess I just really
need to know did we fund them at
the level they need to be funded
to do what they've already got
to do.
This yes.
Mr Chairman yes Vermont funding
level is above the executive
request and I believe there
seventeen million dollars of
special appropriation to the
apartment Environment Department
which is substantial and they
have opportunities to use some
of that funding for staff and to
the extent related to special.
And they thank you very much Sir
have you had drawn members
attention to page sixteen.
Specifically Representative
setting on an answer to your
questions we've added.
Seven point five million.
Additional.
In order to in many of these
areas and I think we were
advised actually more than that
but we were advised that many if
not all of these have federal
match is connected to them.
In this is page sixteen.
In our specials and
supplementals workgroup
recommendations with we've
adopted.
Mr chair Senator there's federal
matching to cover this so we can
leverage for these other things
the hiring and the idea of
funding thank you Representative
Sarinana I think.
My understanding is that many of
these we increases again.
By seven and a half million
dollars much of that is intended
to help the department leverage
in match additional federal
funds.
So for example Mr chairman
online to twelve two point eight
or.
To match federal funds for
cleanup of Superfund hazardous
waste sites there's also a part
of money at the department of
finance and administration
for general matching as well.
Thank you very appropriated.
And just as another no members
will be getting sort of full
Write ups of the to tally of
funds because we were increasing
the recurring general fund
budget we're investing a
significant amount through
special appropriations and then
in some cases there may be
additional sources of funding so
that was we'll see the the sort
of sum total not just by this in
in a base budget or in a special
but combined so this would be
added to the additional that
came through the base budget
recurring increase.
Okay I just want to know that we
have enough money for them to do
with we've already asked him to
do over the last how many years
that's what I will.
Mr chair I think you're counting
on the executive to make.
That's the beauty of this budget
process the executive asked for
amount of money they think they
recommended LFC mix
recommendation we count very
much on that and many people
want more than the executive
recommends including the cabinet
secretary.
But you know if you use your
committee needs to rely on the
executive budget recommendations
the department finance for those
amounts and you've gone above
that that the executive just
for.
But Mr Chairman if you.
The executive asked for eight
point five and we did two point
five so.
I guess I'm speaking to the
recurring recommendations from
okay.
Thank you Mr thank you
Representative and I think to
your point there will be areas
where the we have fully met with
the executive came into this
with in some cases we've gone
over that including in the
specials in some cases and will
be sending this bill to the
Senate where additional capacity
remains to make recommend
changes from our colleagues in
the state.
Thank you thank you very much
I don't.
Representative Pettigrew for
second time and then
Representative Lujan for a
second time thank you Mr
chairman I want to remind.
Our committee that we have.
Regis our budget the last four
years five years in the garment
Department bile almost a hundred
percent.
And so.
Very significant when you look
at it from from where we were at
two four we've done we have a
nine point eight percent
increase just and budget not
talking about the specials I
think it's more than sufficient
thank you representative
Representative Lujan please.
Access for the second time Mr
chair and I'm just going to kind
of go back and agree with the
Representative Sarinana I think
that we're looking at unfunded
mandates if we don't look at
increasing the business
operations and
At the energy department because
I'm just gonna say that I think
we need a closer look if we need
to work with the Senate to
understand that I hope we do do
that and take that opportunity
but it's not matching up from
our where we are with the with
where are we looking at this
budget
said I just wanted to note that
Mr chair thank you very much
Representative Lujan.
Okay any other questions from
committee members as a regards
our specials and supplementals
workgroup recommendations.
Casing on west for a motion on
our specials and supplementals
workgroup recommendations.
Mr chair of move that the
committee adopts the specials
and supplementals recommendation
workgroup recommendations.
Right there's a motion.
It's been moved by by Sir Dixon
second by Representative Garcia
is their opposition to adopting
that motion.
Replace Representative Pettigrew
in opposition.
Okay and please also show
Representative setting and.
Okay
We're gonna move on to.
Our section five language only
recommendations.
Mr Chairman looks like this.
These are requests from agencies
were you've appropriated
funding.
And they haven't expended all of
it
and we went through a consensus
process with the FAA we talked
about this and you kind of work
work at it I believe the
the recommendation was to go
with all the consensus items
there was one that we did not
recommended that was a two
thousand eighteen appropriation
that still has not been fully
expended by the state can do a
everything else we've
recommended is on this you Mr
chairman.
Thank you very much Mr Bradley.
Representative Cruz thank.
So being fairly new to this
process I special time with the
council services to go over
appropriations are specific to
each of the twelve
and typically agencies are the
ones that request the carryovers
of continuation.
Is that what we're talking about
here or is that a separate
activity Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman representative these
are special appropriations so
section five that were made in
prior years that the they had
expended and so they're asking
for an extension of the of the
time period to fully expand
those funds so is there an
action that we individually have
to take for and this may be
separate from this activity but
for a variety of projects that
were funded is that an action
that we have to take
individually we know the
agencies that were funded Mr
chairman you do have a similar
process when it comes to capital
outlay that you'll want to know
which projects in your district
have been funded that may not
have been fully extended and ask
for that through the re
authorization process is part of
the capital outlay bill these
were only appropriations that
were in previous house bill two
is thank you Mr chairman thank
you very much Representative
Cruz.
Okay let's go on additional
questions as it relates to our
any language recommendation
question.
Right right I don't see any
other.
Percent of the on any part of
the budget are you referring Mr
chair.
We're just on the thank you okay
let let Charles can you get us
to the page number please read.
The language only it's a
separate packet that looks like
this this language.
These are the extensions of
prior year appropriations.
Great.
And we work closely with DFA to
come to a consensus on most of
them and what we have before is
what we're recommending.
Okay so members taken.
No it's.
And then after we do this when
Mr chairman will move to the
bottom language that the
workgroup Mr.
We're getting deep in the weeds
of.
Will to.
Okay I'm gonna ask them for a
motion that we adopt the
language recommendations.
Thank you Mr chair to move that
we adopt the language
recommendations.
Okay it's been moved by by
critics and second by
Representative bila Cruz there
any opposition to that seeing
none we've adopt those let's go
deeper into the.
The for into the weeds of these.
Our next set of pages Mr
chairman our specific budget
adjustment authority for
agencies as we talked about
earlier agencies do have broad
authority in house bill two to
transfer money between the
categories salary and benefits
contracts and other.
they have authority if they've
got other revenues say that fee
revenue to increase that by up
to five percent and then they
have very specific authority for
different types of revenue that
they would bring in for specific
purposes and amounts and that
those would include budget
adjustments to finish out the
current fiscal year that they
would need and they will be
budget adjustment starting at
the next at the beginning of
next school year we typically
recommend limiting how much
budget authority changes you
give HSD starting the budget
next year because you just spent
all this time building I
graduated but if as agencies get
to the middle of the year if
they're recognizing they're
bringing in a lot more revenue
and then they had before built
into their budget and they have
specific types of things that
they want to use it for this is
the authorization for that
sometimes budget adjustments can
be used in times of austerity to
help agencies with more
flexibility you may not have
funded something at the level
that they wanted but they got
some flexibility to move money
around through this process and
with that Mr Chairman a you did
have a workgroup really go into
it go into this in depth I'd be
happy to answer any questions
that folks have otherwise stand
for questions great thank you
very much Mr scally okay we have
members we have this this is for
our.
At please go through at your
leisure.
are there any questions on it
now.
Representative Brown and we've
we visited on this and made
aware of recommendation that we
do it up this as is
Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr chairman so that
that's I think what I just want
clarification on their cell.
Items here that are not
recommended in HSC scenarios so
if we adopt whatever we do here
is we're going with that is that
correct correct representative
row K. thank you.
Representative Baca please thank
you Mr chairman and I think you
kind of addresses order when you
said about that an agency can
make these budget adjustments
and I did you also say that that
we received a report of the LFC
will receive a port for these
requests for budget adjustments
and that the director Mr
chairman the director can
basically object to it as far as
to note that it is that is that
correct Mr chairman Mr Chairman
representative that is correct
all that objection does is
trigger a hearing by the LESC on
the topic it's pretty rare to
get to that usually we can if we
do have a concern about it a
budget adjustment request will
typically sit down with the
agency and if there's a real
problem and bill withdraw it
if there's still a desire to
move forward then they can come
and justify that publicly to the
to the LFC but it would still go
into effect thank you Mr thank
you very much for Sembach.
Kate
I don't see any other questions
so we're going to ask a motion
on it for a motion to adopt the
HDFC recommended budget
adjustment request authorities.
Thank you Mr chair of move that
the committee adopt the
budget adjustment request
authorization workgroup
recommendation.
Okay it's been moved by by your
Dixon thing by Representative
Sarinana there any opposition to
that motion.
Thing then we've adopted that.
Okay members that brings us to
the conclusion of the catch of
of this process we'll go to Mr
Valdez for next order with your
appearance provided the LESC
with drafting instructions with
all these things in here I ask
that you for you.
Point two members.
I'm ready to act as a sounding
board and any technical changes
are changes that are necessary
after that there was in process
thank you Mr Valdez and I want
to point ranking member
Armstrong and myself to be that
to member of the technical
working group alright Sir lower
rate ranking member Armstrong
and myself.
For.
Okay members that it's gonna
concluded for today we'll see
everybody back here after the
floor session to take up one
piece the Senate legislation
thank you all.
