Senator of Armstrong.
Here.
Representative brow I'm here.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Crowder.
Here.
Representative Dixon.
This.
Representative Garcia.
Representative ended up.
Hop when we hit here.
Representative Eli here.
Representative Lara.
Your.
Representative Sappey ana here.
She heard.
Representative swifter.
Here.
Representative Trujillo.
There.
I chair small here.
Madam chair Lundstrom.
I'm here and thank you everybody
And as we see people joining
this zoom will make sure that
there are there noted as being
present today we're gonna start
with the Human Services
department which is agency six
thirty.
What we've asked is that you all
pulled out of the high level of
sheets because some of these
things are going to be just very
difficult to say because the
numbers are so small once you
start saying all the different
components for these a bigger
agencies but for now we're going
to go ahead and start with the
analysts and analysts I wanted
to make sure you telling us what
page of what rate you're
speaking from and then we'll go
to secretary Scrase so analyst
you're up.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is ruby and SQL and I am the
analyst with the legislative
finance committee and my
counterparts today from the
department of finance and
administration is Mr Michael
Michael Regan and we also have
with us from the Human Services
department secretary Scrase
hello introduces both when the
time is appropriate so I'll get
started with page one madam
chair of the currency.
So it looks like this for
everybody.
So we'll start with page one and
kind of just go over the total
numbers and then we'll move to
the high level which is on page
thirteen and it looks sort of
like this if you all want to
have that ready to go with that
chair woman said.
If you turn to page one thank
you look under the sources so
this is all the revenues for the
Human Services Department you'll
see that that total.
Operating budget for the the
Human Services Department was
seven point five billion dollars
so this is a large agency at
receives a lot of federal funds
which overall add that to that
really significant number that
the big part of our overall
state economy.
If you look to the the
differences in general fund.
You will see that the LFC
recommend an additional amount
in general fund as sixty seven
million eight hundred fifty six
point five so the LFC
recommendation for HSD is
basically sixty eight million
higher in general fund we'll go
through that and the LESC
recommendation is about three
hundred eighty nine thousand
four hundred dollars lower in
other transfers then the
executive recommendation.
Lastly in revenues you'll see a
large number of different at
three hundred and sixty four
million one hundred and ten
thousand nine hundred dollars
with the LFC being higher by
that amount.
And
we can just let to.
The high level now and will
start at a really high level
talking about where those
differences come from and in
overall revenues it can be it's
basically fall all within the
Medicaid program so
We don't even really need to
look at all the details here
I'll take you to line twenty six
on your high level and you see
there if you look at the out of
the bar this column the LFC
different that is higher by
sixty seven point I basically
that gets to almost all of that
sixty eight when you add in a
piece for Medicaid behavioral
health.
So you see here that the LFC
recommend an additional sixty
eight million basically an
additional general fund for
Medicaid over the executive
recommendation well I want to
draw the committee's attention
to
the other line where we get that
additional piece to get up to
the sixty eight and that is
under
if you look under Medicaid
behavioral health a new look and
line thirty one you see a little
higher amount of the almost half
a million four hundred ninety
three thousand so that ties you
out to the sixty eight million
between those two numbers madam
chair members of the committee
if you also look.
Online thirty six in the little
box right here in the first
column there's an important
piece of information we need to
draw your attention to and put
these numbers into some context
for the committee so
the Human Services Department
Medicaid program does quarterly
projections we're we appreciate
their efforts to do the latest
quarterly projection a few weeks
earlier so we have that data as
we moved into the legislative
session.
And basically.
What that projection indicated
was that for FY twenty two the
agency was projecting at their
requests level and at the
executive level because
basically those are the same at
this point
it was projecting a hundred and
sixty nine dollars shortfall for
FY twenty two in general fund
dollars for the Medicaid program
so that's an important number to
keep in mind
so at where we pointed that out
for the committee is just a
placeholder if you look in line
thirty six the box here in the
first column you'll see about
the third line down it says HSD
projected FY twenty two
shortfall and it says the exact
equals a shortfall of a hundred
sixty nine point six seven
million and the LFC equals a
shortfall of a hundred and one
point sixty four million so I am
looking at more up to just quit
care you know on the on the page
one where we're doing the high
level spreadsheet I think we can
put the that one out we can
share screen on that this more
detailed one I like the way
you're going through it here and
identifying lines because the
general fund transfer.
Line that she's talking about is
on the first page of six thirty
of the so can you pull that up
RubyAnn.
We can share screen on that one.
I I.
It.
that that's not the for yeah
was.
I just think it's important for
the committee to know what we're
looking at here and it's the
first line in general fund
transfers and she's gone through
that to explain the
Far right column of sixty seven
million eight hundred fifty six
and it's all in the medical
assistance or Medicaid priests.
And we can we can keep these
they are are different shapes up
but then we'll just have you
refer back to the more detailed
line by line line item.
Certainly madam chair so I'm.
So we need to give you a little
bit more context give the
committee a little more context
madam chair
so you see this number here the
sixty eight by eight fifty six
point five in the page one of
the different state that the
general fund difference with the
LFC recommendation higher so you
see that type out in the high
level the two pieces between
Medicaid and Medicaid behavioral
health that's where that number
comes from you see that.
indicated before we had
FY twenty two jacketed short
options from the latest at
projections and Human Services
department compiled but there's
another really important piece
of information and
Let me go into just a little bit
of explanation and and and I'm
sure the department will talk
about this as well but
The committee knows the Medicaid
program is N. F. federal
entitlement program states put
in general fund and other
revenues and they leverage
Medicaid the amounts that the
money that states can leverage
on the federal level depends on
basically the poverty level at
the state overall it's based on
a three year average it's called
the federal match rate or it's
called F. map so that's what
you'll hear it I think a lot of
times is the F. map it basically
means that federal matching what
we can drive down with our state
dollars so in New Mexico since
our our overall incomes are
lower in New Mexico and our
overall socioeconomic levels are
lower we had a large federal
match.
So it's on average across
programs that varies depending
on categories about eligibility
for the Medicare program but we
get basically seventy five
percent that's an easy way to
think of it so
now currently there during the
pandemic and under federal
public health emergency orders
all states are getting an
additional six point two percent
federal match so what that
equates to right now in New
Mexico is about an additional
seventy five million dollars in
federal funds and we just found
out last week that the new
administration and at the
federal level has indicated it
plans to extend that additional
six point two percent F. map all
the way through calendar year
twenty twenty one so that means
we can expect to get an
additional and I'm Randy need
that bit about seventy five
million for each quarter so two
more quarters than we had
initially anticipated so July
through as and then September
October through December your
December so we get an additional
hundred and fifty million
dollars and of course a portion
of that has to go to fund the
program so with those additional
pandemic federal matching funds
comes a requirement currently
from the federal government the
state maintain maintenance
effort it's called and what that
means is we can't drop anybody
off the Medicaid rolls so if
there are there on the be
qualified there on they stay on
for the duration of the public
health emergency unless they
remove themselves so that has a
cost associated to it and.
The net impact in state revenues
is basically about you can be
from forty five to forty nine
fifty million dollars that we
came so we think that will have
approximately from ninety four
to a hundred million additional
dollars that will help offset
the shortfall that you see here
on the high level in line thirty
six in the box so that's an
important piece of information
that you need at the store way
as we're going through these
numbers and will need to make
sure we take account for that.
So with that madam chair lift
back to page one so what's up on
the screen.
And we'll start going through
that page one and that the
narrative here and and the
expenditure levels so we just
wanted to give you a little bit
of that context and background
overall for the Medicaid program
since that's really where our
main differences are are
residing between the LFC and
exec for the most part in all of
the Human Services Department.
Continue on with the expenditure
level this is overall for the
Human Services Department LFC
recommended about a million
seven million from forty two
point two.
Hello the executive
recommendation.
person in contractual services
LFC recommends nine hundred
forty four thousand five hundred
below and lastly in the.
Other category LFC is
significantly higher by four
hundred thirty four million.
Point three basically and that
pretty much all tied to the
federal matching funds for
Medicaid so LFC have additional
sixty eight million in its
recommendation or Medicaid and
with that you of course leverage
that rematch seventy five
percent that I talked about so
that's why you see so much more
federal funds in the LFC
recommendation.
The narrative section on page
one and we can zip through this
part because I basically already
gone over at I'm again in
general fund LFC sixty eight
million higher and that adds to
the overall general fund support
of a billion sixty four for the
Medicaid program and the
executive recommends the
requested level a general fund
support for Medicaid which was
nine hundred ninety six point
four so nine nine six three five
three is the amount now there's
another difference that we do
need to point out in the other
transfers revenue we have a
difference here and tobacco
settlement revenue so the LFC
recommends five million three
hundred and sixty one point six
from tobacco settlement and the
executive recommend seven
million three hundred nineteen
point three so that the
executive at the current year
the FY twenty one operating
level LFC at a lower number now
why is that let me just train
quickly summarize that so that's
tobacco settlement revenue for
members who are new to the
committee those come from the
master settlement agreement that
states entered into with all the
big tobacco companies around you
know tobacco usage and the
impact on health no this state
depending on the.
that auditing system that
happens every year based on that
the state in the spring it gets
revenue that from the tobacco
companies.
Without going into too much
detail
we we get that N. and half of
the money is diverted to the
tobacco settlement permanent
fund and half is diverted to the
tobacco settlement program funds
typically the legislature
appropriates the revenue from
the tobacco settlement program
fund in years well and we've
implemented austerity measures.
Bills have been passed to
provide the legislature the
authority to also appropriate
that additional fifty percent
from the tobacco settlement
permanent time.
In FY twenty two the projections
that we get from the economist
from the department of finance
administration LFC economist and
the attorney general's office
all indicate that we're going to
have a substantially decreased
amount of tobacco settlement
revenue coming in and that's
because of arbitration right now
so the LFC the total amount the
total amount that's projected to
come in is twelve million for FY
twenty two normally the state
gets an amount from thirty to
thirty five million so it's a
big hit so the in the LFC
recommendation it it built the
recommendations across agencies
because multiple agencies
receive typically these tobacco
funds it built it to the twelve
million the executive
recommendation to a higher level
two US employment and we have a
spreadsheet in your packet right
all of that to the committee and
looking for the page number and
we we have questions it's page
seventeen of your packet we have
questions about that we can go
through that later but just
wanted to point that out that
the revenue in the LFC
recommendation is at the
projected level and is dependent
on passage of legislation which
is currently in the Senate and
the executive recommendation is
at a higher level and also will
depend on passage of
legislation.
So that's an important point to
point out madam chair.
So now if I'm still page one
it'll go faster after the
so under the at third bullet on
page one so right here.
The LFC recommendation for
federal funds is primarily I
it's higher than the executive
is primarily associated with
Medicaid but there's also piece
in there for the supplemental
nutrition assistance program and
for person that the executive
augmented additional federal
funds.
For.
Page two here.
I'm right here under the based
on page two.
The difference in personal
services employee benefits that
you see here at is primarily
associated with just those
higher federal level in the
income support division and in
contractual services the
difference are primarily
associated with them.
It recommending some additional
federal funds in income support
and child support.
And then the last category here
is the other category.
And that is where LESC is
recommending a substantial
amount higher in federal funds
for the Medicaid program now
regarding language madam chair
members of the committee we do
have differences in language for
the tobacco settlement funds
that I just got so we have to
spell that language out in the
General Appropration Act so we
always have to reconcile that so
that's the difference there we
also have another different want
to point out in the Medicaid
behavioral health program the
LFC recommendation includes
language that fifty thousand
dollars be transferred to the
administrative hearing office to
provide support for Medicaid
hearings officer officers
legislation was passed in
previous years and to support
the Medicaid hearing officers
over at the administrative
hearings office H. show and the
LESC recommendation I spelled
out that that funding needs to
be transferred to support that
service.
And lastly regarding the
performance measures performance
measures began.
Page.
The packet there about four
pages of performance measures
this is a large agency
these are important measures for
the state to track that outcomes
for the citizens of New Mexico
for this very important set of
programs that supplemental
nutrition program Tanith
Medicaid child support so as
it's important that we track the
then we do have some differences
in target between the LFC and
exec but we reconcile those
between the both sides so those
reconciled amounts are
highlighted in the performance
measures.
The only other thing that high
level here that I want to draw
your attention to madam chair is
the LFC volumes we do put a lot
of information into the all LFC
volumes to provide for the
committee the legislature and
all the public so in volume one
which of course is available on
the LESC website that discussion
about the Human Services
department is found on page
fifty two and page one twenty
seven in volume one there's
discussions about the overall
policy impacts in the
implications for Medicaid for
health reform for a number of
things there in volume two
that's of course the detail
about the budget recommendation
and that can be found in on
beginning on page two twenty six
and lastly all the data
information in data tables
associated with Medicaid
Medicaid enrollment tobacco and
pan and can be found in LFC the
vine three beginning on page
eighty seven three page ninety
four I just want those and with
that we're going to switch over
to my counterpart ADA thank you
go over the next program Mr
Regan for.
Thank you Mr good afternoon
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Michael
Reagan street on the executive
budget and policy analyst for
the Human Services Department
and before we move forward I
just want to touch on a couple
things on the summary level that
SSD bill which is going over so
the first thing that I want to
bring to your attention is on
paper you do see this big
difference between the LFC and
Executive recommendations of
sixty seven point eight million
dollars in general fund the
executive recommendation also
does build in non reverting
language for the Medicaid
program for the Medicaid
behavioral health program and
the Medicaid
regular program and so the most
recent projection from the Human
Services department showing that
of the department is going to be
are projected to revert forty
five million dollars in general
fund at the end of this current
fiscal year and that is due to
the enhanced F. map but the that
the department is receiving
through the families first up
act that was passed earlier in
twenty twenty so the department
received seventy million per
quarter and there's a cost
associated with that in
maintaining the maintenance of
effort requirement where the
department cannot drop anybody
from the Medicaid rolls but
there's about forty five million
dollars of savings per quarter
that the department is seen in
we're gonna be seeing that with
the reversion that's projected
at the end of this fiscal year
so on paper it does look like we
have a big difference in the
Medicaid program but the
executive recommendation is
recommending that non reverting
language so the forty five
million dollars that would be
reverted with the executive
language would be able to it
would be reinvested in the
Medicaid program and that would
be available in FY twenty two
With the federal match on that
that's going to equate to about
two hundred million of federal
support so that's the first
thing that I want to bring to
your attention and then also on
the high level of the high level
she line thirty six that
necessity Neville was
referencing on those projected
deficit for shortfalls I don't
believe those to be accurate
anymore we received a letter
from CMS about two weeks ago
stating that the state of New
Mexico would likely receive the
enhanced F. map through the end
of calendar year twenty twenty
one so that means that we're
gonna get the enhanced that map
of six point two percent for two
quarters of FY twenty two of
state fiscal year FY twenty two
so again that equates to about
forty five million dollars a
quarter of an savings in general
fund so I don't believe those
numbers to be accurate with that
new information so I just want
to bring that to your attention
so moving on if we can all move
on to the program support
program different sheet the LFC
and executive recommendation we
have a difference of a hundred
thirty one point eight thousand
in general fund the executive
recommendation is a hundred
thirty one point eight thousand
higher in general fund and we
also have a difference in
federal funds with the cost
allocation match rate and you
can see on the expenditure side
that all that all of that
differences in the personal
services employee benefits
category the executive
recommendation applies a lower
vacancy rate on the Human
Services department which I
believe secretary Scrase will
touch on has done a good job of
filling a lot of the vacancies
over the past couple years so
the executive recommendation is
higher for program support by
two hundred ninety thousand nine
hundred dollars
SSD bell I will turn it back
over to you if you have any
additional comments on program
support.
No that's it thank you Mr
Regensburg.
So I think we can move on madam
chair to page for the child
support enforcement program.
So this is a program and that
deals with child support for I'm
not okay from noncustodial
parents and I think sometimes
people confuse this with
childcare and so this is
actually the child support that
you know once you have it a
divorce and and children have
monetary.
Court orders for their support.
Still in child support program.
There's just a small difference
in general fund of seventy
thousand one hundred dollars
that's pretty small LFC is
slightly lower.
And there is a difference also
in federal revenues of eight
hundred and ninety thousand
eight hundred dollars with again
LFC below and.
In the.
Here you'll see a personal
services employee benefits LFC
is lower by about a little over
half a million five hundred
sixty seven thousand five
hundred dollars.
And thank you down the line LFC
being lower in contractual
services at five hundred eighty
seven thousand and in the other
category by two hundred and six
point three thousand.
So what does that equate to the
LFC is that recommending.
Decreases from personal services
employee benefits and supporting
a zero point five percent funded
vacancy rates and and that's
shown on the PS help forms which
are in the back of the package.
And the executive recommends the
operating levels currently
across the board for all of the
program.
So I think we need to maybe get
the at that committee a little
more context on this as well so
the department of finance and
administration and their their
instructions to all of the state
agencies had requested that they
come in with their requested a
minus five percent for in
September when all the requests
were submitted the Human
Services Department the amended
its budget request in September
but did include some additional
support for the Medicaid program
about forty to forty four
million dollars so in order to
come in within the executive
guidelines at the across the
board cut five point six percent
in all the other program areas
all the other divisions so
you'll see in the LFC
recommendation we added back the
committee added back but not
quite to the FY twenty one
operating level it so that's
really where the difference
comes down to.
Another piece the that is really
important to mention here in the
child support division and that
really ties to the seventy point
one thousand dollar difference
is space.
At the office space so currently
up in Farmington.
The.
The income support this kind of
by the hospital in Farmington
and that space is being
remodeled we've been using
capital funds capital outlay
funds to remodel and update that
space to make it secure in order
to.
Obviously upgraded for the
employee there but also to
combine offices the income
support division and the child
support division so in the LFC
recommendation that the rent is
not going to no longer be needed
for the child support location
so that through that seventy one
seventy point one thousand
dollars general fund statement
comes from.
Right to I think that basically
sums it up Mr Reagan's very did
you want to add anything further
thank you raise bill I will at
also
the child support enforcement
division with Human Services
receives a sixty six percent
federal match and that's where
you see the the general fund and
the federal funds being
different you'll see that
there's a thirty four percent
general fund and a sixty four
point sixty six percent federal
funds associated with the child
support enforcement division
program and secretary Scrase in
this presentation will touch on
some of the risk associated with
not modernizing our child
support enforcement system
we are receiving a mandate from
the federal government that that
system must be updated so are
secretary Scrase again we'll
touch on that during his
presentation but that was the
only other thing that I want to
add for child support
enforcement division.
We can go ahead and move on to
the Medicaid program P. five to
four and your different she
packet and again we've already
discussed the a lot of the key
differences here on the
executive recommendation is
sixty seven point five nine one
million lower in general fund
and we're higher into tobacco
settlement revenue by three
hundred eighty nine and and
other revenues other transfer
revenues by three hundred eighty
nine thousand four hundred
dollars and then the federal
revenue differences three
hundred sixty two thousand seven
seventy six your is sixty two
million seven six thousand nine
hundred dollars and that is just
the federal match associated
with Medicaid and again on paper
it looks like a large difference
but the executive recommendation
does include the non reverting
language for the current fiscal
year so the forty five million
dollars that's projected to be
reverted at the end of this
fiscal year would be available
for Medicaid in FY twenty two
with the executive language
being adopted and also I just
want to point out I I kind of
touched on it earlier on the
high level she on eight line
thirty six some high level this
year when the the shortfalls the
projected shortfalls for FY
twenty two we have actually done
a calculation and I don't know
if madam chair if you would like
me to share my screen and I can
kind of show you the updated
deficits projected with the
additional two quarters why
don't you do that Michael okay I
will do that madam chair.
Okay madam chair let me know if
you can see my screen we can say
okay so this is just a quick a
quick projection with the new
revenue coming in so you'll
you'll see here on line seven
the additional two quarters of
six point two percent
enhancement in F. map there's
projected to be another ninety
million of general fund savings
so on the bottom here equates to
the remaining general fund
shortfall in FY twenty two and
this is factoring in the
executive languages well you'll
see that online I the executive
nonoperating language that forty
five million in general fund
that should be available when
you factor that in the remaining
general fund shortfall in
Medicaid in FY twenty two with
the LFC recommendation would be
forty two million and with the
executive recommendation would
be sixty three million and that
is just accounting for two more
quarters of the enhanced that
map so through the end of this
calendar year
we don't know what what the
future holds or if there will be
additional supporter are or what
what's going to happen the the
the Medicaid program and what's
happening with health care is
very liquid right now this as
you all probably know but this
is this is the new updated
numbers with the with the
additional two quarters of that
mapping factored in madam chair
okay thank you you're welcome.
You're wanting to add on that
just for the committee's
consideration the forty five
million that Mr Regan's for it
has online I and that the
executive is recommending for FY
twenty one.
What that equates to is then the
projections that the Human
Services Department put together
now January thirteenth.
They're projecting for Medicaid
a forty five million dollars
surplus at the end of FY twenty
one just like they were
projecting a hundred and sixty
nine million dollars shortfall
for the end of FY twenty two so
the executive is recommending
non reverting language and that
the revenue for FY twenty one be
used for FY twenty two I think
it's important for the committee
to note that those revenues are
non recurring so the forty five
million would be nonrecurring
revenue that we would be using
to offset recurring costs in the
Medicaid program so additional
consideration it will if if the
committee wants to do that or
not.
Thank you basic question before
you continue on this basis we're
looking at these two new
quarters of six point two
percent coming into the state we
have to from that also make sure
the recovering maintenance of
effort but my question is is
there a sense that there's
expansion tied to this new these
two new quarters or is that
keeping at your base level in
terms of expansion of our
participation in this program.
Madam chair the department's
going to show you some slides on
this but basically I thank you
there's different components to
the expansion so there's the
enrollment fees right the
enrollment has gone up but it's
starting to take down some so
the rate of growth is slowing
then there's other pieces around
expansion there's utilization so
in during the pandemic a lot of
people didn't go to their doctor
appointments and getting going
get the knee replacement yet if
they when and if they were
having a heart attack helpfully
but maybe they defer to hip
replacement or knee replacement
so we think that there is some
room in utilization so maybe
that can expand so much and we
have to potential savings there
so that ties to them managed
care right that sort of
utilization so I think that gets
to your question I hope madam
chair yes can I had Michael if
you have any more to add on that
yes ma'am just a touch on a
point that you may so yes there
is a maintenance of effort
requirement and this line seven
here that you see are that is
the new so the the the Human
Services Department receive
seventy million per quarter but
there is a maintenance of effort
requirement so the actual
savings is forty five million
thirty five thirty five million
of that is associated with that
with the maintenance of effort
in the cost of of keeping people
on the Medicaid rolls and and
just maintaining a maintenance
of effort requirements with the
federal government and when you
guys are saying this is
available to us through twenty
twenty one that takes us through
December thirty first twenty
twenty one okay all right SO we
needed to know okay yes ma'am
and in one thing to also keep in
in mind right now is with the
maintenance of effort
requirement Medicaid members
cannot be dropped from the rolls
even if they would not normally
qualify for the program so at
some point there is going to be.
Of a cliff if you would that
there would be folks that would
be dissing rolled or they would
have to.
Reapply for for their medic
Medicaid membership so it's
really just the through the the
M. O. E. and through the public
health emergency that the the
enrollment would are gradually
increasing secretary Scrase
we'll touch more on that he has
more information on in rural.
All right.
Okay let's continue.
Members of the committee so
we'll turn the page eight.
So this is the income support
program.
So I'm I want to I don't know if
I need to screen share can we
just.
Early that way people are
tracking along with this RubyAnn
on this okay.
You guys Keith the state okay
not yet.
Now yes there you go all right.
Thank you madam chair so out of
the.
Billion one dollar and billion
one about one point one billion
dollar program we are only part
by twenty six thousand general
fund so that's hardly anything
so that's amazing.
It is time to time on this
Very slight difference in the
general fund I'm a larger
difference in federal revenues
and of almost three million with
the LFC being lower and again
for new members to the committee
I am the general appropriation
act the general provisions in
the back of the bill regarding
budget adjustment request it
should be noted that federal
funds can be added to all
agencies budget be a budget
adjustment request bars as we
say so
there's a lot of flexibility
around federal funds to add and
subtract if needed we never want
to turn away of course the
federal dollar.
So and you'll see the
commensurate differences across
the expenditure categories
primarily tied to that the
federal revenue
and.
Basically the executive has a
little a little higher amount
for snap and
so add and that I think in the
back of your packet we have the
whole details of to page at
spreadsheet for Matt and if all
of these programs so if we want
to go into further detail but
most of the differences here are
tied to federal funds so there's
a lot of flexibility around that
and I don't think I'll take more
the committee's time unless you
want to add anything mystery and
Burke.
no thank you missus developing
got it's it's pretty clear on
the executive recommendation is
higher we kept the income
support administration for all
the FTE staff reside flat with
the current year FY twenty one
operating budget levels and then
we have produce more federal
revenue projected to come in for
the staff program and then the
the the Max associated with
keeping the salaries and
benefits flat so that's kind of
how we got to our number with
the executive recommendation.
Representative.
Before and I have something to
Cisco.
just add one more piece sorry I
didn't mean to step I need I
thought you were done I'm madam
chair members of the committee
one piece I'd better note on
Tanith and this is something
that the department has raised
for the last few years with that
and it's regarding the carry
over.
We do use federal TANF funds to
support additional programs at
primarily now in the early
childhood department and a
little bit in CYFD and and had.
But.
We're looking at the Kerry over
balance declining in the LFC and
exec recommendations we didn't
change those transfers from the
current fiscal year however it
should be noted that the agency
has raised concerns in past
years about continuing to use
greater amounts of TANF funding
but federal funding and having
that carry over residual balance
decline and that's why you see
the LFC recommendation is that
the lower level because it's at
the requested level antenna
funding because there is concern
about the fund balance
diminishing to to local level so
I needed to point that out then
chair.
And I think we can move on to
the next program.
He also moving on to the
Medicaid behavioral health
program that's P. seven six six
in your packet on the executive
recommendation is four hundred
ninety three thousand lower in
general fund and six point zero
six million lower in federal
funds and the executive
recommendation is actually
aligned with the on October
Medicaid projection from the
department of for Medicaid
behavioral health so that's how
we got to our number there
and again we do have the non
regarding language for Medicaid
behavioral health
which is part of the Medicaid
program that any funds unspent
in the current fiscal year would
be available any general fund I
should say of unspent in the
current fiscal year would be
available in FY twenty two and
in the past would like with the
junior bill appropriations and
even with the seventy five
million dollar swap that was
done in the first special
session of twenty twenty we have
been able to build those on into
the base when the agency is
submitting the request in
September so that would be an
option I know that this has
given all mentioned that it is
nonrecurring and that is correct
but we could all so bill that in
like we've done in the past for
on non Jew your bill and all the
seventy five million dollar swap
that was done in the first
special session so if you have
anything else ms SQL on Medicaid
behavioral health.
Thank you Mr Ginsburg madam
chair members of the committee
so the higher general fund that
you see here of four hundred
ninety three thousand dollars
ties to that overall higher
general fund recommendation as
sixty eight million for the LFC
cell.
That really sums it up.
And the last.
Division we have madam chair
members of the committee is that
behavioral health services
division and believe it or not
we came in at the same level so
you wanted that we colluded on
that but we did it.
Well there you.
I think we're done we can turn
it over to secretary Scrase and
the other agency staff.
Right Dr Scrase your next let me
get out.
Thank you thank you madam chair
just getting and muted and
sharing my screen to get the
reason station going and up.
I am we do want to focus on key
issues facing our budget this
year and as instructed and so
will just launch this and just
check to make sure you can see
the presentation.
You cannot go ahead of pleasure
to be here we are as always we
thank you for your service as
legislators is that time of year
where people HSD like to whine
to each other about how late we
stay up analyzing all the bills
like that you know you do this
for free and it's an amazing
commitment we appreciate that
very much and also I just a
special thanks to the
arrangements made to do this
safely in the midst of a
pandemic and all the work at
check on LFC staff in in your
staff madam chair members of the
committee do I do this by zoom
and appreciate everybody sharing
their screens and like we do
like to acknowledge that we are
on the unceded ancestral lands
of the first peoples of this
place called New Mexico and I
really want to pay respect to
them for today and this this is
just as true on zoom with all of
us read about through the state
is it is you're not we were
gathered at the capitol I also
are I'm sure every Secretary of
things they have the best team
in their department pretty sure
I'm right when I say it but with
me today are essential Medrano
mia and Nicole Comeaux at are up
W. level with the goal being
here Medicaid director in St
Paul Ritz my general counsel the
sand of all our expert finance
CFO the board behavioural health
journey to lose a child support
in I'm a part of the reason
giving us all to you is so that
you will have on the contact
information Judy parks is acting
as our HR director for mail
Martinez income support John
Pearson IT duty million esports
communications Shelly Begay our
tribal liaison Alex Caceres
Smith our manager strategic
planning and review project
manager Sally and Jameson rental
counter to keep things going
throughout.
The year forced making sure that
everything you ask us to do
actually gets across the finish
line I just a reminder that we
really think our mission at in
in HSD is to transform the lives
of low income people in New
Mexico and work like any
business what app do to improve
the quality of our services in
in the service we provide as
well we have four goals most of
the budget and focusing on the
services and programs to provide
that's what we talked about so
far the way we help New Mexicans
but will also touch a little bit
at the end I. T. and and of
course Australia slide minute
about how we're doing with our
human resources one thing I
learned madam chair and members
of the committee my very first
time up.
Presenting before this committee
which is almost two years ago
today is that how well HSD is
doing is in filling its budgeted
positions is really important to
you and I invite I don't I'm
sure this code is not direct but
I believe I was told not to come
asking for anything more into we
make good use of what you all
are giving us and so today this
is a grant but I want to
highlight a couple things about
this in just a second but the up
we have our score card online
this is our authorized think
it's the right which I'm you
know is up.
I always have that offer open if
you want to fund us up to this
level will fill those positions
we are we are now running at it
is not coming up over the zero
point eight three percent
budgeted vacancy rate I think
it's the best in the history of
the agency and that are in it I
can always deal with questions
at the end but I do want to give
credit to the committee for
asking this question every year
pointing me in this direction
and our team has worked really
hard to retain people and as I
said we have more information we
can talk about also lots of
numbers today what I like that
Medicaid obviously the biggest
part of our budget with the
federal matching the almost six
billion dollar range in RubyAnn
and and ask about Oregon's
Bridget great job covering most
of the bases on that New Mexico
does have the highest percent of
their population Medicaid this
is July we believe we're over
forty percent now you can see
yes over here as number one also
just a reminder that you have a
data book we sent by email it's
in your mailbox as hundreds of
pages of the sort of information
you can use not only to see
where our New Mexico is doing
compared to the rest of the
world but you know here's an
example by county and it's worth
noting the importance of
Medicaid as an insurance vehicle
in the state of New Mexico
currently up we have also
different calculation than the
national map you saw forty two
point four percent with some
counties above seventy five
percent of the people who live
there enrolled in Medicaid and
the vast majority in the forty
to it forties and fifty percent
range as well so this is
important not only to our I'm a
global level but also at the
county level obviously on the
individual level as well we have
been juggling a lot of balls in
the air the past.
The past twelve months these
balls are each worth weigh about
seventy five million dollars a
quarter if you've heard it's
been kind of agonizing to be
honest with you during these
projections every quarter
without knowing the intent of
the federal government like a
ratings for point out to you
that we did get indication from
the federal government that it's
likely that we'll receive that
extra funding the end of the
year and that's wonderful news
to us it means we have something
we can assume that goes beyond
the next ninety days and so we
when we submitted the budget
this we didn't know that even
with our most recent projection
we weren't sure what is using
today we've adjusted updated
numbers to give all of us a good
idea of where we're at at the we
are looking and it's important
you all understand that we will.
Every month we don't descend
role people.
Just that alone at this point
seven percent to our membership
that adds up over time we that
we've added we have twenty
thousand more people than we
normally would do that inability
to discern role and we've taken
on another a hundred thousand
members as we project and madam
chair your question will
enrollment continued to grow by
definition mathematically it
will cause that maintenance of
effort does not allow us to
actively desyrel people
occasionally someone moves out
of state usually someone dies
but it's a very small percentage
in snap we've taken on the
initial hundred fifty thousand
clients there's three hundred
fifty thousand new students
receiving in elementary through
I still receiving Bob PTA budget
as well we do in partnership
with PED so we have.
I'm really taken a lot of growth
in the past year as part of our
response to help New Mexicans in
this time of difficulty with
rising unemployment rates of
this graph I want to.
Reddit our Medicaid team for
being patient with me as we've
revised it but this was the
budget we submitted and we're
working offer and Roman this
orange line here these this is
what's happened so far you can
see were right about here in
February twenty one and our
projection but to the end of
June and then we now know that
that maintenance of effort in
that extra federal funding will
continue a couple got quarters
so this also answers the
question about membership growth
yes that will continue to the
end of the year and then you can
see this drop off in this drop
off is important and we'd be
happy to entertain questions
about how we're going to manage
that in the end as well I want
to talk about a family just
because this is what drives what
we do every day in New Mexico hi
this is why people come to work
it HSD this is why our vacancy
rate is so low but this is just
one family of three living in
Sandoval county Abigail's a
seventy year old with a
grandmother she's the primary
guardian for rand children ages
three and five I think you all
of the New Mexico ranks first in
poverty rate for people sixty
five and older were in the top
ten states and also as with
grandchildren and grandparents
caring for those grand children
they're on a limited income with
Abigail social security and she
has the regular monthly expenses
and now because the issues are
the are the kids parents are is
taking on that responsibility
for raising them and we'll come
back and show you all the
pandemic and what we've done is
affected your at the end all
lots of interests is your
behavioral health we appreciate
the concurrence on behavioral
health among staff executive in
and up LFC recommendations of we
have invested a lot of money
here are New Mexico used to be
the highest drug overdose of a
state in the country through
excellent work.
Work in HSD India age that's
gonna we're not not right number
seventeen still this is the
number of people hundred
thousand in each county and of
course we're all familiar with
the high rates in Rio Arriba
county we invested in some of
these areas really working
expand our services for
substance use disorder on the
rise program as a expanded
behavioural services for those
who are incarcerated book all
three of these you've supported
law enforcement insisted
diversion the idea here is to
keep people out of the system
rather than incarcerating and at
for a long period of time some
of the behavioral health
disorder getting them into
immediate treatment when they're
apprehended the first time and
and other states have done this
our experience is very good join
that we're now starting to
reduce our incarcerations in the
long run which is a win win for
everybody
we have four major and.
Strategies that goals in
behavioural fiber but not going
to go through all of these I did
want to mention that we are
actively up promoting telehealth
gets than the second and also
you can see this is three years
of the average number of
suicide attempts in New Mexico
people hospitalized for that
blue line you can see this
decline at the beginning of the
pandemic which is very
interesting to.
Higher this this year over
previous years decline rise
during the summer now all in
lower than trend over that the
ending months of the year and we
can answer questions on that but
you can see lots of programs
lots of services and race injure
our new CEO of the routes
collaborative has presented the
combined agency budget of one of
the interim LESC committee
meetings and and so you've seen
how we're working together to
coordinate the services across
agencies and you can see this in
the parenthetical notations
every time there's more than one
agency.
You entrusted us with two large
appropriations in the special
session around thanksgiving last
year one was five million
dollars for a one time cash
payment to lower income New
Mexicans we took care five
million we're able to added two
million to that we partnered
with taxation and revenue and
we're able to distribute four
and sixty five dollars.
Fifteen thousand one hundred
eighteen lower income New
Mexicans this past December and
got that money into their
checking accounts up for eighty
percent of them on December
twentieth bill the rest of the
checks the next morning and so
great turnaround on that in
addition you gave us another up.
Five million and and not yours
Act funding to enhance food and
we distributed that within about
three weeks three to four weeks
to the local food banks in New
Mexico and so that resulted your
action resulted in an additional
three point six million meals I
get all these pictures here are
from the date of Oct and wanted
to up to highlight those here's
another one from the data
collected actually from our
online scorecard I want to
mention RubyAnn mentioned our
metrics I am the R. LFC metrics
yeah agency has all of our
metrics on an online scorecard
in addition we are building
sections right now that the
child support and income support
measures are online and once we
get the data out for behavioral
health and Medicaid that comes
in a lot of months later those
will be online and you can go
online anytime you don't have to
wait for a Buck any time you can
go on and see updated data we've
been busy this year with the
budget you gave us at that
moment expansion we're now
projecting eleven and a half
percent Medicaid growth we have
promoted telehealth for state in
the United States to get
approval to pay telehealth at
the same rate as a in person
visits and so we bridge that
utilization gap by increasing
telehealth and these are three
M. CO two here's the here's the
right after the pandemic the
pandemic started year medially
put that into place and I'm.
Neal Bowen can tell you more if
you're interested about how
that's worked out I in our in
our experiment with telehealth
that we hope to be able to
continue I'm a big question I
know Avengers to all of you is
agency doing everything we
possibly can to leverage every
federal dollar I feel really
confident with our own agency we
are doing that but we're also
expanding that to other agencies
so we acted quickly during the
pandemic to reimburse the O. H.
for testing of the testing they
were paying for Medicaid
patients for immunizations in
the vaccine doing that the only
community based waiver program
has a nice two dollars and
seventy seven federal fund match
every one dollar the state
funding or even working with all
the agencies actually to work on
billing for other services they
provide this is the testing I
mentioned in and I the O. H. is
going to follow this is a graph
we have borrowed from chasing
per mile you may show it also
just shows shows significant
increases in billing to a test
day and instead of using general
fund to pay this fallout general
fund is paying roughly fifteen
percent of every dollar fifteen
cents on the dollar so we're
pleased with that and we have a
manual a lot of other agency
work we're doing my connected to
threat you can use it as a
reference to work do you have
actually set other agencies up
to ensure that every single
dollar they spend on Medicaid
recipients whether its program
administration or service
provision gets a federal match
so this a huge personal interest
of mine and I've really been
delighted with the collaboration
of other cabinet secretaries to
do it this is what I call our
dirty laundry slide up those big
balls you been juggling more
adding in a quarter million new
people on benefits between snap.
And Medicaid we've had a few
glitches along the way sometimes
you read about them in the paper
I at I think that madam chair
unite sort of developed an
informal wager there's no money
involved that we would finish I.
R. I. T. project on time I said
we would you said you never seen
that before we neither of us
anticipated the pandemic and
that is clearly behind schedule
as we've shifted almost all of
our I do resources to
configuring new benefits for
people to meet them at their
time of need and get them to the
mandate we had some glitches in
a transfer in personal care from
one system to another where the
point now are the last people
are sending in their W. four is
in there electronic deposit
forms we think we will be sure
that we can answer questions on
that we talked about in December
the fact that our customer
support center was overwhelmed
with the the huge new volume of
PED be today benefit our clients
and we delivered another hundred
fifty million dollars of food
support to the state but that
over one their call center we're
behind but I hear this morning
and all this week we're down to
very low abandonment rates than
some delay in programs let's go
to our version of the numbers I
I think you've
my colleagues done an
outstanding job what do you
through them and highlighting
the main differences which out
you know are are in Medicaid
this mean increase we're asking
really for three point eight
seven percent increase in the
Medicaid budget by that remember
calls after three percent
decrease in that seventy five
million swap that happened in
the special session last year
and are we going to be and
highlighted the other changes I
won't go into detail this just
compares current year budget to
next your budget in the dollars
changing the percentage change
that three point eight seven
percent.
General fund increase I'm I'm
not gonna spend a lot of time in
the slide that we were asked in
other committees how much yours
money or pandemic related funds
in there lots of bills has been
routed through HSD and that so
far about three quarters of a
billion dollars we expect about
the same amount for around one
and a half billion by twelve
thirty one twenty one we can
answer questions about these as
well I thank my colleagues did a
great job this recurrent up
deficit in the and the base is
something or in a that we are
you need to address at some
point this year next year of the
language that the feds uses it's
likely to continue I don't know
what our accountants think of
the word likely they like to
actually get something in
writing that says it was gonna
happen but here shows the
general fund and that additional
general fund that's generated
comes to HSD through other
revenue sources and bills that
have passed in the past to
increase general fund revenues
some of which caused HSD this is
that portion of the Medicaid
budget these combine to and this
is the whole federal match the
goes with that and you can see
in I'm actually really proud of
this we've increased by one
point seven billion dollars in
federal revenue between FY
nineteen and FY twenty one and
that we as we all know helps our
economy as well there are other
issues that are will will have
to be seen.
Vaccine expenses is real expense
Medicaid will pay for hundreds
of thousands of people to be
vaccinated and and I and with
all the discussion regarding the
budget shortfall we do have a
plan in place that we can pull
out in use if we have to
implement cost containment
strategies but at this point in
time we're very limited in what
we can do because of the
maintenance of effort
requirements and the only thing
we can do is really up past the
the steps and on to providers
something were not wanting to do
right now I want to highlight
the S. map just a little bit
more detail and rather than
going through this you have as
your reference this talks about
traditional Medicaid the federal
match rate is seventy three and
half percent here's the state
portion of the column I want to
focus it says for every one
dollar general fund we
appropriate HSD how much does
the federal government check in
you can see it ranges from two
dollars and seventy seven cents
up to nine dollars within a
weighted average cost all
programs very close to four to
one match and as was also
mentioned that extra F. map six
point two percent that takes us
up to four dollars and seventy
two cents right now until and
until the end of the pandemic
for every gems general fund
donor and so we take this very
very seriously we don't want to
leave any federal dollar The New
Mexico is entitled to on the
table this is the membership
projection that we discussed
this was our last projection you
see it starts to fall off in
July but that's that's not
what's going to happen it's
likely becomes true this will
continue to go up and start
falling off here but this is an
unprecedented that rate of
growth it's even actual faster
at some point during this then
the R. then that employee.
Tatian the affordable Care Act
which is backed here are I did
want to talk and Michael
Reagan's for introduces topic
about child support
modernization bill we receive
written notice from the federal
government right after the end
of the session last year do we
not catch up with federal
transport modernization by this
year that we rest loss of a
hundred forty seven million in
federal funding hundred thirty
million in ten of which is our
lowest low income people in New
Mexico I just want to highlight
this from for the financial
perspective but since you're
financing will also appreciate
the fact that when we go back
and ask someone to pay child
support arrears for more than
twelve years or even more than
six years we can that we collect
a very small amount of money and
other states have learned and we
hope to emulate them that if you
use a three year period you
collect a much higher percentage
of child support arrears and so
this gets more money to kids and
we've got some data we at my
staff can share with you if you
want more know more about that
but why do you keep your eyes up
is it does it is probably other
than whatever the federal
government can do with Medicaid
the biggest restore budget this
year
and lastly you funded us last
year for GME two years ago
that's graduate medical
education it happens to be just
for doctors but we're interested
in all kinds of providers the
get out of medical school.
And we are expanding our
training across the state with
the focus on primary care in
psychiatry and focus on rural
areas and we believe if we keep
up with this plan we will be
graduating forty six Daniel
primary care doctors.
Per year for ever and that's
enough to cover a hundred
thousand New Mexicans of the
intimate small the state here
hundred thousand Mexicans
whether new primary care doctor.
We have asked for special
appropriation restaurant this
year were asked to Assam's were
put it we put that in for your
fifty thousand a year for two
years to jump start this program
and seated up in so that that
are on the docket today this
team this group has done an
amazing job the detailed
strategic plan a lot of success
so far I'm and Leslie my last
slide and this is also mentioned
in the discussion of the numbers
but when agency cut its budget
by three percent we chat I T.
hole so everyone had to cut
their budget a little bit more
to do I do whole we believe that
the aspen program had been under
funded in the past is as good as
you can see Aaron now our up to
all the funding we think we need
we may need a little more in the
future and why is that well
because our customers are
increasingly contacting us by
electronic methods you can see
toward the end of the year with
our out reach a lot more people
reaching out over the internet
on their on their cell phones to
apply for benefits that's a good
thing in the long run when we
automate application processes
we approve accuracy greatly
usually they're simpler basis so
I it takes any kind of human
error out of that equation we
like our phones to focus on the
topic cases and up so I as you
know I'm very committed IT I
think it's the future of our
being able to meet the needs of
the majority of New Mexicans we
will always have the services
for people who can't today we've
got people every day since the
beginning of the pandemic
standing outside in parking lots
in our forty some HSD buildings
across the state of providing
services to be able so they
don't have to come in and sit in
the waiting room just like you
for afforded us the opportunity
to not come in and I'll be in
the same room together today as
well and so that's really at the
case then.
Family signed up for monthly
snap benefits back supplemental
COVID nineteen emergency snap
benefits and she's getting four
and seventy five dollars more
per month which helps the kids
that are you know these little
kids eat a lot is there growing
up they got utility support the
kids grandchildren Adam Medicaid
and and because of up that low
income the building only social
security they're approved for
ten of funding and the Abigail
even and during this process we
identify that she could get into
the medicine Medicare savings
program which is a state program
that supports for part B..
hospital premium payments and
she wrote us into this is a
better thing yes I'm Christmas
day I no longer have to worry
about how I will provide for my
babies and I'm showing you this
because she thanks us but we
know that it's the
appropriations you give us that
maybe just this outcome possible
and hundreds of thousands
literally hundreds of thousands
of similar outcomes during the
pandemic and so with that I'm
gonna stop hopefully a we focus
to purposely those G. up
programs and strategies and that
affect the budget and madam
chair to the back to you for any
questions anyone may have thank
you.
Thank you Dr Scrase if we could
have your stop Schering screen
please.
Thank you all right we've got a
few questions here from the
committee and we're gonna start
with Representative Trujillo
please.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Dr Scrase and her team.
This is been a very
comprehensive presentation lot
of numbers going right to the
parts in my head but.
As I was listening to
everything.
As I was listening to everything
you know there are two bills
that are going through the house
and the Senate regarding child
support.
How how is this
child support bill I don't know
if you've seen that I think it's
house bill one ninety.
If you how how will it have an
impact on ten of funding and
with so that means for the
people.
Both budget.
Okay so.
Dr Scrase thank you madam chair
and that Representative tree on
members of the committee we have
seen the bill we have written
the bill it's C. bell and I'd
like to turn it over to carry
our media and up
in Germany to lose to answer
your questions about about how
that in impacts the the budget
and how it could.
Thank you Secretary I good
afternoon madam chair at
Representative Trujillo and
members of the committee thank
you for asking this question as
secretary Scrase mentioned we
are currently at risk of losing
our ten o'clock grant which is
about a hundred and twenty two
point six million dollars if we
don't come into compliance with
federal child support rules the
reason for that is because
receipt of that federal block
grant and is contingent upon our
compliance with those federal
rules so today we serve about
twenty six thousand very low
income individuals and families
at most of them children to the
town of program at and provide
financial support it's really a
financial lifeline for families
living at or below eighty five
percent of poverty so very low
income families are for your
reference eighty five percent of
poverty is about twenty two
thousand dollars a year for a
family of four
in addition is asking about
mentioned that we also send what
grant funds to our sister
agencies we currently pay about
sixty four million dollars to
early childhood for pre K. and
early childhood home visiting
programs
Through the ten o'clock Grant we
also send about a million
dollars to
children youth and families for
supportive housing and several
hundred thousand dollars to
public education for education
support.
And the Representative Mrs news
out of me whole
Yes the concern I have is
because you obviously both the
you guys with the bill like
that.
So what do we have to do to
ensure that the work in
compliance through this bill
specifically.
We have to talk about is that
the balance between holding on
to study a parents accountable
but also in making them
effective in.
In not providing money for their
kids so they that they don't
they don't live with them so
kids could be kids because
there's accountability the
federal government that we are
you discussed and maybe you can
do touch on those two items
also.
Very
happy to do that and then on the
side director Toulouse have
anything to add have him way end
of the bill essentially
addresses three components two
of them are required by federal
law the two pieces that are
required by federal law our and
making sure that child support
orders are affordable that right
now as secretary Scrase showed
when the orders are not
affordable we basically can't
collect anything so we
anticipate a substantial
increase in collections as a
result of making orders more
affordable the second piece of
the legislation is to make sure
that we can establish medical
support for children us that
he's met medical support
constitutes grounds for
modification of a child support
order stuff those are the two
federal requirements that if
we're not compliant with we
stand to lose those federal
funds that secretary Scrase
referenced and additionally the
bill also proposes a secretary
Scrase talked about earlier a
best practice that's used in top
performing states to modify the
retroactive are we always time
frame which is the look back
period of how far back does not
debt can accumulate for child
support orders
it's from twelve years to three
years and I think it's important
to mention that we worked in
concert with the point on these
recommendations for these are
not the common best practices to
started sure the success on the
child support collections and I
would just if director Toulouse
have anything to add.
Madam chair and committee
members and Representative
Trujillo thank you.
Secretary you are me ho you know
summarized it well but I think
it's you know it's important to
recognize that this this bill
and incorporates the final
policy changes what was really
fourteen policy changes that New
Mexico childhood had to make to
become compliant with federal
rules are changed.
So you know we have a we you
know to answer questions you
know we have to make these
changes to have our state plan
approved with the federal office
and you know the town block
grant is contingent upon a child
support state plan approval.
But you know really what this
bill the purpose of this bill
and the purpose of the federal
rule changes is like W.
secretary Reno said it's it's
really to ensure that the NCP's
actual income in the Knoxville
parents ability to pay is
considered in establishing with
the chart monthly child's
propagation is.
This bill does not modify in any
way any of them Forsman tools
that we use madam you know to
ensure compliance but it does
you know because redressing the
natural parents ability to pay
and use and actually come it has
proven in other states and which
is the whole premise of the
federal change to improve
voluntary compliance you know so
that we're not taking the
stringent enforcement actions on
people that are in between jobs
or you know especially during
the pandemic and you went
unemployment is increased it
just gives us the flexibility to
make sure that we're we're
taking the right action to help
NCP's become more engaged in
their cases.
So that we can you know improve
their voluntary compliance I
hope that answer questions
Representative madam chair or
and CPS noncompliant parent not
to Soto parent.
Story parent.
The kids dolled.
Madam chair Dr Scrase and Mr to
lose this is the same as a dead
beat dad bill is that.
Madam chair a committee and
Representative Trujillo no this
is not you know I so I worse
results for forced conversions
since nineteen ninety four and
you know what our experience so
what a lot of our statistics as
as Dr Scrase you know showed is.
Most people want to comply with
the quarter they just have
underlying you know roadblocks
to be able to comply you know
you know what this does this
this gives us and of course the
flexibility to make sure
accounting for all of those
different variables in the on
somebody's employment you know
even some of their underlying
you know reasons why they don't
comply with orders so that we
can work with them to you know
make sure we have a strategy and
and on monthly child propagation
that works to their current
situation you're currently the
rules are are it's kind of a one
size fits also either complying
or not complying and then that
is just you know it's it's it's
just not you know conducive to
really allowing on so parents to
work with us your to approve
their engagement on their
child's purchase.
Question comment I think.
This doesn't.
Based on the fact that it's not.
Roches bills they don't take
away license driver's licenses
do they from the not the person
who is in the compliance so do
they.
So the way that a license
suspension versus it's under the
parental responsibility act it's
actually a federal requirement
also that we have that program
in place but you know the way
trial license suspension works
is if they do we enter the court
order in our system if they
don't pay for you know two
months there sent a notice that
then they can you know which
encourages them to work with us
if there's any likelihood of
employment or they're going to
get employment like we will work
with them so they don't lose
their lives this this bill does
not change any of.
C..
Process thank you madam chair
Mister to lose me ho and Dr
Scrase.
You.
Let's go to the next the
individual with the question
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much madam chair
and I Dr Scrase for that a great
presentation in the interest of
time I will talk to offline
about the behavioral health
professionals I have but I do
have one question for you Dr
Scrase madam chair going to the
Human Services department's
overview page starts on page
twenty six to twenty six and buy
into it looks like with Medicaid
utilization rates down why are
managed care rates up and are
there is there a possibility of
overpayment and so do we have a
mechanism to reclaim some of
those overpayments thank you
madam chair.
madam chair and Representative
home in the Ellen members the
committee great set of questions
and one.
What may run through them so it
might take about order number
one in our hundreds of the
managed care companies we re co
any excess profits which is you
know at money we send them money
is what they spend we have fifty
percent back of anything over
three percent profit on the
downside they are responsible
for that and so it's not it's a
hundred favors and say in that
regard I in addition to the our
video the utilization decline
was that was a temporary decline
primarily in April and may the
state actually closed operating
rooms and you know which are the
life blood of my many rural
hospitals were to be at their
income and choose ambulatory
surgery facilities and so we did
feel some obligation to make
that out we actually went right
we increased rates to those
hospitals to make up for the
fact of the lost volume and we
actually did not pass on the
money to do that the NCOs that
in our view we are we actually
paid extra to the hospitals to
make them all the NCOs did not
pocketed funds because they had
to pay those rate increases we
get all use them for a quarter
for everybody except hospitals
that meant for from I believe
around somewhere in April to the
end of September in the call if
you could just driving the
dollar value of what that was
but I know we have not seen a
big drop up to utilization
several months ago and came back
up and my biggest worries
position is and we're seeing now
is when people the like care
people are afraid to go get a
mammogram on all of us here see
the primary care doctor there I
will for sure whatever yes for a
long period of time medical
expenses never would start going
up because they come in later.
We've seen a bit of that when
you are large hospitals this
winter people in the icy without
comment much more staff are
extremely work can be more out
of control so it's a tough
balance but I feel like we all
BMC is accountable might.
Having the best on the rating
reasons without giving more
funding in and that's all amount
of money to go and we know what
it is.
What what is I yes senator is
about a hundred and forty two
million dollars in additional
payments to hospitals for that
quarter and other providers but
that was the grand total.
Thank you Representative the L.
and manager.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Dr Scrase all right
Representative Anderson.
Percent of Anderson.
Representative Herrera.
Thank you madam chair of thank
you
Thank you members of the of the
analyst and thank you Dr Scrase
site to members really popped
out to me on we grew our
Medicaid population enrollment
by a hundred thousand this year
how many total do we have on in
Medicaid now in the state of New
Mexico.
It's in the high eight hundred
thousand goal time in here know
the exact number.
Madam chair.
Madam chair and members of the
committee and and Representative
Garratt we.
We are now at just about nine
hundred one thousand actually
members.
And that project to be at about
nine thirty six thousand by June
of this year.
Well thank you madam chair thank
you
I also Dr Scrase are another
number popped out which is the
growth in the snap P. EBT
program three hundred and fifty
thousand so that was in this
year of the pandemic is that
correct correct federal
government offered program madam
chair Representative R. and
members of the committee
operator program you stand a lot
more money to kids the beat the
thinking being used to get food
and school the other meals and
school they got the money we got
lunch Simmons breakfast some
gets actually got multiple bills
they and school and so is that
the federal government pays all
bill for that money and half of
our administrative expense.
To expand that program has been
very successful unit revenue
program and spending as much as
we get we had a few bumps back
in September and October not
July at little shortage
apparently in national George ID
cards would have thought that
and but we got through it and
and I do want to kind of signal
you all that this morning I got
a letter from
at the nutrition services
approving us to do another very
large amount of money on this
this spring after the end of the
school year to continue this
funding options get so super
excited about that news and I
what back director Ludwig van
Asten analysis and perfect
timing and meeting with my agent
of seeing that and I'd be
delighted to pass on that means
that thank you madam chair and
Representative where I am madam
chair Dr Stacy thank you for
that thank all your staff that
was that I have a list that made
a huge difference and in
people's lives and and we're
very grateful for your chair
department for making all of
that work and it could NEC it
could have been the same I guess
I guess is also looking at the
chart review showed that that
huge number going down in and
that I'm sure you've given it
some thought but what happens
when this care is money COVID
money ends when is that going to
be it takes and and how are you
going to kind of the
redo the numbers or I I don't
know if you can call every
authorized recertify how would
you how would you do that as a
state agency I'm just very
curious about how that will
work.
Madam chair and members of the
committee and Representative
Ferrary the answer to this
question what will be the same
as the action required what
keeps you awake at night now not
that I don't have enough to give
me away you know way Medicaid
works away snap works we
recertified people do really
detailed income information that
figure out of their eligible you
know those nine hundred thousand
people we've got in the rules
normally we would do one twelfth
of the month for that war in
January but you marginally more
ring not doing that the federal
government as part of the
maintenance of effort is usually
people on don't Jack up snap
thanks for deal.
Almost half a million people
now.
Your budget budget budget chair
is a snap and.
We used to renew them every six
months the one six the lowest
forms the mom and.
Equipment that advert you know
we're not going to that renewal
process so why should I think
you're asking so I you know
returned about a million people
in immediately hi Mr you know
stay up late on new year's day
and the research by it as
impossible so we're pushing
really hard at the federal level
to say you know this is this is
an impossible task we can't do
this and I'm on third your to be
honest the that's right we
haven't mentioned yet but of
those hundred thousand
additional people were pretty
sure the fifty thousand of them
when we recertify will continue
to receive benefits and as I
mentioned in my colleagues of
the LFC if you can tell me where
those fifty thousand are we can
do this a lot quicker but the
only way to now is to go through
every single person hundred
thousand all million people get
new data on their income and
their dependents and and all
that so hi this is something
were working with our the
Russian delegation in Washington
is a concern of every Medicaid
director probably is losing more
slate and I am I know my does
work I just got a small gets it
on gems of some other reason
right up this is a really big
for us and something that we're
gonna we will be back next year
report on how it's going that
you can't do twelve months and
work in a month or two three.
I'm madam chair Dr Stacy thank
you for that answer I know in
the past when when New Mexico
went into a recession other
states can come back in a couple
years and always takes New
Mexico about five years and so I
I don't think that all these
people will be automatically off
of that Medicaid and be back
working and everything will be
rosy I think it's going to take
us to a five year recovery
period to sell anything I would
say that this committee or the
staff anything we can do to help
you I would I would like to
encourage you to ask and that I
guess we'll all stay ten thank
you madam chair thank you Dr
Scrase for answers.
I thank you representative will
go back to Representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair I know were we've got a
long afternoon and I'm going to
ask a.
Responses to either be short or
we'll talk about it later madam
chair I broke it into two pieces
one is Medicaid wanted schools
on the Medicaid question I was
especially interested in hearing
a report of from a state agency
that we have achieved the
highest thank you well.
Hi vacancy is is what we often
talk about but the number was
surprisingly slow it referred to
as the best in the history of
the agency and I thought to
myself that how to assist
gentleman if he has achieve this
what is what is his plan to
sustain that serve Dr Scrase
please.
Thanks up and if I am I'm gonna
share my screen very very
briefly once I remove all the
windows around and sure all used
to having to do that and that
just as sure you're really
really quickly on our scorecard
E. R.
I I already showed you the graph
of the vacancy rate here being
zero point eight three percent
will pop up there one of the
things we noticed we also look
at Chernobyl what percent of
employees leave reporter we
always have the rear champ three
percent of our employees retire
we expect that we celebrate that
so I not much we can do about
that this is really interesting
this is the beginning of the
pandemic and people really
hunkered down they we did not
journal where they generate
dropped a lot of these a good
proportion of these folks are
retirees you back up a little
bit but now it's staying steady
we have a very comprehensive
programming quarterly employee
meetings with the secretary and
deputy isn't got on chair
meetings were really emphasizing
the importance of employee
retention and doing the kinds of
things good managers will to
connect employees with their
work and so we're hoping that
has not provided cannot get
better the other thing I would
mention the second we have
really high employee
satisfaction
from marketing their work
situation.
And you know working from home
basically she says what she
have.
That because of the working.
Okay.
Senator Kristin small number and
so people like that work at home
and we we can measure our
productivity and we're seeing
positive results there as well
you know we have an awful lot of
front line I'm parents have
little kids and they are finding
it sometimes it's harder
sometimes they're finding it the
convenience so we thank you
they're trying to become the HSD
of the future find those people
want to spend their whole life
helping other people in the
toughest times their lives want
to make that a really solid home
for people that live with us for
a long time so you know the data
well tell us next year what we
did on that that we're happy
with our results so far thank
thank you Dr Scrase and analyze
really salute you and your staff
particularly your H. and R.
person who must be doing an
outstanding job in filling the
vacancies that you found when
you started I did want to ask
the LFC and analysts to question
relative to Medicaid and I think
I know the answer but in short
we were talking about the of
Medicaid F. Matt that we were
talking about the match and then
we were talking about the
requirement that we dropped no
one in New Mexico is that just
Medicaid or is that handout also
and secondly finally I heard
something that with something
like we're gonna get this
hundred fifty million and that's
gonna be a forty five to fifty
million dollar game and that
will bracket into ninety four to
a hundred and fifty million I
hope my rendition made sense but
I was trying to understand am I
supposed to be concerned about
ninety four two hundred fifty
billion and then I thought you
know in the context of an eight
point two billion dollar budget
maybe that's not significant as
it stands up please L..
C..
Madam chair representative
Anderson still the maintenance
of effort the six point two
percent maintenance of effort
only applies to Medicaid it does
not apply to a tenant or snap or
any of that.
And then ninety four to a
hundred million that you're
referencing madam chair
representative that's not a
number per se to be concerned
about it's a number to be happy
about I suppose that the well
not happy they were having a
pandemic but
So I guess it depends how you
look at it but
That's the additional two
quarters for the remainder of
and calendar year twenty twenty
one or the first two quarters of
fiscal year state fiscal year
twenty to so those are the that
the additional six point two
percent federal matching funds
that will get so
you'll recall that Mr Regan Byrd
had his spreadsheet that he had
ninety million so it basically
we get madam chair at around
seventy seventy seventy five
million a quarter it is tied to
our higher enrollments so that
the numbers have gone up as
we've gone through the pandemic
because our enrollment incline
the incline increased.
So that's where that number
comes from and that number will
help offset that projected
shortfall thank you thank you
very much for that of that was
hope for clarification but
nonetheless it is still a
complicated animal to completely
understand
I'm I if I could madam chair I
wanted to talk to Dr Scrase
about of of how he perceives.
Yes agency.
We sometimes talk about CYFD D.
O. H. and H. yes the building up
of a group working together in
the health care delivery
component and dealing with this
pandemic and what I see is many
New Mexico schools of the eighty
eight districts there are a
bunch of them that are going to
try to meet the February eighth
deadline for getting the school
doors back open I'm interested
in that because I believe
getting our children back to
school is a necessary early step
to getting New Mexicans back to
work so I I I sort of eight two
two and my real question Dr
Scrase is as you go forward it
and up it would be in observing
the New Mexico schools try to
struggle through closure or or
what we call that all virtual
education to a hybrid.
What role do you think you're
agency will be playing in
supporting that important
effort.
madam chair Representative
Anderson members the committee
that's a great question I think
we are in conversations right
now with PED and a leverage
federal match for expansion of
school based therapies and
treatments and school based
health centers and so we want to
leverage federal dollars for
medical care for Medicaid CNN's
in schools I will not remember
that fifty four percent of all
New Mexico kids are on Medicaid.
This isn't present wall of your
question but seventy five
percent of babies roughly born
in New Mexico are bored on
Medicaid and so how kids are
doing in New Mexico is a big
issue for us and I actually
during this pandemic because of
my.
We're all working over DO age
working very very closely
Secretary Stewart and I and our
you know governor's office at
all about trying to get schools
back open we gave all really
long presentation I.
Seems like last week was
yesterday morning Secretary
Stewart knighted the combined
education giving these and we'll
make sure to send me a copy of
that as well because of that
that's a date about why we think
this is the right time to make
that move thank you thank you Dr
David then as you lean into of
the effort to see our return to
school program work I see a of.
I guess it's a gating criteria
that rapid response or in
fourteen days.
Of result in fourteen days back
in remark moat learning does
that statistic recommender mean
anything at PED number that you
wouldn't be as familiar with.
madam chair representative that
enter Santa while I'm walking
willing to serve a little bit
out of my way and I'm afraid I
would be arrested by one that
are out thank you for that
question thanks no thank you
regard I'll wait for Secretary
Stewart did my only point going
forward really goes like this I
hope that as we move into hybrid
learning and I hope to the
extent you have any control over
it we don't simply make it pass
fail on his on screen or
districts performance therefore
you got to go back and start
over again I think that of
implies to me rather than pass
fail.
I hope we will go forward with
past probation and fail I hope
we can not a painter selves in a
quarter some of these larger
high schools have met up I think
a greater issue relative to
testing once a quarter of their
employees want to wait the whole
area of sports is is a very
important particularly down here
where we play a lot of
competitive sports and I just
think we've got to of it lean
into it means let's not see how
tough and say boy you get one
over baby you were two weeks
back at home with everybody at
home I think that will be almost
worse than what we have today so
thank you but your response
would be appreciated.
Yeah.
Great brief Dr Scrase I mean we
don't need to have these long
discussions if you would provide
a brief answer thank you.
Madam chair thanks for that
direction Representative Anders
we can talk more offline I think
our everything you talked about
was really weighed heavily in
the conversations hi PED is what
a lot of thought into this and
we're gonna have Secretary
Stewart reach out to get to go
through some of the details
thank you doctor.
Thank you very much keep up the
good work madam chair very much.
Representative Armstrong thank
you madam chair I'll be brief Dr
Scrase thank you for your
presentation I was curious if
the just health program is under
your department.
Yes yes Madam chair
our Representative mentions I
didn't see any line item on that
or funding and was just curious
on how that was coming in and
it's up and running in all areas
that it needs to be.
I'm just scanning the screeners
you I've got the can speak to
that I'm gonna turn this over
your act director com I just
want to let you know we're so
privileged amber here up she
actually knows more about
Medicaid I think that anybody in
New Mexico and so we're
delighted that you moved here to
be with us all.
Madam chair members the
committee and Representative
Armstrong at thanks for the
question and I actually eminent
at eight I think W. secretary
Amir jump in as well but I'm you
know the line item you're
correct wasn't listed there the
program is up and running and
have made some pretty
significant strides in that area
so you know before I'm.
And the W. secretary Rubin her
role she was managing that
program so at Kerry I'll give it
a the staff here and then let
you jump in with any additional
items but are we just open up a
new contract that I think is
going to allow us to operate
that program even more
efficiently and generate some
savings for the state W. did you
wanna jump and.
I'm sure thinks the as Madam
chair representative Armstrong
members of the committee thank
you for asking this question
that program I'm cert passionate
about it it's been really
interesting project The New
Mexico really is a leader in the
work we're doing here it has
been a heavy lift for the
counties and so we are at sorry
let me step back for a minute
and just described the program
to the just health program is
really our program for justice
involved individuals and
providing Medicaid services
transition of care and
suspending eligibility or sorry
budget for populations that are
incarcerated we do exchange data
with counties but that has been
having less of that contract
that Nicole is referencing will
allow us to I have a data source
on and people who are admitted
into the prison and jail and
when they leave at so we will
have a universal data source
that will allow us to economy
those suspensions and then
reactivate Medicaid eligibility
upon reentry into the community
and that will allow us to also
facilitate coordinated care with
them managed care companies so I
don't to take too long if you
have any questions I'm happy to
talk with you offline about that
okay thank you if you could
reach out to me afterwards I
would love to because I know
it's
Mr difficulty being implemented
in one of my County so thank you
so much that's all thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative let's
go to Representative Allison.
Thank you madam chair being
question for Dr Scrase.
Good afternoon
HSC report on page two twenty
eight I was glad to see that
coverage initiative it says
there that the HSD is planning
implementation of a managed care
entity to serve native American
starting in the northwestern
quadrant of the state that just
sounds like my area and the way
I read it your encouraging and
will be supportive when we have
such an entity that's formed is
that correct.
Yes madam chair and and
Representative about also read
dancer here's the things number
one we think it's a it's it
would be great to have a native
American run managed care entity
in the state that's part of what
I was really interested in when
I first came to this Rall years
been attempts in the past would
be the first state actually hold
off on that right now we're sort
of on a suspended creative time
in our work.
Asian is working out some of the
details about how they want to
approach the project contract
with us what we believe we built
a great foundation work in the
contract quite a ways along
we're just and an inflection
point where our just stop
waiting for them to sort out
some of their buying preferences
is that as a nation relaying
this to us and we'll be able to
move at.
Thank you Dr Scrase C. this very
very encouraging because I just
filed legislation to support
that this morning so I think you
Dr Scrase and thank you madam
chair.
Thank you representative Allison
Muscogee Representative small
thank you very much madam chair
thank you Secretary thank you
analysts first madam chair miss
us about thank you so much you
walk through in detail and
incredibly complex.
Budget during an incredibly
complex time and thank you first
question madam chair miss us
bell the LFC recommendation
would still ensure that we do
not have a base deficiency in
the next fiscal year for
Medicaid compared to the DFA
recommendation is that correct.
Madam chair representative small
and it is correct that the LFC
recommendation includes an
additional sixty eight million
for Medicaid so if you combine
that with that hundred million
approximately that we expect to
get from the federal additional
six point two percent F. map
that of really close as a large
percentage of the gap
but then of course that the
executive is taking a slightly
different approach using of the
forty five million and non
recurring revenue so that close
the gap as well in a different
trajectory.
Thank you madam chair thank you
miss ask about
we we did go through that and I
know I I wonder madam chair this
in those things much better than
any of us but the then rivers
airy language that is being
proposed by the executive when
there are resources to close
this and say it seems like in a
much more year to year
accounting it seems preferable
to go with the larger base
recommendation from the LFC in
to avoid issues that might arise
with the non reversionary
language
second
madam chair
this is a quick quick question
for secretary Scrase.
I it showed that the difference
she's that that you're proposing
that they're proposing and that
it LFC and exec concur that
there will be eight few are full
time employees in the income
support division you also
explained secretary Scrase the
really
Full emphasis that HSD has put
within technology to serve New
Mexicans during this pandemic do
you foresee those changes and
that focus on technology being
one of the more permanent
changes and evolutions for HSD
kind of the before and after
pandemic that madam chair has
asked about during the interim.
Madam chair representative small
members of the committee and now
if you ask me this question a
year ago I would have been a bad
prediction I think one thing the
pandemic and shown us is that
people actually strongly prefer.
Things like online enrollment
when they have a computer you
don't want to sit in our waiting
rooms and so I think you know
and and another thing we've done
is set up call center to use the
go statewide so if one region of
the state is getting a lot of
calls and another one is sitting
I believe that the our
technology implementation just
routes those to maximize people
getting answers to the questions
I do think that it isn't
strictly implementing new
technology and driving down if
G. trap because now we got a
thousand frontline employees
managing sixty three different
benefit amounts regulated by
state and federal law that
change is a very the more we can
automate the standard decision
making and serve up to our
frontline employees the
information we need more
accurate we get and the more
speedily we can resolve these
concerns up until two applied
online over the past year thirty
percent of those were got a
determination right there while
they they waited so I think.
Implementation of technology I
mean an awful lot of
businesspeople on this committee
I think their answer is going to
be probably the same as my dad
absolutely we need I'll leverage
every chance we can get on for
automation arm place like it and
our customers really like it and
we will still maintain those
services on the ground those
folks who don't have access to
that kind of technology that
percentage is up progressively
dwindling over time thank you.
I thank you Ishq thank you
Secretary Scrase
deeply appreciate the answer
just to other real quick
question questions madam chair
first you went through some of
the the the last special session
adjustments the five million
increase for food banks the five
million in disaster relief
it sounds like both of those are
out the door you leverage the
disaster relief the one time
payments to low income New
Mexicans another forty percent
with federal funds madam chair
secretary Scrase do you see
space in either one of those
areas.
Base and or need for us to keep
on our radar screen as we
continue moving forward this
session.
That madam chair and that the
Representative small another
great challenging question
I think as long as New Mexicans
you know New Mexico in New
Mexico kids and particularly at
the highest rate of child hunger
that there will be room in this
state to invest in and increase
our.
Our investment in those food
programs there's a bill that we
work with Representative
Stansbury on to this end as well
for a longer term solution but
I actually think that food is
going to be an ongoing issue for
New Mexicans and it it interacts
of course with the ability to
work and you know and kids
having enough food to learn in
school so it's a really big
issue New Mexico and in terms of
income support you know it's.
US states have in excluding ours
figured out ways to interface
with the federal system to fill
gaps like we did you know a few
days before Christmas for very
very low income families to get
them extra relieve and so I
think my view of it is
we're gonna have to keep our eye
and what the federal government
is doing you know if we if
unemployment benefits just
simply run out and people have
to go on longer and longer
period of time
that's going to create other
problems in health care
behavioural health things like
that so I think both should be
on our radar screen.
Yeah we've got a million low
income people in our programs
and this could be a more
vulnerable time if you're
already you know that Janice the
threshold it UP Jareth mention
for like a mom to kids twenty
two thousand dollars it's eight
dollars and eighty cents an hour
this is below minimum wage for
somebody working forty hours a
week so is a very vulnerable
population and I agree that you
need that we all need to keep a
close eye on how things go and
the interaction of federal and
state funds.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair that concludes my
questions just moving forward I
think the question touched upon.
That is when the maintenance
efforts are on to conclude at
the end of this calendar year.
The working to be ready for that
what it will entail both and
potential cost savings also in
significantly increased
administrative work it's a great
highlight and the.
Yeah and and really again madam
chair appreciate secretary
Scrase his team in the LFC
analysts for their incredible
job today thank you madam chair.
Crowder.
Thank you.
Madam chair and thank you and Dr
Scrase for your presentation.
This
is great I know there's a
tremendous working this out for.
I've got several questions for
those questions chair.
About something that as I was
going to the last.
Now
that we have information we will
just.
I have.
Moments that's a big picture
view of our budgeting process
the or shared with the committee
and.
The.
Was this.
We have.
Representative you know it's
hard to hear you could you speak
a little closer to your my
please thank you yes.
And I will.
I will try and turn them just a
little bit.
The process the first thing I
noticed was that this agency is
is receiving are being
processed.
The ten percent general fund
increase.
In the past few weeks with the
agency.
Agencies are pleading with us to
harmless or don't compare
budgets let us break even but
this agency has percent increase
in general funds.
This notice was.
This is.
Receive one point two billion
dollars.
Which is approximately twenty
percent of.
Local.
Will for the budgeting process
One agency is about twenty
percent of the total and I think
that's happening to the doctor
but the other twenty nine thirty
agencies that we have out there.
And so I feel are budgeting
process agency.
It allowed our process to get we
have one agency this become to
support our rulers it's become
those the.
The less of our agencies.
Yeah I reached the point.
On that one Dr Scrase would
create any part The New Mexico
to on the table and also
What what Senator caller.
But if we continue put
hers in one agency to pursue the
federal dollar I think we're
doing it in causing harm the
remaining cities within our
state it.
I'm probably got less stress
less not I'm not he was getting
up for this morning.
I think that's about this
morning I.
I I just think that what we
we're in the process.
Is something we really need to
stop an exam.
The first dollars is the a lot
of those agencies with our
state.
Thank you for allowing me to
write comments.
Already thank you Representative
Crowder I I got the gist of that
comment to us if Dr Scrase wants
to all responded dollars knocked
that's okay if you do that's
okay so it's up to you.
Madam chair and representative
probably super brief up I I
didn't I want to apologize if I
gave the impression that we
wanted to use the entire general
fund just for the federal match
I mean my point I think was why
spend an extra general fund
dollar if we're entitled to a
match in the second thing is you
know for adding no we got an
increase in our membership that
looks like it's going to end up
being eleven and a half percent
in so that's what's driving our
and our budget for next year and
it's was really the question I
think for you all as it is now
ten percent increase to cover
eleven and a half percent more
people have become unemployed or
are otherwise I run across users
medical illnesses during the
pandemic is that worthwhile
investment or not and that's up
your call we are trying to be as
efficient effective the
provision of frontier dollar yet
thank you.
All righty let's see we've got
any other hands a.
All four questions I I don't see
any but I I do have a couple
comments myself here and and
looking at all of this
Know what my plan is I'm gonna
set up a small workgroup.
Come together and and come back
with a recommendation for the
full committee for couple
reasons the approach for general
fund uses different quite a bit
different between the executive
and the LESC.
I and if we don't get it right
we have to make sure the
language all ties also and each
one of these sections is
different
we don't want to use non
reoccurring for Rick your
recurring expenses.
And we just want to make sure
that
we're going to have funding
available to support the nine
hundred I think is nine hundred
thirty six thousand that was a
given to to us earlier and make
sure that is available as we're
approaching approaching up
building this budget for the
following year it is intriguing
to me that we are going to have
An issue around enrollment that
I'm looking at the high level
line three.
Of the negative seventeen
thousand eight hundred and
seventeen that spanned a number
that was agreed to but I tend to
agree with Michael on Google his
comments when he said you know
these things just aren't right
right now I mean there's some
things that we need to we need
to do a little more digging into
and come back for the full
committee's review.
Our I'm I'm interested in costs
around maintenance of effort be
nice if we could also have a
maybe our analyst to saying the
CMS letter for the enhanced six
point two percent.
I don't like not language.
I understand why it's why it's
being proposed but we generally
don't do it Lester said.
Good reason and I think we just
need to do a little more digging
on the US it's one of our more
complicated budgets of that we
deal with is certainly by far
the largest budget on overall
when you combine general and the
federal funds into all of this
so what I'd like to do is I'd
like to ask Representative
Sweetser to leave this I'm gonna
ask Representative sticks
Syriana.
Alain and chat field to work
with you Representative Sweetser
and the two analysts as well as
Dr Scrase is staff that you know
however he thinks needs to be
the person to weigh in on this
but I need you to come back with
a better understanding of what
this is going to look like and
then they're very very different
there are very different in the
use of general fund and that's
what we care about so again it
be Sweetser Chatfield lanes are
not Syriana and Dixon welcome
back and and give us a
Good.
Recommendation I suspect down
together working with RubyAnn
and Michael both the avid done a
good job on this this is a hard
budget to get your arms around
again Dr Scrase thank you
for your presentation thank you
for your work and all this and.
It's always been interesting to
me to say that the you know the
Human Services Department all
almost services a bank for
everybody else there is a chart
there that he had put up in how
money moves to the different
agencies like CYFD and health
and and all these other things
that actually close through his
department that he's going to
have to you know he has to
answer for at some point here
and and hopefully there is a
good working relationship and
understanding on what those
returns on the investment will
be.
A whole bunch programs tied to
the US and again I guess that's
what we're going to do so at
this point I'm not going to ask
for a motion.
We're not going to go through a
hearing again we're not going to
do that what we're gonna do is
recall on Representative
Sweetser on behalf of the
smaller group.
To provide the recommendations
so it's not gonna be executive
are LFC it'll be HSC
recommendation when you come
back.
Already thank you again hello am
presenters and committee let's
move on to the next hearing.
Which is.
The
Department of Health.
HSD because six six five.
Madam chair would you were
repeat those names of those
board members.
Yes those would be.
Will be led by Representative
Candie Sweetser it'll be
Chatfield Ryan lane Syriana and
Dixon on the small committee
thank you madam chair and if you
want to volunteer will let you
on.
Madam chair I would be willing
to serve of because I. we hear
are getting our work up energy a
statement about done.
Okay let's put that let's
Carrera and Anderson on their.
All right thank you let's move
on to the next next agency and
will call on the analyst please.
Good afternoon madam chair
members committee Kelly client
with the legislative finance
committee as the chairman sorry
we're on HSD code six six five
the department of health with me
today is my counterpart from the
department of finance
administration MaryBeth cents
more and the secretary designate
Dr Tracy Collins there's also
several other department of
health staff that she will
introduce at the appropriate
time if it pleases the chair.
So with that I think that we're
going to start with the general
fund summary high level in your
packet first it explains very
clearly the differences between
the LFC and executive
recommendation so in your
packets for the members that is
page fifteen of your packet
again page fifteen of your
packet to go over the general
fund summary high level.
Now looking at the general fund
summary high level you'll notice
at the very bottom on lines
eighty three there is a ten
point four million dollar
difference with the executive
being higher in general fund
revenue recommendations and the
LESC however a majority of that
difference can be found on just
a few lines in this I'm gonna
highlight just those few lines.
The first one I'd like to turn
the committee's attention to is
line ten line ten is an
executive recommendation to
increase school based health
centers using additional two
million dollar general fund the
LFC did not make this
recommendation because it was
not included in the agency
requests this came in as an
executive recommendation.
The agency requests early on in
this process was actually to
reduce the help the school based
health centers the LFC
recommendation instead decided
to leave those harmless journal
finalized however there is an
increase federal revenue that
the agency is expected to get
with the even even a flat budget
so the executive added two
million all the LFC did not
because it did not come through
our normal budgeting quest
process.
That it will also be the case
on mines thirteen and lines
fourteen so first wind thirteen
you'll see that there is an
increase from the executive
recommendation for three million
dollars for teen suicide
prevention services again that
we didn't have a chance to go
through vetting of this project
because it wasn't requested of
the LFC and so we haven't been
provided data at this time it
was not included in the LFC
recommendation.
Also the case online fourteen
for larks also known as long
acting reversible contraceptives
you notice the executive
recommended an additional eight
hundred thousand for larks.
Online sixteen you'll notice
that the LFC recommendation puts
and one point nine million
dollars of revenue that the
executive does not and you would
have heard earlier in Revance
presentation that there was a
difference in the tobacco
settlement revenue recommended
by the executive verses the LFC
our revenue projections are
lower than the executive so in
order to bring those revenues
back in as close as possible to
hold agency as harmless as
possible it's not totally
harmless but it mostly is the
LFC put in eighty one point nine
million dollar recommendation
for that.
Now if I could bring the members
attention down to line forty
two.
Line forty two is in the
facilities management program
and the executive recommendation
put almost one point four
million dollars and two FTE.
Again the LFC wasn't requested
this so was not included in the
LFC recommendation.
The next to the line which is
actually not a difference but I
do want to
bring everyone's attention to is
line fifty seven this is in both
recommendations but I did think
it was important to bring to the
committee's attention that both
recommendations online fifty
seven at seven million dollars
back to the to a developmental
disability sports program in the
special session mostly remember
that we took a Revenue swap
in DDS do we had additional
federal revenue coming in and it
was we were able to take seven
million out of state general
fund to help us during that
tough Financial Times no that's
one time money so we're putting
that seven million dollars back
in both recommendations to hold
the
program harmless on that piece
and then online fifty eight
you'll notice that both
recommendations increase TDS T.
Services overall executive just
a little bit more so the
executive recommendation did
seven point two million wall the
LFC recommendation added two
point five million for a
difference of four point seven
million now I do think it's
really important that we think
back to the previous
presentation with RubyAnn and
she talked about that increased
asked map that increase that map
is included in this DDS do match
rates so
we're going to get additional
federal dollars through halfway
through the FY twenty two fiscal
year through December what that
translates to four DDS di is an
estimated six point seven
million dollars per quarter that
we don't normally get so that
money will be matched in on top
of these increases general fund.
And then the final line that I'd
like to bring the committee's
attention to is lines sixty six
and you'll see that there was an
increase for receivership by the
executive this was another
recommendation not initially
included in the agency requests
that five hundred thousand
dollars was not included there
for the LFC recommendation so
those there's a lot of other
changes but those account for a
majority of the ten million
dollar difference between the
LFC and exec we're talking about
the state general fund and I
figured be easier to go through
those few lines first before we
go to the different sheet so
that everyone has a broad
perspective of it as we go
through this.
With that I'm gonna go back to
the.
Different sheets the traditional
different sheets and just go
over the summary sheet before I
turn it over to my counterpart
at the department of finance and
instruction.
So revenue wise we already
talked about the ten point four
million dollar difference
between the LFC India fan most
of that being in the public
health program the DDS di
program there's other revenue
differences however you'll see
recommendation for other
transfers was two point eight
million below the executive for
prefer that projected reduction
tobacco settlement revenue
there's also a projected
reduction in county supported
Medicaid revenues and that much
like the tobacco settlement
revenues is comes to LFC as part
of a consensus revenue from the
economist and so the two point
difference is the reduction
tobacco revenues and the
reduction in county supported
Medicaid projected by the
consensus revenue.
A program between DFA and LFC
economists.
Recommendation for federal
revenues will
was higher than the executive I
five point three million and
that's mostly because the
LFC supported the department
requests for federal revenue as
well the executive made some
reductions based on what they
thought were closer to actuals.
Without all going to some of the
oversight of the base the
executive recommendation for
person was one point two million
about the LFC resulting from new
initiatives recommended by the
executive we went through most
of those and also lower vacancy
rates the executive
recommendation for contracts
with two point six million above
the LFC mostly resulting from
those new initiatives in the
public health program not to not
submitted to LFC for
consideration.
You'll see recommendations for
other costs mostly supported the
department request well the
executive is flat jury of which
was in the DDS di program
resulting in a seven hundred and
ninety nine thousand dollar
difference well both of the
recommendations increase funding
for DD Services the executive
recommendation did slightly more
than the LESC we went over that
in the general fund summary high
level.
As for language you'll see me
Executive recommendations both
contain language regarding the
tobacco settlement revenue
however these languages are
different given that we have
different reclamation
recommendations on how much
funding we think that's going to
go in and that's much like the
HSD our recommendations of those
have to be reconciled between
HSD and LFC depending on which
tobacco revenue settlement
recommendation the committee
goes with.
Finally you'll note the
performance targets have been
reconciled learn the back of
your packet I will bring your
attention to our volume pages in
case any of your interests said
at the top of your packet you'll
see those notated of for do you
wage the volume one can be found
on page fifty two through sixty
volume two which is our
budgetary recommendation can be
found on page two sixty one
through two seventy two and
volume three there is a chart
regarding the DDS di spending
and allocations which can be
found on page ninety five with
that I'll turn it over to my
counterpart Mary Beth to go over
the first program.
Thank you Kelly a good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Mary Beth
tends more and I am the DFA
analyst for the department of
health so I'm going to take you
through the first P. code in
this agency it's P. zero zero
two it's the Public Health
Division.
So R. Kelly has gone over
several of these items a little
bit but we'll just go through
Eight in this programs contact
so for revenue the executive
general fund recommendation was
three point three million about
the LFC I'm for new initiatives
that weren't included in the
department request and I'll go
over them a little bit morning
moments the LFC recommendation
again for other transfers with
two point eight million hello
the executive and that is due to
the projected reductions in
tobacco settlement and county
supported Medicaid revenues.
The LFC recommendation for
federal revenues and other
revenues I supported the
department request well the
executive decrease federal
revenues to be more in line with
the actual from FY twenty after
the base the executive
recommendation for person with
two hundred and forty five point
four thousand above the LFC to
support new initiatives not
included in the department
request to give just a little
bit more information on this
quickly for you about half of
this with the implement a health
care study
results health care study that
affected
The person in Public Health
Division and it also affects our
facilities so I when we go
through facilities you'll see I
and some differences in person
there as well.
Also the executive
recommendation includes on
additional two million so Kelly
went over this in a high level
two million to expand services
at the school based health
centers.
Three million to address teen
suicide and eight hundred
thousand for long acting
reversible contraceptives and
that's really the majority of
the remaining difference in the
program and again as was noted a
moment ago the initiatives
weren't in the department
request these were executive
Hans so the LFC did not consider
them
and for language so this is
worth noting the LFC and exec
both contain language regarding
the tobacco settlement revenue
appropriation but the funding
contained in the language there
The funding in the language has
different amounts so it just
reflects however much was in the
respective recommendation.
Performance measures are
reconciled and other note on the
summary I will turn it off Kelly
the next program.
Thank you Mr Stewart we're on to
U. zero zero three the
epidemiologists and response
program this is one of the
programs that has smaller
differences for the department
the executive General Fund
recommendation was three hundred
and twenty seven point eight
thousand above the LFC.
The LFC federal revenue
recommendations support of the
department or quest well the
executive reduce the revenue to
reflect actual amounts received
in FY twenty resulting in the
slightly over one million dollar
difference.
Due to the increase federal
revenue the LFC recommendation
for person with seven hundred
thousand above the executive the
LFC recommendation for FTEs
supported the department's
request for resulting in the
fifty two FTE difference.
The executive added FTE to
account for contract research
rate with federal cares funds
the LFC did not include this
these are not necessarily going
to be FTE forever so you don't
necessarily need them to be
added to the rules this way it
is one approach so so that's
something for the committee to
consider going forward with that
I will turn it over to MaryBeth
for laboratory services.
Thanks again Kelly madam chair
members of the committee I'm
gonna take you through P. zero
zero four which is the
laboratory services program also
known as a scientific lab
laboratory division after this
program the LFC general fund
recommendation was two hundred
and forty point one thousand
under the executive the
executive federal revenues
recommendation was six hundred
and nineteen point one thousand
under LFC again to reflect the
actual federal grant amounts
received in FY twenty.
In the base the executive
recommendation for person reduce
the bacon C. rate resulting in
the difference of four hundred
thirty six point eight thousand
in contractual services the LFC
recommendation supported the
department's request well the
executive increase the budget to
keep it flat to FY twenty one
and that accounts for the
difference of about fifty seven
point eight thousand it so
there's not too many differences
in this program they're pretty
minor so I'll I'll turn it back
over to fund for that
facilities.
All right thank you so much
we're in the P. zero zero six
disabilities program that's on
page five of your packet.
You'll see general fund
recommendations supported the
department request while the
executive increased nearly one
point three million the
executive recommendation
slightly adjusts other transfers
resulting in the twelve thousand
nine hundred dollar difference.
Yes the LFC federal revenue
recommendations supported the
department requests while the
executive decrease this amounts
reflect FY twenty actuals
resulting in the nine hundred
seventeen thousand five hundred
dollar difference.
The LFC other revenues
recommendations for the
department request for the
executive increased slightly to
allow for adequate budget to
implement the results of the
health care study that missed
and noted earlier in her
presentation.
In the base the executive
recommendation decrease the
vacancy rate and included
funding to implement health care
study results in a resulting in
the one point four million
dollar difference in person the
LFC recommendations for the
department request for
contractual services well the
executive may reductions reflect
actual amount spent in FY twenty
resulting in the six hundred and
fifty two point one thousand
dollar difference.
And I'll turn it over to Mary
Beth this does work for the EST.
Thanks again Kelly I got madam
chair members of the committee
this is going to be an overview
of our P. zero zero seven the
developmental disability
supports division.
As we noted earlier this is the
other area of the budget that
has the the most significant
differences in funding levels so
for revenue the executive
general fund recommendation was
four point five million about
the LFC in the base the LFC
recommendation for person
supported the department request
well the executive
recommendation reduce the
vacancy rate resulting in the
difference of five hundred and
thirty point six thousand.
Also in the basic executive
recommendation reduce the other
costs category for care and
support as requested by the
department well the LFC remained
closer to the operating budget
resulting in the difference of
seven hundred and nineteen
thousand.
Well recommendations increased
funding for the waiver services
the executive recommendation was
four point seven million higher
than the LESC in the other
financing uses category which is
where the majority of funding
for the waiver is given the
recent continuation of increased
federal matching rates well the
LFC and exec recommendations
could increase duty allocation.
I LFC estimates total revenues
increased sixty seven million
per quarter for each additional
quarter the federal government
continues the increase match
rates and very quickly I will
just know that when these were
when you recommendations were
put together we did not have the
information that the the
enhanced F. not had been
extended as far that wide so
that that was new information
and then not a performance
measures at the target
differences were reconciled and
and they're noted on the summary
and I'll turn it back over to
Kelly.
Thank you Mr Moore yes just to
be really clear on this both the
LFC the executive recommendation
when when this was recommended
up last year the DST was
projecting a shortfall that with
the increased F. map right and
both DFA and LFC putting that
seven million dollars back that
was taken during the special
session it is highly unlikely
that there will be a deficiency
going forward in that projection
so really the question is more
about how much growth.
The two recommendations look at
in a minute hopefully did not
MaryBeth the she agrees with the
statements create.
So with that all could turn over
to P. zero zero eight the health
certification licensing
oversight program.
The executive general fund
recommendation was five hundred
thousand above the LFC to expand
receive receivership Services
which was not included in the
department request so was not
able to be considered by the LFC
the executive recommendation for
personal was forty five point
three thousand and one FTE above
the LFC due to decreased vacancy
rates the executive
recommendation for contractual
services was five hundred and
thirty eight point six thousand
above the LFC mostly for those
receivership Services increases.
And the LESC recommendation for
other cost categories supported
the department's request well
the executive made miscellaneous
reductions resulting in the
eighty three point nine thousand
dollar difference.
With that I will turn it over to
Mary Beth for the medical
cannabis program.
Thank.
Madam chair members of the
committee this is P. seven eight
seven it's the medical cannabis
program this one very simple the
executive and the LESC
recommendations are identical
so I'll just leave it at that
and have to back to Kelly for
ministration.
Thank you very much okay we're
in the lots program which is P.
zero zero one administration
also call programs support many
other agencies this can be found
on page nine in your packet.
The executive general fund
recommendation was one hundred
and eighty seven thousand above
the LFC well the LFC
recommendations supported the
department request the LFC
recommendations support to the
Department quest for personal
spending well the executive
decreased the vacancy rates the
executive recommendation for
contractual services category
remained flat with FY twenty one
operating budget well the LFC
recommendations supported the
department request resulting in
the four point two thousand
dollar difference the LFC
recommendation supported the
department request for the other
cost categories well reducing
miscellaneous expenses will be
executive recommendation
remained flat with the operating
budget resulting in the twelve
point three thousand dollar
difference for program support
that is the end of the programs
the next few pages are
performance measures in case the
committee has interest in those
things are also very important
there's several pages of them to
look through and with that I
will turn it over to my doctor
for any final comments you may
have before the secretary.
Thank you madam chair Committee
I I don't have anything else to
add so I'll just introduce Dr
Tracy Collins and to to get her
presentation.
Afternoon thank you both madam
chair members of the committee I
want to echo Dr Scrase and thank
you for your service I want to
thank you for the opportunity to
present our budget for fiscal
year twenty to but I do ask
madam chair by might introduce
members of my team prior to
getting started.
Go ahead secretary designate
Collins please sure I want to
introduce area and showers
director of the office of policy
and accountability I want to
introduce the director for
budget and grants management
Shani Romo I want to introduce
the division director acting for
public health Mr Geoff Larra I
want to introduce acting deputy
secretary Mr Jason Cornwell and
I want to introduce W. secretary
Billy Jimenez and with that if
we can begin to share slide.
This.
One moment madam chair members
of the committee it'll just take
me a second to get these flights
upload it.
Thank you so much if we move to
the first slide please.
Second we just got the Sentinel.
Slideshow.
And the lower right corner you
can also very very.
Okay.
Let's start with slide so for
our to our fiscal twenty two
Budget overview our total
request to six hundred twenty
seven million two hundred twenty
three thousand seven hundred.
Next slide please.
So I want to review the various
areas that support are requests
for public health division we're
actually asking roughly six
point two million and for our
administrative services division
we're asking one hundred eighty
seven thousand for epidemiology
responses three hundred twenty
seven thousand eight hundred.
For scientific laboratory
division it's two hundred forty
thousand one hundred and for
developmental disability support
it's approximately eighteen
point six million.
Next slide.
For
Madam it's approximately one
point two million and for health
certification licensing and
oversight also known as our
division for health improvement
for DH all right the request is
six hundred and seventy eight
thousand seven hundred.
Next slide please.
So as far as a supplemental
appropriation request which
you'll be used to cover
facilities management division
public health and scientific
laboratory divisions to address
but budget deficits related to
the COVID nineteen pandemic the
total request is ten million
next slide please.
So as to the epidemiology
response division and our
response to the pandemic please
note that we clocked more than
fifty seven thousand overtime
hours by ERT staff estimating a
total of one point seven million
over time cost and things that
we addressed included case
estimations contact tracing
collaboration with tribes and
nations and is disease
surveillance.
I also want to highlight for
epidemiology response division.
That for contact tracing we had
three hundred twenty eight
temporary staff and seventy
permanent staff we're trying to
pitch and during the senator
regarding
case of contact tracing we've
actually had a capacity of
eleven hundred twenty cases per
day.
Next slide please.
The total request for
epidemiology in response to
vision is three hundred twenty
seven thousand eight hundred.
Slide please.
For the Public Health Division
in fiscal year twenty one Ph.D
staff work thirty two thousand
one hundred thirty four hours of
overtime totaling a large amount
of one million in personnel
costs more than one million and
in fiscal year twenty to we were
one million nine hundred ninety
five thousand nine hundred and
fifty eight and personnel costs
and that's obviously the cost
thus far and again it was
related to testing contact
tracing state emergency
operations regular operations
administrative support.
Next slide please.
So the total request for the
Public Health Division six
million one hundred thirty nine
thousand eight hundred and I
want to point out that a large
portion of that is three million
two hundred youth adolescent and
young adult suicide prevention.
Tional service contracts with
school districts to address
adolescent health issues
including you suicide youth
suicide and suicide attempts are
increasing in New Mexico
including children as young as
ten years of age schools do not
have staff to do this prevention
work so this money will fund
contractors who can address
mental health issues including
youth suicide prevention public
health perspective and trained
staff and screening and
depression referrals these
efforts need to be funded due to
the impact of COVID nineteen on
the use this funding is not for
adults suicide only for you
adolescent and young adult.
Next slide please.
For a laboratory division the
response of the pandemic has
really been around providing
laboratory testing for state and
local agencies infectious
diseases environmental hazards
and impaired driving.
Currently were operating at a
capacity of twenty four hours
seven days a week due to the
pandemic in addition to the
pandemic response our normal
responsibilities include
veterinary food and dairy
testing for the department of
agriculture and clinical testing
for infectious diseases that are
public health significance
likely got you boleh and west
Nile virus.
Next slide please.
So the total request for the
scientific laboratory division
is two hundred forty thousand
one hundred.
Next slide area.
So I want to spend a few minutes
providing some clarity on
central registry versus the wait
list.
Registry is a database that
tracks applications for home and
community based waivers the
actual wait list is comprised of
only those applications that
were considered complete and
those applications are placed on
hold.
There is a steady increase in
the number of individuals added
to the waitlist since fiscal
year fifteen there are two
primary factors for this we had
an average of three hundred
individuals added to the wait
list each year and fewer
individuals removed from the
wait list through the allocation
process.
However the close of fiscal year
twenty we saw a slight reduction
the wait list from five thousand
sixty four in nineteen to four
thousand seven hundred and
forty.
As of January twenty first
twenty twenty one almost six
months into fiscal year twenty
one there are currently four
thousand six hundred and seventy
two individuals on the waitlist.
The reduction of weightless
which was due to do DST's
ability to increase allocations
in fiscal year eighteen the DST
was not able to fund allocations
but in fiscal year nineteen do
TST was able to find one hundred
and forty allocations and just
when you're twenty we were able
to provide three hundred fifty
five allocations.
Next slide please.
Do budget reductions in fiscal
year twenty one DDS DDS had to
reduce the number of allocations
to two hundred and seventy two.
Any reduction in funding for DDS
state will significantly impact
DST's ability to allocate
individuals from the wait list
any year where there are fewer
people removed from the wait
list through the allocation
process that are added to the
application process the wait
list and wait time will increase
next slide please.
So for fiscal year twenty to
funding is needed for all
waivers please note that without
restored appropriation PTSD will
not be able to allocate
individuals in fiscal year
twenty to from the wait list for
the DVD are the media waiver so
without the support provided by
the executive recommendation DDS
the may not be able to move
individuals off the waiting list
and into services next slide
please.
So for the developmental
disability support division or
DST a total request is eighteen
million six hundred eighty nine
thousand four hundred dollars.
Next slide.
So for our health certification
licensing oversight division our
division of health improvement
DH II.
We conducted a hundred and
seventy one on site COVID
nineteen inspection control
surveys and we have met all
federal COVID nineteen survey
work low timelines.
The requested increase for the
help certification licensing
oversight program supports
ongoing efforts to ensure
oversight and licensing of
medical facilities to include
investigations of an abuse
neglect and exploitation New
Mexico hospitals boarding homes
crisis triage centers and
assisted living facilities among
other activities.
Next slide please.
The total request for DH I is
six hundred and seventy eight
thousand seven hundred.
Next slide.
For facilities management
division and the response the
pandemic there's been reduced
bed availability and occupancy
limits and delay to somebody's
care for the most vulnerable New
Mexicans we've had increased
demand Koster staffing issues to
meet appropriate clinical care
staff to patient ratios we've
expanded needs for I. T.
improvements such as the
pharmacy system electronic
health records and billing
Clarence house.
So the total request for the
facilities management division
is one million two hundred and
sixty three thousand two
hundred.
And administrative services.
For the administrative services
the total request is three
million six hundred eighty seven
thousand of which a hundred
eighty seven thousand is funding
to restore budget cuts resulting
from the fiscal year twenty one
special session.
We also request three point five
million for pharmacy system
replacement and this is the
replacement for several outdated
despaired pharmacy systems this
is essential to improve
capabilities for prescription
management improving revenue
processing orders managing the
dispensing of medications
inventory management and
preventing medication errors
modernizing our pharmacy system
will allow for better regulatory
compliance and transferring and
disposal of controlled
substances notification and
security reporting to national
regulatory agencies with that
final slide.
Thank you everyone madam chair
members of the committee I want
to open up for questions.
Thank you very much Secretary
designate Collins.
Thank you to the analyst for
your presentations today we're
gonna go ahead and get started
with questions starting with
representative Armstrong and
then we'll go to Representative
Garcia percent Armstrong please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
secretary you for your
presentation I just have a
couple of quick questions I was
curious
if you could point me or someone
in your department can point me
to the our rural primary Health
care act and where the funding
is for that if it's in this
budget.
Okay I'm gonna madam chair and
members of the committee
Representative Armstrong I'm
going to ask a Shani to respond
to that thank you.
Hello everyone Mr chair
Representative Armstrong the
funding for the rural primary
health care act is in the Public
Health Division.
I was and did you have another
question with that I just
wondered what the about where
that is I don't I don't know
what this line item or it's hard
to mount within on the
aggregated on number well we can
get that full amount for you
I would appreciate that I I'm
having some issues keeping a
clinical but in my area and was
curious about that and then also
for the county health councils.
Where that funding is.
It's in public health as well
Representative Armstrong it's
I'll get that information for
you as well we think we had
At one time a hundred and eighty
four thousand dollars and during
this last
Session there was an increase
basing crease are requests for
the health care councils and so
that I have to get you that
number as well.
Okay thank you very much I just
want everyone to know Ole and be
aware of how important those
health councils are to the state
of New Mexico there they
represent all the counties and
they are on the ground in the
areas that we live work and play
and it's it is adamant I am
adamant about funding those
health councils especially in
rural New Mexico and I
appreciate your answers and I
look forward to hearing from you
thank you thank you.
Thank you representative
Armstrong thank you for your
work on that as a quick reminder
everybody to go through the
chair.
And which I am certain and just
briefly next we're gonna go to
representative Harry Garcia.
Thank you Mr chair I got a
question for the lady on the DD
waiver.
You know I've been a
Representative for five years
now and that this is not going
down very much what is the
reasoning behind that other and
funding.
Mr chair and Representative
Garcia I'm going to call on W.
secretary adjacent Cornwell to
respond to that thank you.
Thank you madam secretary Mr
chair and representative Garcia
the reason the wait list does
not go down is because without a
certain level of recurring
funding to to offset the number
of people that get added to the
weight test every year we're
basically treading water.
And so on average about three
hundred individuals get added
they become eligible for the
services in any given year so
unless we outpaced the number of
people who becomes eligible
we're basically going to tread
water.
Thank you.
Mr chair
The reason I ask is because I
have to individuals in my family
there on the the waiver right
now and what I'm gonna ask you
now know who has oversight.
On what's happening with these
people on the waiting this as we
speak they have home visits and
so forth what oversight on on
the people working for you to
see if they're doing the right
job.
Mr chair and Mr Representative
Garcia
the department does not have
oversight of people who are on
the waiting list we check in
with them periodically to make
sure that they're still you know
available interested and ready
to receive services but the
department does perform
Pre COVID and post COVID when
we're allowed to home visit we
perform home visits my
department was able to execute
almost two thousand face to face
home visits
the fiscal year prior to to
comment taking hold of our world
and also the division of health
improvement are they survey the
agencies that provide services
to the individuals on the
waivers.
In the interview them they
interview their staff and their
nurses to make sure that they
are competent trained and have
good relationships with the
individuals they support and
division of health improvement
also investigates all
allegations of abuse neglect and
exploitation for individuals who
are in services.
Thank you Mr chairman of was
Carl I think of you
misunderstood to question what
the question was on your staff
being that is supporting these
people in the waiver has
oversight on your staff in part
because I want to come to that
point after you answer that will
the ball and I'll tell you why
about the question of.
Mr chair and representative
Garcia I'm sorry for my
my a lack of clarity for
individuals and services my
staff.
DDS Department of Health DDS the
staff.
Have oversight of those
individuals who are in services.
Thank you Mr chairman the reason
I brought that up Mr well is
because all.
On the on the.
On the my family side.
The people are going out there
to help the two individuals one
individual is severely
handicapped.
And they were teaching how to me
cookies this is a case worker
did it make more sense to me on
what we're doing.
Babies people money to Wall to
healthy people would be to help
and what I saw was not very
in order what the services
rendered in all the at one point
told me well we're teacher do
that because the building will
work at a grocery store this kid
can come to do.
You know that just bothered me
that this happened about three
four years ago I was wondering
whether oversight on the people
who work for you so we we know
we know we're not what you
resources on on stuff that
doesn't help these people at
all.
Mr chair representative Garcia
I empathize with what you saw
that day that individual who
receive services has an
interdisciplinary team of folks
that team may consist of an
employment coordinator of course
direct support professionals T.
P. doctor patient therapist be
separate but also mentally they
have a they also have a case
manager who's in essence the
quarterback of that team now my
Division supervises all the
members of the team and the
quarterback as well and if ever
we get a a complaint of you know
services be provided that don't
match with the individual and
visions for their lives we
certainly go out an investigate
work with that team to bring it
back in line or what that
individual in their guardian
want for that person's life.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
that answer and then the reason
people don't complain too much.
well it because they're afraid
to get pulled out of the all of
the the waiver because you know
there's a lot of pressure to get
onto it and people for the most
part are kind of shy away from
complaining too much you know
and I brought it up because you
know I saw it firsthand and that
is you want by my side quite a
few times and I S. last time
wipe disk these kids are through
marriage one fifty five year old
male one forty eight and I asked
my wife is happen all the time
you should you just you know
but we can't complain too much
because then people get in
trouble for that and it also
just concern the reason I
brought it up to your attention
is so you can be aware of what's
going on out there or do have a
little bit more oversight on
who's taking care of what out
there.
And the allows to the concern of
mine and I've I've brought this
up last time too and all Senator
bring it back up again one more
question Mr chair of I have a
lot of questions would do a time
frame.
how do we pick the people to
actually get on the TV we were.
Mr chair and representative
Garcia first let me address a
point from the previous question
no complete will ever result
within individual being removed
from services okay so I just
want to make that clear once an
individual is eligible and on
the DD waiver the only way that
they whatever come office
services is if they they move
out of state or they die or they
a lax to to withdraw themselves
okay so how a person moves into
service once the department has
enough money to allocate
currently New Mexico uses
registration date as the point
in time so it in in in in
layman's terms it's almost first
come first serve so family will
fill out an application that
comes to the Department we
verify that that individual does
meet our eligibility definition
and then that is the date on
that they are in line that is
their date on the waiting list
and what as we allocate people
we go back to a certain date and
time and then we we make people
aware that you know you'll your
number your your your
registration data is is.
Do you want to move into
services and then we walked them
through everything they need to
do from the moment they get
their allocation letter to the
day the first their presentation
and your staff person shows up
to help them so Sir is bite
registration date.
Thank you Mr chairman Scott well
thanks for the first answer to
my question that's good to know
because you know people are kind
of gun shy and people don't
complain because they're afraid
to what's going to happen the
consequences are terrible and we
all renal retaliations of
questions will thank you madam
chair and thank the second
answer thank you for for the
presentation thank you Mr
chairman eight thank you very
much Representative Garcia
before we go on to our next
question we do want to call on
our LFC analyst for additional
feedback in this very important
area Kelly can you please add
additional feedback.
Thank you Mr chair members the
committee I just wanted to
remind the committee of are
really important policy shift
about this in the last year so
the executive and the LESC and
the legislature funded what's
called the community supports
waiver and the agency is
beginning to scale that up
meaning that some of the
individuals on that waiting list
who were not receiving services
are now beginning to receive
services with the limited budget
until they can come into the
more comprehensive weaver and I
think that's really important it
was a big step for the state and
for us to remember that we're
starting to roll out some
services for those on the
waiting list until they can come
into the conference of greater
waiver several years down the
line.
Thank you very much Kelly you're
referring to the media waiver
thank you for bringing that up
and thank Representative Garcia
for for those questions next
we're going to continue on we're
going to go to Representative
Hochman Vigil then we'll go to
Representative.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
director Collins and all your
colleagues for this a very
interesting and helpful
presentation my line of
questioning centers around the
development of the COVID
nineteen backseat vaccination
website and also the rollout
program I didn't see any
particular reference in the
materials to that so I was
wondering first and foremost
where those monies are coming
from and our state monies or if
there federal.
Mr chair and Representative
Hochman Vigil I want to I thank
you for your question I want to
start out I will call on Shani
in just a minute but I do want
to start out explaining that.
On my arrival we begin a very
intensive approach to based
guidance so that providers that
understand who to target first
with vaccine doses because of
the limited supply which is
still an issue even though it's
gotten better and the website
itself has been something we're
quite proud of we're the only
you know state in the nation to
start of that and we are
currently fourth in the nation
for vaccine distribution which
were very proud of specific to
the dollars for the vaccine roll
rollout I miss Romo if you would
respond I would appreciate it
thank you.
Mr chair representative.
Sorry I didn't get the name
Representative Hochman Vigil.
What the hell hello Sir yes on
the taxi the vaccination rollout
there's funding from the special
session house bill one special
session that you H. received for
ten million dollars and so there
is funding there for on the
media
component of the vaccine
efforts and because the ten
million consisted of contact
tracing testing and vaccine
efforts so there's ten are part
of that ten million and then
there's a grant right now that
are.
The public health division is.
Preparing to send their
application in for eighteen
point nine million dollars for
these efforts and and then
there's been other purchases
that we've made are to assist
with the initial arms efforts
before we receive the money for
the grant funding.
Thank you very much Mr chair at
director call them so I think
you wanted to to continue
answering the question director
yeah I just what Mr chair and
Representative Hochman Vigil I
wanted to add that the eighteen
point nine million is really
going to include a lens on
equity and also to
representative Armstrong to try
and gauge our councils and try
to work with them more closely
so that's another positive I
just want to share thank you.
Thank you very much at Mr chair
and the secretary does I'm sorry
secretary doesn't need a Collins
my apologies
then that follow question I'd
have been if you were not to
receive that grant is there any
particular money designated for
the upkeep and expansion of the
vaccination program through DO
H..
Mr chair and Representative
Hochman Vigil actually the money
that the ten million I'll let
this rubble comment more detail
was the money that we had
specific to the vaccine rollout
but for additional funds Shani
can you please that thank you.
Mr chair Representative I still
don't get the name because I
can't.
Do you.
Hochman Vigil Representative
haha.
Sorry trying to read it off the
screen okay so those are the
those two amounts that we the
ten million for the special
session our portion of that and
then the eighteen point nine is
what we have at this point there
is a portion of the another
question from the in that
capacity requests that we
received hundred twenty point
seven million are that they're
working on that plan so I'm not
sure if that grant at that
Brandt application has any
component of that so we're going
to have to look at you know
toward
Looking at the funds for future
costs after you know we do the
vaccination rollout.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
secretary designate Collins and
miss Romo I appreciate your
answers to this my hope is that
you just continue to communicate
with us as R. as future plans
developed to ensure that this
very important vaccination
program is very well and fully
funded for the rest of the state
thank you very much.
Thank you very much
Representative Hochman Vigil the
Martin next we're gonna go to
Representative Lotta followed by
Representative Chatfield
Representative Lotta thank you
Mr chair of thank you Secretary
Disney I I appreciate the
presentation and the information
I do have a question though on
the presentation and you they
they yeah on the slide so you
presented to us earlier with the
our on the on the staff on the
overtime hours in the estimated
to local one point seven million
overtime costs I really want to
ask about the contact tracing so
so we're the contract research
where the hired by the by the
state with the state employees
or the contracted out Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chair and
Representative Lara I will ask
actually if Mr Jack Lara is on
the line he can comments from
the public health division.
Madam secretary Mr chair
Representative Lara and members
of the committee of for the
contact tracing I do know that
now that we've hired on contact
researchers there now under the
F. B. in response the vision and
so we have those positions under
that that division that's a
separate division then Public
Health Division of so and I I
believe if I could refer to the
Shani Romo to confirm that
that's where those positions now
are housed.
Mr chair representative Lotta
the positions are housed in here
do there's approximately four
hundred positions contact Tracy
positions and there are being
paid right now out of the at the
lab capacity on grant the one
that they refer to as the
contact tracing rent.
So that is where the on they are
paid for and they are state
employees temporary on state
employees and you know it as
once the funding is gone then
the positions will go away.
Thank you for that thank you Mr
chair one other thing so what so
I wanted to know or I was in the
very curious as to the the the
turnover was I know that it was
a very difficult thing and I
appreciate the work the hard
work that everyone did to get
the contact tracing was I was
very very important part of
getting of this pandemic under
control so you know did up at
how what was the Max or or what
was a maximum of employees that
that you had at one time or what
what what was to turn over I
just I'm curious because
I I I heard through the
grapevine that there was a lot
of turnover in there was a lot
of turmoil with the with the
with the contract racers and out
and one of the aspects of that
was that many of them didn't
speak Spanish and so there was
that there was a that there was
some miscommunication there with
my a communities and and
monolingual Spanish speakers
with the contact with the
contractors that can that can
speak the language Mr chair.
Mr chair representative Laragh I
am not aware of a large turnover
I know that we reached about
four hundred as far as the
maximum amount of employees but
most people we hired did stay on
as far as the translation piece
we now have a team in place to
provide Spanish translation but
that wasn't deficit early on and
this remedy would you like to
add to that.
Mr chair representative Lotta I
do not know the turnover of for
this often contact tracers I
should contact Yardi which is a
pretty million GM response
division to inquire on this
information for you.
Mr chair yes please thank you I
really of I would really
appreciate it and I understand
how difficult this was and I and
I and I and I'm very
appreciative that that you that
the department has a sufficient
staff and they in that you've
hard for Spanish speaking
contact research thank you for
that I appreciate it thank you
Mr chair that's all I have.
I thank you very much
Representative Lotta thank you
for the questions thank you for
the responses sorry I was on
mute next we're gonna go to
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman my question goes back
to the DD right waiver what is
the current wait time right now.
From registration date to to
allow an individual receive
services through the waiver.
Mr chair representative chapter
all I'm Mr Cornwell can answer
you madam secretary Mr chair and
representative Chatfield the
state is broken down into five
regions North west southwest
southeast southwest and in metro
and so we allocate from each of
those five regions.
But for all five regions when we
receive funding to allocate
we're going back to individuals
who have signed up in two
thousand and eight.
Show me your how many how many
years is that.
Eight to eighteen are about
thirteen years Sir I'm sorry Mr
chair Representative Chatfield.
Thirteen years.
So a child is nearly grown
before they get the services.
Representative outcomes Mr chair
and representative Chatfield
if a family signs up at when the
child is leaving school they
will face a very difficult time
of life right before services
begin of the forty six hundred
individuals that are currently
on the waitlist roughly twenty
three hundred of them are minors
under the age of twenty one so
much of their services are
through the through their school
system right so they they have
an IP in there getting therapy
they're getting respite if
they're on the waiver and so we
are constantly asking families
you know get identified early in
eligible early so that by the
time you know an allocation
exists you're not faced with a
big gap because once the child
leaves school there's really no
other you know there's there's
some other services but it's
certainly not the fullest
service array of the waiver so
we encourage everyone to sign up
very early but currently it is
thirteen years.
Mr chairman I work I really
appreciate that that answer and
well thirteen years a long time.
That.
Thank you very much
Representative Chatfield next
we'll go to Representative had
a.
Thank you so much Mr chair of
thank you Mr corn well I I guess
my question is what is the cost
of the of the of the client
going on the the waiver what
have you budget that if let's
say you have a child of six
coming and how how much you're
gonna budget that over I guess
the question their lifetime
depending on you know what
they're disability yes.
Up.
Mr Mr chair Representative
Herrera okay
So two people different people
are eligible for different
service packages and so a child
is eligible for a smaller
service package because of the
school is really going to pick
up the bulk of their services
their school and their family
until they turn twenty one
adults get a larger service
package because they get housing
employment day program therapies
nursing so right now the average
cost of an adult who is on the
DD waiver is around ninety four
thousand dollars a year.
The average cost if they
selected them the video waiver
which is a self directed waiver
big individuals can hire and
fire their own staff it's some
differences like that that cost
is about sixty eight thousand
dollars per year.
and so every year when we
allocate we analyze how many
people picked the DD waiver
versus how many people picked me
via waiver and then we can
predict it's usually about sixty
five percent the waiver thirty
five percent the visa waiver
then we use that average cost
amount to be able to project out
depending on how much money
received how many individuals we
will be able to allocate in that
on coming fiscal year.
in addition to those took to
that you know the the regular
allocation right you house the
legislature funds us and we turn
that into services we also do a
Christian allocations that means
a person moves out of state or
if a person passes away their
opportunity goes to the next
person in line so we don't hold
anything back we don't know we
do keep a small number of of a
allocations on reserve for when
an individual is dropped off at
an emergency room or there's
abuse and then they can't stay
there the need service but that
is how we project the cost of
the waiver every year we use the
average amount based on the a DD
waiver allocation and an average
amount based economy via
allocation.
Thank you thank Mr chair thank
you Mr Khan that's the that's
very helpful to me and how many
people do we have on a duty
waiver right now what is our
mission we have about thirty two
hundred individuals on the DD
waiver in about eighteen hundred
individuals on the the me via
waiver around two hundred
individuals on the medically
fragile waiver that is a very
special way where it gets all.
Some of some of the individuals
who are on that waiver aren't
supposed to live past ten or
twelve years old right because
of that service package they get
to live at home with their
family and their caregivers and
we're seeing members who can now
they're living much longer now
having a higher quality of life
because of that very cost
effective labor so thirty two
hundred do.
Eighteen hundred me via.
Matt French and of the growing
supports we were Mrs Clinton
mentioned earlier all has about
a hundred and seventy five
people are on it now and we're
growing that you know we try to
grow that every day.
So you have about it chair
Mister.
She had about fifty four hundred
people on.
The waivers and how many people
are on the waiting list of four
thousand six hundred and seventy
two.
And yet okay that amendment
thank you very much thank you Mr
chair that's uh and thank you Mr
Carmel it's very helpful.
Thank you thank you very much
Representative out I'll have a
couple of questions and we'll go
to madam chair Lundstrom
thank you Secretary designate
Collins I guess the first
question I'd like to briefly
return to the vaccine roll out
or the continue and vaccination
New Mexico.
The the we are clearly being a
successful state one of the top
states are getting vaccines out
to our populations that said
there and we have an excellent
tool to track that I want to
compliment that tool as you
mentioned secretary designate
Collins.
In that publicly available
transparent data there are wide
disparities between the
vaccination rates per capita in
different counties and for
instance the county where I come
from doing Ana County.
Is somewhat down that lease list
I think we're twenty third out
of New Mexico for the third the
three counts my question is.
Does anything from your
perspective X. explain the
disparities in per capita
vaccination rates to this point.
And moving forward knowing
there's a finite amount of
vaccine New Mexico has been very
effective about utilizing the
doses that we have gotten.
What should we expect and really
hope and need to see an uptick
in the per capita vaccination
rates across New Mexico but
especially in counties that are
that are currently lacking.
Six thank you Mr chair madam
chair and members of the
committee please keep in mind
that when you think about our
provider guidance so those are
the groups street prioritized to
be vaccinated first given the
limited supply vaccine the phase
one a or healthcare providers
and then in phase one B. in the
first two subgroups it's those
are seventy five or older or
those with chronic condition
depending on the prevalence of
proportion of the population
the county health care person
when we look at these initial
numbers of race by county you're
going to see a discrepancy
that's one component the other
component is through that how
many vaccine providers do you
have any given County you can
get shots in arms so that's what
influence as well what you see
as far as the disparities among
counties final point I want to
make is that the O. H. is really
actively engaged in trying to
understand and do a good job
with vaccine roll out and with
the lands on equity equity
meeting getting out to all
counties all the regions all the
communities of color major and
so we want to make sure that
we're doing a good job and
that's something we're currently
evaluating it ongoing thank you.
Thank you Secretary doesn't
icons thank you for those very
clear answers
And I guess I would look forward
to being in close communication
given the appropriate focus on
equity the current.
Large disparities and again and
I don't want to be too parochial
but in done the Ana County with
a high percentage of folks that
fall under the one be that is
seventy five or older and being
so close to the border
you are your emphasis also on
the through put and and
increasing the ability of health
care professionals and or others
who can administer the vaccines
that's I appreciate that point
so I look forward to staying in
very close communication there
and and seeing that lands on
equity in the in the focus on
the state really kick in.
Second secretary designate
Collins and I think probably
both for Mr Cornwell and also
for Kelly with the LFC.
The the new policy switching now
to the do the waiver the new the
new policy around via.
Is there opportunity to increase
the proportion of folks who are
on the waiting list who will
take advantage of me via given
its lower costs and the fact
that while while on the waiting
list of course folks are
receiving the the I think I
would assume although I don't
know for sure very few services
so do we see that ratio
increasing are there ways that
we can act that serve New
Mexicans to increase that ratio.
Yes Mr chair I'm gonna allow Mr
Cornwell to answer thank you
Matt thank you madam secretary
Mr chair I think we're the media
waiver is tantamount to the DD
waivers so they're both
comprehensive waivers I think
Sir we you're referring to the
supports waiver that is the
newest waiver it has an
individual budget of ten
thousand dollars and it has a
case management function that is
paid for that doesn't come out
of that ten thousand dollar
budget amount.
It has a ten service right in
those ten services were
developed based on a survey that
the department did all the
families that were on the wait
list so we wrote them.
And we said what do you need to
make a difference in your life
while you wait for the
comprehensive waiver for
allocation to the comprehensive
where.
So we do believe that in time
people will take advantage of
the supports waiver as they
continue to realize that.
taking a supports waiver
allocation does not remove you
from the waiting list for higher
level services should you need
them in life.
The main difference between the
supports waiver in the
comprehensive waivers is
residential caring for someone
twenty four hours a day in a
provider operated home is
expensive but respite day
program behavior support those
types of things are inexpensive
but they make all the difference
in a mom and dad's life so we do
think this is your one we're
about seven months and and we're
we're lagging behind our targets
we're going to continue to
educate continue to let families
know that this is for them are
built you know based on feedback
that they that they gave us and
that they will not come off of
the waiting list for
comprehensive services should
they need it so in short Sir yes
we expect more people to take
that waiver over time.
X. thank you so much Mr Cuomo
for that really informative and
and and and and excellent answer
I appreciate it we are going to
go back to Representative Garcia
briefly and then we're going to
go to madam chair.
Garcia amendment thanks for the
opportunity asking the question.
But to call as a leader the
phone will we spoke briefly
offline the but we avoiding
because we and I ask the
question of why the selected
what county do give off the
vaccination this the reason I
bring that up to now because I
want the people that are hearing
in my community why that
happened because.
My in school district was in
line for getting vaccinated in
the fall of well done and so
nobody got vaccinated and
they're still asking me why what
are we doing I'd like for you to
explain to a little bit of would
not.
Certainly Mr chair madam chair
representative Garcia.
The issue with the teachers if I
understood your question
correctly Sir was that they were
not in the current list of folks
who are eligible for vaccines
unfortunately the only are
receiving as of this week fifty
six thousand doses of vaccine we
have about eight hundred
thousand people combine looking
at phase one a and the two
subgroups who are in the seventy
five or older or with a chronic
condition now we definitely want
to get our teachers vaccinated
but the supply is not there
therefore priority groups we
have in place right now are
those who are most at risk for
morbidity and mortality from
Mexico that and so it's just a
matter of supply demand mismatch
and ideally we definitely need
to get the teachers and other
frontline essential workers
vaccinated but we need more
vaccine.
Dr dollars Mr chairman the
reason I ask a question what is
a one point two more County
district the school was in line
for vaccination they told them
that one line and then they
pulled the plug on on that's the
question I wanted to okay this
yes Mr chair madam chair
representative Garcia there was
miscommunication internally with
the O. H. as I came in the door
I began to write the face
guidance I had a team in place
unfortunately the communication
was not as strong as it should
have been and so we realized
that we had communication going
out saying just shots in arms
and not following their faced
items that we had to put a stop
to that that we can get on track
and that was the reason for that
change I'm sorry for that.
Thank you doctor golden's repeat
that answer thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Garcia thank you
very much secretary designate
Collins at now we're we're gonna
go to madam chair Lundstrom.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Questions I'm looking at the
Cash balances for this agency
for the department of health.
Six six I and I'm looking at
the phone number zero six one
zero which is the general
operating fund.
As of November twenty twenty
there sixty one million dollars
in there.
And I'm looking at the DTW NSW
and their sixty million in
their.
And then the Fund purchased
account about two million in
there just wondering what's
going on here I mean I would
think that would be.
Rolling through the dollars
available to this department.
So I'd appreciate a response.
Yes madam chair thank you for
the question I'm gonna ask Shani
Romo to respond.
Madam chair members of the
committee so for the sixty
million the scene fund balance
for it believe it's the or sixty
million.
I believe he said for.
Allen's or was it for the duty
waiver on well there's both on
here
we've got DD waiver.
At sixty.
Million here okay and so on that
one there we we the HSD invoices
Department of Health and so I'm
not sure if there the invoice
has it coming and so we pay
according to the invoices from
them so that's probably why you
see the amount there because the
budget for the
our duty waiver and supports
waivers about a hundred and
twenty million so we're halfway
through the year so that's where
you would see that large amount
there.
Are you know sixty million still
left over then the the sixty one
million that you're saying from
the six one hundred that's for
the whole agency and so are you
know and we we have a lot of a
budget of three hundred million
so sixty one million left over
you know that's it's kind of on
track with what we have on to
half the year.
And we're showing a negative
Miss showers on the
Department of Health county
supported Medicaid.
Supported Medicaid so on that
one there we were given a dollar
Department health is given a
dollar amount to spend too and
so we're gonna have to look at
that because I reduce the budget
authority off for this and
in response to Kelly
letting me know Kelly client
from the LFC letting me know
that the funds were going to be
reduced and FY twenty one and
twenty two so I went ahead and I
reduce their budget authority so
all look at this cash balances
see what's going on because we
did have to give every year the
fund balance of the that any
balance that's in the coming
spring Medicaid has to go back
to DFA.
For their efforts.
Okay and I want to follow up on
a question that was asked
earlier by one of the committee
members and this gets back to
the roll out of the vaccination
I.
We saw report Ms in the
Albuquerque journal about the
percentage of people vaccinated
county by county.
I am very concerned about what I
saw regarding Santa Fe County at
twenty one percent and then my
County McKinley County at eight
percent which was at one time.
The highest per capita in the
whole country.
Now when I look around the rest
of the state when you look at
Burnley own every place else
it's very very low so I need to
have a better explanation of the
one I just heard somebody give
Representative small as to why
that is so different.
So madam chair I appreciate your
question and I can tell you at
this point with meeting up maybe
two months into this role
there's a lot of effort around
addressing in antiquities and
trying to improve the percentage
by county.
unfortunately when we have to
person place was rolling out
baxeen there was not a good
policy in place to keep track of
what we were doing we've now
make changes in our staffing so
that we can improve how we roll
out the vaccine so that you
don't see these discrepancies.
What what were those inequities
was just availability County was
it population base is it that
you live in the city different
what's the what was the
procedure the procedure was to
look at the number of the
population and the proportion
who were healthcare providers at
the time and I as I was walking
in the door and to determine how
many doses would be needed as
well as the group that who can
get shots in arms and so the
larger entities got more doses.
Well.
The fly with may I think I I
think that's completely unfair
to rural New Mexico thank you
think it's completely unfair to
the areas that were hit the
hardest during this pandemic and
of course will be asking for an
update.
Those are to the end of the
session as to what it looks like
now since it's I don't I don't
know exactly what the time frame
was from the Albuquerque journal
article but it's just not that's
just not acceptable to me and
I'm sure it's not for the whole
committee.
Anyway with that being said I
appreciate the presentation
today and I'm gonna go to
Representative small for a
motion.
Thank you madam chair I would
move the LFC budget
recommendation for the
department of health.
Okay we have a motion to we have
a second.
Thank you madam chair okay we
have a second is there any
opposition to that motion.
Saying number motion has been
approved so we do have the LFC
want to thank the presenters
today it's been a long afternoon
and I appreciate everybody hang
in there I want to remind
everyone that tomorrow
Our agenda we have the early
childhood
education and care department as
well as CYFD that starts at one
thirty.
But there may be some changes in
our calendar it was brought to
my attention that there may be
some changes in regard to the
way floor sessions are handled
I'm not prepared yet to make a
public announcement on that but
if that does happen will be
working on Saturday mornings I
know we've got a meeting this
Saturday morning to make up for
what we weren't able to do last
Friday that's the two
subcommittees that group has
those two sub committees will be
meeting I believe it starts at
nine o'clock I haven't seen the
calendar but I think it's at
nine o'clock.
All virtual of course and then.
Maybe meeting next Saturday at
eight thirty.
about eight thirty to ten thirty
but I'll get more information
from leadership on that again I
want to thank everybody on
Monday then we'll be looking for
a report from Representative
Smalls group on the federal
lands issue and then hopefully
on Tuesday at noon will be
looking for a report from
Representative Crowder and
Garcia regarding vacancy savings
and how that hell that's
actually handed handled in the
budget process.
we will ask Representative
Sweetser and her
Working group to also come forth
on Tuesday at noon with their
recommendation.
All right I appreciate everybody
same time same place tomorrow
thank you madam chair.
