I'm trying to log on from my
office so I apologize.
Okay thank you Representative
Castellano and then good luck.
You have the link though right.
Madam chair if you could send it
to me we appreciate can't find
it in my email.
Okay Mr downs would you resend
him the link please.
Thank you madam chair hard
working as of lately.
Play that is on its way okay we
have an agenda and we will go in
the order of the agenda so it's
not numerical order but it is
the order we are listed and that
means we're starting with ages
because three seven nine the
public employee labor relations
board and if we can start with
the analysts and you introduce
yourselves and our our agency
Representative and we'll proceed
from there thank you from yes
thank you madam chair.
Because.
I'm LFC analyst for the public
employee.
For I'm sorry hundred and
Representative but we I am
unable to me what he's all the
and the people are not needed so
I need.
I need people commit themselves
they were at going to be unable
to hear the the presenters the.
Hello right yeah and also river
I guess she's not on your.
Mr Jones I'm able to hear you
and if I could if you could mute
and honestly if you could make
hello because that would be
helpful as well.
I apologize everyone needs
things to start out rough I
don't know what else to say and
and a lot of times they
interrupt so.
We are I apologize can you give
us the agency code one more time
as the lately Representative
Hochman Vigil will start with
agency code three seven nine
public employee labor relations
board thank you very much madam
chair.
All right honor would.
I'm gonna hold on one.
Hi and I'm now able to mute I
think.
Look at me meeting everybody
okay.
Power of the chair right honor
if you would proceed I
appreciated thank you all right
thank you madam chair.
I'm hundred Jorgensen the LFC
analyst for the public employee
labor relations board that is
code three seven nine.
For FY twenty two the LFC
recommends of base budget of two
hundred forty three thousand
dollars for the agency that is
four hundred dollars more than
the executive recommendation the
entirety of that difference is
in the person category where the
LFC recommends fully funding the
agency requests and the
executive Allwine the person
expenditures with prior year
actuals on now turn it over to
miss miss CS for additional
comments.
Everyone my name is Nicholas yes
I am the budget analyst for
public employee labor relations
board I I would just like to
echo what Connor said and say
the LFC and executive both reach
consensus on performance
measures and targets thank you.
All right thank you and we have
from the public employee labor
relations board with us.
We sure this is Thomas Griego
executive director for the
Mexico public employee labor
relations board I want to thank
you for this opportunity to
address the subcommittee in to
make a few comments with regard
to the LFC and Executive
recommendations.
I was for a while they're a bit
concerned with the necessary
cuts that we've all had this
year to budgets.
at a time when the public
employee labor relations board
was tasked with additional
duties by the twenty twenty
amendments to the public plea
bargaining Act required us to
take on a greater workload.
From a local leader boards that
were elected not to continue
holding hearings and meetings
certified bargaining units the
sort of thing that the public
employee labor relations board
does.
And of screening those local
board applications as we were
required to do under the twenty
twenty amendments for those who
are desiring to continue under
local board resolution or
ordinance so that's a lot of
work covering a lot of public
employees and this board
Was able to cut its budget.
For a small agency a
considerable amount looking at
my neighbor's.
He's gonna promotion panelists
sure I continue.
To.
Approximately fifteen for from
the original FY twenty one
operating budget.
To cut more than that because we
quite a bit of concern as to
whether we would be able to
effectively continue but I'm
happy to say that both the LFC
recommendation and the executive
recommendation both recognize
that concern and have I'm happy
with either one of them although
frankly for an additional four
hundred Bucks I'm asking that
the committee approved the LESC
recommendation are there any
questions about what the the
board is doing in FY twenty two
or anything that we may have
done in prior budget years madam
chair.
Thank you Mr Griego and I
appreciate we fell from members
trying to get on the stand so I
apologize for that is the sort
of the reality that we are
living in I do not see any hands
right do we have any members who
have questions on this
Budget three seven nine agency
code
vice chair small.
Thank you very much madam chair
Mr gray go you had mentioned
some of the additional
responsibilities do you see
those charges use.
Expanding in the upcoming fiscal
year are kind of understanding
the
what you laid out there is that
kind of what what what you
expect for this upcoming fiscal
year.
I expect the current.
Workload to maintain.
It is
a noticeable increase in prior
years workload.
But I don't think it is going to
be crushing I don't think it's
going to cause us to come back
to you for additional
appropriation for additional FTE
I am property reading between
the lines of your question I
think that may be your concern.
Right now I think it is that we
only have two FTE at this
agency.
And if we work hard and to put
in the extra time so far we're
able to handle the additional
workload and I expect it will
stay that way for time being and
once we get through the initial
period of approving or not
approving local boards I think
we will see a leveling off of
that workload and I'll be able
to tell you better at that time.
what to expect in terms of
increased workload I hope that
answers your question.
It does thank you very much
Mister Rigo thank you very much
madam chair.
This thank you I care do we have
any other questions from the
committee.
And just a reminder we do not
take public input in the
subcommittee hearing although
we're happy to
to get that input when we when
we go to the full committee as
you know we what we do today we
are adopting only as a
recommendation so seeing no
further questions
the committee vice chair had at
a I will go to you for a motion.
Thank you madam chair so I was
on a little late they had taken
the other subcommittee meeting
and I couldn't get to this one
so thank you thanks everybody
for putting up with that it is
it is trying to find side like
to make a motion that we
recommend the the executive
Executive decision.
second.
Thank you very much so move by
Representative had added a
second by Representative small
is there any objection to that.
All right I see none thank you
very much Mr Griego and that
thank you very much hundred
nickel on on presenting for a
us on that
more.
We have more people joining FY I
think we're in good shape here
we are going to move to the
state personnel board that is
agency because three seven eight
three seven eight and Connor
will start with you again thank
you.
Thank you madam chair this is
the state personnel board
Again.
Three seventy eight.
For FY twenty two the LFC
recommended a general fund
appropriation of three point
seven million dollars.
This was one hundred forty one
thousand dollars will last in
the executive recommendation and
the entirety of that difference
was in the personal services
employee benefits category.
The LFC recommendation fully
funded the agency requests well
the executive recommended
holding but person category flat
relative to the FY twenty one
operating budget.
You'll also notice in your
revenues both recommendations
included one hundred fifty
thousand dollars lasts from
other transfers.
That's related to sh current
shared service agreements
wherein spoke contracts with
small agencies to provide HR
services on their behalf CPO is
scaling back going to program
and recommending that those
smaller agencies partner with
large agencies and staff.
And that explains the reduction
in both the LFC and executive
director.
Turning our attention to have
to.
You'll see there is a both
recommendations reduce the
authorized up to the counter by
two that reduction is in
accordance with the CPO request
and reflects the deletion of two
long term vacant FTEs from the I
authorized positions.
Spoke currently has a vacancy
rate of thirty four percent
that's been relatively
consistent over the last two
years.
And at the time of the budget
initiatives LFC analysis
indicated swell had.
Surplus in the person category
of approximately five hundred
eighteen thousand and that was
due to again that back high
efficiency right.
I'd now like to turn it over to
this message is for additional
comments.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I would like to
point out that although the
executive provides a higher
amounts within the personal
services employee benefits
category provides the agency
with about a ten point eight
percent vacancy rate what is the
LFC provides a fourteen point
four percent vacancy rate
I would also like to continue
and stating that the LFC and the
executive reach consensus on
performance measures and targets
for the agency thank you.
All right thank you very much
and and as a director I thought
you on earlier are you available
to present for the agency now I
am madam chair thank you and
thank you very much to a Mister
Jorgensen and espacios sent to
you chair and to all the members
of this committee for navigating
through what continues to be
unprecedented times as we are
doing for all state employees
including at St person
there's a we have a a short
presentation but I I think
you've all been provided and I
would just like to just but
instead of going to a screen I
just like to say in support of
state person that what we have
done and continue to do is to
prioritize strategically hiring
helping to train and retaining
qualified staff including during
this pandemic we have
streamlined all process sees in
conjunction with the FAA and all
our other agencies to make sure
that every dollar spent is
appropriately done and that we
have made the most and best use
of technology in order to
maximize a telework Environment
we in conjunction with the rest
of state government got all of
as many as almost all who can
telework to a telework
Environment very quickly after
the up a public health emergency
was put into place I'm and at
the same time we all adjusted to
make sure that online trainings
were provided for employees that
disciplines were able to move
forward that are Education
Division kept going I will note
madam chair members of the
committee that we also have
finalize both master agreements
with the with both of our unions
and are now and supplementals
and go she Asians with both
that's after eleven years of not
having
every new collective bargaining
agreements and I would just note
that madam chair members of this
committee to note Mr Jorgensen's
remarks which are accurate about
our vacancy rate I will note.
In the last three weeks we have
hired three people to our staff
and have to two vacancies which
we have done continuous postings
on both in our training team as
well as our education law
division I will note that when
it comes to the work that state
person has done and continues to
do with a super lean staff to be
sure the staff that we have a
state person are among the best
if not the best in H. R.
community across state
government we have experts on
hand who can help other state
agencies navigate through there
are so many issues their
recruitment issues their
discipline issues their
reorganization issues and that's
what we do so the experience and
expertise that's necessary to
landed state person is such that
we have endeavor to bring in
people with who are more junior
and to help train them so that
they can grow into other folks
for example on this phone
division director of the New
Madrid and division director
Andre Robert Smith because we
want state person to be the
place where cross pollination of
all H. R. process used at the
highest level happen so I would
ask madam chair members of this
committee to support the
executive recommendation we
continue to recruit and Ernest
R. for folks to join our team of
in order to make sure that we
can provide the best possible
service to the rest of the state
agencies who as you know madam
chair members this committee for
anyone who has had a job in
their life which is everyone on
this phone your human resources
professional makes can make all
the difference in the world that
can help you stay and it can
drive you away and what we
endeavor to do madam chair
members this committee is to
make sure that we provide the
best possible service for our
state employees because in turn
that will be the best possible
service we can get to the state
and with that I turn to
questions thank you madam chair
members of the committee for
your patience thank you director
call.
And and I do not have your
presentation so I'm not sure how
that we shared but and we will
make an effort to get it to
everyone if it was emailed to
the staff we will have a get it
there and so I think it that's
probably adequate I'd like to go
to questions now instead of
going back and trying to share a
budget for your own information
we're not we're not actually
looking at that okay and so.
You are turning to questions
Representative Hadda.
Thank you madam chair thank you
very much
director call me and I guess I'm
just curious about how state
salaries compare with the with
the market our competition in
the regular market I'm just very
curious about how that how that
works out for you.
Sis and other state agencies all
of them impact certainly thank
you madam chair thank you vice
chair for the question
so certainly in this market with
folks being out of work I think
that there are the places that
you can find easily fill
positions and and are super
competitive if not better
competitive in the labor market
Outside of the southeast which
still does outperform from as
salary perspective even despite
the economy right now so I will
say that on balance for many
jobs in the mid range of the pay
bands we are very competitive
for higher level jobs for
example if we're competing with
Los Alamos national lab where
we're competing with
Netflix Inc in Albuquerque for
it IT professionals on the
private sector outperforms the
public sector however I will
note that chair and vice chair
that we still outperform from a
budget perspective we do out
perform a budget in the public
sector here in New Mexico than
the private sector does so as it
can being competitive there's
some jobs for which we are
extraordinarily competitive and
other jobs for which it's the
nature it's the nature of the
beast there's not going to be
any time when we can compete
with necessarily the CIO of Los
Alamos national lab even though
we might cover that talent
completely I hope that answers
your question.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Thank you do we have other
questions I see no more hands
raised.
I'm and I have just been
notified that at least one
committee member is still in
another committee want to rest
of committee members so I know
we have a lot of activity going
on today no other questions from
committee members then Panama
will just share with you that I
have a lot of confidence in and
I always feel good when you
present to this committee
because I feel like you've got a
good handle on on so in the
state and and I didn't always
feel that when I first came in a
couple of terms that goes so I'm
I I just want to take an
opportunity to publicly
compliment you and your staff
for the work that you're doing
because it really is it really
at the heart of the state
government if we don't have a
good person office and we don't
have people where we need to
have them so thank you that's
nine if you madam chair may I
just say that the staff at St
person bar none is as dedicated
and passionate a public servants
but you're gonna find so thank
you so much for recognizing them
that way I really appreciate
that Madam chair in the late
late thank you and with that
vice chair had and I'll turn to
you for a motion.
Issues you Madam.
And I don't have the view site I
was I'm sorry and madam chair
thank you and I move that we
accept the LFC recommendation.
I second the motion chair.
Needed by Representative had
added seconded by Representative
Castellano glad to have you on
Representative and is there any
objection.
All right then and director call
then I I know that you are
Only a we are fully aware that
this is just a recommendation is
just the starting point and
we'll go on from there thank as
as we as we put the budget
together so thank you very much
thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee.
Lately and your staff all right
thank you little rock but we're
we're going we we now move to
the administrative hearings
office this is the HSD code
three four zero three point zero
and that and we will start with
our analyst if you would
introduce yourself and and
present this agency to it.
You madam chair members of the
committee my name is Cindy
Montoya I am the executive
budget analyst I do not see my
LFC counterparts I'm I'm the
weapons you may be running a
little bit late but if you would
like to I can quickly go through
the different she.
I would appreciate that thank
you.
Of course.
So again HSD three forty B.
administrative hearings office
and in regards to the narrative
the LFC recommendation provide
eighty part eighty five point
five thousand less in the
executive recommendation I'm the
executive recommendation provide
a flat budget to the FY twenty
twenty one budget well the LFC
recommend a five percent
reduction in revenue.
Both recommendations include
fifty thousand from the Human
Services department's which is
statutorily required to
reimburse the administrative
hearings office cost of contract
hearing officers.
The LFC also recommends eight
and it an additional five
thousand more than the executive
recommendation and other revenue
to account for the anticipated
the revenue that the agency
received from other agencies.
In regards to the base again at
the executive is just slightly
higher would just flat and it
eighty five point five thousand
there is the executive
recommended team point nine more
in the contractual services
forty three point nine thousand
in the other category for I. T.
I'm and about twenty seven point
seven in person services and
employee benefit.
In both recommendations include
language indicating that the
other state funds appropriation
to the administrative hearings
office includes a hundred and
sixty five thousand from the
motor vehicle division and
funds.
And there's also language
included in that at identifies
the inter agency transfers
appropriation to be administered
in here administrative hearings
office from the Human Services
Department for cost of
conducting administrative
hearings under the Medicaid
provider and managed care act.
And in regards to performance
measures both the LESC and the
executive have come to content
that.
Can it now turn it over to
director Brian David Denton or
answer.
Madam chair this is David Abbey
director Miss Allison Nichols is
on our way issues in our sub
committee and I think we can go
ahead with the director but I
I'm representing her until she
comes I think DFA presented for
way.
All right thank you thank you
director Avid and yes if we
could if we could have our
are on administrative hearings
office director.
Course thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Prine's intense and I'm the
chief hearing officer the
administrative hearings office
and assets and staff with me on
the call in case questions come
up later I just want to
introduce them I agree on a
Rivera she is our scheduling
manager at sign your and she is
our chief financial officer I do
have a short power point that I
was provided and if it's okay
I'd like to share my screen it's
been timing about eight minutes
so it won't take too long and
with with the indulgence of the
committee all share my screen
yes please do are you able to
share yes I believe so.
Okay so
I'm sorry before I begin I just
want to give a quick overview
during the presentation about
who we are the work we've been
doing because it provides
context to the FY twenty two
request and then of course I
will talk about the two
of recommendations and at the
end of the presentation I will
ask the committee to adopt the
executive recommendation
although I fully understand the
process here.
What will probably get
recommended I will ask for the
executive recommendation so as
many of you know we conducted
administrative hearings
involving various statutes the
tax administration act property
tax code motor vehicle code
implied consent act.
Health insurance premium
collection and Medicaid provider
and managed care act.
We're relatively small unit we
have sixteen FTE that's ten
hearing officers including
myself I program support
positions a chief financial
officer position and as of
November of twenty twenty we're
now fully staffed and our
hearing work happens across the
state so we do have offices all
over the state Santa Fe
Albuquerque Clovis in Los
crucis.
And I just want to tell you a
little bit about our work which
is in FY twenty the hearing
officer caseload per hearing
officer the annual caseload was
three hundred eighty one
hearings per year for hearing
officer breaks down into two
major hearing types I do W. why
am I consent act the license
revocation hearings that is when
MPD is seeking to revoke the
driving privileges if anyone has
been arrested for DWI in the
state we did three thousand four
hundred and thirty nine of those
hearings in FY twenty.
in terms of just two quick
things that we matter
performance measure in that we
only have for those three
thousand four hundred thirty
nine cases where we send it
because of our air or dismissed
because of R. err.
And we did training both for law
enforcement and defense
attorneys across the state which
is in the performance measures
the other main hearing type we
do is state tax protest hearings
under the new property tax code
in the tax administration act we
did two hundred thirty one I'm
sorry we received two hundred
thirty one new hearing request
last year and we conducted three
hundred and forty one tax
hearings all of them timely
within the statute which is one
of our performance measures.
Of this area has been area of
tremendous growth however in the
last three years in this finally
stabilized to an area where we
can handle the workload without
additional resources as the next
slide shows and I'm not gonna
spend much time in the slide
other than that you can see the
trend in the last three years
for finally stabilizing to a
more sustainable level.
I heard although the.
Chair Lundstrom is not on this
meeting I have heard for in
previous meetings ask every
agency to briefly address how
the COVID nineteen pandemic
affected their work and how they
think it'll affect their work
going forward so I did prepare
the slide
to just go over it how how Covid
is impacted all offices is madam
chair you spoke to earlier today
essentially since the pandemic
has yet we've had a thirty seven
percent reduction in R. D. W.
why am I consent act hearings
we've also had a reduction in
travel costs because we switch
to remote hearings during the
pandemic over Video Conference
or telephone but we have also
had an increase in IT costs
related to video conferencing
services telephone costs remote
mailing and other activities we
needed to get set up to do the
remote works.
And we did revert some funds
last year that's largely
attributable to we did at that
vacant position till November
and we knew it was a tough
budget year so we reverted as
much as we could and we cut back
and some non critical.
Is that we had planned for the
year moving forward through and
hopefully soon to some new
normal beyond this pandemic
we we have looked for ways to
increase our productivity and
the way we have done that as
we've gone out to other state
agencies and entered agreements
with them to conduct their
administrative hearings and so
far in this fiscal year FY
twenty one we've done.
Four five state ethics
commission hearings I think two
or three secretary state hearing
and a half dozen or more of the
board of nursing hearing said
requirement with them and we
think this is a value added
proposition for the state
because we know a ministry of
law we now to conduct hearings
and we can conducted at we think
it's a more cost effective level
for other state agencies rather
than having them go out and
contract with private attorneys
to service hearing officers so
this is one of our strategies
going forward to try to provide
some value to the state we do
speculate that as we finally get
out of this pandemic there's
going to be an initial spike of
the D. W. Y. I consent act
hearings beyond pre pandemic
levels as bars and restaurants
are fully open and social
gathering restrictions are
lifted and unfortunately we also
anticipate there's going to be a
spike in tax protest cases as
part of the fallout the economic
fallout the pandemic.
With that background I want to
turn to our FY twenty two
appropriation request
when we prepare the request in
August and turn it in on
September first at that time as
you all are aware there was the
mandated five percent reduction
which we met we cut an
additional ninety thousand six
hundred dollars from our
adjusted FY twenty one operating
budget this is in addition to
the hundred twenty one thousand
cut from the original FY
operating FY twenty one
operating budget.
And I know you're all test to
think macro about this the state
budget.
You know the six seven billion
dollars state budget and two
hundred and ten thousand dollars
probably doesn't mean much to a
small agency like ours that is
based largely on personnel costs
and we're fully staffed there is
not a lot of room for us to to
absorb further cuts and to get
to this additional mandated five
percent cut we had to take some
risks.
With our budget as they relate
to core services and the way we
achieve the five percent cut.
That cutting any person we had
to reduce our HR service costing
category three hundred we just
heard the state personnel office
they do provider HR services or
have historically I understand
they may be changing as we go
forward so we had to cut the
funding that we've been paying
state personnel office we've had
to cut interpreter service costs
interpreters are important at
these hearings we do have plans
to try to make these things work
but there's a big risk about
whether we can make it work and
it's a dangerous to cut
interpreter service costs and we
have a force vacancy rate at a
time when we're fully staffed.
And without turning to the LFC
recommendation which which
agency Montoya summarized well
in Mr abbey also indicated well
the the LFC recommendation
essentially takes are mandated
five percent cut and adopts that
with some minor adjustments.
Which makes perfect sense
because that's what we submitted
and we were told the cement.
However I would ask the
committee to consider the
executive rectus current
executive recommendation which
provides you to tional eighty
five point five thousand because
it mitigate some of those risks
to court services I just talked
about it will allow us to fund
our HR services will allow us to
provide interpreter services at
the hearing and make sure that
we meet payroll at a time when
we're fully staffed.
And also it provides in previous
years legislature's have asked
us to increase and improve
hearing officer training
particularly on the tax side the
executive recommendation at risk
for some of these funds allows
us to make sure that the hearing
officers do have excellent
training on the tax programs.
And even under the more generous
executive recommendation H. of
stores in that reduction of
almost thirty five excuse me
thirty six thousand dollars
compared to the original FY
twenty one operating budgets so
I certainly understand how the
committee process works but I
would ask the committee to
consider making the are topping
the executive recommendation or
at least to keeping that in mind
as you go to the whole committee
if there's rooms later on to add
a little more to the LFC
recommendation.
And without having to stand for
any of your questions the staff
for myself for happy to answer
your questions.
Thank you Mr vanden sand and
thank you all I understand our
LFC analyst talent New Mexico
but has doing this you with in
in the other subcommittee ram I
listen I don't know that you
heard anyone to as presentation
but she did cover well I just
wanted to go to you first to see
if there was anything else you
wanted us to to know about this
agency before we take questions.
Thank you madam chair I
apologize yeah I guess I'm
synthron invite and I couldn't
get in this room so sorry at
home but no I sure Cindy did a
very good job but I'm I'm
available for questions about
our budget recommendations thank
you.
Thank you and to our new members
we have been failing to note
where you provide this
information and R. volume but
please know it's almost always
on the top of our different
states so this particular agency
valium to page sixty six and and
again you find it wealth of
information in those volumes and
with that I will turn it over to
committee and I will start with
Representative and Dayan Hochman
begin.
Thank you very much madam chair
I and to the analysts and to you
director Ben Benson for the the
very at and forming a
presentation I'm a visual
learner so seeing it in front of
me really always help so thank
you for that I'm I just have one
question and it's based upon the
information and our volume to
page sixty six looks all
The full budgetary lay out this
number jumped out to me I don't
know this is a question for the
analyst or or for you director
and then send but in your
contractual services actuals for
fiscal year twenty you had about
a fifty percent less actual
budgetary user contractual
services based the.
At verses what you had budgeted
for this coming year and then
that's a little bit less for
both your per your request and
also what the LFC recommendation
is at this time so can you
explain to me what that
difference is based upon.
Thank you representative madam
chair up so a couple of things
happened we as I said we were we
had some FY twenty and twenty
one initiatives we were going to
do one of them is we're going to
contract to do some custom
training for our tax hearing
officers very tax specific
training I'm dealing with New
Mexico gross receipts tax and
the.
Various deductions we were
thinking of working with New
Mexico New Mexico tax research
institute however when the
crisis sort of hits that was one
of the areas we said you know
that be nice to do but with the
budget situation we don't want
to start a new funding programs
we stop doing that we also we're
going to contract with the tax
hearing officer the tax load as
it said earlier is actually it
stabilizing gone down quite a
bit and we we don't feel we need
to do that anymore so we cut
that and then we have not gotten
any of the.
Which is the basis for the
Medicaid provider in managed
care act.
I believe that started on July
one we've not received any to
date we thought we're going to
get some of those in need and
need to contract out we've not
got those yet I think that might
be related the pandemic in HSD
has had other focuses and we're
going to get them that not I
think those would be the
immediate
things I I'm Tanya.
Ramirez's my CFO Tony do you
have anything else you want to
add to that I think that covers
the main reasons why we have not
expended for three hundreds to
the extent we thought we were
going to.
Okay thank you I'm madam chair
and director and finance and I
just have one other question I'm
what is the status of tax
protest in excess of three
hundred million as related to
the G. R. T. on drilling.
I'm sorry.
What do you have any information
can you hear me yes give me
information on the status of tax
protests in excess of three
hundred million dollars is
related to the G. R. T. on
drilling.
Representative and madam chair I
think I would need some more
specifics and I'd have to be
careful how I would answer that
it for asking about a specific
type of cases are you asking
about the chemical in reagent
line of cases that's for you all
before the court of appeals.
Madam chair director ed Benson
yes I am okay I can talk more
about that because we do have
numerous published decisions I
issued a decision or we issued
excuse me we issued a decision I
believe in early twenty nineteen
of the primary issue in that
case is whether hydraulic
fracturing or fracking is it's
commonly called.
Was subject to the chemical and
reagents deduction we did a lead
case on that in twenty nineteen
is currently on appeal before
the court of appeals we rule
that it to the deduction did not
applaud that that is a taxable
activity under the current
statute we're waiting at this
point for the court of appeals
to either affirm or reverse our
decision on the hydraulic
fracturing question now the
court of appeals has considered
to related issues.
Regarding the sale of.
Coal and natural gas and they
have a firm does some both of
those issues saying that the
chemical and reagents adduction
does not apply to the sale of
coal and the sale of natural gas
the remaining major question is
the hydraulic fracturing.
Representative if that's if
that's what you're asking about
or or if there's something else.
I should answer right now
director madam chair director
and if we need any more
information I can go offline and
and contact you directly thank
you.
Thank you Representative are
there any other questions I saw
one other hand and it's been
withdrawn so do we have any
other questions from the
committee.
Okay I'm seeing now I thank you
very much especially thank you
that your you seem to be an kind
of a
proactive ready to to proceed
mode considering what you're
anticipating after all the
pandemic directive and then them
so I think you're a you know
what what you said your
presentation I think is exactly
right we're gonna see some of
those issues.
Rise and they're going to
B. I thank very
Very plentiful and I'm
appreciative that you're not
that they're not going to catch
you off guard so thank you for
your endorsed by them that I
appreciate it and with that.
With that I will go to the
committee for motion I'm not I'm
not positive vice chair had at a
is still on the.
Are you are you available vice
our motion.
Yes.
Can you hear me.
Thank you.
Denson and and once and in
keeping with practice of this
committee and move that we
except the LFC recommendation.
Thank you is there a second.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Hochman
Vigil with the second and the
directive and and then as you
well know this is just the
starting point so we appreciate
very much your position on this
and and all the information that
you have provided.
If are there any objections.
All right see none we will adopt
the LFC and and we appreciate
you and your staff time very
much today thank you very much
have a great day
well all right and that takes us
to say commission of public
record thank Commission public
records in its agency code three
six nine and we will start with
the analyst.
Good afternoon and madam chair
members of the committee my name
is mark them etcetera and the
fiscal analyst for the
legislative finance committee
and I'll be presenting to the FY
twenty two budget
recommendations for the state
commission of public records
agency code three six and nine
and the respective volume two
pages are one of seven and one
oh eight for your reference
for FY twenty two the LFC
recommends a base budget of two
million seven hundred and fifty
six thousand that's
approximately a hundred and
thirty nine thousand dollars
below the executive
recommendation where as the
executive recommendation
recommends keeping the agency's
funding levels of flat with
those of FY twenty one the LFC
recommendation is consistent
with the agency requests of a
five percent reduction you'll
notice that both recommendations
keep the agency staffing levels
at thirty seven FTE just flats
with the FY twenty one and both
the LFC and exec have reached
consensus on performance
measures and targets for FY
twenty two.
with that thank you madam chair
and I will have to assign and
Miller mining and defense
counterparts for any additional
comments.
Thanks for the a good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee
think more the basically covered
it all really the the entirety
of the difference between the
two recommendations is in the
person category the executive
applied an unfunded vacancy rate
of about ten percent well the
LFC applied an unfunded vacancy
rate of about fifteen percent so
this means that the executive
recommendation funds a little
more than thirty three of the
agency's thirty seven FTE well
the LFC recommendation funds a
little more than thirty one of
thirty seven F. T. E. and
currently the agency has twenty
eight of those FTE filled so
both recommendations allow for a
few more FTE to be to be filled
HSD so with that I will turn it
over to any agency
representatives are on the line.
We do that Simon and my to do we
take P. six four one separately
or.
There's only one P. code at the
agency so the summary covers the
because.
Thank you very much all right
HSD Representative for
Commission public records.
Yes ma'am madam chair members of
the committee.
my name is Dr Kendricks.
I'm state records administrator
of the state records center and
archives I appreciate the
opportunity to present our
fiscal year twenty twenty two
budget appropriation request and
for your continued support of
our agency before I begin I'd
like to make some introductions
of a Georgette old child this
deputy state records
administrator in Ruben Rivera
chief financial officer
These individuals part of our
highly qualified team which
recently completed its fourth
consecutive audit with no
findings earning them the well
deserved plaudits from the state
auditor for their financial
stewardship and ethical tone at
the top and I'm proud of their
work on behalf of the people of
New Mexico and grateful for
their attendance and support
today madam chair members of the
committee I know you're fully
aware of the importance of
recordkeeping and providing
access to the records of state
government I also know that you
appreciate the important records
which constitute the historical
patrimony of this ancient land
of which we are privileged to
safeguard and make available to
the public.
Madam chair members of the
committee are total FY twenty
two appropriation request is two
million two million seven
hundred fifty six thousand three
hundred which is one hundred and
thirty eight thousand eight
hundred cut from the FY twenty
one operating budget and this
includes two million four
hundred and fifteen thousand in
general fund and three hundred
and eight thousand seven hundred
in our revolving fund.
We were instructed by LESC DFA
and state budget division and
this committee to cover our
operating expenses from our
revolving fund and this is
reduced the fund balance
considerably we have been able
to sustain our revenue in our
involving fund due to the large
number of emergency rule filings
created by the COVID nineteen we
anticipate the number of
emergency filings to decrease as
the need lessons.
The potential reduction in
revenue will impact our ability
to cover fixed costs not only in
FY twenty two but in years to
come it is for this reason that
we are respectfully requesting
that our general fund
appropriation reflect sufficient
funds to operate the agency and
that this committee consider the
executive recommendation madam
chair members of the committee
this concludes my brief
presentation our staff and are
happy to answer questions and
would also like to thank Mr
chair and Mr Miller for the
help.
All right thank you doctor
Hendricks and being something of
a public records nerd I greatly
appreciate this department so
thank you for all you do will go
to the committee for questions
and we will start with that
ranking member Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for your presentation Sir
Senator last few years we've
heard about your storage space
capacity and your ability to
store state records.
Madam.
Can you say that a little bit
how are you going to have all
your your storage capacity going
forward.
Madam chair representative
Crowder
you and I have spoken to
previous committee meeting about
this we are in critical
situation in terms of space
we have looked
For a new bailable GSD home
building
that we could
use to.
To expand our facility we've
looked at the possibility of
getting funds to construct a new
facility
we have also looked at obviously
looked at
Of some sort of technological
opportunity that would help us
but the the bottom line is that
we're going to be completely out
of space eventually.
we have done some things such
as.
Purchase some shelf extenders in
the archives vault which will
give us a little bit more extra
space but
As every year goes by we're
we're increasingly running out
of space and
so we will be in a critical
position pretty soon.
At
sea and brought him to where
you.
Purchased about five thousand.
What you're seeing showers.
Christian.
Five thousand box basically.
How long it will last year.
Madam chair representative
Harold just to give you an idea
that particular vote that you're
referring to
Currently has
about thirty two thousand boxes
And prior to the purchase of the
extension.
We will consider that ball to be
completely full and what we were
doing is the the rent there were
about five thousand boxes that
are sitting in the record
center.
Waiting to be transferred to
archives so that spaces actually
in a sense that spike is spoken
for
just briefly for those of you
who might not know
documents have a lifecycle some
of them have a certain.
Attention period that can be as
short as a few months or a
number of years but some records
many records are permanent and
have to be stored in perpetuity
so those records we have many of
those records right now that are
waiting in the our records
center for an opportunity for
them to be moved into the
permanent facility the archive
small
and we will do that as soon is
the situation with COVID
makes it possible for staff to
be in to move them but so really
although we we came five
thousand spaces are those spaces
were already spoken for.
Thank you for that so what I'm
hearing now is is your your flat
out of space.
And in your as I understood your
comment your plan going forward
is to work was GSD to try to
find space
That is that an accurate
statement Sir.
Madam chair representative
Crowder we are continually
working with GS the secretary
Ortiz is a member of our
commission so we've we've toured
a number of vacant state
buildings none of which were
we're really adequate for our
needs in terms of size or the
climate control situation that
we would have to create
so we have we have looked at
that we are continually looking
that we're we're definitely on a
G. S. these right are and we
have been in the not too distant
past we've done studies about
the possibility of
expat physically expanding the
facility that we have here in
Santa Fe essentially trying to
double the size of that facility
on the same campus they were all
right now so we've looked at all
those options and we will
continue to look at those
options
going forward.
Okay I'm thank you for your
comments and for answer my
questions again.
Hopefully you you'll be
successful
it is concerning that the
state's records are.
It in such a dire need of a
home.
Hopefully you can get that
worked out soon thank you for
your comments thank you madam
chair.
Thank you ranking member Crowder
will continue on with questions
from the committee
representative had at.
You madam chair and thank you
I'm director except I guess it's
a follow up question to
Representative Crowder how much
would it cost us to double the
space of the public records up
I'm just curious.
Madam chair of the.
Representative it would.
The last estimate that we had to
double the size of the facility
was between twenty five and
thirty million.
undoubtedly the cost has gone up
because that study was done
number of years ago.
but it would be a very expensive
proposition and that's what we
run into
It says to me like you and me
members of your committee
understand the import oranges
records but often times
especially when money is tight
There's not a
a building a record centers not
a very sexy option compared to
some of the other things that
that decisions have to be made
for so doing
we're competing against the
building a new school and
building a record center I think
we're going to offer the school
most times.
Thank you madam chair thank you
director Hendrix the just for
the record would be in favor of
the.
Get help in getting my.
Please say so thank you very
much for your presentation thank
you for that.
Thank you Representative are
there any other questions from
the committee.
Right I don't see any as so
thank you doctor Hendricks and I
will entertain a motion from
vice chair have data on this
agency.
Thank you madam chair and the
again I move that the committee
adopt the LFC recommendation.
Thank you is there a second.
Thank you.
All right thank you
Representative small and is
there any objection to the
motion.
All right then doctor Hendricks
thank you thank your staff and I
think I think we do very much
value what you're doing and and
hopefully we'll be able to to
work on your space issue and in
this and future budget so thank
you very much thank you.
Okay and that moves to the state
investment council that is
agency code three three seven
and I will turn it over to our
analysts.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee good
afternoon my name is don
Iglesias and I am the analyst
for the state and then
investment counsel again code
three three seven for your
reference the LFC recommendation
can be found on page sixty two
of volume two and with me today
is my DFA counterpart Simon
Miller along with state
investment officer Stephen
millions and chief financial
officer BrainChip.
As I see is funded through non
general fund sources with
revenue from the land grant and
severance tax permanent funds
any unused budget reverts back
to those funds referring to the
different sheets both the LFC
and Executive recommendations
reduce the agency budget for FY
twenty two by about four percent
largely to accommodate the
agency's expectation for lower
asset management fees which is a
reflection of weakening market
conditions resulting in lower
investment returns than in
recent history external as that
management fees and consultant
contracts make up about ninety
percent of S. I. C.'s operating
budget and these are external
managers are based on the dollar
amounts of the investments they
manage and the performance of
those investments.
Regarding person as I sees
budget request includes funding
for all seven of the agency's
vacant positions however the
state personnel office in
activated I of the set of the
agency's seven vacant positions
since they were unveiled for
over two years the LFC
recommendation recognizes that
the pandemic may have interfered
with the agencies recruitment
efforts and therefore provides
funding for two of their vacant
positions but the eight three F.
T. E. that had been vacant for
more than four years which is
reflected in the PS cap in your
packet.
The executive recommendation to
eight and removes funding for
all five FTE that were
inactivated resulting in a
slightly smaller recommendation
for this item.
Both recommendations include a
one percent reduction in the
other category as requested by
the agency.
You'll be able to provide more
information on the investment
performance of S. I. C. and
other state investment funds in
the investment report on page
twenty one of volume one and you
can also find information on the
permanent fund's asset
allocations and beneficially
distributions on pages twenty
eight thirty two of volume
three.
In summary as I sees investment
returns for point two four
percent for the land grant
permanent fund and negative
point six percent for the
severance tax permanent fund at
the end of FY twenty reflecting
the market downturn following
the pandemic and that subsequent
recovery that regained most of
the losses the agency's long
term targets are seven percent
the land grant permanent fund
and six point seven five percent
for the severance tax permanent
fund the market value of all the
funds invested by ASIC totaled
about twenty seven billion
dollars in June twenty twenty
that was up from twenty five
point six billion at the end of
June of twenty nineteen however
most of that increase in total
value of assets managed is due
to the transfer of management of
the tax stabilization reserve or
the state's rainy day fund from
the straight state treasury to
the SFC.
The permanent fund's lower risk
asset allocations did allow the
funds to perform brought
relatively well when compared
with pure investment funds
during the downturn that a court
occurred in the first quarter of
twenty twenty they range in the
highest quartile for public
funds of Senators similar size
for that quarter however those
lower risk positions do tend to
perform poorly relative to peers
during markets at periods of
market upswing like that of the
second quarter of twenty twenty
and therefore the permanent
funds performed in the lowest
quartile for the quarter and one
year period that ended FY twenty
they also performed below the
median for the three and five
year periods that also ended on
June thirtieth twenty twenty.
The HSD had no findings and its
FY twenty audit and lastly LFC
and yet they have reached
consensus on the performance
measures and with that I will
turn it over to Mr Miller from
the effect.
Hello again madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Simon Miller I'm an analyst with
DFA
don covered everything perfectly
there so I don't have any
additional comments at this time
so I'll go ahead and turn it
over to our state investment
officer Mr Modi's.
Thank you Simon.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
With you today.
Rather than occupy anymore time
that is necessary explaining
what we have been doing at the
state investment council I would
refer you to our website.
And to the letter that I have
posted their explaining
how rights of twenty twenty.
Where site is located at S. C.
dot state dot in a I'm not U.
S..
No introduce right share right
is our chief financial officer.
And right if you would please
proceed with any comment you
have.
Sure.
madam chair other members of the
committee and thank you Steve
for a introduction of in the end
thanks to work analysts both don
and Simon I really appreciate to
be able to work with they're
knowledgeable they're helpful I
think they definitely have the
needs of the the state in mind I
think one of the the thing I
wanted to in emphasize most and
I think don touched upon this
very nicely approximately ninety
percent of the request a is for
contractual services which
includes the asset management
cost of these fees as she points
out our asset based so as our
assets increase so do those
costs so when we're doing our
estimates we're always trying to
estimate to make sure that we
make it through the end of the
fiscal year as far as the budget
is concerned especially during
the.
Pandemic as everyone would agree
hiring has been a real challenge
in fact at least part of this
time there was a freeze
statewide.
As there is improvement of with
the pandemic outlook I can see
the the hiring will probably
likely improve in the near term
also.
Don pointed this out but it's
worth noting again any unused
appropriation amounts revert
back to the original funding
sources which are the land grant
permanent fund in the severance
tax permanent fund for instance
in of fiscal year twenty in
which we just completed the are
we reverted back over eight
million dollars as it relates to
the you're in reversion amounts
of I think don also pointed out
the or R. report is now
available I think it was
authorized for release.
Friday a week ago there is no
auditor proposed adjustments or
there's no way.
The findings of of any type it
was a clean opinion a claim
report that report should be if
it's not today it will be on our
website hopefully by tomorrow
and with that I'm open to any
questions that you might have.
All right thank you very much Mr
Shipp and director Marie thank
we do have questions from the
committee so I will start with a
ranking member Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for your presentation
tomorrow
I guess the foundation of my
questions and comments we're
gonna come from page sixty three
of all I have to all right in
the I guess the second paragraph
down from the top there's a four
line paragraph there this is yes
I see as long term target right
return is seven percent for the
land grant permanent fund six
point seven five for the
severance tax permanent fund.
Are your annual investment plan
for twenty one let me back up
this is an FY twenty land grant
permanent fund in December sex
partner to fund portfolio return
eight point two four percent in
eight point six percent
respectively return on
investment so.
Pretty pretty far below the
targets it is as I understand
that this is your annual
investment plan for twenty one
expects the next seven to ten
years will be a low return
environment.
And after accounting for returns
royalty inflows and
distributions S. I. C. expects
the land grant permanent fund to
grow at an annualized three
point three percent in a
separate tax permit fund to grow
at an annualized one percent.
So looks like the the next seven
to ten years your painting if
very bleak picture is that an
accurate statement Mr Shipp
Representative Crowder and other
members of the committee of I
would agree with that I know or
the state to our chief
investment officer isn't with us
here today I think he would
agree with that I think the
returns for fiscal year twenty
were of certainly not up to our
expectations but I think
relative to how the market
performed I think they're
probably in line with the market
expectations if if you look over
the last several years or has
been you know some valuation
swings in the equity market and
valuations are very high right
now it really poses the question
of how much higher can they
actually go in because of that I
think or overall expectations
going forward our of quite a bit
lower than they have been in the
past in certainly you can look
at the of you know the yield on
the market right now they're
down away low to so we're we're
just not you know what we can
paint a more positive picture
but I just don't think it's
realistic at this point in time
in as our expectations improve
what will move our you know
expectations up but at this
point in time we're not all that
optimistic going into the next
several years okay thank you for
that S. or not my three
questions are good are going to
be based on this is the
foundational thought.
Of the of the market trending
down going forward.
It we got a house joint
resolution one which the FIR on
there says that there are us to
tap the permanent fund for a
hundred ninety six million a
year.
So that may impact what you're
already dealing with
we have to executive order
signed by our president one was
on the keystone pipeline I don't
know if that will affect.
Oil and and revenues within New
Mexico I'd like to ask a
question in just a minute in the
second one is is the moratorium
on permits on federal land for
the sixty day freeze
I I'm real curious how those are
going to impact the ASIC or have
you done an analysis yet on the
impact of those Representative
Crowder we have council meeting
yesterday and those issues came
up we're still grappling with
getting our arms around the
answers to that of the certainly
it's probably more on the
negative side than the positive
side as far as the absolutely
impact we're not sure at this
point in time but I mean you can
definitely see it impacts going
forward and you all all you have
to do is compare expectations
for the the future with what's
happened in the past and we we
can see some some headwinds
coming our our way and as to the
overall impact of both the
keystone and the federal you
know drilling of executive order
I think it was what will just
have to get our arms around that
probably have more to report on
the future.
Thank you Mr Shipp so madam
chair I would like to ask your
permission on behalf of the
committee to request an analysis
be done on the impact of the
permanent fund.
That's that's going to have a
great impact on how we budget
how much money we have available
to budget and as the
appropriators I think that's
those are are key components
that we're gonna need in the
next sixty days to really assess
a budget so I like to ask if you
would do an analysis of the
impact of keystone it may or may
not be an impact I don't know I
know the hundred ninety six
million dollars for resolution
one passes is going to be an
impact.
And I I believe that there will
be a strong impact if the
drilling activity on federal
lands.
Is extended beyond the start of
sixty days if it's extended
beyond sixty days it's gonna be
a huge impact.
And so I'd like to request an
analysis from S. I see as to how
those three items.
Will likely compare
impact.
Your funding available to us as
the appropriators Representative
Crowder and other members of the
committee I believe Charles
woman who is our director of
communications and Legislative
Affairs is on the the call as
well right now I would ask you
if he has anything that he might
like to add if you would like to
do that.
Representative Crowder and madam
chair I am Charles almond and
the the legislative analyst for
the S. I see.
and certainly Representative you
identify a very key component of
the the the how we kind of look
at things when when we gauge the
impact of distributions out of
the fund when we look long term
if that the three likes this
tool which are basically inflows
investment returns and.
I'm sorry I lost my train of
thought so.
You you're you're very correct
that that inflows can negatively
impact of the the overall
distributions that we make out
of the fund the next ten years
we expect.
You know.
Based on what we've seen
recently even during the
downturn
heading into the downturn we
saw record inflows to the the
land grant Fund and more money
was in fact coming into the
permanent funds than was going
out.
however during the downturn
those Gallup did diminish
greatly dropping from about a
million a month down to close to
thirty million now since then
they've that has recovered and
bounce back quite a bit in
November we received eighty
eight million dollars from the
land office in the land grants
fund that's well in excess of
historic returns in December
that was eighty million dollars
again.
We're you've seen it in history
a little bit down year over year
the next ten years as far as oil
and gas and flows we expect
those could be strong and
maintaining we've seen however.
Big public policy decisions like
you get out of Washington could
negatively impact those inflows
and you know then if if you have
negative or or low returns over
that next decade that could kind
of double down the effect so
certainly inflows outflows and
our president returns are the
the components that to you
should look at very closely as
policy makers.
Thank you for those comments
what three paragraphs or on page
sixty three.
There's a comet I guess Mr Lacey
is probably provided for us it
talks about the early childhood
education and care fund.
It is says the fund is designed
to capture one follow revenues
this is a quote from production
activity on federal lands.
In in some of the sixty day
freeze is going to have a direct
impact on the funding available
to early check what's going to
happen there funds other gonna
grow and we know it is a hundred
ninety six million a year it is
going to be removed from the
purpose on under house joint
resolution one.
It would be healthy for us to
understand the know how that's
going to impact what's it gonna
look like five years out or
twenty years out of state years
out if that passes so all of us
here is if we can get an
analysis from SRC on those three
areas so we can.
Do a better job of appropriated
so Mr chair and and
Representative Crowder and by if
I may just make one point of
clarification.
Sure I'm on that paragraph that
you're referring to the only
thing that I wanted to clarify
on the early childhood Trust
Fund is that the the way that
that fund was designed is is if
federal mineral leasing payments
were expected to exceed the five
year average than anything about
that five year average would go
into the early childhood Trust
Fund and in the current revenue
estimate from December we did
not have an expectation for
their for federal mineral
leasing payments to exceed the
five year average in at least
three twenty twenty four not for
twenty twenty five so I I just
wanted to make a quick point of
clarification that that that
Fund only receives revenue in
excess of the five year average
in the current revenue estimate
did not anticipate that it would
receive additional funding
through that source it will
still receive investment
earnings from what is produced
yes I see and could still
potentially receive access
school tax revenue on if there
is such revenue and if
Representative reserves exceed
twenty five percent but I just
wanted to make that at one point
of clarification it thank you Mr
glasses I appreciate that I can
see that it and I can see where
they're expecting about a three
point six annual return on that
fund
I think you did a wonderful job
and volume to.
This is one the most thorough
reports I've read so far thank
you for that.
Madam chair that concludes my
questions I.
Hopefully the the committee will
approve.
Allowing them to provide
analysis for us thank you madam
chair thank you and ranking
member Crowder and and director
mo we see if that if that is
something that you can provide
to us in a timely manner I think
everybody on the committee would
appreciate receiving them thank
you we do have as several more
members with questions I'll go
to a vice chair representative
small.
Thank you.
At the very much madam chair
thank you Mr Murray seed thank
you Mr Shipp and to the analyst.
Start with a few questions one
that I had asked I believe
actually last year which was
regarding
the leadership's.
Sense of the ESG that is
in environmental social and
governance investment standards.
Has has that have has that those
three areas have those three
areas been considered or are
under consideration by you all
and allocating
the our permanent funds.
Charlie you want to take this.
Sure Representative small madam
chair
Representative small we we have
not.
Enacted a specific impact of
social or governance policy said
many of our our our managers do
have a growing number the
observe it really implement.
You see policies and and strive
very strongly to ethically
invest one of the council did
you that relates directly to
this would be
During the interim
the council worked with other
state agencies to develop a
renewable energy.
Strategic plan and we
implemented that
at the end of last year after a
a lot of debate a lot of work on
it if that gives us a roadmap
and a lot of flexibility
this was House memorial and from
last year and it basically to
cast the council with a putting
work
And can mapping out where we
want to invest in the future in
renewable energy opportunities
specifically Mexico but also in
a broader sense and so that
thank you one thing I think that
you could look to to see what
we've been up to since best that
question last year understood
thank you very much for woman
and madam chair relatedly do we
have I guess first just for our
edification.
Our permanent funds rank us as I
recall from last year and I
don't know if it's changed were
roughly like thirty fourth in a
worldwide even in in terms of
sovereign wealth funds is that
still ball park where we are.
As a state compare of
comparatively worldwide.
Representative small that that
is accurate we're in the mid
thirties when it comes to
of global sovereign wealth funds
most.
As most of you know those are
are related to to energy energy
revenues oil and gas.
S. Steve this state investment
officer at that speaks directly
with.
Almost all of the domestic
sovereign wealth funds and he
may have some more information
or insights if you want to share
with the committee sure not that
I I thank you Mr woman I was
just.
Wanting kind of establishing and
making sure that that context
was the same as it had been
which is just something to
appreciate deeply that the state
of New Mexico is thirty fourth
globally for its
sovereign wealth funds which is
something to be treasured.
If I may this is eve.
We are also number three as best
we can determine in the U. S.
just wanted to add that for you.
Thank you Mr Mari CD that that I
appreciate that deeply
So the knowing that that we have
this international an incredible
national presence.
Is their work to establish what
our exposure what the state and
that benefits varies asset
exposure is within
the current environment and I we
can go on and on the points
Representative mentioned by
ranking member Crowder very
accurate absolutely valid within
this context additional points
that I would add would be
The the downside risks and
exposure from.
A rapidly changing climate in in
the destabilization that that
can cause and and us because
So I think that.
That do we have a handle on what
that exposure is and.
Mr couple of quick points at one
you know we've seen probably
unfortunately quite frankly for
New Mexico acts on the
Leave the.
The.
The market at I'm gonna forget
it it Exxon was replaced by
Tesla course Exxon and their
subsidiary XTO have a very
important presence in the
Permian and in the Delaware side
of New Mexico but the those
assets in the public valuation
across a wide range have seen
significant challenges.
Suffice to say over the last
year.
Do we know what our exposure is.
In that in those areas Mr
Morrissey Mr Wallman Mr Shipp.
Your call.
Chief investment officer is best
positioned to answer that I
don't know that we could even if
this were on the call today give
you percentages are specifics on
that Representative small.
We would be more than pleased to
respond to that specifically if
you wish.
Representative small I would add
just for your information we're
in the process right now of
completing the implementation on
a new research system which is
called a Latin in its
actually obtained from Black
Rock and it's going to allow us
to slice and dice our risk
analysis a little bit finer than
we have in the past and will
probably have more to report on
that future.
Thank you thank you Mr mo E. si
I deeply appreciate it it just
and want to make sure in
publicly honor you in your teens
stewardship through the the fact
that we are in the place we are
is in no small part due to your
significant leadership Mr Shipp.
That new risk management tool
and you know I I just know what
I'm able to read but I do know
that blackrock is what.
Seems generally agreed is one of
the international leaders within
that ESG space and has been
aggressively looking to grow
and and and seems to think it's
very good business to be in that
area so the fact that you are we
are utilizing tools for risk
analysis the that they're
developing sounds pretty
positive to me
so so those with those we
conclude my questions madam
chair presenters I think as we
seek to.
In form of this incredibly these
incredibly important funds the
incredible responsibility and
the the wait frankly that you
all Kerry and that we carry as
we enter into these
conversations that we make sure.
Regard a young.
In a.
In a.
From an investment perspective
regardless of of the different
values we may bring to it
that that we you know we add in
some of these additional
elements of exposure and
potentially the areas of growth
on in these in for with the
state investment council and so
I at addressing the S. G. P.'s
certainly looking at that
exposure portion I would deeply
appreciate and and know that you
all will be following up thank
you for indulging me Madam chair
thank you gentlemen for the
incredible job that you do.
Thank you vice chair small we
have more questions will go to
subcommittee vice chair how
data.
Thank you madam chair and like
to thank everybody on the panel
I'm curious about how much money
from the investment fund that we
put in New Mexico businesses I I
know there's a special on that I
just can't remember how much we
put into and I and building our
own
our own.
State businesses and
corporations.
Surely would you respond to that
yes as a representative for
that's actually.
Very much at this week's I for
us that the council has been a
pretty active the last year we
started right at the beginning
of the crisis by authorizing a
hundred million dollar fund
specifically for small business
loans but targeting larger
businesses that weren't in line
to receive necessarily PPP or SD
I see funding
that frontier is is moving along
we've deployed about sixty five
million of it and it has a few
more months to run but generally
we're pleased with with the
businesses that I believe it's
twenty two businesses that have
received those of these are
larger employers with hundreds
of employees
The program that you're
referring to is is our New
Mexico private equity program
and it over the past twenty plus
years actually going back to the
the early nineties as invested
in dozens of New Mexico
companies typically targeting
venture capital startups the
idea when the legislature put
this program together and
authorized to act and in the day
was to facilitate tech transfer
out of the national lapse in to
find the the next you know
Microsoft if you will that
that's up and coming it's had a.
Extract record over time there
are some very strong companies
in there today
some of these you know could
eventually go PO many of them
are.
High tech and high wage earners
essentially there's about four
hundred billion dollars is
currently deployed into that
program today there are
limitations better.
In the state by statute because
all of these investors to come
into the severance tax permanent
fund which is you know has two
goals one to get financial
returns from our investments but
also to promote the economic.
The economy and and job creation
here in New Mexico so those are
our main programs as you know we
also dedicate out of the
severance tax fund two percent
of that of that fund goes which
is more than a hundred million
dollars goes to the SB I see the
small business investment Corp
and so those are the kind of
PTI's economically targeted
investments that we are allowed
to make out of the the severance
tax permanent fund.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chairman I guess and my
second question is I I just
wanna make sure I understand
something when you say that the
long term targeted rate of
return to seven percent for the
land grant permanent that is
since that as an annual seven
percent were rolling average of
five years seven percent.
Yes seven percent return rate of
return so a net of fees after
after all said and done we shoot
for a seven percent rate of
return for the land grant Fund
in a six point seven five
percent rate of return for the
severance tax fund that the
difference there is the
economically targeted
investments they are in a little
bit less financially.
Thank you madam chair Mr woman
no is that on an annual basis
present on a five year basis is
that seven percent return is
that your target in on an annual
basis that's what I wanted to
know annualized test every year
okay thank you yes
Representative Herrera I would
also add on that seven percent
there might be some years or
over seven percent and some
years you're below the seventy
percent and we constantly look
at that seven percent and the
six point seven five percent of
four the severance tax fund and
ask ourselves is that doable
over the long run and we'll
evaluate that and you know based
upon discussions we have here
today is probably more likely
than not in the future that
estimated return annual return
would be going down as opposed
to out because our expectations
are of the more negative than
they were in the past.
I thank you madam chair thank
you Mr Shipp about this track
you returns with the university
of California because I come
from that background their
return last year was one point
seven percent so I just for the
record thank you so much.
Thank you Representative and we
have another question
Representative and they happen
to be in.
Thank you very much madam chair
and thank you to mystically
status for her good analysis and
to Mr Wieser night shift
enrollment for a fascinating
conversation about the
investment counsel I know that
it's are you been in the news a
lot lately and it's a great
opportunity for newer members to
the House Appropriations
Committee to learn more about
what you do a lot of the
questions I had it been answered
I just have one specific
question lack left and that's
going to be starting on page
sixty three of all you into our
kind of continuing on to page
sixty four and it's with regards
to the hundred million dollars
that was allocated as part of
the small business recovery act
and you say that you know it
does it only looks like about
twenty two million in loans have
been made and that you don't
expect to use the four hundred
million from initial drop down
so my question to you is that
what do you expect to use the
rest of this month thanks for is
it just revert back to the
investment counsel or does it
remain allocated for something
else Representative of all to
get a question if I may I can
tell you that you know there was
originally a hundred million
dollars your mark for that
program we did transfer the
monies and because of the of you
know scoring the way they were
doing the loans of base to
basically is spelling out who
could attain the loans
I guess there wasn't the demand
that the thought of what would
exist I I think that Original
Bill is being reworked at this
point in time but because of the
fact that we transfer the
hundred million dollars we
thought that whole hundred
million dollars would be used it
was decided that sixty million
of that would be returned
because we didn't just what the
dollar setting there so in the
future depending upon what
happens with future legislative
bills.
we might very well be
transferring the money back to
them again but at this point
time it remains invested or at
least the sixty million dollars
that they dated maintain control
over.
Thank you very much madam chair
Mr should do you need provided
are statutory authority to
transfer that money
Representative no we we don't
need
Authority of I mean we had the
authority to transfer the
money's we were just told by the
finance authority that they
wouldn't be able to use the
money that was transfer based
upon demand and the way the the
loans were actually of review
the you know they they thought
they were going to be more
qualifying loans than there were
in as a result of them not
actually be able to use the
money that we originally
transfer they transferred it
back at our request because we
didn't just want to be sitting
there and it basically of zero
interest earnings and also
that's the reason they did that
and Madam chair representative
if I may just add very very
quickly to that on the the
provisions of the bill that
passed in the special session
for June did specifically given
S. icy authority to work with
NMFA in terms of the how they
would function the drawdown of
the four hundred million that
was allocated and so because
they were permitted that
statutory authority to do that
then they were able to work with
NMFA to determine the initial
drawdown would be one hundred
million with the hope that they
would drop down more as more
demands well came in but that
didn't end up materializing but
that the reason for doing it in
increments was so that and it
exactly what happened if they
drew down all four hundred
million but only you know less
than forty million was invested
in the rest of that funds would
have been just sitting account
doing not thank therefore by
drawing it down an incremental
phases they were able to allow
those funds to continue to be
invested in our money for the
state and then had the potential
to either draw down more if they
needed it or as had happened in
the reverting the balance of
what they did drop down so that
it can now be.
Reinvest.
Thank you very much madam chair
and I appreciate the
information.
All right thank you very much
Representative thank you all
actually for the excellent
questions and the X. excellent
input that you provided in this
have been a very interesting
conversation and and
enlightening for all of that
even some of that the third on
the committee for a while so at
this point and Representative
vice chair had at I will
entertain a motion thing no
further questions from the
committee.
Thank you madam chair and I and
I recommend that we go with the
executive recommendation.
We have a motion for the
executive.
Representative small second is
there any objection to that
motion.
All right then we will accept
the executive recommendation and
I appreciate the questions in
the request of this committee to
the state investment council for
some additional information that
will help us in our decision
making as we proceed and and so
I I thank you all for for
helping us make those decisions
in the best possible light and
providing that information as as
we proceed so thank you all very
much for being here and for
being so helpful with your
answers today.
You madam chair mask a point of
clarification yes ma'am go ahead
so on the performance measures
to differentiate the executive
and LESC came to consensus on
the LFC recommendation for
those measures so at my question
is if we're going with the
executive recommendation for the
budget would we still be going
with the consensus LFC
recommendation for the
performance measures.
And that is a very good question
I'm unsure of the answer
typically have how is that
handled on the basis of it to my
knowledge I I would think that
we would generally go with the
consensus that was reached
between the two agencies unless
the Committee desires to do
differently.
All right and I'm not seeing any
input from the committee so I
think we will proceed with that
in mind and as you know this is
adopted only if the
recommendations so if there is
something we need to revisit we
can revisit brought full
committee thank you for bringing
that to our attention thank you
thank you madam chair.
All right thank you we've got
one final committee I'm sorry
and department to look at and we
are going to the public school
insurance authority that is
Mexico three forty two three
forty two and I believe we're
back with the Mr Jorgensen if
you'd the bailable to started
out.
Yes.
Jordan said the LFC analyst for
the New Mexico public schools
insurance authority that's
agency code three or two.
With me are Simon Miller the
department of finance and
administration analyst for the
agency and I believe we have
Mister Richard the lady who is
the executive director of the
agency.
This provides risk and health
benefits insurance programs to
school districts and charter
schools statewide outside of
Albuquerque public schools which
handle better insurance in house
and separate from next.
The university of board has the
authority to set rates for
insurance coverage be that
health and risk insurance and so
I just wanted to point out that.
We're talking about the the
budget recommendations here what
we're really talking about is
expenditure authority because
the minutes you board does have
the ability to set those rates
independently what we're talking
about is authorizing a certain
expenditure level here today and
neither the executive nor the
LFC recommendation made any
changes to member premiums and
that is all logged on the nifty
aboard.
The LFC and executive staff have
reached consensus on all
performance measures and targets
of those are reflected in the
back of your packet you'll see
them on page six.
With that I'd like to get into
benefits program this is key six
thirty.
Operates for twenty two the
executive recommended fully
funding the agency request for
the program that's a thirty
three point nine million dollar
or ten point three percent
increase from FY twenty one
operating budget.
Additionally that's fifty two
million dollars higher than FY
twenty actual expenditures the
LFC recommended an increase of
thirteen point eight million
dollars that's four percent over
the FY twenty one operating
budget and it's about ten
percent over the FY twenty
actual expenditures.
The executive recommendation
will note includes seven point
six million dollars in fund
balance that's
Is not included in the LFC
recommendation the reason for
that is that under the
expenditure assumptions of the
executive recommendation.
Expenditures will exceed
revenues and it'll result and
Nexium needing to dip into fund
balance to cover costs.
That's not in the LFC racked as
it anticipates all lower level
of expenditure.
For FY twenty two Missy is
anticipating I'm nine point
three percent increase in health
benefits premiums assessed on
educational employees outside of
APS.
And.
The general appropriations act
has historically included budget
adjustment a forty which
authorizes next yet to increase
their budget to pay any.
Claims for risk or medical
coverages.
That's not at issue here but
that would be a staff
recommendation is to continue
that coverage and the reason why
is because if
if you'll note in volume three
on page forty seven we have
a chart that C. shows actual
expenditures.
Health benefits fund is a pretty
good amount of volatility there
so for example in the last three
years.
The total.
Expenditure has sort of
ocellated.
Twenty six percent over the
prior year but in FY eighteen it
was down by five point four
percent so it's.
There's enough volatility that
it's pretty hard to it's pretty
hard to really nail down where
expenditures are gonna end up
and that's why this committee is
typically included budget for I
just meant Authority.
The last thing I'd like to note
on the budget program before
turn it over to Mr Miller is.
Another
The area of polity is comment
and there's been some
significant savings as a result
of the lockdowns and people's
inability to access medical
treatment because of the COVID
nineteen pandemic.
We estimate those savings are
about ten million dollars at
this point but obviously the
pandemic is ongoing and and some
of those services remain
difficult to access so it's it's
an open question as to how much.
How many procedures are going to
be delayed and ultimately
canceled which would create
savings of a program and may
lead to a smaller than
anticipated rate increases and
FY twenty two.
With that I'd like to turn it
over to Mr Miller for the risk
and the program support
programs.
Thanks Connor good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee again Simon Miller
from DFA and Connor just went
over the health benefits program
and so now I'll go over the risk
insurance program which is P.
six three one.
the risk program provides risk
insurance for property liability
and workers compensation
exposure for public educational
entities the executive
recommendation is twelve percent
greater than the current fiscal
year fiscal year twenty one to
cover potential growth in claims
expenses resulting both from
increased membership as well as
increasing claims severity.
Unspent unspent funds reverted
agencies respond if claims
expenditures are less than the
budgeted amount.
The LFC recommendation is
basically flat to fiscal year
twenty one however and and just
as Connor had talked about
agency generally receives budget
adjustment a forty to increase
their budget from fund balances
for claims expenditures if
they're higher than anticipated
again like like Connery said the
claims claims expenditures often
fluctuate widely from year to
year so the budget adjustment
language allows agencies the
flexibility to cover claims
expenses that of agency must pay
out if they come in higher than
anticipated.
So now we can turn to programs
support which is P. six three
two and this one is pretty easy
are both the LFC and exec are
flat to the current year
operating budget in that
program.
So with that I will turn it over
to director Valerio.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee just a second to
get my screen up.
Thank.
Okay.
Okay.
The committee on which rural
area on the executive director
for the public school insurance
authority I'm joined today with
projects on the wall of our
deputy director and also economy
is more to can Thanh our chief
financial officer I'm gonna give
a brief overview of the agency
are two programs benefits and
risk in them not just kind of
talk about some of the issues
that we're facing and what some
of our efforts are we're doing
to try to contain some of those
costs.
We're created back in nineteen
eighty six the server of the
purchasing agency for school
districts charter schools higher
educational entities and from
other educational entities.
Today we were of Mr Georgian
mansion to all school districts
in the state except for
Albuquerque public schools are
eighty eight mandatory school
districts ninety six mandatory
charter schools also includes
charter schools are charters to
Albuquerque twenty seven other
educational entities which
includes from higher education
institutions and we have an
average monthly membership our
medical plan.
Forty seven thousand six hundred
seventy two employees and their
dependents are membership have
been decreasing about two point
two percent annually however we
also have been
a slight increase recently with
the addition of eastern western
and New Mexico tech universities
to financial poll.
We're operating on a staff of
the land and authorized FTE and
we're governed by the eleven
member board of directors which
you can see on the screen
Representative I for ideas about
different entities throughout
the state.
Where are we going to the most
common and target Mr George and
Mr Jorgensen and Mr Miller just
went over those however I do
want to mention that our
revenues are derived from other
state funds and so what that is
is all the premiums that this
has to school districts are
other members and so the way
that funding works to pay for
premiums if money is put into
the insurance line item for
public school support for school
districts distributed to them
and made them pay premiums to us
also in looking at a nine point
three percent increase wages
painting for FY twenty two the
impact public school supporters
nineteen point three million
dollars to fund the employer's
share so that lasts about
thirteen point eight million for
employee benefits which is
averaging about a sixty three
percent employer contribution
about five point five million
for risk premiums.
Any money to put into public
school support for that
insurance line item because the
funding formula APS will receive
approximately twenty five
percent of that amount about
whether they requested any
increases or not want to mention
that this amount is just cover
the employer share nothing to do
with the employees.
Program this years show us some
of the benefits offering that we
have as far as carriers and we
offer medical dental vision of
fully insured life and
disability plans and also we
have a very robust wellness and
wellbeing programs that we offer
to our members we're fighting
this year in our medical and
dental in that in addition to
Blue Cross and privateering
we're also offering seeing that
now and for dental we are
offering delta dental in
addition to United Korea
consulate general building that
we're granting are members of
the national access to care and
also creating some
competitiveness within those
carriers if you would like to
see any of our different plan
options and what's what some of
the benefits are for the doubles
and co insurance and whatnot we
urge you to visit our website at
W. W. W. dot and C. dot com.
What
history for the year twenty
nineteen we thought of being
increases in emergency room
utilization and also
prescription drug costs as
you'll see down on the bottom
left we have a total medical and
prescription drug cost of three
hundred twenty three point four
million dollars of that our
planner Nymphaea rate eighty
five point four percent and our
members carshare was fourteen
point six percent of that
amount.
Would also like to point out on
this first believe that
approximately eighty five
percent of them to members rely
in rural communities outside of
Albuquerque and so in the very
last require an awful
competition risk result in
higher costs a tree could retain
health care professionals in
addition providers are also
attempting to make up for lower
Medicare and Medicaid
reimbursement rates in these
areas.
The distribution of our planting
claims of very interesting this
and you can see that one percent
of our members are costing
thirty seven point two percent
of our total cost when you look
at the top five percent it's
about fifty seven percent about
plan cost we have a very small
percentage of six busted members
who are often quite a bit of
money on the plan and a larger
population health your members
are than subsidizing those does
more staff members.
Your soul we're talking ditions
high you'll see the are our
biggest increases in twenty
nineteen wearing have a
hypertension also write me low I
protection of mental health and
nineteen point three percent
increase that was prior to the
COVID nineteen pandemic and
since the pandemic we've seen a
large influx of requests for
behavioral health benefits and
services and so we expect that
number to increase quite a bit
for this year.
To try to cut down some of those
costs and target those areas
that are costing us more money
we have disease management and
care management programs
available to all of our medical
carriers and no additional cost
for member we recently
implemented diabetes management
blood pressure management and
weight management programs
through a long goal which is
also at no cost to the member
and through these programs and
members are given an opportunity
to the cellular connected
devices for free and no cost to
them harm these are connected as
I mentioned through Bluetooth
and with that they have access
to one on one coaching got real
time to community support and
also for diabetics that limited
strips and lancets were approved
by medics we also implemented a
pulmonary remote mining program
through express scripts also a
similar of Bluetooth cellular
connectivity device for the
inhalers.
Our Telemeds business is
something that we've been
promoting this really we've
implemented in twenty sixteen I
actually taken off I think maybe
not because of the pandemic
there's been a lot more interest
in the program and so we've seen
a big increase of from six
hundred and forty one visits in
twenty sixteen up to eighteen
thousand up to September of
twenty twenty the very positive
thing of this is that you can
see a telemedicine visit only
cost sixty six dollars for the
plan which is what we're paying
up compared to an urgent care
visit of about a hundred fifty
seven dollars or emergency room
of one thousand six hundred
dollars we hold these
telemedicine benefits the visits
are continue.
This drug expense on the flight
you can see up for twenty
nineteen our expenses increased
by fifteen point one percent we
also have on eight point four
percent increase the number of
prescriptions that were given
out this is due to a large
increase in non specialty cost
and utilization I do want to
point out regarding their
dispensing right now eighty six
point six percent so we do have
a very high generic utilization
is about that very good in the
same I'm quite a bit of money.
Where to the medical you can see
the top of drugs that we're
conditions for drugs on our drug
spending you can see that these
are very closely tied to our
medical conditions.
In the next slide show some of
our efforts on prescription
drugs for the first of our
annual prescription clinical
savings and so forth through
June thirtieth twenty twenty you
can see the November Saint about
five point four million dollars.
And for the national average we
have also save an additional six
point nine million dollars.
Getting a COVID nineteen back in
March of the pandemic started
there was the emergency the
emergency rule that was
implemented in that time the
office of the superintendent of
insurance Madam said that
commercial health insurance
plans have to pay for the cost
of testing and treatment I one
hundred percent with no pressure
to the member and so the way
that it does not fall under the
supervision of officers
superintendent of insurance
along with other members of ACT
acts such as Albuquerque public
schools retiree health care
General Services Division so we
weren't subject owever we
decided we wanted to.
Are in that and then also offers
and benefits for members we
decline in often and say that we
are going to cover the cost
entry test the cost of testing
and treatment for our members an
estimate that we have updated
this was done back in August so
that we're gonna have a span of
four point nine million dollars
we're currently updating that
estimate however we ran actual
numbers to the end of December
and we currently have a standoff
for March to December of seven
point five million dollars you
can see that we quickly well or
that initial estimate.
We're not
looking at other reduction and
utilization of nonessential
cares about Americans services
researchers think about for
entering into painting a savings
of fourteen point nine million
dollars where five point one
million dollars of that coming
back in just as members are
seeking that care and getting
access to care again and I
giving us about nine point eight
million dollars in savings.
Another thing that recently came
out of small parties projection
that we're going to start
looking at now the federal
government is also going to
mandate that we cover the cost
of of the vaccinations at a
hundred percent with no culture
to the members of that going to
be an additional cost than we
had anticipated but will not be
projecting and we'll bring that
back to all our later day.
Reasons for this fiscal year we
passed on the land and premium
rate increase of five point five
percent until about what if you
look down on the bottom six
percent or high any PO option
plans and two point one percent
or low option plans for this
fiscal year when we built the
budget we're anticipating about
nine point three percent
increase however because some of
those reduction and and services
that we have seen some of that
savings we're hoping that we can
maybe pass on something around
the seven point nine percent
market may be able to go out
possibly below six percent the
ninja board meeting next week to
to review those scenarios and to
make a final determination on
that and so this is what the
budget when we when we submit I
want my point three but we are
hoping to bring that down.
I'm here so the impact of the
increase that we have this year
the mansion for the six percent
R. I. E. P. O. option than the
two point one percent or will
options this is shows what the
what the impact was two
employees based on different
salary tiers for this year.
Our point fund financials with
the increase that we passed on
this year we're looking at
ending this fiscal year with a
balance of about ten point nine
million dollars.
Program
We have a very robust research
program we assure act throughout
the state of approximately
twenty six billion dollars of
that seventeen billion our frame
stucco construction which is the
most valuable type of
construction and sixty percent
of those properties are located
in some of the worst protection
classes our workers compensation
we insure about forty four
thousand employees for the
twenty two point two million
dollars in payroll three hundred
twenty five thousand students
under liability forty four
thousand school committee
participants nine thousand
volunteers and ninety three
hundred vehicles including
buses.
This gives you a history of are
we going back to FY seventeen
you'll see a big spike in FY
twenty eight to thirty five
million dollars our liability
that was a tribute to of the
large settlement and sexual
molestation.
The
frequency and severity trends
for workers compensation and we
usually which you'll see here in
the frequency of claims which is
the red line is going down
however the severity of claims
going on meaning that we're
seeing that last claims coming
in however the cost of those
planes coming in is increasing.
A lot of the same AOC for
general liability of the same
trends here.
Fourteen years on sexual
molestation and these claims
have been coming in a lot more
frequently unfortunately and
it's costing a lot more you'll
see over the last ten years we
have to spend a lot twenty four
million dollars in and those
types of claims and what's not
included in this graph the
settlement we have last year of
twenty two point three million
dollars in the graphic of that
pre dated that ten year history
however the settlement was paid
out last year and that was very
unfortunate which was one one
perpetrator of multiple victims
and that continues to be ongoing
for twenty two point three
million dollars to the project
will be going up a lot higher.
We also have a property loss
which is a contractor for
astronomical we we've seen a
reduction in property claim for
that in the looks like for this
year are down about a hundred
claims as compared to last year
so hopefully we'll see some
savings there.
Our efforts on our loss
prevention program to try to
contain some of those costs and
avoid some of those claims
coming in so you can see we are
trying to address areas anywhere
from at economics to our.
Assistance for special education
I school facility on accidental
find a printer training we
worked with arm school personnel
things of that sort.
But the increase for this fiscal
year we were able to knock down
any increases to school
districts for their
responsibilities we're doing a
special appropriation last year
ten million dollars and so that
helped us keep our our rates
latter not pass on any increase
for next year we're looking at
an eight point eight two percent
increase and similar to the
budget commemorates this will be
reviewed by the NM shipboard and
finalized next week.
Financial including a finishing
this fiscal year with a balance
of about two point eight million
dollars in fund balance.
Including we support executive
recommendation the fully
supports the agency's request
for expenditure authority
however I would mention that the
LFC recommendation of adopted I
respectfully request that the
committee considered giving up
the bar forty that Mr targets
and mentioned that I'd be happy
staff any questions.
Thank you very much director
Ilario for the wonderful
presentation he went through it
quickly and there was a lot of
core content that I think our
members would probably like to
spend some time with so I'm
hoping you will email that to
our staff and and they can email
it to the subcommittee or the
committee of the whole just so
we can drill down a little bit
more on it and and before I go
to the committee for questions I
wanted to compliment you for
stepping up for the testing
a costs of your members and
joining the insurance the
Authority on that because it
mattered at that time thank you
with the with the with the right
thing to do and I appreciate
that you get it for your
members.
With that I'll go to questions
and we'll start with ranking
member Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for your presentation Mr
Valerio
I wondered as you work through
your presentation if you've had
an opportunity to analyze House
Bill for.
Which could potentially have a
huge impact to your risk and
liability
have you had a chance to look at
that.
Representative we have we're
actually you are invited to
participate in the task force
for the civil rights commission
prior to them
getting their recommendation and
and working on the bill on we do
know that it is going to bring
additional costs into the
authority however because this
is something that's new we don't
have claims history to kind of
go back in and put a dollar
value on that and so it's very
difficult to put together a
fiscal impact we believe it's
going to impact Association the
counties a lot more how about
police forces however we do know
that schools will see some some
increase plans because of this
bill.
Thank you for that and and no
wonder you're part of it and you
had an opportunity to preview it
is any of that anticipated cost
built into your budget request.
Madam chair representative.
Okay
You you mentioned that in not
this year but in two years
you're gonna have an eight point
eight two percent.
Request for increase in premiums
is that correct not sure I wrote
that down right.
Madam chair representative on
eight point eight two that was
far risk program for risk
premiums to school districts and
then one of the benefits to
identify at nine point three
percent for benefit premiums.
Okay in in when does that come
into effect.
Madam chair representative
without on the nine point three
that would be effective October
first twenty twenty one and the
eight point eight two percent
for school to be on July first
twenty twenty one.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you for your for your answers Mr
Paul are.
Thank you representative we have
another question Representative
Castellano.
Thank you madam chair although
it's a little bit on on this so
Mr video you're saying even with
the nine point three percent
health insurance increases the
you're still looking at to lose
about the last one eleven point
six billion.
Ring in your belt your fund
those two negative six or ninety
four thousand at the close of F.
FY twenty two is this because of
the pandemic restorative.
Representative our time that we
ran the projection dollar budget
request without eleven million
dollars we would be easy bring
that info fund balance and then
that would result in a deficit
we have updated those
projections to do with our board
next week as I mentioned and so
we're now hoping that that nine
point three can be reduced to a
seven point nine percent
increase which would be a lot
better for for teachers and
school employees or hoping maybe
even be lower than that but for
will be making a final
determination next week.
Thank you madam chair as
ministers for Connor.
why why is the executive budget
almost twenty million dollars
higher than the LFC budget I
don't know if we use explained
that but can you tell me again
please.
Madam chair representative on
all
Is.
Essentially.
How we think medical costs are.
So with your resume the overall
twenty nine million dollar
difference is the LFC assumes a
lower rate of growth so well the
LFC rack is last me executive
director also thirteen point
eight million dollars higher
than in.
FY twenty one and so but also.
Just pointing out.
We have the.
We look at relatives.
To the actual expenditure the
LFC racket is thirty two
dollars higher than what we saw
in FY twenty.
Actual that's about a ten
percent difference so we look at
it annualized we're looking at a
growth rate of five percent.
this all the LFC produced a
brief
health benefits and we quoted a
couple organizations one was
The Kaiser foundation that
showed the but I anticipate
about a four point seven percent
increase year over year and
benefits over this time period
the other one was from CMS the
federal Medicare Medicaid.
And they were looking at an
increase of about five point one
percent so the LFC rack is lower
than the executive.
But it's in line with some of
those other projections.
Okay thank you thank you madam
chair thank you Connor.
All right thank you very much
are there any further questions.
All right see none I will and go
to by chair had at a four
motion.
Thank you madam chair a I'd like
to move that we
I recommend the LFC is the
recommendation.
The motion madam chair.
Thank you for that and and
Representative does your motion
include granting the buyer
authority that and director
Valerio at four.
Excuse me Madam.
Matt madam chair.
Yes correct Director Abbey in
general
Bara forty is kind of a separate
exercise of the committee and it
would be my suggestion to
include in your.
subcommittee report which staff
help you with the desire to to
address that bar issue but it
would it typically not part of
the action on the FY twenty two
expenditure recommendation.
All right thank you I appreciate
that very much now so the motion
stands with the second by
Representative Castellano is
anyone opposed to the motion.
All right thing no one I think
we are good and thank you very
much director of the Larry and
again if you could get that
information email to the staff
so they could get it to us I
think I think you provided a
whole lot of information that we
would like to look at further do
you.
Thank you.
All right thank you.
And committee I believe that
concludes our work for the day
unless someone has something
else that I'm unaware of.
And I don't see is so thank you
very much subcommittee we
appreciate you and you have a
little bit of time off for this
afternoon so thank you all very
much and thank you staff.
Thank you madam chair well madam
chair.
You.
