The secretary for this meeting.
Okay I'll just go off my list
and.
Representative Syriana.
Your Mr chair.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Garcia your.
Representative Lane.
Mr chair.
Representative Lara.
Your Mr.
Representative Trujillo.
Dear Mr chair.
Was that Representative Lara.
Yes Sir.
Thank you.
Okay
Members please make a very brief
introduction in the area there
you Representative.
And all conclude the
introduction before we go to our
first panelists.
Our first presenter.
Okay starting with the.
I see on the screen Christine.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Christine Trujillo I'm how out
of house district twenty five in
uptown
Albuquerque it's the mid the
middle of the city.
Very well thank you
Representative Lara.
Thank you Mr chair my name is
Roy out are a.
And I represent a house district
thirty four in southern Dona Ana
County.
Representative Lane my neighbor.
Thank you Mr chair I represent
house district three which is
the eastern portion of San Juan
County and and neighbor as the
chair set.
My main Harry Garcia.
Thank you.
My name is Jerry Garcia
Representative how districts
sixty nine cover parts of San
Juan McKinley small of
Bernalillo Valencia County I'm
gonna be here with you today Sir
thank you.
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you
we'll ask district sixty seven
start western Representative
Solomon and up in their house
marquees up north east side say.
Thank you Sir Representative
Castellano.
Thank you Mr chairman discussed
Anil state representative
district seventy I
Representative San Miguel
Torrance and a little bit of
Santa Fe County.
Thank you.
Anderson.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr chair
I'm Phelps Anderson I represent
districts sixty six which is the
southeastern quadrant of the
state and Chavis.
We and Roosevelt County.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Representative Syriana who is
also the vice chair of the
subcommittee thank you Mr
chairman I represent house
district twenty one which is a
Bernalillo county Albuquerque
the international district in
east central corridor thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you and finally I am
Representative Anthony Allison I
represent district for.
By Representative six chapters
and also small communities of
water flow Representative
Kirkland in a small sliver of
Farmington.
In the.
I'm really looking forward to
working with the subcommittee
you got a lot of good friends
and we're practically family
here so let's get a lot of work
done.
We have not we have seven.
Presenters that will be
presented to us this afternoon
and
we can just a go through all of
them.
We will begin with the agency
for sixty.
Mexico state fair so the
presenters for New Mexico state
fair.
Mr Sally said he was going to do
the presentations so whenever
you're ready Mr Sally.
Mr chairman
so like you said agency code
four six zero the state fair
will briefly go over the two
recommendations and then turn it
over to Mr morning and Mr
Nordine
the major difference that you'll
find with the executive an LFC
differences for the state fair
yes funding for the
African Americans performing
arts center the LFC had a little
bit of money in the state fair
recommendation but there was a a
junior bill appropriation a
couple of years ago that put
that money in the office of
African American affairs
that's where the LESC had
recommended putting it
executive recommended
transferring that money to the
state fair directly since that
help support the state fair's
ability to support the center
and that's a major difference
there's some differences and
revenue assumptions and the
impact of the pandemic will have
on the the shares ability to
generate revenue the the final
thing that I would say is that
not part of your decision making
today but when you get to
specials and supplementals Sarah
does have a six and a half
million dollars supplemental
request that it's maybe there's
two million from and the LESC
recommendation
the state there's not been able
to operate this this past year
and so they've had to pivot to
other operations we hope that
some of the chairs funding could
have been used to help pay for
those but it wasn't and so
you're you're left with an
agency that's supposed to be
generating its own revenues not
able to generate its own revenue
but it's still a current cost
with that Mr chair I'll turn it
over to Mr pre if he has
anything you'd like to.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you very much
for having me today I just would
like to add some notes regarding
the general fund appropriation
recommended by the executive of
two eighty five point zero that
amounts does get put into
Tripoli's budget every year but
then it does get part over or
not part of work but it does go
into animal you agreement or and
a cream and two axle to support
the facility so one way or
another the money does end up
with expo.
That's all I have to say.
Mr chairman you also see in your
packet that LFC and DFA staff
have reconciled performance
targets and presented a
consensus on that and
if you're in agreement with the
fire of of some folks to just
put this money in the state
fair's budget this would be one
where you'd want to take the
executive recommendation at that
point in time and then hopefully
subcommittee B. would do the
same thing and that would it
would line up the funding where
it's also going to end up either
way with that Mr chairman I like
to turn it over to the agency.
Thank you Mr chair members up
members of the committee
Representative my name again is
Dan morning on the executive
director general manager of New
Mexico state fair Mexico New
Mexico with me also I have my
CFO bill Morgan we are the two
scruffy grey hair guys today so
we have our COVID beards kind of
going so but we appreciate the
time that you're taking to
listen to what we have to say
about the New Mexico state fair
I will as it was said by
director solely.
Due to the public health order
More to.
Two thousand twenty.
We have been shut down all
events have been canceled.
That's the status that we are in
today and for the foreseeable
future
again.
We did it
I'm playing a pivotal role in
the pandemic response this is
been said you're like no one of
these are president and comments
not only for all the next all
businesses but exponent Mexico
as well yes we are used to being
in enterprise raising our own
funds but since we have been
shuttered there's no way for us
to do that but the one thing we
can do and we always our mission
is to Mexicans right.
Let me just give you a little
bit of data about what is.
Our understanding that backs
vaccinations
our what we are doing now and
that's what everything is
everybody's excited about but
prior to that testing was so
critical I am getting that
testing done efficiently in a
manner that we could be able to
get that information for the
department of health to take
that give it to the governor for
them to make the decisions
necessary to make yo opening and
reopening and things of that
nature of those sub and we
started right away we're one of
the first mast testing sites
from being exposed to Mexico
we're not satisfied by doing
just one thing we have to do a
lot of things at the same time
so we reached out to the
community and we have partnered
with several nonprofit
organizations that are getting
necessary
supplies to people that are in
desperate need right now early
on we were giving water to the
nap us supplying in transporting
water to the Navajo Nation
before they got their storage
intact since we have a lot of
large buildings of the State
also department health report
with them and we are now story
all of the state's PPVs are
being distributed throughout the
state and have been doing that
since April.
So well those are things that
we're proud of but food is also
very critical blood drives we've
been partnered with by talent we
have partnered with Roadrunner
Food Bank more grow food bank as
well as Calvary church and
several other organizations to
ensure that New Mexicans get
food in the most critical time a
perfect example of that is today
as I said here at school to
Mexico and they are beautiful
grounds and I'm proud to be out
here but it was a rather trying
morning as of this the city was
pretty well shut down streets
were not passable so to speak
but that didn't stop people from
lining up for their food today
hundreds of cars well we opened
we were here my staff was here
and Roadrunner Food Bank was
here and what our food banks you
talk to those folks the problem
would have been able to open
today it would have been for our
facility because we see
challenges as opportunities so
that's what we did and we make
sure when you look into the
hundreds of cars and the people
that are in those cars those are
our fellow citizens and when you
see them in meeting you see the
smile on their face.
In the grant how grateful they
are that they are receiving
this.
Makes my job real easy I'm glad
to be able to do it so just some
numbers that we have been doing
over fifty thousand cars have
come through exponents go loaded
with the Mexicans to get their
testing done and understand that
we all as not only we a testing
site but we are vaccine side at
the same time in the in the
mornings we do testing in the
afternoons we do vaccines the
one thing that we are very good
at and basically we treated this
just like any other up at we
know how to move cars and people
physically we have seventy two
thousand people that come
through our gates on a Saturday
in September when we have the
fair so we figure we can handle
this and we have been able to
but fifty thousand cars a lot of
a eight thousand vaccines have
already been given out and more
to come and again understand
really doing these in the
afternoons or for a couple
hours.
US seventy five hundred boxes
over seventy five hundred boxes
of food that is critical to New
Mexicans Mexicans at this time
I'm again we are a successful
model for other facilities and
have been had other facilities
commander to see how to move
people efficiently and get them.
What they need whether it's
vaccinations or testing that
goes from Presbyterian Hospital
loveless UNM as recently Laguna
pueblo was out here recently and
we have a mayor Tim Keller we
coming out Thursday with his
folks so that they can set their
places up so that when more
doses of vaccine are available
we can do this in an efficient
manner and let's not recreate
the wheel let's learn from what
we have learned and we will get
our mantra to the Parma health
is you get the vaccinations you
all will get the people to you
but we have done it in a very
efficient way to where people
are not inconvenience they have
there been up the ability to
send their car until they are
called in to as a stage in the
property your call to take away
they what may have a short walk
and to come into the heated
building they get their their
vaccine and they take their
observation time and then
they're back on their way and if
they have mobility issues we
accommodate that as well at the
same time you don't have to
leave your car you can stay in
your car and get that vaccine
just the same and we're proud of
the partnerships and understand
that this is a partnership that
we have not only would just the
department of health to our
magnificent heroes these nurses
and doctors the paramedics the
National Guard they're all out
here doing their part to make
sure that New Mexicans get what
they need this is what is
required of us at expo New
Mexico and we will continue to
do this mission until we are no
longer called into that duty
again.
APS's called us they needed flu
vaccinations a place to make the
regular flu shot the flu didn't
go away it's still here but we
supply them with the the
facility to be able to do that
as well
Not only with doing that you
know we didn't have our
traditional state fair everybody
right now should have a sad face
it was sad to not have the the
state fair to a new magnificent
event but that did not to
tourists the only thing that we
were allowed to do was virtual
well exponent Mexico state fair
tradition we're going to do it
to the best of our ability our
to do it with excellence and I'm
proud to say that we had over
fourteen hundred digital entries
alone for some of our
competitions four thousand votes
for can't cast of New Mexicans
for people choice competitions
reporter with the New Mexico
department of agriculture for
got to have a food processor we
had the best salsa salsa contest
in New Mexico and not only that
we we are proud supporters of
four H. and FFA.
And we did not let our kids go
by the wayside and our
exhibitors we put on a virtual
livestock show and sale and it
was a professional show when it
was done well we had the judges
of like to thank all these judge
that we normally hirer to come
out of the show is a
professional judges that judge
show volunteer their time to do
a virtual show so it was done
well and over ninety thousand
dollars was raised to distribute
to these kids and I'm proud to
say that every entry four
hundred and ninety five entries
over two hundred kids all two
hundred kids receive money from
the New Mexico state fair show
and sale all of this goes to
offset some of those costs that
we know we're so which normally
hi for doing their projects
again they were started well
before the pandemic started so
we're glad to do our part also
they were able to keep their
animals so they had jackpots of
shows they could go to or their
own county fairs which in late
in the year somewhere allowed to
vote they were able to exhibit
their so we're proud of our our
four excuse we look forward to
seeing them back on the grounds
and twenty twenty one
again we were recognized
nationally for the work we did
on our virtual fair by the
international association of
expo affairs and expose I. Athey
as well as the western fairs
association we are are are are
virtually for was the number one
virtual fair in the country
we're very happy about that very
proud of that was done very well
and I have a staff that is.
Amazing.
They take a challenge and just
run with it and those of the
people that you have working for
you you're an expo to make Sicko
and I'm proud to be associated
with them so good for that we
will do that for accolades would
support to know that our peers
and the fair business was hit
hard this year around the world
around the country as well of
that we are recognized for doing
the job that we did.
And as you.
Underfunding one of the other
things I want to talk about is
that I'm proud to say that we
are the future fair this year
the country in twenty twenty one
and this is where France Sarah
planners and organizers will
come out to New Mexico if the
pandemic allows it they will be
allowed to come out.
To come out and see how we
organize our fair and we share
ideas and this is a great honor
and something that hasn't
happened here in New Mexico in
decades so while we're proud to
be able to say call that New
Mexico we're first in some
things not last and we're proud
to say they were first is a fair
we're very proud of the work
that we've done
as you've heard from more
analyst that we although the
what the Mexico state various
categories categorized as a
enterprise agency it was
necessary to submit a deficiency
appropriation request for two
hundred thousand ought to cover
our expenses not covered by
revenue for the year ended in
twenty June thirtieth twenty
twenty and a supplemental
appropriation request for the
six point five for the current
year that will end in June
thirtieth twenty twenty one
these requests we believe will
fully cover all our expenses for
the period that we have been
called in to be a public service
operation supporting.
The needs of the citizens of New
Mexico.
So with that once again say I'm
proud of what our facility has
been able to deliver during this
pandemic these are like I said
unprecedented times we look
forward and remain hopeful that
normally a gradual normalcy will
return to our state to our
country.
And in the coming months we look
forward to once again we can
welcome you and every other
citizen of the Mexico and those
from outside the Mexico to the
grounds for celebration of our
strength our unity.
And our resilience.
At the New Mexico state fair and
twenty twenty one.
So with that we've come a long
way I'd like to leave you with a
quote from Ben Franklin.
That failure to plan you plan to
fail.
We do not plan to fail at expo
New Mexico or the New Mexico
state fair ever.
With that I finished my
presentation is different
questions thank you.
Thank you Mr morning.
I would like to vote for
question from the committee
members and I only see one hand
so far Mr Anderson
Representative Anderson.
Mr chairman can you hear me now.
We can hear you thank you.
Mr chair I appreciate the good
work that's being done at the
New Mexico state fair and can't
imagine.
The show like that there are
being postponed is got to.
Create a tremendous amount of
problems however I did want to
ask the analyst question
relative to what I believe I
understand on the African
American performing arts center
of the seventy five thousand
dollars the Cape was originally
to one agency and has now come
over
and then there's some additional
money I think that goes along
with that
And it's really I've my question
is are are you in agreement on
the amount of money and it's
simply.
Sort of a process question of of
of of of them Madam money the if
you could help me with that I
almost think that it's it's it's
not about the money it's about
where do we account for the
money thank.
That's correct Mr chairman
Representative of Anderson
there's
The executive just.
A puts the appropriation where
the expenses actually going to
occur so that the agencies don't
have to transfer that money
through a
and and are you process and LFC
staff for an agreement with that
and if recommend you take takes
that correct.
Thank you for that and and
taking the exact would be a of
the a motion or an action that
would be a better
account for this money movement
no disagreement on the doctor
just sort of the process is that
correct.
That's correct I think there's
only a maybe a nineteen thousand
dollar net difference between
what's in both budgets
the the only other issues I have
a little bit more
Authority and the other revenue
category under the exact rack
but you know if the revenues
don't come in the next year than
they should reduce their budget
accordingly I'm sorry I don't
see that as a problem.
Thank you for that and again a
follow up to the LFC let's say
hypothetically that next year's
the other revenues were out
standing because New Mexicans
were selling through GST to get
out and enjoy the fair again and
they actually run substantially
higher
remind me if you could senator
where does that money go and
when do we see that again.
The agency if there if they were
running ahead of what their
budget was they would need to do
a budget adjustment to increase
their spending authority and
that process would be filed with
the department of finance and
administration and I'll see
staff would review it.
Thank you very much and then a
final question relative to LFC
or executive of I'm the the
thirty five permanent employees
that work at the New Mexico
state fair does either one of
these budget recommendations
include a salary increase
from either side.
That any agencies base budget
the LFC includes one and a half
percent increase
For all agencies from the
general fund and there's an
expectation when the legislature
does that that other state funds
pick up a portion of that cost I
think there are adjustments
assumed in the base for minimum
wage increases for those
employees that that might be at
the minimum wage so they would
have sufficient authority to be
able to pay that.
Thank you very much for that
answer Mr chairman that's all I
had thank you very much.
Thank you representative.
Anderson are there any other
questions I thought I sing the
hand of a.
President of Garcia.
Mr chairman I did have my hand
of the put it down to this
question I'm gonna ask might be
the premature.
Then.
Do you guys run the racetrack my
correct.
Chair representative we do not
run the race track that is run
by the downs of Albuquerque we
have a lease agreement a land
lease agreement for it's a
twenty five year lease agreement
that but they run the track.
Thank you sure because I I I
want to make sure the rest of
question thank you very much
thank you Mr.
Thank you representative next I
see the hand of Representative a
lot of.
Thank you Mr chair I do have a
question I'm looking at the at
the notes here on the on page
four and it says that the agency
hires a large number of impact
of temporary staff so what is an
average number of how many
temporary staff to are hired and
would you be of I'm just gonna
throw this out there are no I
don't know what's rolled or not
but would be prudent to use
contracted services instead of
just hiring about right.
Chairman I believe
Representative Lara that's
restricted to me.
I guess whoever whoever can
answer to thank you I will if I
cannot also conclude bill if I
need to the the temporaries that
we hire are mostly for fair
time.
And that's for a short amount of
time within thirty days that
they work they're in and out and
You know but we've we've always
hire temporaries and it's it's
something that we're very
efficient with we've taken in
consideration the minimum wage
and all those increases and the
differences are the problem is
is that if we don't have the
money we will hire as many
people it it's as simple as that
so I mean what will will run it
as close as we can as as a
business but it makes more sense
for us to keep the temporary
staff.
Okay at thank you for that they
thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative
I don't see any more hands of
the.
Check it real quick there is no
work had so.
if there is.
No more questions I would like
to thank the presenters of Mr
Sally Mr Perea and this morning
and as a formality I got this
note just prior to the meeting
or I got this this afternoon and
stay is just to reinforce what
Mr Sally had said.
It says that in nineteen twenty
nineteen the legislature
appropriated funding for
programs and exhibits at the
African American performing arts
center in the office of American
African American affairs Senator
as you recall is located on the
state fairgrounds the executive
recommendation moves this
funding from the triple a to the
state fair for the center while.
LFC for the junior male or
regionally appropriate to the
triple a.
As a result if H. AFC adopts the
executive recommendation today
for both the state fair and the
triple a you can accomplish that
move by funding with minimal net
difference to the general fund
which is what we recommend that
you consider so that's an
official notes that I would like
to have right into the of the
notes here so with that and over
questions I would like to ask
vice president of Syriana can
you please make a motion for the
committee members.
You Mr chairman I'm I move the
executive.
Thank you.
Can
you hear second second.
Second by Representative Phelps.
It propose some folks from the
members.
Hearing.
We will forward his
recommendation to the full
committee thank you.
For an excellent presentation Mr
Sally Mr Perry and Mr morning
thank you very much thank you Mr
chair members of the committee
appreciate it.
Okay.
The next presenters coming up by
the comers and Toltec scenic
railroad commission.
Agency number four ninety
Representative
we're presenters Martinez
Sampdoria.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
Jacqueline Martinez some LFC
analyst when compressing told
take scenic railroad.
I also have a few members from
railroad joining us today I'll
let them introduce their team
once we turn it over.
Looking at your different sheets
in front of you the main
difference here the LFC
recommendation reduce general
fund revenue by twelve point six
thousand that was a five percent
reduction from the FY twenty one
operating budget and you'll see
that reduction made and personal
services employee benefits as
well as a little bit and the
other category
the executive recommendation
maintained general fund revenue
flat as well as all expenditures
flat with the FY twenty one
operating budget.
And with that I'll turn it over
to Germany with the executive
for any additional comments on
his recommendation.
Mr chair members of the
committee
The executive recommendation
maintains expenses to FY twenty
budget as Jacqueline and I have
some struck when it mentioned
the exact recommends keeping the
HSD flat to FY twenty one due to
there are many fixed costs
within the Congress and tell to
pool tech
three hundred four hundred
categories and we also
understand that there have been
permanent staff who took pay
cuts.
during the reductions of the
special session in order to keep
their staff for we would like to
restore it's close to possible
those individuals to their FY
twenty one.
amounts and salaries this
executive recommendation will do
that we believe that the LFC
recommendation would.
Further allows indifference take
more of a pay cut and possibly
be below minimum wage.
Through it all the tourists that
come into our state.
And that is all absent thank
you.
Mr chair if I may.
Representative Castellano.
It what is the LFC recommend
reduced general fund revenue by.
On.
Twelve thousand.
Five percent of FY twenty one
operating budget.
Representative.
So are LESC committee in our
budget guidelines followed.
Reducing general fund revenue
that was back in September when
we were having our budget
hearings and at that point the
executive that was a request
they submitted their budget so.
It's hard for us to add money
when agency requests that cut
For you all do you have the
opportunity to.
Change that being that the
executive did not cut the
personal services.
And Mr chair tunes Oaklawn thank
you Mr chairman also keep in
mind with you're gonna see a lot
of differences in the salary
budget line items with many of
these agencies keep in mind that
the LFC recommendation has a a
coal well that's it shows up in
a different part of the budget
that we've initially make its
way into the agencies based
budgets.
So there is money for small
salary increases that will show
up in the agency's base budget
once they put their operating
budget together if if that's
adopted by the full legislature.
Okay
S. Martinez says Mr Ferrier any
other.
Anything else that.
Now Mr chair that's all from us
I think we're ready to go over
to the agency thank you very.
Everybody my name is Eric Mason
on the interim CEO for the
Kommersant Altec railroad.
Mr chairman members of the
committee we appreciate the time
today to president of the the
state status of the Kommersant
all packed and and review the
proposed budget for fiscal year
twenty twenty two I joining me
today is our CFO and act and
also are to New Mexico
commissioners bill locked and
building up our all of which are
on the call today so I I want to
kind of take a moment to walk
everyone through sort of where
we come from of which twenty
nineteen to twenty twenty just
to get an idea again a refresher
on sort of our revenue in our
passenger count just put it in
perspective on the twenty
nineteen we are at forty two
thousand passengers roughly and
obviously the COVID we took a
massive hit like most you know
tourism and travel organizations
to one thousand passengers
roughly so that meant really up
you know revenue in twenty
nineteen of of of five point
three million and we we took
that down to one point eight
this past operating season we do
have we are optimistic as as I'm
sure we all are for twenty
twenty two operating season
obviously it's a it's a gated in
and cautious optimism given the
state of the world we live in
today and and given COVID is
still out there however you know
we we did and I'm I'm thank you
very much for the
Representative support for
raising the the issue of
potentially bumping into minimum
wage requirements and we
appreciate any consideration
they can be supported there are
I did want to give and get a
chance to chime in here on
additional details regarding our
financials and that we can also
pose a question status quo.
Okay you're on mute.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee for
the chance to state our case
today and say the condition of
our where we set of.
To deal with more detail out.
Our goal over even overview of
the financial and the other
of a performance of the
operating arm of the rebels have
summer and indeed it was
extremely devastating
effectively and we were down
seventy percent from the prior
calendar year which is an
enormous yet the other
commission itself also needs to
continue to run and in the in
the process of our support which
comes combined from New Mexico
and Colorado
we we saw a six point five
percent reduction overall when
we combine the four percent
reduction making New Mexico in a
somewhat larger one out of
Colorado
when we submitted our request
doing follow the guidance that
grow provided to us back in
August and the included the five
percent recommended reduction in
the initiatives however that
does not in any way shows story
of what it does to us if you are
operation of the commission
itself which is but that we're
speaking about today this is
highly fixed we don't get any
significant opportunities to
provide medical reductions in
our professional services Judy
NA we got a very small
concession of our insurance
carrier
Kate on the fact that we were
operating fewer track four of
our exposure to property which
was somewhat reduce however was
a very minor what so the
reductions that we took for the
FY twenty one budget.
It's actually handled in one
place to get to come from and
that that was in in our labor of
I like to say so we we did not
in the state payroll system we
we basically have to supporters.
no to do so we we needed to make
but a thirty two thousand dollar
reduction and we created by
means of of the and myself
actually taking a significant
cut of the rest of our nation
please hold to that any
additional to that.
Will be further of.
With any rate so taking it for
the actually does take is that
the area of minimum wage
considerations and the and is
significant significant amount
so would have to be taken and
spread more broadly so at the
point we sit today we basically
are surviving in the commission
operations we have the the fact
that are real road
appropriations was significantly
reduced did not actively reduce
the operation the commission
itself which provides oversight
to entire property the the bill
still need to be paid the
insurance needs to be adjusted
the other.
Things that we do in the
committee that does support on
an annual basis don't get
reduced so the cost of doing
these things if anything
sometimes goes up because fees
other things tend to create even
and pandemic years.
What we are today we made a
request of and we're basically
saying anything anything that
could be done to help restore us
back to the levels we saw
initially for the FY twenty one
budget of would certainly be
very much appreciated otherwise
the the effect on the computer
operations and the people who
work there are affected we going
to be going to be a diminished.
The.
Early.
I thank you for your your
opportunity to do here
presentation today and was
certainly in any questions that
we have.
Okay so that concludes your
presentation.
Yes Mr chairman okay I only see
I want to open up question for
the membership of I mean the
committee members and the first
I say is Representative
Trujillo.
The state yes thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee and this question is
directed to the LFC analyst if
you don't mind I is it do you a
jackal.
Yes.
We get down on the bottom of
page one sixty four
the narrative says that the LFC
recommendation reduce the
general fund revenue by twelve
point six.
Four five percent now what was
the rationale again for that.
Budget hearing the LESC
committee that was part of our
budget guidelines so we were
doing reductions and all
agencies at that point of three
to five percent this agency was
twelve point six thousand five
percent reduction.
For the for the railroad.
This Mr chairman and Jacqueline
this is prior obviously to
comment and all of the issues
that were were
Much to that right.
Yes this was during the COVID
however.
At that point I don't think the
LESC committee was aware of a
lot of the reductions that have
been made to the staff
especially seeing the CFO we
didn't know he was taking
reductions to is now Hey that
was kind of jeopardizing getting
to minimum wage so that
information kind of got to us
relatively recently.
Well because of that and I
appreciate Mr chairman and
Jacquelyn your the
clarification.
Clearly you know the amount of
money that we're talking about
is not huge and the recognizing
that we have a process that LFC
to go with the lower
recommendation I would really
import this committee.
To restore.
What I believe should should not
go back to the budget and the
not have anyone take any cuts
because they're trying to keep
folks from from
Making a determination in terms
of employees right from making a
determination if they can't even
have a right to work much or buy
food or whatever it is it
clearly I understand Mister but
that may not be in our the poor
house thank you should not be
taking cuts of.
Of it with his own salary right
and I think that I would beg the
committee's indulgence in trying
to at least restore.
What
what the the.
This toll take.
People have asked or the
executive has asked because you
know you know based on what
Jacqueline said that they didn't
have a lot of this information
before they made these
recommendations so I would
implore the.
The committee Mr chairman to
consider strongly
My request thank you.
Thank you representative of the
next person raisin is that is
Representative Anderson.
Thank you Mr chairman of Mr
chairman I was going to ask the
analyst
It is.
The New Mexico Fund The New
Mexico employees in this
Colorado you.
Fund the Colorado employees.
Mr chair representative Anderson
I think it would be the best
person to answer this question
from the railroad.
Thank you Mr chairman if it
could take a swing at that I'd
appreciate it.
Representative thank you our
employees are in one school they
come out of a common common the
employee base.
The funding that is received
from both of the state's support
all of the employees that that
we have within the commission
and the the same thing those
actually for the operation the
road itself the the money that
revenue that we need a change
from our operations supports of
essentially all employees and we
treat them all equally this.
Thanks thank you for thank you
for that answer and
And I'm just trying to
understand it when we look at a
total budget of six million two
is that all in for the rare were
all sourced is everybody if they
sell it in Colorado or if we
should take it New Mexico it's
all one pot the in my
understanding that correctly.
Representative that.
Act that includes the the most
revenues from all sources
including the Colorado support
in that number the additional
questions you see are the the
general fund request that comes
out of the state of New Mexico
on it that's held separately
because the you folks.
Basically make the
recommendations and do the
appropriation on that is
individualized.
Thank you for that answer and I
wish you the best our family
certainly enjoyed the our time
the railroad but it's been a
little while so it'll be with
grand children thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
I don't see any more hands on
the board so with that.
I want to thank the presenters
miss Martinez Mr Pereira Mister
Mason and Mr that I thank you
for very good presentations and
the.
The vice chair.
Syria can you please make a
motion for the committee members
thank you Mr chairman I move the
LFC recognition.
Okay and then hi.
The recommendation that the
Representative Trujillo made be
made before the full committee
when we make this recommendation
as we forward this
recommendation to the full
committee.
Okay with that thank you for
your presentations.
Our next presenters.
Are going to be the board of
examiners for architects.
Senators Nichols and Rivera.
So Mr chair I'm going to
present for Mister Nichols on
the the architects.
And the bottom line is there's
no difference between the
recommendations and the agency
as a flat there's just some
changes and use our fund balance
and some of their fee revenue.
With that I.
The analyst of also reconciled
performance measures and with
that I'll turn it over to just
if you have any other comments
in fact the committee.
Mr chairman this is that Andrew
Miner from DFA I think our
analysts the internet without so
I just pool at I don't have
anything to to add additional so
I just I turn it over to the
presenters.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Mallory Gonzales I'm the
executive director and the chief
financial officer for the New
Mexico board of examiners for
architects I wanted to start off
by apologizing for my voice I'm
not feeling too well I believe
here with me on this the meeting
is our board chair Mike Lowell
St and our vice chair Jim
Archibald.
Our mission is to be charged to
protect health safety and
welfare of the public we are in
enterprise agency not part of
the General Fund and we are
requesting a flat budget for FY
twenty two.
I am happy to announce that at
the end of FY twenty we did get
approved for all government
entities to now offer online
payments along with the new
website and database to comply
with the PCI requirements to
offer online payments.
I thank you for your time and at
this time I stand for questions.
Okay.
Any questions from the
committee.
I don't see any hands so.
Madam vice chair Syriana can you
please make a motion for the
committee members.
I'm sure Mr chairman I move
since they both the same I guess
I move the LFC.
Thank you madam vice chair.
D. chair.
I second the motion option.
Okay thank you very much in with
unanimous vote will forward that
recommendation to the full
committee.
Thank you to all the presenters.
Sally Mr Myers and miss Gonzalez
thank you very much.
And that brings us up to the
presenters the HSD for four six
the board of medical examiners.
Presenters.
The client and Rivera.
You're on.
Hello can you hear us okay this
is Donna reed better from DFA
budget.
Yes we can hear you.
Okay thank you.
Whenever you're ready okay I was
waiting for Kelly to start but
I'll go ahead and start
Basically the executive
recommendation was seven.
Point two thousand below the LFC
recommendation and both the LFC
and executive recommendation
have increased other revenues to
better align with the FY twenty
actual revenues therefore
needing we needed to reduce the
fund balance revenues in FY
twenty two.
Overall the LFC recommendation
for revenues with flat with the
FY twenty one operating budget
well the executive
recommendation were lightly
lower resulting in the seven
point two thousand dollar
difference.
I'm.
In the face the executive
recommendation transferred money
from personal services to
contractual services
origin the LFC funded the
maintain funding for the
position of the.
Madam that medical director in
the bay and the LESC
recommendation the executive
recommendation part of the
agency requests for moving that
funding to contractual services
for the medical director that's
where the real differences
between the two recommendations
so
The executive.
I'm sorry go ahead I'm so sorry
my audio when out and it just
came back Mr chair Kelly Klein
from the LFC so after dawn is
Donald make comments I really
apologize for that.
Okay that well that was pretty
much the major difference
between the two recommendations
Kelly you're welcome step and
now.
Thank you so much on I really
apologize for that he's
in these are very interesting Mr
chair I'm just like to know for
the committee that this is a non
general fund agency so the
revenues come from licensing
fees this agency does not affect
the state general fund the
performance measures have been
reconciled if you're looking for
additional information on the
LFC recommendation you can be
found on page one fifty of one
fifty one of the LFC volume to.
And since the main difference is
regarding personal
recommendations I would just
have the committee turns their
page three if they have any
questions about the LFC person
recommendation and this is our
personal our PS counter personal
calculation sheet showing the
LFC our personal recommendation
and any type of
funded vacancy rate in there and
with that I will turn it over to
the director Sundar Frank who
joins us today for any
additional comments.
Good afternoon members of the
committee I am Sandra Frank I am
the executive director of the
medical board and I am here with
Gail Muscat in the US who is our
CFO
as Kelly indicated we are an
agency that is funded solely by
licensing fees of our our
professionals we regulate
physicians physician assistants
and several other smaller
medical entities within us we
did propose a flat budget and
there is very little difference
between the DFA recommendation
and the LESC recommendation
I I I always get asked this
question so I'm just gonna tell
you off of that the top we do
have to vacancies right now we
are looking for medical director
and one other position and with
that I will stand for questions.
Okay
And has raised by Representative
Anderson to be followed by
Representative lane.
Go ahead Representative
Anderson.
Representative Anderson here on.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm get in
this figured out Mr chairman I
have a couple questions to the
analyst real quick US one I'm
looking at some data our
presentation relative to our.
A different sheet on the medical
board and I'm curious
specifically about a physician
assistant licenses if that's a
biennial
renewal.
And we look at at a number like
five hundred M. and my then
under the impression that you
multiply that times to do no
Sir.
Mexico.
Mr chairman I'm sure the
director could probably answer
this better than I but I'm under
the impression that those lights
with the there by annual just
depending on when they get at
school and when they apply for
licensure thing that is every
other year but the number can
vary depending on when the
applicant originally applied to
their lives to the.
Thank you for that answer and
the same holds true on the
positions are which who were in
a triennial of license renewal
and if you assume that it's sort
of spreads out evenly over the
all three years of the forty one
hundred number of four it.
Issuance and renewals
that's actually a much smaller
number than the total number of
licenses outstanding is that
correct.
Mr chair.
Go ahead.
Mr chair members the committee
representative Anderson that's
correct so for the physicians we
renew a third of them every year
and for the PA's we're we renew
about one half every year just
depending on their their renewal
cycle.
Thank you very much for that Mr
chairman then my question goes
to
I was curious why there's a
twenty for twenty percent
difference between the executive
recommendation of five hundred
physicians assistants and the
LESC recommendation for six
hundred twenty percent being a
rather large variance.
Does she LFC have any
explanation for the higher
number.
The higher they have the agency
requests five hundred.
Yes Mr chair representative
mentioned that's a great
question so if you look at that
same rate you're referring to
and go to the FY twenty actual
column for that performance
measure you'll notice that the
agency reported and FY twenty
there was six hundred and twenty
nine for that performance
measures of the LFC
recommendation look at those
actuals and thought that we
should align of the agency
performance closer to actuals
we did have a converse I do have
a conversation of my DFA
counterparts who actually talk
with a director Frank as well
and said the director believe
that that six hundred was not
normal and that it was there
were some type of look is the
wrong word but there's something
inflating the numbers that
fiscal year needs he didn't
believe that it would coming
closer to six hundred for FY
twenty two and so in performance
measures to go she Asians LFC
agreed to to look at the DFA
recommendation closer to the
five hundred number which was
the Department request.
Thank you very much for that and
insensitive the school impact of
whichever number is closer does
it really matter for today's
discussion on going to simply
move on and say there is one
other one that is of interest to
me and if it's deals with the
something that I don't believe
the executive director
necessarily cease but it's the
fiscal FY twenty actual
investigations into high risk
prescribing.
and that number is five so I
think okay I.
investigation maybe the wrong
word if it is I apologize but
but what is the medical boards
position on trying to ensure the
New Mexico consumers that are
attending to a high risk.
Being
in in trying to bring compliance
I your comments would be
appreciated.
Mr chair answer that.
Please okay at some Mr chair
Representative Anderson members
of the committee so because of
COVID we we did not do our
regular compliance question and
and by compliance could push
what I mean is there are
actually two parts to
investigating high risk
prescribing there's one part
that is regarding PMP compliance
and that's prescription
monitoring program compliance
and then there's a second part
where we are looking at overdose
deaths attributed to
prescription drugs this year we
only we did not do the PMP
compliance question because it
it could it call it occurs in
this spring right when COVID was
happening and because we were
trying to get a Federal
Emergency licensing place to
license people from out of state
very quickly I just couldn't did
not have the resources to do
additionally do the PMP
compliance part of that however
we didn't stop the PMP and let
me explain PM Pete compliance is
technically when we we write for
licensees about their compliance
rate anytime a physician pools
are he writes a prescription she
writes a prescription they have
to have checked the PMP before
issuing the script so so it our
compliance push for PMP is about
whether or not they they looked
at the PMP before they issued a
controlled substance
prescription this year we didn't
send out letters demanding
that people explain their PMP
compliance right and it was
simply because we were focused
on getting the federal emergency
license to get more doctors into
the state of New Mexico and it
was really unfortunate that it
happened that way but we only
delayed the the letters that
went out the letters went out
act.
Actually after July we sent out
three hundred ninety letters so
the numbers will be very
different for you next year
because we'll actually have to
compliance pushes on PMP in
terms of overdose in high risk
prescribing and in terms of
overdose death we have continued
to investigate those and and
continue to process them we have
not delayed investigating people
who look like they're
prescribing is problematic or
could or did it lead to an
overdose death.
Thank you very much for that
response and I wish you the best
of luck in that area going
forward Mr chairman that
concludes my remarks thank.
Thank you Mr Representative I
don't see any more hands so I
would like to thank the analyst
and the presenters or a good
presentation.
And I would like to ask the vice
chair at this time.
Representative Seri on can you
please make a motion for the
committee members thank you Mr
chairman I move the executive.
At age.
Thank you madam vice chair.
With the motion we will forward
this recommendation to the full
committee thank you very much
you and that will thank you.
Yes it will take us to the next
presenters of.
Agencies for sixty five the
gaming control board.
I'll step in on this one as well
Mr chairman
I'd like to turn your attention
to volume three there are some
charts and graphs in there that
might be interesting for the
committee to to look at if you
turn to page sixty five.
Sixty six.
And sixty seven you can see
three graphs one is gaming
revenue by use.
So how much does the state bring
in from horse racing purses
verses tribal revenue sharing.
FY twenty was obviously impacted
in the fourth quarter.
By comment and closures.
that impacted on page sixty six
the number of live horse racing
days by racetrack.
And it also impacted pretty
significantly the net when
proceeds of the the different
tribes and pueblos.
You can see on page sixty seven.
That's obviously impact the
general fund revenue estimates.
and those were incorporated into
the revenue estimates but today.
We're going to be looking at the
gaming control board this budget
first.
That LVC recommendation
represents a five percent
increase in general fund
revenues for FY twenty two in
the executive this represents a
three percent reduction.
Reductions are are mostly in the
Two hundred categories with some
other financing with some other
Four hundred reductions as well.
If you look at
That PS calc for you can see A.
M. column in the amount of
funded.
Thank you positions that the
agency has.
In FY twenty HSD transfer twenty
five thousand out of that
category to contractual services
and others.
And.
You can see where they analyst
have reconciled and and.
the performance measures
recommendations as well with
that I'll turn it over to Mr
preference comments.
Mr chair members the committee
the executive does not have any
comments at this time I will now
give it over to miss Ortega to
give a presentation.
Good afternoon Mr chair members
of the committee taking the
place of acting director
Cynthia Ortega army ho today my
name is Jeremy Romero of
commissioner also serving as the
board chair of the New Mexico
gaming control board again I'd
like to thank you for allowing
me to appear in front of the
committee today.
The COVID nineteen pandemic has
delivered a streak of bad luck
to amendment casinos unlike any
other elect that string of bad
hands the fallout had a rippling
effect on very degrees affected
to affected workers state and
local tax revenues vendors and
others in this in the casino of
supply chain are relevant to
budget current vacant the gov
expositions all that we're
really utilizing for of vacancy
savings have been primarily as
of for the Globex is a executive
director position a state tribal
gaming ran into all of board
member positions from the group
from the Gulf Act standpoint
we've been also throughout the
years been able to really live
off of of the vacancy savings
for for for these open positions
with that stating the cuts in
really overall been able to
fight provide the the quality of
output from the gaming control
board in its in its workers that
day in and day out every day
consistent with with the with
the yearly budget that the
gaming control board is given
with me today I have a staff
present to acting StateTribal
came Representative a Richelle
Camacho one with the staff
attorney Eric locker and along
with the our a budget shall
Burrell all night stand for
questions.
Questions for.
Mr Romero from the committee.
Mr Romero did you say that you
had other.
The presenters with you.
Yes Mr chair I have a staff of
staff present media acting state
tribal gaming Representative
Representative shell Camacho
Longstaff Attorney General Eric
locker and budget for the game
control up.
Machel relative.
Okay will give me a few minutes
and then we'll proceed with
questions from the committee
right after their presentation.
Thank you Mr.
Are they on.
Mr chair I do see a acting
State tribal gaming
Representative with the agency
over shell Camacho on.
And also our budget for the
gaming control board shall the
role and they are both on me
right now.
Thanks at this time as well.
Thanks to this team good
afternoon.
Mr much of.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee I my
role here today is to stand for
questions in the event Mr
chairman you were committee
members have any questions
regarding tribal gaming.
Okay
our first.
Person through us question would
be Representative Anderson he
will be followed by
Representative Trujillo go ahead
Mr Anderson.
Thank you Mr chairman
Mr chairman I I I think by first
question might go to miss
Camacho and my question is one
of of curiosity as to
with the.
Indian gaming.
C. nose open what is your
response when somebody says what
has been your COVID experience
of continuing for we're having
gaming operations under way
during this pandemic do you do
you see some alarming response
relative to the spread or are
you satisfied where do you go
with that please.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Anderson act is
the our tribes who are operating
and if chosen to re open and
resume gaming activity
part of our of of our process
under the.
Fifteen twenty fifteen gaming
compacts is to request their
reopening plans to ensure that
they do have a safety plan in
place to mitigate the spread of
COVID nineteen and so for the
tribes that have chosen to re
open that are currently
operating we do have a plan I in
hand in record and we've been
satisfied that that plan
addresses the requirements
issued by the national Indian
gaming commission as well as the
local department of health
current mandates.
Thank you for that answer
and I am very pleased to hear
that you know satisfactory
results are being achieved yeah
I commend you for that.
Chair if I could I'd ask Jeremy
Romero.
Question relative to
Well if I hadn't forgotten I'd
be happy to ask it Mr Romero but
it had to do with the well we
had to do with sports betting
you sent under your purview
in New Mexico.
Mr chair we are currently
currently looking at of a
reviewing the bills and
recommendations
With not only sports fan but
really betting in general in New
Mexico how we can best the you
look utilizing good gaming New
Mexico really to move are you
gaming in New Mexico Ford of
ICANN junction with that see how
how gaming revenues to best
utilize of for state revenues
both on the state side and on
the on the local strive for a
site for revenues and up up from
the board's perspective in HSD
perspective we're going to work
diligently of with all
stakeholders involved to really
move gaming for and and and move
came in for and and and the
sensible up of manner that best
suits the needs of of of all
parties involved.
Thank you Mr Romero for that
response and I take that to I
believe I interpret that is no.
The gaming control board has no
current operations of forty over
sports gaming in New Mexico is
that correct yes.
Thank you then my last question
Mr Romero is I hear quite a bit
of discussion over the interim
about what I refer to as class
A. or class B. machines for I
can't work with there's a B. or
one two but whichever one it is
I know he I suspect you know
what I'm trying to ask which is
what is the status of those
class B. machines of
disassociated New Mexico receive
any revenue off of that game.
Mr chairman I would refer that
to gaming control board staff on
that.
Mr chair as well as chair what
Romero Representative Anderson
if I may in regards to the
tribal gaming facilities at the
our machine so they are
currently operating right now
fall under class two and class
three gaming class three gaming
is a traditional slot machine
those are what are what we've
I'm point is the racino I they
racetrack casinos that's the the
traditional slot machine class
two machines are the electronic
bingo machines that look very
similar to I'm the traditional
slot machine are they however
are not operated similarly and
they operate off of a building
go hard if you will in terms of
tribal gaming because class too
is not addressed or monitored
under the current compacts we
have done surveys in the past
however that is not normally
under under the purview of
either the gaming compacts or
the gaming control board as it
relates to to tribal gaming when
are we completed our last survey
which was one fiscal year ago
the a number of class two gaming
machines throughout the state on
tribal lands amounted for less
than one and a half percent of
the total amount of gaming
machines present.
Thank you very much for that
answer Mr chairman
and
I I guess for the moment I'm I'm
pleased that the one and a half
percent of the total population
he is that also accurate to say
that that one and a half percent
does not contribute to any of
revenues to the state of New
Mexico under the compacts
and therefore the other
remaining ninety eight point
five percent does fall under
those compacts and therefore
payment to the state among other
things.
Mr chair representative Anderson
that is a correct statements and
I'd like to also add that as
we've done three surveys over
the past several years to
included during the last fiscal
year we've not seen that number
moved past the between the one
and we are less than one and a
half percent.
Thank you very much for that Mr
chair because
until you you have some basis of
fact you you might your mind
might wander to a bigger
percentage of their for a bigger
impact and certainly a one and a
half percent seems to be below
the threshold of of significant
Mr chairman.
Miss Camacho Mr Amerila thank
you for your answers I'm done.
Thank you thank you
Representative
thanks we have Representative
Trujillo followed by a
representative Garcia.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and thank you for The
presentation restore Domingo and
Mrs Camacho or ms much of money
I'm.
Thank you that you know the in
the governor's speech today
she's saying that she wants
schools to open by February
eighth but dissipated openings.
Dark times for gaming.
She does.
Representative Trujillo ring
we're gonna we're gonna rely on
the information from the
department of health and really
full their their guidelines
important protocols within that
in conjunction we are going to
really have a finger on the
pulse of the casino as far as
appropriations plans a as far as
opening plans and in safety
plans to to ensure the safety of
of of all persons entering and
exiting the casinos in in a safe
manner so we're going to really
look at that look at everything
in pretty much all hands on deck
and rely on and and rely and all
that information to really make
a an informed decision with
that.
I'm Mr chairman and Mr Ahmed or
miss Camacho
did any of you ever keep track
of of the people that you
scanned as they entered casinos
during the COVID to determine
who was who was who had COVID
who didn't is that information
that you have.
Mr chair representative Trujillo
I do with the way that the
compact is right and we do not
have unfortunately the direct
oversight in regards to how the
tribes are operating or or
choosing to to operate and so
we have seen many reopening
plans that require patrons to
have their driver's license
scanned as they enter the gaming
facility others have chosen to
collect the information from
those patrons manually while
others require patrons to open
up a player's card players club
account out where that card is
then tracked and it is easily
able to identify the dates and
times that specific patron or
patrons enter the gaming
facility fast allowing for
useful information to be
provided to the department of
health or other local authority
I in carrying out contact
tracing
Thank you very much that's what
I was interested in I was
wondering.
How how you all kept in touch
with each other to ensure that
the same people weren't going
back in.
Possibly we impacting other
patrons.
Hopefully maybe that can be
something you can keep track of
with the D. O. H. in the future
thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you for.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you representative.
Next we have Representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman of the the
bureau I don't know all agency
commercial work Mr chair of a
metal on all your work but the
regional bill this coming out
how's that going to affect the
gaming compacts for the native
tribes.
At chair.
Your chair.
Representative Garcia if we have
our council Eric Loker on I'd
like to defer to him.
It can you hear me this is Eric
low here.
Hello.
We can hear you okay great thank
you very much everyone yes our
agency has done an analysis of
the bill that has been
introduced legislation slide
your HB.
One one and
There is a number of concerns
about how that would impact
revenues from.
The Indian gaming tribes signed
on to the compact.
it appears.
As a whole reading the compact
the the proposed expansion of
class three gaming to non.
Tribal entities such as racinos
and others to do sports betting.
in table games up would relieve
the Indian tribes from having to
pay the agreed upon revenue
sharing set forth in the act
I believe that the sponsors of
the bill might
so this would be not violate the
compact because they wish to
have the new medic New Mexico
lottery administer
the licensure of those two
particular kinds of classroom
gaming but in my opinion in
reading the Indian gaming
regulatory regulatory at the
federal level the compact and
also having experience in
litigation.
Regarding revenue sharing
disputes
I I believe it would be doubtful
that a federal court would find
such an expansion even if it is
administered by the lottery and
organization I have my doubts
that they wouldn't see that as
an expansion violating
their obligation to pay revenues
so the compact would actually
say in fact regardless of
whether there's expansion class
three gaming or not the real
issue with the compacts in our
oversight would continue in
other ways but the real issue is
it is what it yes the the lack
of revenues coming in are going
forward would have to be
acknowledged.
I think chairman thank you for
that in other words would just
say it is the it's going to
affect the casino not be.
Will not be taxes of what
they're paying and they're in
the ratio was what a what a
beginning from one to another.
I'm sorry.
Well
In my in the the legislature
will need to look at the
revenues assuming that the
obligation to pay at
approximately ten percent of the
revenues of class three gaming
the tribe's currently pay on
there's a slight accounts
statewide
would have to look at that as to
any potential gains to the
limited expansion class three
gaming to racinos and to other
potential licensees I and I
think that miss Camacho could
probably give us better figures
of what.
Are projected revenues are from
Indian gaming this year in the
last few years.
We'll
go there was commercial well we
can't really consider this year.
On non gaming revenues is going
to drop off the the pool.
Deal because it's not a fair
assumption to go back three
years or four years and include
this year because invention
dollars so if we're gonna go do
that we need to all.
To get this year and go back
three years prior to the in
Deming though we will be doing
is hurting the because she can
only by adding this year to what
can not count on this year's if
they were open the part of the
the part of the year that would
be announcer judgment on their
part and all of that just a big
concern of mine if we're gonna
go into that to see what
balances out and put in front of
committees say well T. not only
me this much compared to what we
could have made this much we
need more out of the.
A little formula.
Mr chair representative Garcia
absolutely art are agencies had
these conversations and we agree
that understanding what has
happened to this year which
impacts our fiscal year twenty
in fiscal year twenty one we've
we've ensuring to a large
unknown as to when out when
tribal casinos can I can revert
back to what we call normal
operations and so taking that
into consideration when we look
at the last three fiscal years.
Prior to twenty twenty which
would be fiscal year seventeen
eighteen and nineteen Revenue
share received by the state
deposited into the general fund
during fiscal year seventeen was
sixty point seven million that
number increased the following
fiscal year twenty eighteen the
state five sixty six point three
million in revenue share
deposited into the general fund
and then eight twenty nineteen
the last that the last normal
routine reporting period we have
on the books outside of COVID
provides provided seventy six
point five million dollars in
revenue share from the tribes
into the general fund that is
exclusive to revenue share does
not include that regulatory cost
reimbursement fee that they paid
which is substantially smaller
and so as we move from fiscal
year seventeen through nineteen
we can see the a slow and steady
increase in in monies are paid
to the state through revenue
sharing.
Thank you for that and madam
chair Mister chairman I'm sorry
of.
The Mr Marshall.
The lottery board allowed to
have gambling machines full
skill gap up there there compact
or or is that something
different is what I heard bill
there would assault all at one
time then I heard Mr chairman
they will go to rent a spot on
the racetracks.
Because you know stuff with that
in mind the right track.
Mr chair representative Garcia I
believe you are referencing of
the the bill House Bill number
one C. Group One in regards to
the limited expansion of class
three gaming I and Mr Loker if I
could include you on this answer
I think you may be able to shed
some more light.
Yes Mr chairman and fellow
legislators
What I will I would say to that
effect is is that this would be
beyond the purview of any
expertise or existing staff for
personnel knowledge
that we know of under the
lottery acted as well as how
it's set up so it's sort of
creating another gaming control
agency if you will if this were
enacted
and in terms of even if our
agency were delegated to all to
oversee such activities it would
certainly require more staff and
training to administer gaming
the table gaming and sports
betting that is currently not
allowed in the state
So it is non conventional if you
will and
it seems to me again that the
intent here is to try to not
violate the compact by having it
administered the sports betting
and and the table games licenses
through the New Mexico lottery
however that's a legal question
that would be decided whether by
the courts looking at the
totality the compact in and what
is considered up class three
gaming under federal law and
certainly sports betting and
table games are class three
gaming
in our contacts only provide for
the racinos up to six of them to
have up to seven hundred and
fifty slot machines each that's
the limited class three gaming
allowed in the state as well as
the non profits may have up to
fifteen machines of license
through our board
and so that that's did you have
any further questions on that.
Mr chair all of not at this time
it just a concern of what's
happening in the Mr Marshall
December earlier be sure not
include the previous year on on
your finding that just needs to
mislead everybody at the lower
part of your thank you very much
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you representative will
see more hands on the board so I
would like to thank the
presenters in the analyst for
the presentation and the I would
like to remind the members that
let's keep our questions to the
budget that we are talking about
let's not stray from that the.
Some to go the budgets.
With that the let's move on to
our next presenters well before
we do that I.
I would like to ask the vice
chair Representative Jared on
can you please make a motion for
the committee members thank you
Mr chair I move the LFC
recommendation.
If there's no oppositions we
will forward this recommendation
to the full committee.
With that again thank you and we
go on to our next presenters
that sense.
I'm sorry.
There will be HSD for six nine
the racing commission.
Presenters Nichols and Perea.
good afternoon Mister chairman
members the committee
subcommittee I'm Allison Nichols
and I'm the LFC analyst for the
racing commission I'll briefly
talk about this in the revenue
differences and all that Jenny
Perret at talk about some of the
differences the base
recommendations
it need both
the executive an LC
recommendations include mostly
general fund revenue the
executive recommendation
includes about sixty thousand
more in general fund revenue
than LFC recommendation includes
recommendations include
seven hundred thousand dollars
from the crime test funds
and
At three hundred thousand
dollars in industry revenue
racing says I'm the both
resource testing fund funding
and it is revenues would be used
to fund drive.
Drug testing contracts and the
commission projects ending
balance for that testing fund of
about five hundred thirty eight
thousand dollars for FY twenty
one and I'll let me talk a
little bit about that
recommendations for the base.
Mr chairman many in regards to
the base the executive
recommendation provides a flat
budget across all categories.
We could do
recommendation person fully
clues funding for all FTE which
are recommended and commission
spots.
The LESC recommendation reduces
the person budget by fifty nine
point nine thousand or three
point six percent the HSD.
As.
Sorry the executive
recommendation provides one
fewer FTE in regards to the LFC
wreck the bat one position was
vacant for two years that's why
we do not recommend that one
extra position in regards
performance measures the LFC and
the executive.
Agree on performance measures
and with that I will allow Mr
travel to proceed with this
presentation.
Okay before we do and Jeremy I
see a handout from the chair
miss Lundstrom she's got a
question.
Thank you Mr chairman I can wait
till after the agency president
thank you.
Okay thank you madam chair.
The HSD.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my
name's is mile trail executive
director of the New Mexico
racing Commission thank you for
the opportunity to present
before you today also on this in
meeting that should be out the
chairwoman of the New Mexico
racing Commission miss everyone
gay and our CFO the brains of
the operation December Trujillo
and the answer any questions
after Representative but that
once again my name's is mile
trail executive director of the
New Mexico racing Commission
commission must work closely
with the horse racing industry
to ensure the integrity and the
viability of the industry agents
at the racetracks rely on the
commission so they may
confidently place wagers on
horses in races conducted within
the state of New Mexico.
Some of the racing commission's
duties part of some of our
programs are licensing and
background checks oversight and
judgment of racetrack operations
testing of selected horses for
drug detection investigations
testing apparently to pay outs
oversight racetrack financial
obligations oversight of the
racetracks capability and I bet
viability top rated race meet
and to promote and support the
economic viability of the horse
racing industry within the
state.
Our focus and FY twenty two is
to continue restoration of the
general public's view of the
horse racing industry and more
importantly the survival of the
horse racing industry which
suffered significantly due to
the closure of the gaming side
of the racetrack operations as
well as a cancellation of two
race wins in twenty twenty which
was some right park in
Farmington New Mexico as well as
the New Mexico state fair.
This was all due to the the
current pandemic that we're
experiencing.
FY twenty two appropriation
request will focus on ways that
will assist the agency with
these goals including the
addition of an auditor Attorney
and veterinary team to help
enhance regulation and the
perception of our industry.
The agency will continue to
pursue avenues to regulate the
horse race image industry as
efficient as possible while
continuing the efforts to gain
the public's confidence in the
product that New Mexico's five
racetracks.
With the newly appointed
commission entering its second
year the primary focus is to
concentrate on reviving the
industry in the COVID nineteen
era.
And to ensure its survival while
strengthening the racing product
in New Mexico.
The components in doing some
include assuring that the race
horses welfare is the highest
priority secondly the agency
will continue to earn the
betting public's trust I
continued enhancement of the
drug testing program with a
focus on out of competition
testing.
This program will ensure a level
playing field for all
participants and the betting
public.
Regards to testing.
This is the third year of the
New Mexico racing Commission
contract with industrial
laboratories in wheat ridge
Colorado in two thousand
nineteen a total of ten thousand
five hundred sixty five post
race specimens were analyzed and
that is compared to eight
thousand three hundred seventy
five in two thousand eighteen
and four thousand seven hundred
seven in two thousand seventeen.
That is a one hundred twenty
four percent increase from two
thousand seventeen to two
thousand nineteen it's largely
due to the better pricing we got
when we change lab from the
university of cap avis to
industrial laboratories.
Agencies percentage of
violations and post race testing
also do that well it decreased
despite that significant
increase it was eight point our
point eight seven of a percent
in two thousand nineteen which
is down from one point five
percent in two thousand
seventeen that is a forty two
percent decrease in drug
violations.
Over three years.
Also included with this year's
request and I'm mention again it
will be out of competition
testing and the growing of that
program in two thousand nineteen
The New Mexico racing Commission
ranked third in the nation and
out of competition samples
analyzed.
The approval of the commission's
requests to create an official
veterinary team increase out of
competition testing is only one
part of the commitment and
dedication to continued
enhancement of the contest
program there's also goal to
implement a testing program for
morning training as catastrophic
injuries to race horses are
realized during the morning
training and workouts not just
during the races.
The focus as I mentioned needs
to continue to be on out of
competition testing to assure
this is not being imposed on our
racing animals.
Because you Mr chairman.
Like are like our horse racing
industry New Mexico the New
Mexico racing Commission has
survived difficult times in the
past ten months in which the
testing program has been ravaged
by the lack of funding from the
department will handle which is
the money that betting patrons
wait drawn horse racing as of
July first twenty twenty the
agency has expanded over two
hundred and fifty seven thousand
dollars frequent drug testing
well only bring in a little over
eighty thousand in funding.
As any businessman or woman see
that's a losing proposition.
But as you proceed forward.
We'll continue to weather the
storm we will continue to focus
on the survival of the industry
while maintaining integrity and
safety of the coin athlete.
And if I may for the floor Mr
chairman members of the
committee to madam chair Borges
you'd like to say a couple words
miss amber Trujillo our CFO is
that she's like to say a couple
words.
Okay.
Thank you Mr I have good
afternoon Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Beverly Bargate I said is the
chairwoman of the New Mexico of
racing commission I start right
now with three other
commissioners and unfortunately
due to the loss of one of our
commissioners in December we are
one number short
that might goal today is to to
tell you.
And remind you of the value of
New Mexico rationing.
It's a it's an old western
culture goes back generations
and it's still important today
not only because it provides an
Avenue for some of our people in
our state that are very
agriculturally based very role
based and also encourages people
from out of state to participate
in our industry that means that
we are five hundred million
dollar industry and we provide
in jobs for the alfalfa growers
the stores you know as well as
providing opportunities in
growth four of those are going
to be paid directly G. R. eads
during office we support from
eight to ten thousand jobs in
New Mexico and we are just this
one produced sixty three million
dollars to the general fund in
two thousand nineteen.
Through this pandemic to get to
current of we are as you well
know going through a crisis
situation that we've been able
to operate a business as usual
national center for monthly
meetings.
And we have had just recently
our first rules Medicaid.
When we get on this one part of
our regulations are.
Bites by the statutes and
regulations that are at and and
forces them and applies equally
to all members of the industry
and is also our duty to create
an image of total proficiency
professionalism and most
importantly integrity we also
want to provide a climate of
economic prosperity to all those
participate in our industry four
horsemen our donors and racked
racetrack management and most
importantly we our duty is to
protect the interest of the
state of New Mexico.
We were very fortunate in this.
Pandemic our period to be able
to run to Arbor meets one Andrea
does so and C. of parking homes
and because of the guidelines
following the protocols of the
health and safety even though we
could not have patrons which
really reduced our revenue in
horse racing therefore.
When the two casinos closed as
well and not having patrons at
the track there's not an
opportunity to do a generate
pair mutual of.
Revenue unfortunately of out of
the two hundred thirty seven
racing days that were approved
by the commission for twenty
twenty we ran only hundred fifty
three days at also impacted our
our revenue.
I'm more biggest tracks are
produced and generate a lot of
money reduce our dancer in
particular has.
Approximately four thousand
people patrons attending their
track and over two hundred
thousand people during your meat
read also down to have the
largest purse money the Triple
Crown which is similar to the
Kentucky Derby
that that's the first part of it
we have three big races and
someone park as well has a some
part W. which is a feeder to the
Kentucky Derby so that is the
the importance of continuing
the the industry the horse
racing industry in our state and
so I stand for any questions
that you may have heard the.
Okay.
Madam chair.
Yes.
Madam chair all right thank you
Mr chairman I do have a couple
questions I'd like to ask Miss
so this agency want to ask
Ismael if racetrack operations
are based in state statute.
Mr chair the.
Members of the committee of Mr
Lundstrom if can you repeat the
question again so I yeah what
I'm curious about in your
opening comments you at you it
made the the comment that this
commission has responsibility
for racetrack operations and
guidance so I'm asking you is
that based in state statute.
Yes
The state statutes and I've
given the racing commission full
authority to have complete
oversight and the for the entire
racing industry that includes
the racetracks themselves
typically the people that do get
into trouble in our industry our
licensees such as jockeys and
trainers violate the day in day
out rules but that periodically
we do face sanctions on the the
racing facilities are the
racetrack licensees so we do
have oversight on on those
facilities they have to adhere
to the horse racing act just
like any other individual
licensee would have to.
Okay Sir facility operations for
the year approved by this
commission.
Yes yes they are.
Okay so under the COVID health
orders of this industry was
basically exempt because it
falls under agriculture is that
correct.
Mr chair
Miss lunch from that's not my
understanding we weren't exempt
from the closures we we were
closed based on the department
health orders which Casey was
very specific the horse racing
then we were allowed to ask some
race with such as read also
downs and the downs at
Albuquerque to operate with
twenty five percent capacity in
the dining areas because they
were open aired a dining
facilities so as we were
partially opened for part of the
year
but now the problem of the
pandemic as as unraveled into
more problems now it's a
financial problem where with the
casino's not opening we do not
have the purse money which is a
prize money that is given to our
men are we've run out of that
money for the most part in our
industry so question what I'm
asking you Mr chairman and is is
is.
is the track operation pace I'm
not talking about the
restaurants I'm not talking
about going into facilities I'm
asking about the track
appropriations pace is that an
exam industry under the health
order because it falls under
agriculture.
I mean it's just like
construction was one of those
industries that was exam to
there several of them that were
seen as as important and didn't
necessarily have to follow the
the health orders I'm asking you
if that's not the case for the
track appropriations not not
about talking about restaurants
or anything where there's
gatherings.
Well.
Complicated answers because the
race tracks are restaurants as
well as their multi component it
I have organizations restaurants
gambling entertainment about the
route the racetracks were open
partially but the exam part was
the agricultural site in which
the horses and the people that
care for the horses they were
allowed to operate so the what
they call the barn area the
backside facilities of these
racetrack operations they were
able to continue on because the
horses need twenty four hour
care need veterinarians to be
there we need people to
exercise of forces so the actual
racing oval was open for horses
to exercise during this pandemic
in during the closures so so
that was the essential part of
the horse racing industry was
the chair for the forces the day
in and day out care for them but
we're.
Is.
Yes clear and also Mr chairman I
also like to ask I understand
that there can't be a period
longer than seven days of non
racing is that is that correct.
Well the the the rules and
statutes
It is seven days but the I roll
the first ever race me is the
day before the first day of
entries which entries means the
first day that forces are
entered into races and the
program here in New Mexico they
take entry seven days out so.
There's debate that that could
be eight days could be seven
days.
Okay well there's debate what
you use as a commission.
With utilized to wait for based
on what the rule says the day
before the.
The first day of entry.
So eight days.
Okay I just wanted to make sure
I was clear on that and then
what I'm going to ask the LFC
staff to do is I'd like to have
a deeper dive into that that
seven day rule across all the
tracks Mr Abbey and analysts yes
I'd like to take a closer peek
at this this is a very important
industry throughout the state of
New Mexico
brings in a lot of the business
and and employs a lot of people
and I'm just curious as to how
these rules are being
implemented since they're in
statute and I be looking forward
to that review by the staff
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you madam chair and with
that that takes us to
Representative Anderson your
own.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr chair
Representative Lunsford covered
really my question about
relative to the racing the
important industry to New Mexico
and.
orders closing them in
agricultural exemption which I
believe to be in place or should
be so I'm gonna stand and Mr
chairman forego any further
questions and a weight of the
review by the LFC on this issue
thank you very much.
Okay thank you.
Representative Hey don't see
more hands on the board so.
I would like to thank the
presenters in the analyst for
the presentation and I would
like to ask vice chair Syriana
can you please make a motion for
the committee members.
Thank you Mr chairman I move the
LFC recommendation.
Is there any resistance or a
bottles to the recommendation.
Hearing.
We'll.
Recommendation and forward it on
to the full committee thank you
very much.
Thank you to our final
presentation this afternoon
agency for seven nine the board
of veterinary medicine.
Anytime you're ready presenters.
Thank you Mr chairman good
afternoon my name is Caitlyn one
analyst with the legislative
finance committee.
DFA analyst Donna Rivera and I
will present that differences in
recommendations for the
bordering area medicine and the
board director Francis ours is
also here with us I'll start
with just you know on revenue
this agency does not receive any
general fund revenue is derived
from fees that the board
collapsed both LFC and the
executive recommended increases
in other revenues and decreases
in the use fund balance.
LFC recommended and that revenue
increase of fifteen and a half
thousand dollars well the
executive recommended an
increase of ten point one
thousand dollars so the LFC it
recommendation is slightly
higher for this agency that's
all thank you and Donna will
take it from here.
Thank you
good afternoon of the base
recommendation the LFC is
recommending person personal
services increased by twenty
four point six thousand five
point three thousand more than
the executive recommendation
both recommendations reduce
contractual services by thirteen
point eight thousand due to
decreases in eighteen
maintenance and other
contractual costs.
Both the LFC and executive
recommendation increase other
costs
to help for court reporting and
other hearing costs.
The LFC recommend four point
seven thousand increase well the
executive recommends four point
six thousand both the LFC and
exec reach the consensus for per
for performance measures with
that I'll go ahead and turn it
over to the director for at the
sewers.
Good afternoon I'm Francis hours
the executive director and CFO
to the board of veterinary
medicine of the board continues
to protect the public by it's
vigilant licensure and
regulation of veterinary medical
professor of professionals who
deliver their services to
livestock to food animals to
companion pets and animals the
children committee of of the
board of veterinary medicine has
developed an application process
to and which has been approved
by the board to begin
disbursements from the animal
care facility fund to entities
which provide sheltering
services to animals
and companion animals have
Provided and continue to provide
comfort and solace to the
general public be it your
grandchildren your children
yourselves during the pandemic
I just want to remind the
committee of the importance of
the health of these pet and
companion animals and I stand
for questions.
Okay any questions from the
committee members Mr Anderson.
All.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
I would just one question the
director and and of the director
I'm curious what the.
Approximate number is for the
number of veterinarians that are
currently practicing in New
Mexico I see I need some
information on renewal and I was
wondering you said an annual
renewal and what what what your
schedule is thank you of it is
in there
chair and Mr Phelps it is an
annual renewal it is based upon
the birth month of the licensee.
So we have funds revenues coming
in throughout the year.
Thank for that of in Mr chair
that answers my questions thank
you very much.
Okay are there any more
questions from the members.
Okay I don't see any hands up on
the board so.
I would like to thank the
presenters missed one Mister
Vera and miss miss hours for
your presentation.
And the at this time I would
like to ask the vice chair.
Representative Jared on a can
you please make a motion for the
committee members thank you Mr
chair I move the executive
recommendation.
We got a second.
And there's no rebuttals or no
resistance so we will carry that
recommendation to the full
committee thank you very much.
Thank you all thank you all for
the excellent presentations
today and thank you for your
participation.
that will conclude our.
Subcommittee.
Meeting today.
I'm sorry.
Excuse me I think they were
supposed to be another budget
hearing right now also for the
board of examiners for
architects.
Thank you for for.
We.
Two ten.
We heard.
I'm sorry okay thank you very
much.
Okay with that that concludes
our septic or subcommittee a
meeting for today thank you very
much and we'll see you.
When the state E. for another
committee meeting H. A. essay
Committee day.
That is our meeting for the day
thank you very much.
Yes.
