this come in H. B. to this
committee we appropriated
fifteen million dollars to the
higher education department for
for graduate students as well as
for the this this clinical
service supervision so currently
there's fifteen million dollars
in HB two going to the higher
education department that
includes this the services that
you're asking for today.
with that we're let's go to the
committee.
Any questions Representative
Trujillo.
Yes thank you Mr chair of.
For clarification from you that
fifteen million us to that goes
to hire it will actually address
the concerns that this bill is.
Is wanting addressed is that
what.
The.
Thank you Representative Rubio
yes the clinical supervision and
I'll ask Mister if we can get
the language in that
appropriation for higher
education.
but it includes directly the
clinical supervision.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you very much
Representative Trujillo.
Any other questions okay well Mr
Abbey is getting go ahead sorry
Representative Garrett please.
Quick question Mr chair and a
hundred twenty nine thousand
eight hundred where would that
come out of with that out of
that same fifteen million dollar
fund.
Because that's vital to it you
Thank you Representative Garrett
I don't know the answer to that
I think we would want to get the
behavioral health we we would
want to hear directly from
favorite behavioral health
services division on that but
it's a great point okay thank
you.
Thank I don't see any other
questions I think.
Okay Representative thank you so
we need to have that response as
a follow up for Representative
Gareth's question will when will
we get that follow up because
it's really important to walk
out here knowing what direction
the bill is going in and
sometimes to walk out here
totally floored thank you very
much Representative Trujillo I
think we can work to get that
clarification Representative
what I think what we can do
we can potentially also seek an
amendment to this week we cannot
take this out of the general
fund we could constrain some of
the funds are going to the
higher education department and
so representative maybe that's
what we'll do is look work on an
amendment to take this money out
of the already appropriate
already designated fifteen
million that's going to the
higher education department and
that'll give us some time to
track down whether the operating
fund increase will be whether we
need to and then that and okay
thanks tension cantik we'll take
it from the emergency and we're
we're Representative we're going
to table it now but we're going
to this is one that will likely
flag for coming back to to
determine whether or not we need
to have the amendment
to bring this back and and.
Right bring this directly from
are already appropriated money
to the higher education
department.
Okay with that vice chair Dixon
for temporary table motion.
Oh sorry percent federal go
ahead.
vice chair gonna get tales for
looking to the left of.
It anyway Mr chair of Madam vice
chair presenters thank you for
this my primary question is in
the fifteen million those given
to higher education.
Was this language identified
specifically from house bill one
for and if it is that's that
that is great we should deal
with that right now and if it's
not.
Where we have the conversation
the representative Pettigrew in
the clinical supervision is
directly in that appropriation I
think we're gonna we have some
there's some questions about the
amount and there's also
questions about the FIR with the
behavioral health services
administration recurring cost
that we have to account for
that's why I will continue to
have the conversation but great
question.
I would move to temporarily
table of house bill one of four.
Okay.
There's a motion.
Is there a second.
Great it's been moved and second
by Representative Dixon same by
Representative Chatfield is
there any opposition that
temporary table saying on and
Representative also will work
with you in the staff to work
through these two questions
thank you very much.
Eight members
we're now going to ask.
okay we're gonna go passed house
bill one sixty six.
at the at the in consultation
with the sponsor of house bill
one sixty one this money is
already in the budget it's just
a straight appropriation west
vice chair Dixon from motion to
table a motion on house bill one
sixty one cut the Sanchez agreed
to that because the bills the
money is in H. B. two.
Mr speaker I would move that we
table house bill one sixty one.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative Dixon saying by
ranking member Armstrong is
there any opposition to the
table for house bill one sixty
one the money is already in the
budget
is there any opposition.
Singing on the house bill one
sixty one is.
We're gonna continue now
To a house bill thirty nine.
It's a great.
Madam chair it's great to see
you thank you for being here
today on house bill thirty nine
thank you Mr chair and I know
there's not the money for this
but I'm going to just bring it
up so people don't forget about
it so years ago when the SCG K.
then it only included teachers
it left out people like speech
and language pathologists
occupational therapists
psychologists those kinds of
people and generally in order to
get those kind of professionals
you have to pay above the
minimum but what has happened
through the years when I sat on
this committee is people come in
and say over giving teachers a
five percent raise and I think
you mean educators and they said
no teachers so all this bill is
trying to do is to get everybody
who's an educator but that its
name duly licensed because you
have to have a license as an
interpreter for the deaf for
instance so I just am trying
have been trying for within the
SCG came into trying to get this
done so don't forget about it
enough I know it will be tabled
but it's I think it's something
we really need to especially
with the month Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit those people are
really important to educating
our kids with disabilities thank
you very much chair Thompson and
this members again and
especially for new members on
the committee this is a great
example we know that the money's
not in the budget this year but
is the chairs talking about this
is the way that we can highlight
issues for this committee and
the body to look at more closely
as we continue to go through the
session and into the summer and
in the we've seen a number of
instances where things that
haven't been funded one year
this is a process that works us
towards funding those in future
years.
okay madam chair thank you for
that presentation are there any
brief questions that anybody
would like to ask a bring up
before we go to a table in
motion.
Seeing on we're gonna ask for a
motion to table and madam chair
will work we'll look forward to
working with you on this during
the interim.
Mr speaker chair I would move a
table of house bill thirty nine
as amended.
Okay.
Okay it's been second by
Representative Sanchez move by
by Terry Dixon there any
opposition to that motion.
Saying on.
That is a it's been table the
manager we look forward to the
conversation as we go through
the interim thank you and.
I just finished up my other two
took to die in here
I've been on the committee I
know how it goes I know also how
how many advocates get heart
broken at the.
At the thought so the next one
Mr chairman members of the
committee is
it's.
I'm actually let's do that HB
fifty three delivery of
necessary diabetic resources and
this is Sean math and she was a
drafter for many years and I
will let her tell who else what
what else she's doing but this
bill came about because as an
attorney she had a client who
was I believe in one year fixed
at eight hundred ninety six
hours on the phone or something
like that to give her diabetic
supplies and we're trying to
make we know that New Mexico has
extremely high rate of diabetes
and we want people to take to
self manage their diabetes so
they don't become more expensive
with amputations and dialysis
and all of those kinds of things
so we're trying to make it so
that insurance companies can't
kind of play the shell game you
know what we had this supplier
and then they did this so they
don't have to cover things and
I'll let Schardin give a brief
into.
Thank you chair Thompson we're
on members were on house bill
fifty three
And the X. for miss Mathis is
gonna
Just a minute or two yeah go
ahead no please all right very
quickly Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Sean Mathis
I'm an attorney with the
specialty and health law and I
spent five years as a staff
attorney here working for the
Legislative Council services
signed to the Legislative Health
and Human Services committee and
its subcommittees and has part
of that job I did drafting I
drafted health care legislation
last year up a lady Laura
approached me Lori Hart who is
having problems obtaining heard
diabetes supplies from her
health insurance and when she
approached me for help last year
I thought the diabetes was only
about insulin and I have since
learned that diabetes is a
device and supply intensive
disease you've been given a
packet of materials included in
your packet of materials is for
example a log miss miss part was
quite
She was actually a perfect
client because she had made a
log of every time she had a
contact with our health
insurance company or with a
supplier that she was told she
had to use
by the health insurance company
and so there's a lot of over
sixty calls over a four month
period for her to obtain her
supplies so she's not the only
person who has diabetes who with
experiences this kind of a
problem so since I had worked
for the council service before a
and to while I was helping her I
looked at our existing laws
there is no law on the books
that requires a a health
insurance company to
To that requires accountability
for us having a sufficient
number of suppliers for diabetes
supplies there is no law that
holds health insurers
accountable for the performance
of designated suppliers when
they are requiring people to go
to specific suppliers up for
their diabetes supplies so after
we were able to get miss hard
for equipment I just hi.
I undertake it has my own of
project to draft legislation to
change this originally house
bill fifty three was drafted to
update the list of supplies that
devices the technology that
people with diabetes are
entitled to because New Mexico's
diabetes mandate was enacted in
nineteen ninety seven and except
for caps on insulin nothing had
been changed since then and the
standard of care and what people
use today to self manage their
diabetes has changed
significantly
Okay I'll wrap it up however
as I said that there were
problems doing that because
under the affordable Care Act.
specifying these supplies more
G. more specifically even though
we had a general mandate would
implicate an obligation of the
state to defray those costs so
we change the bill entirely so
what we did was we pivoted we
took out any sections that would
trigger an obligation upon the
state to defray those costs and
right now the only of fiscal
implication to the state's
budget is a three hundred and
fifty thousand dollar
appropriation to the office of
superintendent of insurance so
that they can conduct audits
that are required under this
bill of health insurance
companies with respect to their
suppliers.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
very much okay now we're going
to go is there any anybody who
wishes to speak in support of
house bill fifty three.
Anybody who is online yes.
great.
Okay great we're gonna have
threes we have four speakers
online we're going to go first
to Dr rumah Mr room whenever
you're ready for one minute.
Mr chair and representative
thank you for allowing me to
speak Dr Michael rural I am
appearing a tele just high risk
pregnancy specialist I operate a
large practice with thirteen
offices from Farmington down to
Los crucis we care for thousands
of diabetic pregnant people
throughout the year every year I
would ask for your support of
the substitute H. B. fifty three
the representative Thompson and
for he or ringing you today I
can be your eyes and ears to the
issue for in the need of
accountability and transparency
of the insurer they definitely
oversight OSI can help with this
to make certain that patients
like you hear from next Lori who
definitely has a faced
incredible challenges this also
will limit prior authorization
to a single authorization which
would be incredibly beneficial
to health care providers when we
need to prescribe I just change
testing strategies eradication
strategies etcetera would be a
great on the floor in the in in
the trenches help to all of the
physicians and people to care
for patients with diabetes thank
I ask for your support on.
Thank you very much Dr rumah
next we're going to go to miss
Lori Hart agency hard for a
minute whenever you're ready.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm I'm required
to type one diabetic for over
forty years.
This bill will help thousands of
New Mexico New Mexican diabetics
like me whose lives depend on
medical supplies and equipment
are often denied.
I have over the last couple
years I've had reoccurring
getting laid that supplies and
equipment even though I had
health insurance delays in
getting my supplies and
equipment can result in me
ending up in the hospital and
possibly done in your packet you
have provided about one month
of.
Every single one of those
components are necessary for me
to be able to manage my diabetes
properly especially for type
diabetics any delay the delivery
of these supplies increases
their chances of hospitalization
and death up before moving to
New Mexico I got my supply ship
every three months on time with
little interaction for me but
even though we signed up for the
most comprehensive and excess
expensive insurance offered on
the New Mexico public insurance
exchanges in the last two years
I've had to make multiple phone
calls over several days and are
you each time to get my supplies
last year over a month period I
need over sixty five calls seven
one ninety two minutes on the
calls will some of my supervisor
had not shipped thank no one has
lifetime.
And so I'm asking please support
this bill because it will help
both type one and type two
diabetics would hospital
necessary hospitalizations and
possibly death thank you very
much was hard
next we're going to go to Joan
Dickerson John Dickerson for one
minute please whenever you're
ready.
Mr chairman members of the
committee on the question I'm
federal to military families
caucus in the reasons was issues
only twenty five percent of
veterans received health care
through the VA are diabetic.
In fact if this race is to
thirty percent New Mexico.
All these figures do not account
for veterans family members who
have diabetes as military family
members person with type two
diabetes I can attest to the
fact that it is difficult
sometimes to receive drugs cost
I would appreciate support on
this bill thank you very much
thank you very much Mr Christian
okay that we're going to go to
one more miss Laura Keller.
Miss Keller whenever you're
ready for one minute please.
Chair and committee my name is
our color hi work to do more can
diabetes association people with
diabetes in New Mexico and we
strongly support this
legislation and and legislation
that allows for continuity of
care and makes access easy so
that you can find PED's adults
upper complications and thrive
on needed health care costs
thank you so much thank you very
much Mr of.
Okay.
That concludes are the COVID is
there anybody who wishes to
speak in opposition.
I don't see anybody and not in
here is there anybody online who
wishes to speak in opposition.
We don't see any has raised
there so now we're going to go
to the committee Representative
Trujillo please yes thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
representative Thompson you're a
you're a god send I'm trying to
suck up from this morning.
But really she I've lived with
are often on for ten years she's
my housemate and she knows I've
suffered with type two diabetes
for a long time and
These supplies are expensive.
I've had to change a variety of
times the insulin that I get
because it's so expensive number
one can't just take pills you
take pills we take two types of
different insulin and all of its
expensive and then you have to
do a sensor because if you don't
get a sensor you have to poke
your fingers and after a while
your fingers are become very
calloused and and they're
painful and they have to buy the
alcohol swabs and you have to do
a variety of things to access.
The materials you need to try to
self medicate right and and it
isn't easy and sometimes I will
hi and sometimes I'm low and and
up.
For the grace of good people.
The insulin that I have not been
able to afford.
People help you with including
the sensors so.
I know people that don't have
diabetes may not recognize how
difficult it is and I think I'm
not poor I'm not rich but I'm
not poor you can only imagine
how difficult it is for people
who can't act as act taxes any
of these materials and I I know
this is going to die here but it
shouldn't.
And I hope that some point this
committee will start
reconsidering what needs to be
done to help people who don't
have access thank you Mr
chairman thank you for killing
the bill thank you very much
Representative Trujillo next
we're gonna go to Representative
Lujan then Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr chair thank you to
the sponsor.
Expert witness for bringing this
very important piece of
legislation for.
We haven't it's an epidemic that
we are suffering not just here
in our state but across the
United States and my mother and
my brother and my grandmother's
and so many other family
members.
has lived with diabetes.
My good friend and provided
other.
Live with diabetes and
everything that she said and and
all the processes and everything
There's parity
With diabetes and known this for
a long time as a child a you
know I think madam I all my
family members my grandmother
and understanding and it became
second nature you know to watch
my gram my grandmothers and my
mother was a nurse.
Do the injections and and every
day we you know we every day we
have to go visit grandma every
day we have to monitor them and
then now my mother has it type
two diabetes on set at just I
think it's been six years now
and my brother four years and
you know he was in his forties
when he got he resides.
Just all the self management and
treatment management and now I
go with my mother when I cancer
for appointments and it's up and
down I didn't.
The level of of treatment and
and management of the illness is
incredible incredible and the
cost incredible to bring this
for our I hope to work with you
at with anybody that wants to
work on this really get this
through this next year I mean if
anything you know the access
portion of this is is so
incredibly important my mother
was not able to receive during
COVID it was horrible she was
turned away I was turned away at
the at the pharmacies have a
dozen times.
because there's miscommunication
and it was is this product does
this project was the other so
this is an important piece of
legislation I hope to work with
you in the future on this and it
should be going through right
now thank you so much thank you
very much Representative Lujan
next we're going to go to
Representative Pettigrew than
Representative Garrett.
Thank you chairman
I think my only question relates
to the COVID from the experts
with respect to how much money
is exist right now with respect
to audits I heard hundred fifty
or a hundred and sixty thousand
is there a Mr chair.
Mr chair representative The
appropriation is in the amount
of three hundred and fifty
thousand dollars to the office
of superintendent of insurance
profissional person I have been
told that right now they they
have one or perhaps two people
that are
devoted or to following up on
complaints against the health
insurance companies in the state
and at any given time I've been
told that there are between five
and nine I believe health
insurance companies so that's
too few people right now to
follow up on complaints about it
health insurance companies and
in order to
have a rope have a robust
compliance
Of.
Program within OSI so these said
in order to do these additional
of audits that are required as
part of this bill that relate to
suppliers that they would like
to hire a couple of extra
people.
Experts believe you answer my
question as we were.
In your original testimony you
talked to a certain dollar
amount to exist right now that's
been spent and I feel like you
said somewhere between a hundred
fifteen hundred sixty thousand.
Mr speaker Mr go back here
Representative Pettigrew I
believe she was talking about
what we wanted to have not what
we do have.
It at thank you Representative
if anything that miss Smith is
that I think that you said that
there are currently office of
superintendent of insurance
employees who work in this area
Mr chair it's they have two
people in the office to
investigate a follow up on all
insurance claims and I think
everybody in this room has had a
time that they wish they had
someone to call to complain
about their insurance company.
Thank you chairman and and
Representative Thomson expert I
appreciate that I was just
trying to drill into the number
that I feel like I are heard in
the beginning so I could get a
grip on on where we're going
with the request of the three
hundred fifty thank you chairman
thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew next we
have Representative Garrett
please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for being here and it is saying
this.
Question I see statistics of two
hundred seventeen thousand
adults diagnosed this this bill
in any way apply to minors
and it's a somewhat and are any
dollars funneled through school
based health centers through
Medicaid.
Mr chair representative this
bill just addresses people who
have health insurance to have
individual health insurance now
if children or teenagers are
covered under a parent's policy
yes it would of course affect
them but it doesn't specifically
it's not specifically funneling
any particularly care and to
school based health care
everybody is going to have their
own individual of a provider
physician health care
practitioner whether it's a
nurse and physician's assistant
okay thank you for that
clarification that's my only
question.
Thank you very much for Senator
okay I don't see any other
questions I I have a couple of a
few questions first madam chair
it is anybody from the office
the superintendent of insurance
here.
I I I guess I could just I
apologize I I don't see anybody
from the offices superintendent
of insurance here
But the next question then chair
is there any what is do you know
if there's any supplemental
junior funding that's been
dedicated to this purpose Mr
chair no I don't believe there
is item number I mean I I
usually don't bring experts
because I know I get two minutes
in here all and I will say Mr
chair and committee it's so nice
to actually be able to present
our bills and let you hear what
we're trying to do I appreciate
that a lot so we didn't have
anyone from a west side but they
did work with us on the bill
under so thank thank you chair
okay
so that we thank you very much
we have a that there is an
amendment that's been members I
think that that would
essentially strike the funding
however I think I I don't know
that we can actually implement
that because the
There is not another source
funding
so I just I think
unfollowed and maybe we could
yeah so it was there any would
be in the Senate
absolutely if you strike the
appropriation are I mean I don't
know how it all works but we
were willing to big anywhere we
can.
Thank you Representative thank
you for talking so the the
Senate has begun their
deliberations on on House Bill
to so so yes that is sort of
that that is an Avenue Mr chair.
Representative Montoya please
just wondering Mr chair for
stripe the appropriation and we
were to passively.
If we do it on the side.
Thank you thank you
Representative month.
It would if the Fund if the bill
were to pass through both
chambers and be signed by the
governor and funding not be
added in in the sense
or through the remainder of this
process
the.
The this book Representative
Herndon and please go through
the chair.
this proposal for cases if we
were to see if we were to strike
the appropriation of the bill
passes but they get money from
the Senate did does the does the
entire bill go over there so
that it amended state
appropriation back into the bill
so that it is the assigned by
the government could you please
explain that Mr chair thank you
Representative for in that.
The.
this bill obviously has a great
deal of other policy in it aside
from just an appropriation so
if the that the money is added
through the remainder of the
house bill two process then that
and the bill is signed into law
There would be the funding to
implement the bill that then the
cherry that you said aside has
requested I I think it's it is
okay for us.
To strike the probation and and
consider the bill today I do
think though we will have to be
very mindful of whether or not
this ends up
What to monitor closely about
whether or not the funding is
actually at if it is not then it
would not be appropriate to for
the bill ultimately to make it
to the executive.
Okay any other questions
Representative Hern.
Okay Representative please.
Thank you Mr chair for a second
round
I think what they meant.
This is about being for or
against the bill.
But I think the amendment if we
want to page thirty seven in
change.
For.
Gave an alternate phone line
six.
Chair January first twenty
twenty four we could change
those numbers to twenty twenty
five and then they could contend
for the money during the interim
we would be.
Mr chair we would up the.
Promising money from a different
legislators could we would be in
the second session by the time
that this back this bill would
be appropriated with the three
hundred and fifty thousand they
asked for and and so that would
be this in theory the same
legislative body right so we
could we could potentially
change that they keep if if the
money's not there
The bill could stand on its own
as it goes through through the
house floor through the Senate
side if it's not appropriated we
can discuss that for the.
They're appropriation in the
twenty twenty four seconds
session.
Benefit isn't it would then they
could confirm could move forward
with that appropriation and if
it's not then it would not be an
unfunded mandate wouldn't stand
on the some.
Thank you Sir for that.
Thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew
okay Representative Montoya for
the second time and then we're
going to go ahead and Mr chair I
actually agree with that because
then we could allow the bill to
go through the process if it
gets funding on the Senate side
they could change the date back
potentially to twenty twenty
four.
On that side but it would mean
that we we would not have
attached to the.
For this year to it if the deal
were to go forward and then
Representative as the bill went
to that side could then argue
for the appropriation for this
year and offer an amendment to
put it back to twenty twenty
four on the Senate side.
In a convoluted but.
Mr Mr chair.
It would mean that we are not
committing a future legislators
level legislature next year we
are still the legislature we we
just.
Thank you Mr thank you very much
for someone to buy surtax Mr
chair
I appreciate what folks are
trying to do but I'm concerned
that.
I'm not sure if this is our
normal process and what happens
if we.
If there's no funding in the
budget.
And we pass a bill that does
have a fiscal impact.
I just worry.
About sort of the long term
effects and that you.
Sometimes is it not possible to
temporarily to table the bill
get the commitment of the
funding and then.
On table the bill and move it
along I feel like.
That then allows for both the
opportunity to get the funding
but reduce the likelihood of a
of this committee passing an
unfunded mandate.
Thank you thank you very much
bye Sir Senator subchapter
please.
So Mr chairman this is obviously
a good costs.
I'm gonna have to say that I
agree with moisture diction you
know we need to strip the
funding of this bill what I came
here as a just a brand new
legislator I was told our job in
this committee is not to weigh
the merits of the bill but just
to do one thing look if there
see if there's appropriation if
there's no for appropriation in
house bill two which is already
passed over to the Senate we
have no control of the Senate.
Then it gets table if there is a
appropriation the week pass it
but there's also the
consideration of wording which
has a and effect on everyone so
to my and.
Legal legalese way of thinking
the way this bill moves towards
you strip the appropriation and
but you can still have the
wording.
And if somebody chooses to put.
Money and that there's over.
Okay thank thank you very much
Representative Chatfield.
Okay I think what we'll do.
Madam chair and I deeply
appreciate the committee and the
committee's engagement I think
what we're gonna do will ask for
the amendment to be moved madam
chair if this is considered on
the house floor I think we'll
probably work with you to
consider the suggestion for a
floor amendment that would
change the effective date this
gives us a little bit of time to
sort of monitor what's happening
appreciate very much the
suggestion about the different
effective date and that's
something that that we could
also do on the floor thank you
Mr chairman members much better
than I expected.
Trying to raise expert but we
appreciate the dialogue
members so we're gonna go ahead
and ask vice chair Dixon to move
The amendment to house bill
fifty three.
The.
Good move the amendment for
house bill fifty three okay
members and we have this
amendment in front of us does
three things.
On page one line thirteen and
fourteen it strikes making
appropriation.
On page thirty six it strikes
seven section seven in its
entirety and every numbers the
succeeding section accordingly
thank you to the staff for
working with and preparing them
and.
With that okay is there any
opposition to adopting this
amendment.
Well at let me spin move can ask
for a second on the amendment
second.
Sorry.
It's a tie it's a tie in the
second.
Just a brief discussion I I'm on
the amendment go ahead and I'm
good with moving the amendment
with the cabbie out that we do
not move forward of this on the
floor.
Want to see an unfunded mandate
forty if there's no commitment
from the Senate so I I not going
to object to this eminent move
with the majority just.
Want to make sure that we get
this right before it leaves the
house chamber thank thank you
very much Representative Montoya
and again Preciado very much the
discussion the suggestion there
okay is there any opposition to
adopt in the amendment saying
none.
An amended bill okay now we will
go to vice chair Dixon from
motion on house this bill fifty
three as amended.
Mr speaker I would move it to
pass on house bill fifty three
as amended there's a motion is
there a second second okay since
I am I Representative Garrett is
there any opposition to that
motion.
I don't see any
Thank you madam chair then we
want to know again that there is
additional work that we need to
look forward and to do and this
does not guarantee the passage
of this through the rest of the
session but appreciate very much
the discussion we had today
thank you for your members are.
At the end okay members
chairman.
Connect all point.
We're Representative Pettigrew
please.
Chairman of the point that I
want to make is that for the
last two years all of this of
the experienced issues across
the state we're we've had
unfunded mandates placed on our
communities from our school
systems to our municipalities
all the way through so when we
talk about unfunded mandates we
have the opportunity to look is
a certain thing remember we're
in the first session of the two
session.
We're we're in the first point
of two sessions thank you
Representative Pettigrew from
now on last sort of if there's a
need to sort of explain of all
we'll go that way I appreciate
very much
That.
Representative Representative
Thomson.
We're still on
House Bill three fifty five.
Are you prepared to present on
that yes Mr chair thank you.
So this is a very simple bill
another very needed bill making
appropriation to the development
disability supports division to
contract with an organization
that can provide workforce
development pathways and support
systems for students with
transitional individualized
education plans so special
education students students with
disabilities who are graduating
from high school and what I
really want to point out is that
as some of the analysis talk
about DVR does this DVR does not
do this to the extent that it
needs to be done there were
there was a period of about four
years I believe where they were
only taking the most
Most impaired students under
their under their program so
again this is just kind of to
bring it to your attention and
we will try in the Senate to get
some money for this but there's
so many problems we have to deal
with thank you very much thank
you Chertoff and thank
Representative C. and
Representative Kate okay add
this is straightforward members
at there is with there is not
junior fund funding appropriate
dedicated to this purpose.
No I'm not that I know of okay
and it's just a straight
appropriation around this one
thank you very much we will ask
for a table in motion here for
House Bill three fifty five.
Mr chair I would move
to table House Bill three fifty
five okay there's a motion their
second second by Representative
Lujan is there any opposition to
that motion.
See none House Bill three fifty
five has been taken thank you
very much thank you committee.
And Mister chair and vice chair.
Okay
Great to see.
Chair at at a.
And our phone.
I share Dixon
Representative great to see you
here today.
Members were on House Bill three
eleven.
Mr chair members of the
committee I have to and that's
for you and I just one explain
is very quickly.
Last year.
Gosh Representative Dixon and
vice chair Dixon Representative
Brown a lot of us worked on a
bill we're trying to do to give
more money to the cogs to help
with grant writing we knew that
this federal money was coming in
we knew in rural districts that
we really just didn't have the
capacity and.
And they pulled it they put at
the last minute the pope the
bill and we couldn't get the
money and but the door closes a
window opens that we got more
junior money so I got together
with all the people the north
central and we put in about
three hundred four hundred
thousand into grant writing for
for the north central council of
governments okay so I just want
to tell you this is this is a
very good story this is a this
kind of this is necessary so
Monica Abeyta who is our
director emeritus almost she's
so good at what she did is by
July first of last year she had
five printers online now they
have ten grant writers online
really really smart the issue
didn't hire to grant writers she
hired a team of pool because
different people have different
skills so I just want to tell
you fast forward to see one
nineteen twenty three they had
written forty seven million.
Dollars in grant applications
those are al ready out of those
seven million seven hundred and
seventy three hundred thousand
dollars have come in now you go
a month later right months later
and today they have sixty
million out in grant
applications eight point six
million has now come in and that
they also have another to
I'm just gonna come internet
grants out there those are huge
grants ones for ten million on
in Santa Fe County I think in
one for twenty million up to
trauma you know those are kind
that make a grant so if we get
those and that'll bring another
thirty million that NTIA is not
talking with Monica about it we
never get the intended to start
talking to the person writing
the grant that's a very good
sign we don't want to take more
credit I think I think just
having you know sixty then out
and grant applications and
already having almost ten
million in is it is a great sign
and all all all quit with that
we just amended the legislation
so to be very clear that two
hundred thousand go to each
single cost in the state so that
you know every call you can use
this we have this new federal
money coming in we're putting a
lot of money into our kind of
reserve funds in our revolving
loan funds but to get that money
you're gonna need grant writers
at the local level doing this
work and I stand for questions
thank you very much that no
thank you chair and at a at Mr
Bates is there anything that
you'd like to add Mr chair
members of the committee I just
want to thank our legislators
last year it was Representative
at a kind of led the charge on
getting this appropriation
together we had a four five
legislators in the Senate and
house kind of pull this money
together very quickly it was
like the last couple days before
the junior requests were due and
we're just happy we've been able
to get do a good job with it and
there's a lot more work to do so
we're looking forward to the
next four months and really
increasing those numbers that we
have.
Great thank thank you very much
okay let's go is there anybody
who wishes to speak in support
of this legislation.
Here I don't see anybody anybody
online.
And I don't think that is there
anybody wishes to speak in
opposition either in person or
online saying none we're gonna
go first ranking member
Armstrong please thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative for bringing this
forward are there any
accountability aspects of this
as far as the Costco and
is this recurring.
Mr chair and Representative
Armstrong I I did not put that
in I could if I could have made
the bill a lot longer but I and
I did make it recurring because
they're they're either going to
use it and do the job or not so
I decided that it it should
speak for itself if these comics
go out and do the job have it
done then we should look at
recurring but I I will be here
next year supporting this
concept that the work statewide
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative just not all
carbs are created equal and then
Mr chairman I I and concerned
about the no accountability part
I'd like to see a report or
something about how much funding
they brought in or something
like that so I I will get with
you next year and let's do a
little comparison on how well
the constant thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you very much remember
on to the excellent points we're
gonna go now the vice chair
Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair of
Representative insure women
Herrera but could you remind the
committee how much of junior
money thank you I have put in
last year.
Mr Mr chairman and vice chair
Dixon I believe it was three
hundred seventy thousand.
And I just wanted to if I could
comment on Representative
Armstrong's point we're happy to
share our process and our our
structure with the other because
I think this is worked well I
think if we were to try to do
this in house it would have not
worked well having the on call
grant writers and keeping a
spreadsheet every time a grant
goes out and one gets awarded or
rejected being able to report
back to our legislators that
gave us the money so we're happy
to share that with the other
councils of government thank you
and I would like to add that
last year was an idea now we
have proof of concept that
that's the difference I think
now.
And thank you Mr chair and
chair I'd like to know that that
is a twenty three to one of
return for every dollar that you
invested in junior funding thus
far and we're not to the end of
the year if I'm not mistaken you
have already seen a twenty three
dollar match to that one dollar
if I Mr chair and chairwoman for
I believe that there is funding
in the budget in the specials
the amount I believe two million
dollars for this is that correct
Mr chair Representative Jim.
Then vice chair and Mr chair yes
that's what I understand.
UP so Mister chair and
chairwoman in that case we would
still be tabling this bill
because it's just an
appropriation and there is
already funding in house bill
two sat cracked.
Mr chair representative madam
chairman Mr chair that's what I
understand.
Mr chair and chairwoman thank
you for showing us.
The impressive work that can be
done and thank you Mr to for for
doing this it's really really
impressive and so thank you very
much thanks Mr chair thank you
very much bye Sir Dixon
Okay we're gonna go to
Representative Garrett and
Representative thank you Mr
chair so the language is going
to go into the budget of my
correct in understanding that.
Or not thank you very much
Representative Garrett the there
is a two million dollars special
appropriation to the Department
of that so there there is even a
little bit more money going to
DFA the same place
Representative Garrett the the
language here I don't believe
the amounts are spelled out in
the ways that that we see here
in the bill today but the ball
funding is going to DFA for this
purpose KKS Mr chair there is a
technical.
A correction you say that in
fiscal year it'll go to the
council of state governments
should say council governments
the card not the cost.
Okay.
I'm sorry Mr chairman and I
represent their we we actually
had a substitute I don't mean
that was passed out.
Yeah and it doesn't say that
would that was correct okay
thank you thank you
Representative Garrett but the
monthly a please.
Thank you Mr chair just once
again recognition here so we're
going to.
Pass the.
What we're gonna do something
with this and table to get that
correction at the end thank you
Representative monthly know what
we will table this this today we
have a ball to million dollar
appropriation in specials it's
part of house bill two
So so we we we don't need to
pass this to have the money go
to DFA for this purpose.
Thank you Mr chair but
To the testimony of the sponsor
it sounded as if this sept it
was just to just to fix the
technical language that
Representative Garrett mentioned
or to prescribe the specific
amounts going to each of the
cost of this I I misunderstood
that Mr chair and Representative
Montoya was to do both thank you
so Mister chair
I'm understand we still have to
do something.
With this.
We do not have to do something
with this how do we get the
language Mr chair I I received
Mr Abbey shaking his head what
do we do to get the
Representative cementite we we
do not need to we do not need to
pass this for the money to go to
DFA for this purpose and our
councils of government will if
house bill two passes with the
two million that this committee
or more if it's added in the
Senate and house bill two passes
with that then starting in FY
twenty four they will have
access to two million more
dollars.
So we don't need to we do not
need to pass Mr chair I guess
the question is for if the money
goes to DFA money how does the
FAA understands that the
students to go to the cost of
the loan amounts that is.
Descriptions thank thank you
Representative Montoya that that
currently is the responsibility
for DFA to have the process by
which money goes out.
Thank you Mr chair get off line
with you on this to make sure
that that happens I am concerned
that without specific direction
DFA can do whatever they want to
without the specific direction
so that he'll find
Representative for.
Thank you very much for someone
to okay thank you this is
Representative seven well we're
will last for the motion for
tabling of regicide
Representative Brown apologize
go ahead please thank you Mr
chair
Representative I I think we knew
this was going to be a very
beneficial programs and I am
absolutely delighted to see the
results of the proconsul is very
strong and I look forward to
this ruling.
Thank you very much
Representative Brown
with that we will go to vice
chair Dixon for the tabling
motion can graduate and go from
there.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
that we table house bill three
eleven there's a motion.
Second by Representative Sanchez
there any opposition to that
motion.
Thing then thank you very much
share it at a and
congratulations on having more
than this in the budget.
Thank you committee Christian.
Thank you very much.
K. members we're now to house
bill two hundred and.
This is
And I don't see that if we have
the Sanchez out thank we go.
For seven cents great to see her
today.
The.
The the the chair is not accept
emotions to.
Now.
Representative Vincent whenever
you're ready and if you want to
introduce the gentleman with you
today.
Thank you Mr chair and madam
vice chair.
Full disclosure nobody told me
until today the bills come here
to die.
And tell me that and I and I
just want to feel nice so I'm
I'm hoping that arsenal di but.
Okay so
I'm honored to bring this
legislation before you today and
I'd like to introduce my my
expert witnesses to my rights is
the yield Carter had to his
right is any crane.
And I'm gonna start with money
First.
So this is a bill.
That appropriate six hundred
thousand dollars to the.
PTSD program for veterans.
Police and fire first
responders.
And I was super excited to bring
this type of legislation because
the PTSD that police and fire
are going through today is big
problem that we're having a hard
time.
Recruiting police officers and.
I was invited out to so this
this
This PTSD program is located in
Lincoln County and it's out of
fort Stanton if anybody's ever
been up to for stand it's a
historical landmark and.
I went out to visit the facility
and I've been out there about I
don't know twenty years ago and
it was a CYFD detention center.
And whenever I went out there a
year ago I couldn't believe what
I saw and they had rehabilitated
this whole place and they're
taking all the wire and fencing
and all that kind of stuff down
and they turned it into a
program and I was so impressed I
went back for the second time
the second time that I went out
there I've never witnessed
someone have a PTSD meltdown is
what they call them and I got to
wants to wants unfortunately
first hand.
A young man that as a combat vet
that had a break down and.
My good friend Eddie crane scoop
this young man up and took him
off and running back about an
hour later and everything was
just right.
So when they ask me to carry
this legislation I was honored
to do it and I really do think
now I'm a big fan of veterans
and I'm a big fan of first
responders and I was kind of
shocked when I saw how much
money goes into Veterans
Services point zero zero zero
one percent of the budget.
And how many we build three
small road for what date for
what they get and with that.
I would stand for questions or
if my expert witnesses would
like to mention.
Thank you very much
Representative Vincent if it any
brief comments please go ahead
we'd love to hear thank you Mr
chairman honorable Committee
members we've begun at four
stand to make inroads into the
forty eight thousand veterans or
disabled New Mexico we processed
but a hundred twenty through a
program over number years we now
have this facility capacity to
do about ten times what we've
done in the past we're targeting
a hundred thirty two hundred
forty year with this funding
included that's probably gonna
double each year because we have
one level of facility capacity
and it totally up total other
level of operational capacity.
operational capacity will depend
on our staffing year funding.
And facility capacity is a given
already there we look forward to
participate further with
parchment Veterans Services we
have an excellent relationship
with them and I want to harken
back to a representative
mentioned about police and first
responders EMTs also have a
great deal of PNCC.
Infants and there are will come
in our program and if perform
admirably so well so far.
We look forward to entertaining
questions much issues Mr grant
yes for the comments.
Of thank you Mr chairman I think
that on the phone I am the
founder of heating America's
heroes we established this in
twenty fourteen in northern New
Mexico okay and that we were
greatly appreciative of what we
of the sport we had in New
Mexico and northern New Mexico
now we're in southern New Mexico
Lincoln County our opportunities
are better and more and like.
Mr Carter said we're gonna be
able to handle between a hundred
and ten two hundred thirty fifth
year along with for free.
Saucers you know one thing I
want to note is last year just
through first responders okay we
had a loss of a hundred forty
one suicide last year okay
that's not to mention that
twenty two veterans and that we
lose per day because we serve
our country thank you thank you
very much Mr crane okay we'll go
now to is there anybody in the
audience would like to speak.
I don't see anybody and I I is
there anybody online okay we
have several folks for online
we're going to go first to
well actually apple first start
with former representative Bob
Willie Mr Willie for a minute
whenever you're ready.
Thank you members of the
committee I appreciate the help
that I
when I was in the legislature on
administrative trying.
twenty fourteen hundred workers
million excelling and request
includes other New Mexico.
he has this.
Organizations are to flourish
are we all know it is the
funding we've been able to
piecemeal some things and have
selected from through but if we
get our our funding then we
could go word Avenue have the
money in I don't on the work
with that person on this
program
this program is very very much
needed the
often out of our you can only do
so much not only for the so many
has that's where this isn't
might is instead of a moment one
percent of their and what I'm
having with a much better job.
but this is one on one with the
engine.
And I was also going to need.
Researchers are agent is an
indication members Senator but I
think thank you very much Mr
willing next we're gonna go to
again the and and a am I and M.
to.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Gabrielle district ninety
executive director of nami New
Mexico nine minutes ago stance
in support of each thank you
very much.
Great thank you very much
Kerio and next we're going to go
to Dorothy Seton for a minute
whenever you're ready.
Thank you Mr chairman working
she.
And I'm here to be in the half
of the original injury leaves
office of New Mexico we had a
word membership a wide this type
of program we definitely support
because this research is not
only to the men and women that
rules for the program but to the
family members and their
communities or lawyers or
everybody that they actually
there after.
It's from this time.
Program so I'm.
She just lost her.
Going forward right.
Personally called me and we
discuss these matters and the
office support sale ask your
support.
Great thank you very much
instances.
Okay I don't see any other
public comment we're going to go
now to the committee any
questions.
Okay Representative please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for bringing the
Ford that is good seeing you
again.
Visit the site I believe
strongly in this it's
unfortunate actually tried to
get money in here for for the
specifically and under the the
past secretary us sons Spence
Try to work on this as well.
Chairman I'd like to see this
with the appropriation stripped
of them like to see this
continue on through.
Things stand on the phone just
like we have with some of the
other for full so we have but
I'd like to see this make it all
the way to the governor's.
The representative Pettigrew
Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thanks for the presentations of.
Have you reached out to our
department of Veterans Affairs.
Trying get funding for your
project.
Mr chair representative I did
and.
I've I've spoken with the
veteran affairs of of spoken
with the Senator Burt hi have
even spoken with you because I
believe so deeply about this
program.
Because the program that we're
talking about here I I failed to
mention is eight couples.
So what they told me was is if
the if the service person has
PTSD.
The spouse has it too.
So what they do is they bring
they this is a couples retreat
that that you can go to this
place and of course to I want to
help people so.
Because I'm a brand new freshman
Representative Garcia.
I think if funding for this.
I'm just going to give you full
disclosure on that and nobody
told me to get funding on it and
I think it's such a valuable
program I would do whatever it
takes to get it done and if I
can't then you know maybe we can
come up with a way to make it
work somehow.
Of thank you Mr chairman of
Representative.
Of.
It's got some portion of you
don't have funding but Mr crane
has been to
Budget committee meetings
throughout the state
The the refund interim committee
meeting is.
To work up to get funding for
these projects for some reason
whatever reason I was that do
not have.
And when you got the ball with a
little bit too late.
The state the primary if the
station.
You know that nobody wants to
table anything you on another
this makes up all of that but at
the funding is not there if it's
going to get table probably
understand the state of the
state appropriation but even at
that Mr chairman I don't know
all of the the fundamental but
even if you strip it what do you
go from there in all have you
tried to send it to see.
If they have any funding for
their of their of
appropriations bill in the
Senate.
Amendment make request.
What what what they've done with
the the bill on the side thank
the representative Garcia
written so so the Senate is has
not concluded their changes to
house bill two so Mr
representative Mr chairman you
might want to try that of that
Avenue now because they haven't
finished.
The bill and.
There's always kept a prenup
money left over and put a little
bit earlier was going to happen
here we go to work together but
it was really late in the game
try to help you you know I'm a
Vietnam veteran you know and I
know what PTA's do is a Suffolk
present and we're probably
better anybody this committee or
in this.
Nickelodeon in nineteen sixty
eight.
And then and then it's really
important that we help veterans
but the process of getting for
school to be one FY follow right
so that's where it's stalling
out of the exterminator more we
could do.
To make any difference on at
this point.
The representative Garcia that's
right at thank you thank we're
gonna Representative Baca please
thank you Mr chairman thank you
for bringing this forward
you know I think this is very so
much it's needed and it's needed
because of.
Like a representative Garcia my
father also was in Vietnam.
The other thing Mr chairman and
representative that I
appreciated your including first
responders as what they're what
they're dealing with and the I
don't think any firefighter
police officer of the respond
or.
Really was for fully prepared to
deal with the kinds of things
that they have to deal with.
So I want to I want to keep I
want to thank you and we commend
you for bringing this forward
I think that it's worthwhile and
I I think that for many I would
imagine here in a couple years
we're gonna have PTSD from our
medical professionals as well as
a dealt with the comment
pandemic so I think this is
something that the legislature
needs to be aware of I think
this is something that we really
need to take care of those who
took care of us and I I do
appreciate what you bring this
forward thank you Mr chairman
thank you very much
Representative Baca verse about
from please.
I'm just wondering if you're
familiar with a program run out
of Santa Fe called horses for
heroes it's echoing therapy for
for people who've been in combat
and that affected by that
Mr Chairman representative I I
really really appreciate this
we do need to make sure that
next time we we get a chance.
Very very valuable program and I
I consider use twin brothers
essentially that we have
something in the north and now
something in the south in my
question Mr chair and
representative is there any
private money any donations
coming in for this program
currently Mr chair.
Mr chair all I will let my
expert witness.
There has been some private
money that got us through two
thousand twenty two calendar
twenty two
some of the energy company's and
so the birds stated very
perfect veterans of foreign wars
have been prolific with regard
funding the outfitting over a
second dorm we have to twenty
four mentors there.
We have fifty one with the
donation from readers of chamber
of commerce the other is being
updated with the funds from the
VFW.
Anything else that.
Along along with Mr
Representative Mr chairman of
the.
The fundraisers of.
Private donations you know
requests you know that's what
we're.
We're surviving on right.
Unfortunately were in a
relatively static mode without
the state money infusion we need
to grow to the extent of the
demands of the farm farm.
Mr chair and representative
gentleman so I I'm glad to hear
that there some private money
that's helping you March and and
move forward I I do believe we
can make away for some.
Maybe not the session because
the budget.
This is so I'm going to note
this because.
But thank you thank you very
much for some friends at
chairman and Representative
Brown the yes we do do our own
funding but we don't have enough
that's what we're here.
Cut cut and cut and dry Mr chair
one other edition Representative
Brown
You mention this session I heard
reference from Representative
Pettigrew about this being the
first of two sessions for this
fiscal year is that correct.
Thank you very much the the so
this is a.
This is the the the first year
that that is correct this is a
there's nothing else here this
is just a straight appropriation
so a quick I have a couple of
quick questions I think might
help a sort of sort through and
thank you very much to all of
our committee members so
Representative Vincent is there
any.
June so the so House Bill to
junior which was additional
amounts that were allocated to
each house district and Senate
district
is there any junior funding for
this purpose.
Mr chair members of the
committee no there's not okay so
there okay
thank you for that
I might have a couple other
quick questions but I want to go
to Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chair
You know a I would only met my
roommate needs to win this
started and I I feel real
Moores that I've been doing a
little earlier and helping
through the entire process and
and it is kind of true that this
is the graveyard of hopes and
dreams and people's bills you're
on this committee but the other
truth is that there's a interim
process it cranks up you know in
a few short months and and I'll
be very willing to help you
through that
Through that process to see the
which.
You are able to provide
for the US and in I have one
question that who owns the
first.
Mr Chairman representative
somebody GSD and we leases from
the state seventy acres
probabilities I I did a hand out
which is a pictorial description
of it as well as a narrative on
the front this is a very brief
summary of our operation thank
you Mr I've got the and that
looked at all the pictures
didn't read words of.
Read a lot of that involved GSD.
Thank you Mr thank you very much
Representative Chatfield that Mr
great go ahead district
Representative Chatfield we've
got a twenty year lease on this
place so we're not going
anywhere so you know what you're
going to hear from us again I
guarantee great thank you very
much we're all we're all brand
new in this you know
Representative Vinson is done an
awesome job thank you god bless
him for his support he sees it
he knows what's happening you
know and we're all in this here
together absolutely.
Go ahead and I'm Mr chair just
one thing we were successful in
getting fiscal twenty three
capital outlay money to improve
certain persons so it we got a
hundred thirty one thousand five
hundred to build a barn which we
had to demolish
and to get some tractors and
things like this so we do have
some a little bit attraction of
the State.
we're looking for more thank you
thank you very much okay and one
of the things okay and then work
with them we do have to move on
we're I I I understand Sir but
one thing I was saying Sir is I
want to invite if each and
everyone of you.
To our facility okay and I
challenge you to everyone you to
accept my invitation great thank
thank you very much strain and
as Representative Chatfield
explicit thing said there's a
there's a very real bus interim
process and the it's great to
have this on the list
Representative mentioned so
there's not junior funding that
went to each district that was
able to be appropriated
understand that thank you for
that
just a note there is a twelve
percent increase and and an
eight hundred thousand dollars
special that this committee is
dedicated to the Veterans
Services Department so there are
additional resources going to
the Veterans Services Department
as part of sort of and and
perhaps there that there's
another way to continue that
conversation
with that and I think we should
take a close look at the junior
funding as a.
Yeah what what what we should go
back and look at that and see
some of these allocations
doesn't sound like there's
anything there now
appreciate very much the
discussion this will be a topic
for us during the interim with
that we'll go to vice chair
Dixon for a table in motion
just chase was one thing I just
want to I want to say is I'm
super humbled from everybody
that's taking me under their
wing to show me some of this new
stuff especially Representative
Garcia and with that I just I
just want to make sure you knew
that I how much I appreciated
that because there is a lot of
moving parts they go on in the
legislature has a new freshman
and I'm all ears and I'll take
help from anybody that I can get
help from so thank you very much
thank you very well said we're
gonna go to representative
Garcia.
Of thank you Mr Representative
the culture of the Veterans
Committee for the in terms I
would love to work with you
during the interview we get
funding so we don't have this
problem again next year.
Did you know it is important to
get thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much
representative Garcia the legal
version.
Going to vice chair to chairman
I can make a motion we'll go to
vice chair Dixon for the motion
thank you very much for seven
thank you both and thank you to
the committee.
Mr chair
regretfully I move that we table
house bill two hundred K.
there's a motion is there a
second.
K. in state invite
Representative Chatfield And
Montoya is there any opposition
to this motion.
Thing then the doctor will look
for to see again and thank you
very much Representative thank
you thank you to opt for.
Okay members we're gonna
continue.
We're gonna continue on to.
and is Representative Lord great
great to see you.
We're gonna keep going down sort
in order Representative members.
This is house bill three twenty
six.
we're at House Bill three twenty
six Representative Lord it's
great to see it feels like
yesterday I don't just seems
like Justin expert great to see
you think.
To a gap economy.
And I thought C. pack was for
the parent is here to okay so
up.
Representative go ahead please
Mr chair so what we're doing is
we're asking money for CYFD in
the reason we're asking money
for C. would in case any of you
don't know this there are
headlines every single day
today and Santa Fe New Mexican
this lawsuit alleges CYFD fail
to protect the boy was horribly
abused inTaos.
B. PCSO as a judge to keep the
father in jail after child abuse
charges.
The governor called CYFD HSD
dysfunctional announces
executive disorder to set the
executive order a ten year old
foster child elects allegedly
sexually assaulted by foster
teen CYFD building.
Lawsuit claims CYFD put four
year old in danger before his
death CYFD investigator in
Texaco that still gives me
nightmares about what happened
out there.
K. calls it quits over policies
reporter New Mexico children
CYFD S. U. R. D. did me Madam
conditions it goes on and on and
on and on and on of all the
headlines that could pull that a
recent about CYFD so what
happened is.
We brought forward with a team
of people to a bunch to see what
the bills an issue that we had
continually was that it was a
money issue on the bills or
introduce their evidence base we
had H. B. two nineteen enacting
caseload standards one point
eight million dollars with that
we need for that
that's based on November two
thousand twenty twos average
caseload reports and and minimal
annual fiscal report for CYFD HB
thirty four expanding the
definition of family in your
court namely CYFD more tools to
support families just provide
committees and that would be
fiscal impact that we need on
that H. B. one twenty nine
supporting families and children
upon release for short stays we
estimate that the about eight
million dollars investigations
then vote from the Senate
provide days so there's a big
problem with that James Dunkley
Cruz was murdered.
Less than fifty six days after
his last visit for urgent care
we'd significant alarming
document a bruising.
There are no.
Sorry I get emotional when I
read this is just it's so hard
when you dig in the CYFD it's
really really really hard
There were no visits between his
urgent care visit and date of
death.
SB one fifty which was for today
following up the families leave
hospitals on a plan of safe care
plans under the twenty nineteen
Care Act.
See what the said they cannot
support the small but
significant changes to follow up
in these cases of non compliance
it's based on seven hundred and
seventy four thousand dollars
annually and we explore continue
solutions address the families
for the Care Act and CYFD stated
that the excess room
resources that they could not
support monitors and provide
support.
What it all boils down to is I
don't want to keep reading these
I don't want to keep reading
these headlines I don't want to
keep having our children in
danger so that is why we came
forty before stand for questions
I want to introduce my expert
witness.
Thank you chairman.
At seventh committee today
I want to say chairman
representatives that CYFD is
currently testifying against
Senate bill one fifty as we
speak and house Judiciary Senate
judiciary because quote unquote
there is no appropriation for
the bill that we passed in
twenty nineteen and twenty
nineteen we passed care I was
Representative Christine
Trujillo happens to be my new
Representative we passed that
bill CYFD asked us to pass that
bill and as many of you are all
too familiar the bill that we
passed there was a failed to
implement nine infants died in
the very first year with plan of
safe care they're testifying
currently in Senate judiciary
and CYFD has opposed that bill
because it doesn't have seven
hundred and sixty seven thousand
dollars to do the work that we
that they asked us to support
them to do and mandate them in
twenty nineteen so for the but
they are testifying is for them
to do the job that we mandated
they do four years ago it will
cost seven hundred and sixty
seven thousand dollars and they
are opposing that bill right now
because there's no appropriation
for seven hundred and sixty
seven thousand dollars if you
start to look at what the cost
of maltreatment is the cost of
adverse childhood experiences
the cost of a substance exposed
newborn alone you're at over two
hundred thousand dollars in the
first year so I am over talking
but again it's it's frustrating
that right now we passed a bill
four years ago because you I do
access to and there was no plan
how to implement it we are
trying to fix a loophole to
planet and they say they can't
fix it do what we originally
passes four years ago because
there's not seven hundred and
sixty seven thousand dollars
attached to that thank you thank
you very much thank you
Representative lord thank you to
your expert is there anybody who
wishes to speak on this bill.
I don't see anybody I don't see
anybody online I'm gonna pass
the representative more and I'm
gonna have a few quick questions
and then we'll go to committee
and Amanda if I could just from
LFC
can you remind us we're going to
ask a few things so one we're
going to ask for the funded
vacancy dollars for twenty
twenty two for CYFD we're also
going to go ahead and go back
through the additional funding
that that this committee is sent
over and house bill two four
CYFD.
so and I know it's a lot to ask
but
Amanda would you mind coming up
perhaps to address those really
quick.
Okay.
Not no worries what will come
back to that
I think what we'll get to those
numbers represent Florida will
have for the committee there
are.
Significant unfunded vacancies
are for excuse me funded
vacancies at CYFD there is a
significant increase at this
committee sent over and house
bill two in in funding with that
it are there any questions from
committee members.
Representative please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative in the but for
brand this for you know this is
getting to be in the annals.
It's kind of like getting stuck
on a record player.
And well so what kind it is been
stuck on a record player then at
some point in time.
Somebody needs to stick around
to HSD long enough to be held
accountable for.
Yeah with respect to that.
Chair and and Representative
this is something that I I think
that we need to work closely
with director Avid on.
With how we can allocate funds
that are being given to them and
I'm trying to get to.
Updated.
Last year last year.
They transfer for what one point
four million dollars chairman.
the salary bonuses to other
categories.
They were reverted back in
twenty twenty to thirty three
million and then twenty twenty
one hundred and twenty one point
eight million I think it's time.
That is probably a good thing
chairman that that I wasn't here
the day that CYFD
presented in front of this
committee because.
This is one of our departments
to continually fills to
understand the concept of
managing funds.
And managing the actual task
which they have.
They're responsible for.
So chairman and and
Representative thank you again
for the opportunity a challenge
overseas Director Abbey to help
us find a way to.
Get the allocations there the
for bills that they've access
for laws that they've asked us
to do in the past and they
continue not to do it.
Chairman you know I had
extensive conversations with the
secretary of the hill over the
summer with respect to this
there are so many things that
they didn't want to do because
of some of the lawsuits that
were out there.
But.
One of the things that I felt
like I got a very strong
commitment on was that we were
going to make sure we took the
child's needs first.
If if the paternal parents
weren't doing their their due
diligence to foster care parents
would be given a preference over
that and they continue to fill
in each and every step of that
and so I think now is the time
that we either fix it.
And and like I said it's a good
thing I wasn't here that day
because of that should be fun
the whole damn thing Department
French so with that Mr chair
turned about thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew we now
have I just shared.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative lord and miss
back
I think.
That.
There are a number of issues you
know with CYFD I think however
the process of appropriating the
funds to go through a.
Pretty some details and.
Thorough.
Yeah monthslong approach and I
think some of the things that
the LFC staff are going to
provide in terms of numbers will
help shed light on on some of
the issues so while I am fully
committed as you know to
reform and fully funding CYFD in
the best manner possible.
you know I'm obviously going to.
The supporting the motion to
table so yes thank you very much
for bringing this issue up
appreciate it thank you very
much Mr Dixon next we have
Representative Trujillo.
You Mr chairman thank you again
for for bringing this up it was
house bill one thirty five is
when I when I.
Sponsored a few years ago and it
was also for a million dollars
and there was no action after
that this year I am trying to
sponsor some another bill that
we actually have some.
On it so I'm hoping that you'll
join me in supporting it and I'm
sorry that this is going to go
anywhere but I I understand what
you're coming from I've been
there.
And I hope to help in the future
thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much for this interview
thank you very much
Representative more at Amanda
thank you very much if we can
have a few of those numbers
please and then we'll go Mr
Chairman just answer your
questions this CYFD received an
increase of about six percent
for FY twenty four and that he
can see right the funding
vacancy rate is over ten percent
which is very high especially
for an agency of this size of
the overall vacancy rate is even
higher than thank you Mr thank
you very much and thank you very
much.
That
okay I I think we've had a thank
you for the come we've got a
very good conversation members
Representative Lord into your
expert
will we'll go to you for any
closing comments a.
Okay have a recent is closed out
with just something heartfelt
that's it thank you
Representative I'm sorry I'm
losing my voice I have tested
three times are gone but it's
not COVID just landed as I just
wanted.
Representative and chairperson I
just want to put on the record
that CYFD stated in their budget
request to you page three
hundred and fifty three that for
the past few years CYFD has
almost totally been focused on
meeting the demands of the Kevin
S. lawsuit settlement and the
departments FY twenty four
budget is no different of the
departments three thirty three
point eight million dollars or
forty one point one percent
requested increase for recurring
general fund revenue about
eighty one percent of that is
related to Kevin just and why
that is important and why I want
that before the committee is
because CYFD continues to use
Kevin just as both a sword and a
shield and it's exhausting for
people who advocate for better
but data driven evidence based
research they're using it they
say we can't some of these
procedures because of Kevin as
we can't do this seven hundred
and sixty seven thousand we
can't make sure that the babies
are being born drug addicted
drug exposed go home and have
actual follow up care you get
more follow up at a dental
appointment thank you do being
drug exposed and released from
the appointment and I just want
to say.
That it is important to know and
go on the record saying as of
November twenty twenty two CYFD
did not make one single one of
their Kevin asked target
outcomes so eighty one percent
of their budget has gone towards
this yet they have not met one
single one of their target
outcomes and so I don't know how
continuing to fund this but we
have brought forth evidence
based data driven solutions I'm
looking at you right now who's
coming up Friday and we fully
expect the mighty to oppose the
bill because they don't have
funds so it's exhausting I live
in the northeast heights I'm
excited about the north getting
about Google however there are
children dying and I just can't
say that enough if you have not
read the Kevin asked plaintiff
settlement lawsuit it says
advocates say New Mexico's
children continue to suffer from
the state's delays and failures
they call upon the governor
Lujan Grisham to give her full
commitment to long term there is
not one single piece of the
Kevin just not one single one of
those thirty four target
outcomes was Matt and it is very
frustrating to be here.
And and just see seven hundred
and sixty seven thousand dollars
was opposed and we can't do the
work the that you all asked us
to do four years ago right there
are children dying nine infants
died from care at and play it
safe cares in the first year and
so it's just not okay.
Thank you Representative
anything represented and that
other than I wish somebody would
light a fire under their feet
and make them do the job that
they need to do and I don't care
how that gets done thank you
thank you thank you to your
expert thank you Representative
Lord we do want to have these
conversations here we've had the
conversation around
and I think there's a lot of
clearly there's a great deal of
policy and resources that are to
continue to be needed and
appreciate the flag regarding
sort of the this very strong
focus on one's one component
that Kevin a settlement with
that we'll go to vice chair
Dixon for the motion and we'll
look forward to continuing to
work.
Mr chair of it move
to table house bill three twenty
six.
Okay it's been moved by by your
Dixon second by Representative
Sanchez is there any opposition
to that.
Absolutely please show
Representative Pettigrew in
opposition
And now Representative Pettigrew
to explain as well thank you
chairman the.
I think the key thing is fading
off of the specs closing is
that.
This is the that within just a
few months the federal
government takes over.
Maybe that's not a bad thing I'm
not sure.
I didn't vote against this
because we I want to fight the
policies on the on the committee
voted against this because I
needed to be able to say that
piece thank you.
Thank you very much thank you
very much for tomorrow thank you
two experts okay now we're going
to go
We're going on to House Bill
excuse me committee substitute
for house bill one forty two.
and this is
generating facility in mind
remediation.
Representative Allison please go
ahead.
Thank you Mr.
I want to share with the
community the synopsis from the
of health energy and natural
resources committee substitute
they give a good description so
was go off of that.
Is it states the House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill one forty two
well and act the San Juan
generating station facility and
mine remediation and restoration
study act which would require
the environmental Department and
the energy minerals and natural
resource department to first
contact or contract a
comprehensive study of the San
Juan generating station facility
and money to determine the
extent of environmental
contamination of the lands and
waters adjacent to the
generating facility on mine
second developer restoration and
reclamation plant.
And then it also stays the.
The bill will require in that
and and to publish the plan.
Of the bill would further
require.
EMNRD and in that to provide a
copy of the restoration and
remediation study to the
legislature no more no later
than July first twenty twenty
five the restoration plan with.
Need to include specific
measurable steps inform the
public comment and so forth and
so on and I won't drag this on
Care so I just want.
My colleagues to know that the
the main purpose of this bill is
prevention.
Why I say that is in my
district.
Especially in the Navajo Nation
there have been uranium mines
that were left abandoned and
these were left abandoned over
seventy years ago to the state
my people still suffer from the
after effects of the uranium
mine I want to remind the panel
that.
When we were right mining the
uranium that was helping us win
the war in the Pacific that was
used in World War two.
In addition to the mines we
also.
Assisted with person in these
personnel were known as the know
what Navajo code talkers so the
purpose of my bill as I said it
and it being prevention is that
we do not want the money to
leave any room that's behind
that will contaminate.
The groundwater and everything
that we depend on.
On the west side of where the
money used to be is the entire
Navajo Nation.
If any contaminants leak they
will leak into the San Juan
river.
The San Juan river.
Is the northern most boundary of
the Navajo Nation.
And from where the money is
situated it goes thirty miles
for the distance of New Mexico
and then it goes into the it
goes into Arizona for the entire
length for those of the entire
length of Arizona all the way to
pagers on the northern most
border of the Navajo Nation so
my fellow colleagues this bill
is the is
Is all about prevention and we
have worked with EMNRD and.
Embed to arrive at the
Of.
The of situation that we are in
today and I am going to be
assisted by my expert witness
very the nasi when you start
hammering away at me with some
questions that I can answer okay
sec but the bill is very very
simple we work with EMNRD.
In then and we hope that the
appropriations made to those
agencies will be enough to cover
this thank you Mr chair thank
you very much Representative
Allison okay first we're going
to go to anyone is there anyone
here in the audience.
Yes if we could have
the microphone.
go ahead if you want to line up
here in the middle to say
Right for the in support.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Sharon
archer bright I'm a nurse and
I'm speaking in support of this
bill H. B. one forty two
advances to the next logical
step cleaning up the messes with
accountability.
Leave no trace as a boy scout
motto goes we need to restore
these lands to what they were
before the land was disturbed.
The cleanup goals are measurable
realistic and include long term
measureable outcomes.
The jobs will be retained
because the people working at
the generating facilities are
the ones that get preference for
cleanup they know the territory.
An independent assessment could
prevent leaking of toxins which
could travel by river to
Albuquerque please pass HB one
forty two thank you very much.
Mr chair members of the
committee on the river how it
Beaumont organizing director of
interfaith worker justice New
Mexico.
We stand in strong support of
this bill I just want to remind
everybody that the history of
New Mexico has a history of
fortune hunters who on the rich
resources of this land of
enchantment get permission from
the state legislature to enter
the state build their facilities
reap their profits pad their
pockets and when they're done
they leave behind a sacrifice
zone of ravaged landscape that's
hurting the people's wildlife
the water the air and leave
behind that landscape and a lot
of broken promises we don't want
to see that happen again and so
I would remind all of you that
that legacy can be ended when
the promises are kept by the
state legislature to give
oversight for the land of
enchantment and protected from
becoming a sacrifice zone thank
you thank you very much agency
for more.
Okay we're gonna go to we have
online I see it but there's one
hand in order to
we're gonna go first three.
We're close at their okay we're
gonna go the first two Douglas
Michael John Mr Michael John for
a minute whenever you're ready.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Members hi my name is
on the number of registered
lobbyists Association voters New
Mexico.
We urge you to support this bill
it's that appropriate step
towards reclamation and
remediation of the environmental
problems caused by the San Juan
generating station and the
associated money and so we urge
you to support the bill thank
you very much thank you very
much Mr Michael John next we're
gonna go to
Joseph better non this
Mr Nando's whenever you're ready
for one minute please.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the of the committee
I appreciate line
Representative Anthony also for
sponsoring this mill for my my
community I am a registered
lobbyist with and then they need
a vote I know I am from Senator
rock a new.
Mexico and I urged the committee
to so to.
Of the.
but for our our for community to
move forward
from from the past sixty years
of the departmental damage that
has occurred in our region and
this will help help us
understand what the impact has
been to our communities and it
it will help move us forward.
Thank you thank you very much.
okay finally we're gonna go to
Mr Louise good at all Mr get it
for a minute whenever you're
ready.
Yes good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee
recessed at a with the circled
United chapter of representing
our thirty five thousand members
and supporters throughout New
Mexico the San Juan generating
station offering call after
fifty operation ending in
dangerous massive source of
articulate nitrogen oxide and
carbon.
The millions of so called last
and and other contaminants from
the plant and from there the
coal mine were tensely
threatening the soil and water
of communities that have borne
the brunt of the of plant in my
population for decades H. B. one
forty to provides our state
agencies are calls and resources
needed to do a thorough study of
what reserves remain to be
remediated at the plant and
mine it requires input for those
impacted by the mines pollution
it provides monitoring and
enforcement necessary in the
current crisis plant in mine
employees for clean up
operations thank you thanks to a
community leader organizations
Representative Allison and other
sponsors when issued at this
legislation we're too you will
vote yes need to be one forty
two to ensure that San Juan coal
mine no longer harm the health
and livelihoods the running
community thank you.
Thank you okay.
Is there anybody who wishes to
speak against this legislation
here in person.
Saying line was the same thing
online.
And I don't see any hands there
either okay we're going to go
now to to questions
Representative Montoya please.
Thank you Mr chairman and
representative appreciate
realization forward Mr chair I
actually support this
legislation hi.
The.
I do know that there there is
monitoring in place at San Juan
coalmine San Juan generates
Dacian and that is how we know
that there has been.
Release from particularly the
the the the the pit that the
water pit.
but Mr chair and representative
I I don't believe there's any
real concerns because it is
monitored and I think the major
information will come from those
monitoring sources however after
the gold king mine spill and
the.
Very poor response and the very
unsatisfactory response from
from government
and from what we know is still
working its way down the river
which will hit us in in years
the the city of aspect.
Well Harper hill
city legislative cedar hill all
the way back to to to Colorado
is going to be coming our way I
think this is very important
first off so when that happens
it'll be very clear where the
where the damage has come from
but Mr chair I think the the the
community is very concerned and
I think having a third party had
take a look at this I think is
is a very very fair prospect and
the minimal and.
Input that community should have
in this and so I do support this
I think it'll slow down the
actual remediation of the power
plant and the coal mine
there the actual remediation
that will take place it may be
slow down a bit I don't think
there's any rush power plants
not going anywhere so taking the
time to do this so that the
people especially on an
aberration Representative
reservation waterflow to hogback
Shiprock to Arizona deserve to
have a third party like this so
that they can be comfortable
that there's nothing else coming
from that mine and whatever PNM
leaves permanently that we don't
have to worry about going back
to.
I know that there's monitoring
place now I think it's probably
sufficient but let's know for
sure and so I support your
legislation Representative also
thank thank you very much
Representative Montoya
and I would just the
representative Allison thank you
to your experts of the yes I
Representative we have an
amendment here I think we know
there's there's an advance
energy technology fund that this
body passed that has significant
funding as well as some special
appropriations that have gone to
the department of environment
particularly in both of those
places there is funding for for
this purpose so with that
members we have an amendment
here this will strike the
appropriations from this piece
of legislation I would just if
Representative Montoya wants to
move the amendment.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative Montoya is there
a second.
Has been second by
Representative a cruise there
any opposition to adopting this
amendment will go through
briefly well first let me go
through it on page one line
twenty one it strikes making
appropriations.
On page six.
It strikes sections five and six
in their entirety and then it re
numbers according.
Okay we have a motion from
Representative Montoya second
from Santa Cruz on the amendment
so any opposition to the
amendment saying none now we'll
go ahead and just go to
Representative Montoya for
motion on the bill.
Right that there's a motion do
pass for House Energy
Environment natural resources
committee substitute for house
bill one forty two as amended
seconded by Representative Lujan
is there any opposition to this
to that motion.
Saying none.
Yes yes thank you very much
Representative thanks to your
efforts Representative.
Thank.
members what we want to go back
and I two things members first I
appreciate very much chair
Johnson being here I made a
mistake earlier on in regards to
house bill one sixty one and it
after we here Representative
Lujan is bill I'm gonna go ahead
and ask that we bring that back
up the table does not have any
fiscal impact the money is in
the budget I've made a mistake
there is policy attached to this
bill thank you Sir for being
here.
We are going to go back now to
house bill one sixty six Mr
chair of the New.
Representative Allison can we
we're we're gonna ask you to
switch we're going to go back to
house bill one sixty six and
then
Sixty fifty two.
The good side what we're gonna
go to house bill one sixty six
with Representative Lujan then
we're gonna ask for a motion for
house bill one sixty one with
chairs who chairwoman Johnson so
we'll both we know that there's
a couple more to go there.
Representative Lujan thank you
for your work on if you can
present house bill one six.
Thank you Mr chair the committee
Socially what's
House Bill what sixty six does
as.
This is the primary issue that
There is a high percentage of
New Mexican workers in the
private sector who are not
offered a retirement plan and
this bill seeks to address that
and to then The New Mexico
working save act to require the
automatic enrollment to private
employees into the New Mexico
working safe irate program
covered employers not currently
participating in the market
place would be required to
register participate in the
program and employees of covered
employers would be automatically
enrolled into a retirement plan
would also retain the option to
opt out of the plan and Mr chair
if you have and then.
A Representative do you want to
can you please explain the
amendment.
Yes yes Mr chair so
basically either or for parts
the amendments are.
There is a simple language
change page one line eighteen
after the semicolon we're going
to strike that line inserts in
lieu of requiring corporation
from state agencies to share
relevant data.
And then.
There was just a typo on page
two line twenty three strike pro
seating and insert in lieu of
free seating and then on a
third.
Alright on page six line I are
striking two thousand twenty
three and inserting in lieu of
Twenty twenty four.
And then the fourth part on page
nine between nine six and seven
insert this new subsection which
is the.
more substantial
and inserting section do.
Stating notwithstanding any
other provision of law all state
agencies are calls show
cooperate as requested by the
office of the state treasurer
for the advancement of the
working state programs including
the sharing of relevant data as
a party show mutually agree is
reasonably necessary and then
the last part the point I on
page fourteen we're going to
strike sections five and six in
their entirety which would
address the appropriation amount
thank you very much
Representative Lujan
is there a motion for this
ammendment.
Fe it's been moved by
Representative Sanchez.
Second by Representative Garrett
is there any opposition to this
ammendment.
For.
Yes ranking member Armstrong.
I'm in opposition okay a site
what will at let's go ahead
Yes thank you thank you Mr Dixon
Sandra we're gonna this is on
adoption of house appropriations
and finance committee amendment
one to house bill one sixty six
on the committee on this
ammendment New Mexico please
call the roll.
Now.
Representative fox the.
No.
Yes.
Let's come back to her native.
I.
Yes.
Yes.
Hey by vote of eight in the
affirmative nine eight if this
amendment has not passed.
Okay we're back to the bill
With the that is not an amended
bill.
So we'll go back to you
Representative Lujan I think it
not being amended.
This that this that this bill
and this does include
appropriations correct okay.
So I think
in Representative Lujan are
their junior are their junior
funds that are appropriated for
the purpose seventy five
thousand dollars and there is a
we authorization in H..
Okay I'm gonna go to committee
if there's any questions.
I don't see of ranking member
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chairman I I
believe with the what's been
asked for and the appropriation
I I believe that.
All the with all the changes in
the bill this is a mandate and I
an unfunded mandate and I I
don't think that we can move
this forward thank you Mr
chairman thank thank you very
remember Armstrong.
Okay I I think at this point
Representative Lujan I think we
don't have the funds the full
funding in the budget I think we
can continue to look at it but
will ask for a tabling motion
for this now percent Hon thank
you Mr chair I I believe it's
the function of the of what
we've been instructed to do and
I feel like I followed all those
instructions in in getting us to
this point and to have
This this put upon this bill
because of the funding when
division your funding in place
if you can please delineator
explained that to me Mr chair
this is very confusing and I
haven't seen this happen.
To check thank thank you very
much for peace of the Han
at the without the amendment
being adopted and the bill moves
forward with the original two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
being appropriated from the
general fund
on page fourteen.
It and that's I think the crux
of it right now Representative
Lujan is that without adoption
of the amendment
that that we're sort of out of
balance with what's available.
Okay Mister chair appreciate the
and I understand that that
process the process of that but
with the the funding with the
junior funded place in every
authorization for the program
what would be the next steps if
you don't mind me asking thank
you Representative Lujan it was
so will I think we're gonna at
world last for a temporary to in
motion now we'll sit down and
try to and and and also go back
with you on
and senator Tom to sort of work
through.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much Representative Lujan
by surtax and.
Mr chair I would move to
Temporarily table house bill.
Okay it's been moved by by Terry
Dicks and second by
Representative Chatfield is
their opposition to adopting
that motion.
Saying no opposition.
Okay members we're gonna go to
back to house bill one sixty one
eight what I need to do I need
to ask for a motion to be made
to
remove house bill one sixty one
from the table and make it to
the next order of business.
Mr chair I would move.
But.
Struggle
so the vice chair next to make
the motion for to remove house
bill one sixty one from the
table make it the next order of
business Mr chair I would move
to remove house bill one sixty
one from that chairs table and
make it the next order of
business.
They're a second.
Okay it's been second by
Representative della Cruz there
any opposition to that motion.
Saying none
Terry Johnson we.
Come back.
Okay we're on house bill one
sixty one I incorrectly said
that it was a.
Just focus on appropriations
chairman Johnson if you could
explain sort of the what the
bill does and then the briefly
that this course of money has
been included in H. B. two
chairman Johnson thank you Mr
chair and thank you colleagues
on this committee house bill one
six one the is an act relating
to Indian Affairs and it is
moving that Gallup inter tribal
Indian ceremonial office to the
local government division of the
department of finance and
administration.
And it is also re need renaming
the inter tribal ceremonial
office as that inter tribal
Indian ceremonial Association
and making an appropriation of
three hundred and I believe
twenty thousand.
this is this was heard during
the interim committees the
governor is aware of it and also
the department of tourism.
So what we want to do is fund
this project through DFA the
McKinley County as the fiscal
agent and take our Indian inter
tribal ceremonial
Back to our local.
Organizations and and so it is
appropriated in house bill two
with that I stand for questions
great thank thank you Terry
Johnson okay and you have an
amendment at this time we ask
that this amendment can you yep
what's that the amendment the
move.
Okay there's a motion motion and
a second for House
appropriations and finance
committee amendment one to house
bill one sixty one members the
amendment here is in front of us
it's on page five line eight it
strikes appropriated.
And says and insert salute in
lieu thereof subject to
appropriation.
Ages six and seven strike
section eight it's in entirety.
as the as chair John said this
money has is included in H. B.
two and I believe this was part
of the conversation when we
heard from the department of
tourism and others.
Okay with that we have house
bill one sixty one is there a
motion.
Okay that's been moved by
Representative Representative
Trujillo second by ranking
member Armstrong to pass house
bill one sixty one as amended is
there any opposition to that
motion.
Saying none.
Thank you very much thank you.
K. members were
We're gonna go back to.
We're gonna go to house bill
fifty two as amended.
Representative Allison please go
ahead.
Thank you Mr thank you members
of the committee.
Of.
House bill fifty two six to make
an appropriation to fund
International Baccalaureate for
the IB exam fees for all
eligible students in the state.
International Baccalaureate
programs are found in more than
five thousand.
Four hundred schools and one
hundred and fifty nine countries
making the scores of these tests
more widely accepted in
universities and colleges
globally than any other exam
including the Advanced
Placement.
For publicly funded I B. schools
in New Mexico offer the program
that includes these exams and
they are Navajo preparatory
school in Farmington the Mandela
international magnet school in
Santa Fe.
Cottonwood classical
preparatory.
Charter school in Albuquerque
and said the a high school in
Albuquerque.
International Baccalaureate
offers for different programs
the most well known being the
diploma programme fourteen for
juniors and seniors the program
of study typically includes up
to six college level courses.
I'm just going to share with you
the highlights from our original
presentation.
Students at these schools take
between one and six exam and
it's one of those exam costs one
hundred nineteen dollars and the
I. B. school grads or I'd be
graduates are among the most
college ready students anywhere
in the world.
And state funding for these
testing fees will eliminate the
largest barrier for families and
schools and support and the use
of New Mexico to participate in
a world class college
preparatory program that sets
the stage for them to think
globally and act locally.
The first New Mexico IB students
tested and receive college
credits in twenty twelve today
from project managers at St
Sandia national laboratories to
those living here and working
remotely for lawyer to
multinational tech companies to
new local classroom instructors
for the next generation these
young I B. alumni are already
leaders in their communities
across our state.
What a difference the state
could make for New Mexico
students by expanding access
through eliminating barriers to
IB diploma programs with this
appropriation more hard work in
New Mexico students will be able
to take the IB exam to further
their comments of endeavors so
with that just a quick recap and
I've dealt with me one of my
expert witnesses shared role in
our and also I think I've got
online with Shawna percent T. of
C. as the head of school at the
Navajo preparatory school.
So with that we stand for
questions.
Thank you very much
Representative Allison thank you
for being here any additional
words that before we go I don't
know if there's any ideas come
not too much ideas left but
will go any additional words
that.
Okay and no worries of.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee this is
a important opportunity and it's
one tool in the toolbox to make
New Mexico First and education
great thank you very much okay
just one comment as well and I
think with this endeavor.
We have been hearing in the many
meetings and presentations that
it's always mention in the
education system New Mexico is
ranking forty eight.
That spring New Mexico up with
the introduction of this
International Baccalaureate
program we can do it we've shown
it in schools that are using
this program now so I ask for
your support thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Allison okay and
I have Mister that sent the is
on line as well
Where we've gotten to the public
comment is there anybody was to
speak in support.
I don't see anybody here let's
go online I do see
AS one hand will start with
Megan low and then we'll go to
misperception.
Miss low for what for one minute
whenever you're ready.
We.
Yes we can.
Wonderful my name is Megan low
and I am the diploma program
coordinator at cottonwood
classical preparatory school in
Albuquerque and we thank you so
much to the committee for
hearing this bill we really
appreciate it and we really
appreciate all of the amazing
support for all of our students
we're working hard to improve
their education outcomes in the
state of Mexico and we the
program will really benefit from
state support thank you so much
thank you very much miss low.
Kate and now miss Pacific.
Would you like to add anything
yeah this is public comment and
support.
yes that's a thank you so much
for this opportunity chair
members of the committee Navajo
preparatory school is the Navajo
Nation college prep school we
have the International
Baccalaureate program and it
truly takes our school and our
institution to the next level
that we are truly global leaders
that is our mission is to
produce leaders for future and
your support Justin able support
Navajo prep to truly live our
mission and vision of our school
I think at thank you thank you
very much for specifically I see
one more
The.
Donegal Hussein.
For one minute whenever you're
ready and then Jordan kind of
fell and then we're going to
conclude the online portion.
Danielle was saying yes.
Go ahead please up so currently
there thank you for letting me
speak
hello I'm a student at comicon
screen which was school I'm a
junior currently high school and
this is my first year part of
the IB diploma and so far as to
have the right skills and really
think that this is a great bills
because I'd be program he he's
you and gets you ready for
college and teachers are to be
open minded time managed and in
general I just think it's a
great deal the right direction
and thank you for letting me
speak thank you very much okay
our final COVID we're going to
go to Jordan Cantrell Jordan
from one minute whenever you're
ready.
Chair representative maybe can
you hear me yes Sir.
Yes okay so I'm a junior kind
with classical preparatory
school in Albuquerque as well
and this is very beneficial
because any bill that could
allow more access to the testing
in the IB program is gonna bring
more benefits to the students so
this is a very the risk program
but you put in the work and you
get the budget but if you put in
the work and there's a barriers
in the way that don't allow you
to take the test at the end.
It's almost as if you're doing
the work.
And you're not getting any of
the benefits so if we put this
bill in place you get the
benefits you're able to yes and
you're able to.
Read the report of your work so
college acceptance rates for
kids but I mean programs are a
lot higher than average twenty
two percent higher so if we can
break down the barriers in the
walls that don't allow kids to
test that the end of their
journey and I. P. program then I
believe that is very beneficial
thank you thank you very much Mr
kind of okay
Thank you very much for that is
there I don't see is there any
opposition.
In person I don't is there any
opposition online.
Okay seeing no opposition
I want to just no Representative
Allison before we go to the
committee
for the first time this
committee or
we've included one point two
five million this is at the
bottom of page one thirty one of
our budget this was this is for
Advanced Placement and internet
International Baccalaureate yes
assistance members the
International Baccalaureate
assistance that language is
added by this committee in the
public school working group in
in the working proprie says that
we had so
we know that that that's a very
positive thing
Adequate and also will go to
Representative Pettigrew so the
there is strong funding in the
budget going to PED for this
purpose this bill is just the
straight appropriation and has
no other policy so after
committee discussion will ask
for a table in motion but
there's more funding in the
budget David is envisioned in
this bill so a point of pride
for the committee first of
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for the bill I'm I'm intrigued
can you.
Health as I understand it Mr
chair and representative that
there are four schools in the
state of New Mexico the the
offer this can you tell me the
demographics of the school.
The combined demographics just
for us.
I mentioned Mister chair I
mentioned for schools locally
but statewide there are nine
schools.
And they are pretty much all
over the yes the state.
So Mr chair and and
Representative what are the
demographics of the school I'm
trying to get the.
Understanding of.
The baseline for this.
Okay Mister chairman refer to my
experts.
Mr chair members of the
committee and Representative
Grove this is the first speaking
in general terms there's nine
schools and they demographics
very the state of our city and I
think they reflect the diversity
of the state schools are located
in the Albuquerque area and
there's a large screen and Las
Vegas New Mexico the UWC of
United world schools based base
there and then where based of us
the school board member for the
now prepared to re school where
ninety nine percent to native
American
and we would have members from
the Navajo Nation as well as the
agree Apache nation from our Rio
Arriba County and I can say that
the demographic reflects the
demographics of the state.
Thank you chairman and thank you
to Representative an expert for
that so.
Would it be safe to say do we
have a school down in the south
for the state with respect to
the Mescalero tribal.
Mr chair members of the
committee we don't have the I'd
be specific school and their Rio
dosa area
however you know I can only
speak from my own school as we
do to outreach to folks out in
the real does with the Mescalero
tribe and our hope is to get
more muscular members to
Farmington.
Thank you chairman and thank you
for that answer my my last
question is do these nine
schools receive federal funds
and and if they do chair and
representative
is there a reason why the
federal funds don't assist on
the on the testing side of this.
Mr chair and representative I
will refer to my other expert
witness specifically.
Right thank you thank you Mr
Senator did you hear the
question.
Go go ahead yes I did one we
have to remember that the
International Baccalaureate is
in most states even in the state
of Arizona is viewed with and
the advance placement already
the state of New Mexico provide
Advanced Placement funding for
students and that is going to be
on the regular high school
diploma and so if the
international backward really
feel it's a matter of of whether
or not they receive funding for
it because they're still so we
also still take the same state
mandate state matter the
mandated exams but these are
going over and beyond just as
the advance placement it's the
exact same funding that we give
to advance placement students
that were asked to give to the
International Baccalaureate
students.
Chairman and Representative an
expert so if I understand the
answer I just received.
We Fund Advanced Placement and
R. eighty nine school districts
the same way.
That is correct students and
public ed we so the equipment to
be refunded for Advanced
Placement classes to take the
best placement fees.
And and chairman and
Representative experts so.
There's with respect to the line
schools so we're talking about
there's no federal funds that
that assist with this type of
testing and the state of New
Mexico doesn't recognize that
right now.
In all of jump in there
Representative Pettigrew
I think we might ask Mr Liu and
and from LFC we we might flag
this because I think I have also
heard that there is some federal
funding that is available for
these purposes in conjunction
with with state funding what
this areas I don't know that we
know here today I very much
appreciate the question and
something that we can run down.
Chairman it's just
that I appreciate the back and
forth with respect to the
conversation because I'm
learning a piece the the I
didn't understand in and it
would make sense that we would
fund one source and not another.
If the especially if the other
source didn't have a funding
mechanism for in the that would
be.
The separation that would not
make sense at all so thank you
chairman for allow me the
questions thank you for bringing
the bill for great thank thank
you very much Representative
Pettigrew we're gonna go to
Representative
we're gonna go to Representative
your.
Mr chairman I just want to add a
comment on that if I may
International Baccalaureate
testing is a much newer system
to New Mexico public schools and
we funded AP the best placement.
testing for a longer time simply
because it's been around in our
schools International
Baccalaureate snout schools in
APS many charter schools and
some schools province South
exploring so it's just a new
word yes in use it's not a newer
yes it's a newer cast being used
in our state program thank you
very much and that is straight
from the vice chair of the house
education.
Mexico
okay we're gonna go to
Representative Trujillo and then
we'll go to by your text and for
the most yes Mr chairman I just
want to congratulate my
colleague and moving this bill
forward I think you have done a
tremendous job getting this for
this bill.
I heard and it's because it does
have money through PED I
congratulate you because usually
we die thank you Mr Jeff thank
you very much Representative
Trujillo and I think it is a
point of pride for this
committee that we've included
the International Baccalaureate
as one of the eligible parts for
the state funding is there yes
Representative Lujan please I
just want to just concert chair
that one of the schools Mandall
is in my in my house districts
so.
and we got to visit the other
school in and Representative
district and then this is
amazing some of the work and
everything.
Thank you very much
Representative Lujan okay more
more money than this is in the
budget with international
backwards part of it will go to
vice chair Dixon for the tabling
motion thank you very.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
to table house bill fifty two is
amended.
Okay it's been moved and
seconded by Representative Dixon
second by Representative
Trujillo is there any opposition
to that motion.
Seeing none
the money is there any B. two
congratulations thank you very
much for present thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
K. members we're now to this is
house bill three sixty one in
consultation because this is not
an H. B. two we're going to as
vice chair Dixon for a motion
for table and.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
to table house bill three sixty
one.
Okay to move I. by Peter Dixon
state my Representative Sanchez
there any opposition to that
motion thing then it's tabled.
also for House Bill three fifty
eight
The more we know that there is
significant housing funding in
H. B. two we do have to table
house bill three fifty eight but
this body sent over a strong
housing package to the Senate
and will be looking for some
policy coming from them as well
so as I checked by her Dixon
from ocean to table House Bill
three fifty eight Mr chair I
would move to table house bill
three fifty eight.
Great it's been low I by
tradition saying my
Representative Lujan their
opposition to that motion see
none.
Okay.
And then we'll go to House Bill
three nineteen I believe the
same applies here and
also just again is a no this is
much for all the
but but there have been there
were there were additional
funds.
Additional funds and a big
thanks to a representative of
sciences and others for helping
small
small subdivisions work with to
get their audits into compliance
so we'll go to will ask for a
motion to table house bill three
nineteen from by six.
Thank you Mr chair I move to
table house bill three nineteen.
K. to move I. by Peter Dixon
saying by Representative Lujan
is there any opposition to that
motion.
Sen and okay members that
concludes us our work today big
thank you to the LFC and of
course our agency staff members
