Representative offensive.
He's excused.
The Western.
And chair Thompson here.
Okay we do have a quorum now so
Dr Senator Martin fifty.
Please go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and
representative is a pleasure to
be able to come before you this
morning I think some of you
heard what I'm going to be
presenting during the interim
over the summer I'm mental
health parity and so I'm not
going to go into exquisite
detail here because I know
you've got a busy schedule that
will cover the the main concepts
for sure and I it just a little
bit of brief why are we doing
this and I think some of the key
points that that this does is
just not done by the insurance
companies today and requires
them to do
and and then a summary and and
how we intend to actually carry
it out and make it work in the
state where six or seven other
states have adopted mental
health parity based on federal
legislation it had a really
tough time getting off the
ground.
So I'd like to basically if I
want you put this into a a
raised what we're trying to do
here's connect the head with the
body
in in American health care we we
we tend to we look at the body
of god or the Pontic Act cancer
rows and everything else yes Sir
we got a few neurosurgeons you
know but we just have next to
nothing in terms of behavioral
health providers and there's
several reasons for that but in
