First congressional district
election three million dollars
this is a a late requests that
came in because the secretary
state didn't know until later
that they were going to need to
run an election but the
executive.
The requested three million
dollars was in the LFC wreck but
I I think that's something that
staff are okay with recommending
that's something that you'd like
to consider.
For that page met chair.
Okay is there any questions on
this page.
Madam chair yeah go ahead thank
you madam chair for that line
fifty five yeah.
Hearing that the staff is fine
with recommending that and that
only occurs if a vacancy in the
congressional district one
occurs if it this is
appropriated and the vacancy
does not occur that money could
not be used for other purposes
correct.
Representative small that's
that's correct it would revert
got it okay thank you very much
thank you madam chair.
He.
Anybody else on this page.
Madam chair on the.
Line forty three.
On the seventy five million of
place keeper I know there's a
house bill eleven and has two
hundred million in it and
there's another Senate bill it's
somewhere in that same
neighborhood how do they relate
to this line item and how is
that going to be dealt with.
Okay go ahead David.
So.
The the Senate bill one and
house bill eleven which total
four hundred million certainly
relate to that seventy five
million when LFC meat was
meeting in December
We didn't have a lot.
And so certainly there's an
overlap between those bills in
the seventy five million but I
also think the committee still
may want to look at some I
economic development actions
separate from those two bills
more in an ongoing basis then
the merchants who stimulus
straits so you may down the road
she some some some much smaller
items where that place keepers
in addition to the four hundred.
Okay so what I think I'm hearing
David is is we were recognizing
that that's out there we're
gonna have to be that'll happen
in the future correct.
Thank you madam chair thank you
David.
It
talk okay
Hang on a second please let me
Yeah.
Okay we just got a request from
the DFA wanting to know if they
get to say anything about some
of the so let's go back to page
one and let's see if the analyst
has anything to say about the
first
Want to number forty two.
And I go ahead Andrew if you
want to say something go ahead.
Thank you madam chair afternoon
madam chair members the
committee pleasure to be with
you are so far there's probably
just a couple of items I want to
bring your attention to that
Micaela has.
As.
At okay let's see we look at
item number
forty one that's on the webpage
I brought I that's three hundred
thousand dollars for DFA for
information technology
infrastructure upgrades at that
was discussed as a possible
section seven request but was
decided that it would be more
appropriate to be included here
that's all I have in the first
five pages would like to go on a
cover page six around the page.
Yeah but are you sure that's all
you have those of all the first
pages.
Yes the those are all relatively
small and and pretty close so
thank you for the opportunity I
appreciate it but I.
Okay so we're back now on page
six and
It's going to start on this one
and will ask growth now was to
say something.
Going.
Some
of the items I I'd like to the
the ten million for broadband
the the the seventy five million
dollar place keeper the end
okay.
Thanks L. I would just on page
six also point out that I and
number.
Now forty six said to GSD for
vehicles the executive
recommended here one point five
million general fund LFC
recommended one million dollars
from the falls right in
litigation settlements there's
some concerns that that is that
that the process for awarding
those funds is a competitive
grant process that was
established in that part of the
federal court case so there's
some concerns that it couldn't
just directly be appropriate
right like that it's also it's
also awarded on a reimbursement
basis so they basically have to
spend the money up front first
and then get it back so that's
why the executive start with the
general fund recommendation on
that one and on the the
secretary of state item number
fifty five for the special
election I just time in that you
know there was another lady
request as Micaela pointed out
in the second does support that
including that as well assuming
that that election does happen.
And the last one I point out on
this page is item fifty seven
the last one for the tourism
department to restart the
tourism economy twenty five
million dollars recommended by
the by the executive big
priority for the executive so I
just want to a point that out
and that's all I have on this
page thank you.
Okay.
You have any questions we have
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman on that
item fifty five I was just
thinking about timing and saying
to myself noses FY twenty one FY
twenty two.
Because the.
Clear to me exactly what fiscal
year that election might.
Is your comment from either the
analysts.
Madam chair representative
Anderson the appropriation would
be for could be in FY twenty one
or twenty two so.
Yeah that's sufficient thank you
very much.
Okay do we have anybody else so
that has any questions on these.
Okay let's go to the next page.
Thank you madam chair so thanks
pages page seven and the two big
items on this pager item number
sixty two which is for the J.
tip for the job training
incentive program at the
Economic Development Department
LFC recommended ten million the
executive was a little lower at
seven million.
In two lines below that is the
item for lead for the local
economic development act
you know the executive was that
thirty million dollars LFC put
seventeen point five million
dollars in the special
appropriations request so twelve
point five million dollar
difference however in LFC is
capital framework there's
another seven point five million
dollars for Lida included there
so in total between the capitol
NGA recommendations LFC was a
twenty five million dollars for
Lida.
The other one I'll note here is
this item number sixty six also
to economic development to fund
the outdoor recreation
division's investment in trails.
The executive was a little lower
at two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars but they
recommended general fund where's
the executive Committee LFC
recommended five hundred
thousand dollars from the use
conservation corps fund balance
which they've got some good fund
balances that to be
inappropriate use of that's all
I had for this page madam chair.
All right do we have anybody
else on this any questions.
Madam chair by me going thank
your item number sixty I just
want to point out and over sixty
five that's a million dollars
recommended by the executive
board the after equity grant
Fund program something you
established at all apartment to
couple years ago so let's just
checking some some money
background program that's why I.
Representative Anderson.
I thank you madam chairman madam
chairman I was gonna ask on item
fifty nine on the landing page
that we're
we're we're proposing of the
last part of that sentence in
that paragraph gives me some
concern is that kind of of
language of difficult to leave
it open ended like that or is it
more closed and then it appears.
Analysts.
So madam chair and and
Representative Anderson you're
right it leaves it open for use
for other purposes and that's
not necessarily something we.
You know always put on extension
languages since this is a little
rare David you might try and if
I get this wrong but I believe
it's because you know there's
other needs that
you know the tourism department
might need this for besides the
virgin galactic luncheon and
this allows them to do that go
ahead.
I would do this as a supplement
to the five million in the LFC
recommendation for marketing.
Okay I'm sorry recognizes that
the executive at a lot higher
amount the six hundred thousand
modestly extends the LFC
wrecked.
And if are not when a virgin
galactic makes their flight in a
month or two or three eight
successfully.
This this contemplates that the
not perhaps the entire six
hundred would be use of it is
that sort of the concept there.
What would let them prioritized
Representative Representative
Anderson.
Let me restate does that and may
be used for other purposes
meaning that they don't have to
spend any of it to support a
virgin galactic flight of later
this year that's yes
Representative okay thank you
then my other question was
relative to
I believe it goes like this I'm
looking at it I'm picking one of
hello I think it was number
sixty four and I say okay of
seventy five LFC seventeen five
thirty million exec thirty
million.
Are are we.
Going to recommend to the
committee that we go with the
seventeen I number.
In other words I'm I'm I'm I'm
trying to recall madam chairman
when we present this to the full
committee of and and what let's
say I like the LFC the number of
we're number of sixty four how
how does it come to the
committee as soon same sort of
thing on that language out there
are are we getting rid yes it's
recommended you recommend I see
but it on these financial
differences it's unclear to me
how that gets resolved by the
committee.
Mr Chairman are in a later point
your work group will take the
input from the executive that
we're receiving today as well as
you know in separate
conversations we've had with the
effort for for and you look at
adjustments to the in general
the adjustments are going to be
offered in the interest of
narrowing the difference between
the executive the LFC thank you
very much for that are very
that's the answer I was looking
for thank you madam chairman.
Okay do we have anybody else on
this page.
Okay let's go ahead and did you
have anything else you want to
say.
Not on this page madam chair
thank Kay is going under the
next one.
Thanks we're on page eight.
Although the couple of items
first this number seventy four
to EMNRD for the continue
remediation work at the brain
well the LFC recommended a total
of five million dollars of
funding three from the general
fund into from the corrective
action fund.
The executive has nothing here
these three mixed items for
EMNRD items number seventy five
to seventy seven these were all
executive adds which means that
agency didn't request them but
they were included in the
executive budget recommendations
which is why there's no
recommendation for LFC for
those.
Number eighty here to the state
engineer for interstate water
litigation costs is is
Representative Sweetser layered
alluded to earlier this is a
sister appropriation to the web
to the Attorney General for
water litigation but in the LFC
recommendation there is three
million dollars half each from
the general fund and the
consumer settlement fund the
executive recommended the full
agency requests for five million
two hundred seventy five
thousand dollars from the
general fund.
Those are the ones I'd like to
point out.
Did you have.
Yes madam chair thank you are
starting at the top I'll go with
item seventy three that's to the
livestock or in the secretary
this was kind of a late addition
the executive recommended a
million dollars to set up a
state inspection programs are
built out there in the
legislature to do that so those
bills were passed in this would
be tied to that to help us set
up a program
for ID number seventy four the
the brand well so basically the
executive does support what the
LFC has recommended your there's
just concern that that we want
to fill the gap is to cover the
rest and so they'll say I think
there's ongoing negotiations
that make sure that rest is
that's neat that closed out that
project are are provided with
that capital and possibly some
kind of local match
I just want to briefly touch on
a couple of the EMNRD adds that
Micaela referenced I number
seventy five two million or
great modernization projects
that's the basically fill out
last year there was a bill house
bill two thirty three that set
up a grant fund for grid
modernization project so that's
basically to kind of fill up
that fund an award some some
requests according to the
process that was that was a set
up in that piece of legislation
and the six hundred thousand
below that seventy six that's
for sure.
Roger guest I do projects that
was.
cloud based services in the
meeting progress on that issue
we need to okay excuse me under
David are not on mute David.
Representative small can you
help with that yeah I got a.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Andrew go hand thank you
Just a couple more item seventy
nine for the state engineer
seven hundred and fifty thousand
recommended by thank you for
your water plants that that's a
priority for the executive and
the last one year I Maggie our
talk about the litigation that's
been discussed all just point
out item number eighty one for
the state engineer two million
dollars for Pecos river
settlement agreement
implementation expense some
concerns are that the million
dollars recommended by the LFC
might not be enough to cover
expected costs back to
especially due to the ongoing
drought conditions so thank you
that's all I have on the state.
Okay any questions from the
committee on this page.
Okay this one next page.
Thank you madam chair six pages
page nine madam chairman if I
could jump back just for a
second I'm sorry I was on mute
the DFA amp was item number
seventy seven.
My question is are when you
support climate resiliency four
hundred and forty five thousand
dollars
that leaves me wondering how
much of support of for that
resiliency are you going to get
for a hundred and five thousand
dollars.
Representative Anderson that's I
don't have a the great answer
for you that on right now but
I'll I'll be happy to to find
some more information for you on
that on that item thank you.
Okay let me just ask is there of
any anybody in the attending
group with energy minerals and
natural resources.
Well we're waiting to go to
Representative Garcia for your
question.
Thank you madam chair I just
have one quick question on the
item number seventy four I'm not
quite awhile.
Of.
A point in time we don't know
would funding this problem and
all of a it's been on since I
arrived in office so just a
question of two worlds after
we're we're going with.
Just briefly Mr Abbey can you
make a few statements about
that.
Yes I can in about.
December the department received
an update on the cost estimate
to complete the burn well they
had received fifty three million
and determined that eighteen
million more was needed to
finish filling the cavities in
the forests in the bar in the
underground so that's where the
nine million state funds matched
by nine million local was
derived from that department
estimate that they've been it's
been hard to estimate in the
past it's still an estimate.
Sure just what David said the
you know the last year I
memorized it was also a
testament of were never ending
on these estimates of what point
do we stop estimating and get
down to the bottom of my
question.
Well I mean I I don't have an
answer for that they do you
Representative are David Abbey
have a better sense or Andrew on
that.
Madam chair R. Representative
Garcia I believe that the
estimates are about eighteen
seventeen eighteen million
dollars remaining for the
project and as far as I'm aware
it is is very all the that this
that this final final.
While expense.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair representative Anderson
I'll follow up on that real
quick if I could.
Mr Abbey of the fifty three
million already in plus eighteen
of seventy one million is that
the entire project cost in total
or do Sanchez Representative
somebody share.
That is the entire amount
representatives thank you very
much.
Okay anybody else Debbie Romero
is your hand up.
Madam chair stopped out thank
you very much it's not in
regards to that question is in
regard to agencies have been
having trouble getting on to
assume so we may not have
anybody from energy and minerals
to answer your previous question
okay no problem already madam
chair yes go ahead.
Representative Crowder
all of the bride will issue the
the DFA analyst mentioned that
there was also going to be some
capital outlay along with the
locals participation in in the
area.
Where where's the use
authorizing the capital outlay
and we know how much.
Madam chair representative
Crowder the LFC and capital
outlay recommendation had an
additional four million dollars
with some local matching
requirements and it.
So the LFC together and nine
million dollars between capital
and special appropriations.
Okay spend million would be in
addition to local participation.
Thank so Madam chair
representative Crowder that
wasn't included in the original
language that LFC recommended
that I believe it's been an up
discussions about that but it's
something that this committee
will will probably consider.
Okay madam chair just a final
question do we have an idea what
the total looks like
from DFA Micaela so that we can
kind of get a glimpse of the.
From the from all these findings
and the capital outlay and the
local what what we anticipating
the total to be for the prime
well.
The madam chair representative
Crowder depending on what.
You committee members decide the
appropriate level for local
match it'll change but the LFC
rack is nine million dollars I
am from on the LFC from the GAA
and foreign capital outlay
framework okay all right thank
you madam chair.
Did you have a question.
Madam chair I was just going to
say that the executive
recommendation does include all
funding to come from capital
outlay.
Okay it.
All right anybody else on this
page okay we don't let's go
ahead and move on.
I
will go ahead to page nine here
for months.
So just a couple of items to
point out here this first one
million item number eighty three
is extending some appropriations
made in two thousand nineteen
commission on the status of
women that have not been spent
down as an executive and so
let's see didn't have fit to
consider in the original
framework although they believe
staffer okay with that in the
future if that's something you'd
like to consider another couple
of executive ads were up for the
aging and long term services
department for item number
eighty six and eighty seven this
is known reverting language
which would make
any unexpended balances and the
aging network division and they
all don't protective services
division non reverting so if
they have any money left in the
bank at the end of
The end of twenty one and that
they would be able to keep that
you know.
Generally those those kind of
raise a flag for us staff to get
the agency a lot more
flexibility for funds but they
also you know give the
legislature less ability or a
consider any new agency budget
fully every year so those three
I wanted to point out on this
page.
Madam chair if I may just ought.
Thank you I on those items
eighty six the seven so those
were included just a A. L. very
kind of uncertain times for that
aging Department without the
pandemic everything going on
also there in the adult
protective services Division
string receive Medicaid funding
so those were put in just to
give the department more
flexibility in spending those
funds and to make sure that they
are able to continue to provide
those services possibly as
needed in in the next half
fiscal year as a like to for
adult day care and things like
that so that's what and that's
all.
Okay.
Representative Anderson and you
have something you wanted to.
Ask thank you madam chairman on
eighty six and eighty seven of
my question.
Both the LFC goes like this are
not reverting languages always a
trouble some and has this agency
ever received operating language
before in their budget.
Representative Anderson madam
chair I I don't know that off
the top of my head but I would
I'd be surprised if they did we
can double back and and follow
up with you on that.
Then on to the DFA analyst real
quick madam chair it's really I
I understand your your your
concern I understand the
important need but when I hear
the word pandemic come up for
part of the support for non
reverting of funding I think you
know what we can have everybody
in here on that will so would
you comment a bit more on why
you think aging and long term
services merits this non
reverting language.
Madam chair representative
Anderson I believe.
You know you're right that the
pandemic is create a lot of
needs for for many agencies I
think here they're just focused
on being able to make sure that
they continue to provide those
services for the the vulnerable
aging population have some left
over a year depending on how the
timing of everything they have
more funds available and in the
next year and we'll probably get
into this in terms of federal
funding and that's you know the
possible new federal funding
that's coming down that might be
coming down probably you know we
want to be able to work on any
federal funding that's coming in
and distribute that
appropriately but I think it's
just that's all very big
question mark right now and so I
think putting this and we'll
just give them a little bit more
certainty that they'll have
those those resources available.
Thank you very much for that
Madam chairman I I of just
cautioned that
explanation was insufficient for
me are see what the rest of the
committee thanks thank you madam
chair.
Right do we have anybody else
for this page nine.
Okay let's go ahead and move on.
Page ten.
Page ten all over know that
starting with item number ninety
three and then going all the way
down to ninety eight again this
was more non returning language
the department of health and for
the developmental disabilities
program you know for the
department of health items on
top of the you know the general
concerns about undergirding
language that you know we've
raised is that I I want to fly
that you'll see a ten million
dollar supplemental request for
the department of health in our
section six so you know this
means department of health is
saying they're going to money in
the bank likely at the end of
the fiscal year they want to be
able to keep it not referred it
but they also want to ten
million dollars supplemental on
top of that so again.
Raises a flag and that's that's
why it use language and it's not
recommended in the LFC.
Version of the GA and then also
all flag this very last item
here the department of
environment for comment
expenditures at executive
recommended one point seven
million dollars the LFC didn't
recommend any you know it is
this is something that we hope
that if there's need to the
department of environment that
they could ask for FEMA
reimbursement for this FEMA the
president just recently made an
executive order that FEMA
reimbursements for the state for
COVID would be a hundred percent
reimbursable and just seventy
five percent reimbursable
there's also likely some more
federal funding coming to the
state in the next MLS packaging
so there's a couple of different
potential federal avenues where
some of these needs may be next.
And that's all I had for this
page.
Thanks madam chair I would just
quickly point out on the on the
O. H. items I think the most
important one is probably
considered a developmental
disability support program
that's a language that side of
ninety seven and on the
environment one I would just
point out that these requests
were made and
for the reimbursement thing was
that that that came down and and
when that sort of yeah when the
current last year as I guess I
should say are really funding
was set to expire on December
thirty first and this would have
been easier for expenditures
were now through FY twenty two
that they're requesting so
that's why that the executive
recommended that to make sure
that Environment Department it's
yours was played a pretty large
wall is that set up we're not
funding through throughout my
twenty two.
Thank you.
Debbie did you have your hand
up.
Thank you madam chair thank you
very much so for the Department
Barnett I think it's really key
to to point out that the agency
on a reimbursement basis and so
while they may they have to
submit to FEMA and it's not a
quick process number one number
two is it's really limited on
the eligible things that they
will reimburse on so there's no
guarantees that everything that
is submitted will be reimbursed
so I just that's the only thing
I need to point out as far as
being this concert thank you
madam chair what number is that
again now that you guys are
racing out with female as a
potential.
Madam chair item number a
hundred okay.
Madam.
Representative small thank you
madam chair this Fisher it for
item number one hundred the
executive request was that
almost one point seven million I
thought there was a
recommendation of five hundred
thousand is that not accurate it
was partially recommended.
Madam chair representative small
since we're just going over what
was included in the LFC version
of the recommendation and the
executive.
Okay got it thank you very much.
Madam chair Representative.
Might make a note that if we do
go back and look at this line
item again it is one of the few
that does have the non regard
language in the front of it we
need to keep an eye on that.
All right do we have anybody
else on that page.
Okay.
Continue on.
Thank you madam chair page
eleven is our next page the only
two items on here the first is
item number one hundred and
three for drinking water
sampling
the LFC recommended six hundred
thousand the executive one point
two million dollars but I did
want to note that there is four
hundred thousand dollars in the
department of environment
basically for the same purpose.
I'm also gonna just just quickly
flag number one of six to
Veterans Services they requested
hundred fifty thousand dollars
for computers which executive
recommended the LFC to not.
Those are my only two on that
page madam chair Fandor has any
thanks I don't have anything on
the state.
The committee.
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman I was
gonna ask on I have one hundred
and one of one no one has
language of that is of.
I'm clear to me why the seven
hundred thousand dollars looks
like it's going to roll to the
next year for personal services
employee you know it did they
not hire the employees in this
pose a.
Recurring General Fund item and
we're gonna let it roll to next
year's that it did I say that
correctly LFC analysts.
Representative Anderson that's
correct I've got in my notes
here that
Environment was able to spend
about four hundred thousand of
that seven hundred thousand you
know hiring was slow to the
pandemic there was a hiring
freeze for awhile so that's
likely why they weren't able to
spend their whole appropriation
one extended for another year.
Thank you for that of.
I guess my let follow up to the
DFA it would be
There are other agencies that
suffer that same pandemic unable
to hire let's roll it to the
next year or or was the
department of our environment
unique in that.
Madam chair representative
Anderson this appropriation from
last year was basically at given
to the Department as in lieu of
a more of an increase in their
based budgets last year the
doctor says special
appropriation that was strictly
limited it was if the language
that for personal services and
benefits and then of course
after that everything happened
that make it would describe the
hiring freeze that so they
couldn't quite use all of that
so this would just are re
authorized so it's kind of a
special case requirements are.
Thank you very much for that
answer thank you madam chairman.
The next the next page.
Share page twelve this.
And all of the above items are
just language again extending
appropriations this item number
one twelve is interesting
it's to cover benefits
department of public safety to
pair up.
And is that there was a
transition of a motor
transportation officers from the
regular state employees
retirement plan to the enhanced
A police officer retirement plan
but when that happened
DPS didn't pay the extra amount
to pair that was owed to them
for moving us folks to that
higher benefit plan
and the original crest from the
agency was up five point seven
million dollars that you see
from the executive after kind of
further conversations between
our analysts and GPS thing we've
come down to a more accurate
number of two point six million
dollars to cover the amount from
the DPS is to pair up.
In these last two items
you know a big difference for
vehicles for department public
safety thank you to recommended
seven point six million dollars
LFC nothing however there is two
million dollars in GPS's bases
for **** in their section for
their OpBud for the heckles.
This last item for cameras body
cameras things like that for
department of public safety at
the LFC didn't recommend this
because it it really is a
recurring costs you know these
things have shelf life cell we
really like to see that is
funded in the OpBud rather than
as a special appropriation
that's all I have for this page
Andrew.
Our madam chair thank you I have
I don't have anything else on
this page.
The committee Representative
Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair I guess
I'm a little still worried about
one twelve there's I understand
what Micaela said about getting
closer to a number but that's
they're still of the distinction
in those numbers so I just want
to make sure that we are going
to be able to cover what is
owed.
Anybody else.
So madam chair standard that if
you want to chime in but I think
I think we're all on the same
page about that the two point
six million dollars now being
kind of the correct number is
that right yes I believe that's
correct Micaela that we kind of
come together on that number
being accurate.
Thank you that was the insurance
I was looking for thank you
madam chair.
All right let's go to the next
page.
Thank you madam chair next page
thirteen.
All know on this one we've got
an item here number one twenty
one up for hazard pay for the
department of public safety this
was an executive add after the
LFC budget recommendation came
out for two point three million
dollars.
And then after you know I just
wanna know here starting at item
one twenty five and then going
on almost to the end of that
section five we have all of our
PED items you'll just see a lot
of different kinds of
recommendations that are coming
from the LFC and from the
executive about how to
especially spend a lot of the
public education reform Fund I
know HSC hasn't had their public
school support hearing yet so I
don't really want to go through
all of the details here but just
know that they're here for
consideration of the members.
What I want to do is I want to
hold off on those PED we have
and have the hearing so I'm
going to ask that we not get
into any detail on the also go
ahead secretary Romero.
You're on mute.
Thank you madam chair I want to
go back up to one twenty one and
that was in that another item on
the other a page I think it was
run by my department I forgot to
mention one of the things that
the that we've done is we've
proposed language to the
legislature that would allow DFA
duplex ability that in the event
that we get out there money that
that that that comment might
become additional cares Act
money comes through that we
could replace that money with
some of the General Fund many I
think it's real important to me
to note that hazard pay is one
of these areas that we're we're
running short on we don't have
any place or anywhere that we
can pay for this and so
consideration would be you know
we're asking for consideration
for has to pay for TPS because.
They need it but secondly we're
hoping that with the cares Act
money that we can use that money
instead of this money and and
the language hopefully you'll
adopt the language and that'll
give us the flexibility we need.
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman of to
the secretary of I I understood
your your point and and
no disagreement with that but I
I did want to clarify of the
point of Secretary on the work
when we talk about replacing
a general fund money for cares
money for this important purpose
there's replaced maybe in your
mind that the two point three
million dollars remains in the
department of public safety
budget or it would the carece
money for two point three
million dollars would cancel out
of the that two point three
general fund expenditure.
Madam chair representative I
understand I would say the
latter that that would be that
that the weight the approach
that we would take that if we do
receive the federal funds that
it would actually cancel out the
two point three so we wouldn't
transfer so all of these are
actually done transferred
through an allotment there's
different process for getting of
these funds to agencies so we
can hold this until we know
whether or not we have the
federal funds we wouldn't we
wouldn't distribute it to the
agencies.
Thank you at I think of that
language of is certainly needed
and
I understand your point of my
only conclusion is.
When we talk you know it it's so
clearly a COVID of cost that it
just strikes me it must be
clears as sunrise that that
that's where that cost should be
covered in the not the general
fund thank you madam chairman.
Thank you very much we have
anybody also from the committee
that wants to ask a question
about this page.
All right let's move on.
Thank you madam chair so moving
on to page fourteen.
A lot of items for the PED that
you all are discussed more next
week I will note this item
number one forty two on this
page to the higher ed for
teacher prep four ability
scholarships the executive
recommended two point two
million of the LFC doesn't have
any recommendation here in
section five however you'll see
in a little bit that we did
include twenty million dollars
as a fund transfer into this
fund so that.
I read could up the amount of
scholarships that are paid out
every year from this.
Scholarship fund that's the only
one I wanted to the stage.
Andrew.
Our I'm good thanks Micaela.
We go to the committee is there
anybody that has a COVID.
Madam chairman.
on item forty three.
It's just a quick question of of
if we Fund.
Up to a higher education of
million dollars for scholarships
your own teacher program up did
those kids get a scholarship for
that year of school or is that
million dollars extend to a
longer period of time other than
one school year LFC.
Defer to Charles but my
understanding is that's just a
one year program.
More funding for that program.
That's what I would have thought
what if there's any difference
speak up in that's all I had
madam chairman.
Anybody else.
Okay let's go to the next page.
Thank you madam chair in the
next page we get to the end of
section five our special
appropriation section just other
public school support item and
this state in here I'll just
note is the transfer for the
computer systems enhancement
fund this is the general fund
that will portion they'll go to
fund section seven ninety
projects.
LFC India and DFA are pretty
close on that a couple couple
million part and we are just a
little bit ago with the I. T.
subgroup so if it's okay with
you we can go ahead and move to
section six which is
supplementals and deficiencies.
Okay and you get anything are
you good madam chair thank you
okay let's go to the next go
ahead all right so that starting
again supplementals and
deficiencies first chair and FY
twenty one in prior years the
only one on that on this page is
this item one fifty add to the
second judicial court the
executive recommended three
hundred and forty four thousand
dollars LFC did not and mostly
because that court has some
vacant judgeships that we
believe they can cover this cost
with some of their vacancy
savings.
Okay.
I'm gonna say thank you.
Well madam chairman I left my
hand up I'm sorry okay anybody
else.
Okay let's go to the next one.
Thank you madam chair page
sixteen no.
Two items for me to note on this
page the first one is this item
one fifty nine to the General
Services Department for a
projected shortfall in the
employee group health benefits
funding can sedate Executive
recommended thirteen point five
million dollars to the general
fund for this and the LESC
didn't recommend any here's some
background on this unit GSD had
the same shortfall last year
that the legislature helped lead
with some supplemental funding
with the expectation that they
were going to raise the rates
that they charge to say local
employees to help you know
prevent a similar shortfall this
year I.
Those rates that right right
didn't happen because of the
pandemic the mother was a
decision that
executive did one doctor pay
during the COVID especially
since a lot of the raises were
rescinded during the special
section special session so the
shortfall remains policy hasn't
come in anything or has it
recommended anything here for a
couple of reasons one is that
you know of a good chunk of the
shortfall about thirty percent
is due to.
you know shortfall that covers
local employees as well as state
employees there's no you know
requirement for you know a local
contribution to help plug up the
shortfall in the is the second
thing is that this covers all
state employees but not all
state employees are their
salaries are funded at general
fund is a lot of places like
game and fish for all their
employees are funded through
other state funds but the
proposed remedy here is to plug
that hole with totally general
funds.
so it's you know essentially
using general fund to subsidize
local governments and non
General Fund agencies and
employees so that's that's the
background on that one I also
want to note this very last item
here to the state fair
LFC recommended two million and
the executive six point five
million for shortfalls you know
there is no fair this year
there's no activities where the
fair kind of you know and
Revenue to coverage operations
but it has been very active
because most of you know is that
COVID testing and vaccination
sites so you know we we hope
that again at least some of this
shortfall these use needs would
be eligible for coverage by FEMA
reimbursement or by some federal
support that's hopefully coming
to the statement extending this
package so those the two items I
wanted to highlight on this
page.
Thank you madam chair if I may.
Just just a couple on this item
number so going back to that
item one fifty nine.
so one just one concern about is
as Micaela mention this does
also cover all local governments
and local localities have
experienced a lot of economic
hardships that due to the
pandemic everything's those so
there's concern about impacting
them as as well
I'm one sixty I wondered briefly
point out for R. O. T. services
to cover a shortfall in about
four I I think different boards
and commissions funds and the
LFC covered this without all
from the mortgage regulatory
fund and there there's some
legal concern about the you know
that that fund being dedicated
strictly to that purpose and
whether it can be used to
basically plug the holes up in
unrelated funds so that some one
concern there and then the last
one for the state fair shortfall
item one sixty two
Again that just to point out
that you know the the the this
Corona virus really provide
money that New Mexico receive
last year could not be used for
straight Revenue replacements
such as it was it affected by
the fair not happening so you
know it remains to be seen what
will happen in the future really
packages but that's something
silly that we want to keep an
eye on and make sure that they
they are they are you know kept
whole basically so that's all I
have on this page thank you.
Madam chair I think you might be
needed.
Representative
secretary Romero go ahead hi
chair thank you very much and
and just I think I'm just add a
little bit too item one fifty
nine I've been told of that
historically that the health
plan has been subsidized by
local governments that you know
that that the utilization seems
to be higher in in the urban
areas and and not so high in the
rural areas and so that's
another reason that we think
that it is it makes sense to you
general fund I think
that's just something that I
found very interesting and then
for New Mexico state fair this
is another one if right now the
language that that I've seen
coming out of Congress is that
it's going to allow the funding
to be used tobacco revenue and
so we're hoping that if it
passes that we can use the cares
Act money to backfill say there
are some of the other enterprise
agencies that we have that lost
revenue but until then we just
need to be able to help them get
through this downturn thank you
madam chair.
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chair up item
one fifty eight item one fifty
eight talks about shortfalls in
the personal services that taxed
Rav.
My question to anyone it goes
something like this.
All of a million two hundred
fifty thousand dollars in
shortfall in personal services
up how does HSD of that has such
a high vacancy rate in order to
achieve shortfalls in personal
services of that size.
So.
Madam chair representative
Anderson I don't know from
renewable says better
information I do know that
it's here that TRD had
originally budgeted for cincy
Revenue that just didn't
materialize which is the eighty
you know because for that
shortfalls that they have here
and by the LFC recommended it as
well you know for the body else
wants to chime in from I thought
I'd I'd say the tax secretary
was on issues issues issues
still there in the audience.
Secretary Schardin Clark are
you.
Okay let's keep going then
Representative Anderson you
still have before thank you
madam chairman I think that
explanation of answered my
question of that is that the
shortfall was driven by the
revenue shortfall and I think
I'll leave it there thank you
madam chairman.
Madam chair this is secretary.
Chair I had to step away for a
little while but I'm here.
Okay do you actually hear the
question I apologize it did not
okay Representative Anderson
thank you up item one fifty
eight of item one fifty eight
talks about a tax revenue
shortfall of one million two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
up in personal services and.
Was of.
With an agency was such a high
vacancy regrettably but none the
less I know you're working on
that it was sort of well how do
you come up with a shortfall in
personal services of a million
two hundred fifty thousand
dollars and if you want to take
a swing at it was reported that
it was fee revenue
all driven secretary thank you
thank you so much and I
apologize for having have you
repeat that question madam chair
representative Anderson there
was an error in the way taxed
reps FY twenty one budget was
was put in place FY twenty
budget was correct and in FY
twenty one we no longer have
this administrative fee revenue
coming to the Department from
the distribution of G. R. T.
that we make to local
governments there was a ten year
period where we were we're
receiving a portion of that and
we're building up a budget and
that money in other state funds
the error occurred in FY twenty
one and that the language went
away so that the revenue is no
longer that other state funds
revenue is no longer coming to
us but our budget reflects that
it is and so that revenue and
other state funds what
materialized and we weren't back
filled the general fund so we
there was over five million
dollars in other state funds
revenue that won't be coming to
us that was depended on in our
budget we made all the cuts we
can make and we reduced from an
over five million dollar budget
problem to about a two point two
five million dollar problem
then from the two point two five
million dollar shortfall we were
able to take care one million of
it from transferring out of fund
balance but we're left with a
one point two five million
dollar shortfall.
And.
Cancers that thank you thank you
very much for that excellent
answer and I wish you good luck
going forward and I know the
local governments are quite
thrilled not to be paying that
fee anymore thank you Mr
chairman thank you members.
Okay is there anybody else on
this page.
Okay let's go to the next one
okay madam chair this is our our
last page of of section six
although
okay but we also have some fun
transferred this to go out over
after this but for this page
page seventeen only a couple of
items here is item number one
sixty four and one sixty seven
and the state department of
health for both executive adds
on this ten million dollars
supplemental for the permanent
health of COVID was was the one
I mentioned and in concert with
you know the non returning
language the department of
health asked for.
Number one seventy one here the
big difference here at thirty
eight point eight million
dollars for potential impact Aid
liabilities in fiscal year
twenty one one seventy two is
essentially the same thing just
for fiscal year twenty twenty
the reason LESC didn't recommend
the fiscal year twenty one item
for thirty eight million is that
the feds have indeed allowed New
Mexico to go forth is normal
with crediting impact aid for FY
twenty one so that one's not
necessarily needed that's a
different story for fiscal year
twenty on one seventy two and
the difference between the two
recommendations the fifty nine
point nine sixty million dollars
is the whole impacted liability
for that year however in the
special session you can add
legislature went ahead and
transferred you know about
Over thirty million dollars of
that so this twenty million
point nine that the LFC
recommended is the difference
between what's existing in the
state support and and the total
the impact aid liability for
that year.
And that's all I have on this
page under do you have anything.
Thanks Micaela just briefly
going back to item one sixty
seven that the ten million
dollar Department of Health
shortfall so this is something
that I believe does have to do
primarily with revenue
shortfalls particularly
disabilities program so doesn't
really tight much they're not
reversion language items
discussed passion section I and
I believe you're right years on
the call if the committee would
like to ask them any questions
thank you.
Are they on the call.
Dr money could you advise who
who are who we could be looking
for two of.
well I know our he was very best
Densmore's on I think she
separate your wages are very.
Well it's a Jason Cornwell.
Okay we're we're listening I
mean it would you like to make a
comment.
Yes madam chair I'd like to make
a comment can you hear me yes we
can thank you madam chair
members of the committee as
Mister miner just Representative
yes the ten million dollars.
Supplemental that we're seeking
is in the facilities program
other facilities are running a
deficit largely due to decreased
US Census since the pandemic hit
for example
hospitals were no longer allowed
to do elective surgery so the
New Mexico we have center in
Roswell there census fell off
the map in terms of people
seeking short term rehab
a lot of a person's were not
seeking medicated assisted
treatment so our services like
turquoise lodge suffered as a
result and movement across the
long term care field
dramatically slowed as agency as
our facilities all around the
state slow their intake process
is so that people could
quarantine safely so the
deficits come no united because
of those reasons coupled with
increased overtime costs
increased contract costs to to
meet your ratios along with
increased PPE cost really put us
in a bind come and so the
nonrecurring language that we're
requesting with the exception of
DSD what will not
will not be able to close the it
won't be able to signify
sufficiently offset deficit that
we're predicting in facilities
we want to be able to have that
flexibility to use every
available dollar to make the HSD
hopes arms thank you madam chair
and all members of the
committee.
Representative Anderson your
hand is up is that you have a
question on this yes I do first
of all madam chairman it's it's
my general understanding that we
won't be addressing one seventy
one of one seventy two for the
reasons you see it previously
about the that's correct okay
and I'm just going to go into
talking by could about the
gentleman who just spoke on one
sixty seven.
And the I have no doubt that
that those
those added costs and loss of
revenue of were very real but
they did seem to meet up based
on the explanation I heard to be
very COVID nineteen driven and
my question is again well with
all of this federal money that
came to New Mexico to help us
get through this pandemic crisis
why does this ten million dollar
cost of apply to that and
secondly to the same in the.
Of the the term non reverting
language was used and that's not
reflected in one sixty seven at
least in the presentation I have
two questions please.
madam chair and Representative
Anderson the the non reverting
language
is on a different page and I was
speaking as representing the O.
H. as a whole we would seek the
not reverting language and up
primarily for program areas.
Excuse me happening Elgin
response D. H. II DDS di and the
administration HSD.
DDS do we will most likely have
a significant fund balance but I
believe we're also seeking bar
language to use some of that to
offset any agency deficit as we
don
as a at the end of the special
session DSDS had that not
reverting language for number of
years not only does it give D.
O. H. the ability to keep
themselves whole but it also
helps that division allocate
people without interruption year
over year
to speak to the first question
about federal dollars
backfilling loss of revenue we
certainly can explore that Sir
all in conjunction with DFA I
don't have particulars on that
but we can get back with you and
provide more service to answer
tomorrow.
Thank you for that answer on
number two and that was really
the one I was honing in on and
you may have missed a previous
conversation where we talked
about developing language that
of.
As we go forward and and time is
running out for House Bill to
getting out of the house of that
there would be language that
would of cover the concept that
that whatever we do if federal
money were to be available and
cover that that money would not
come out of the General Fund if
if I stated it correctly so
thank you very much for your
answers on number one and number
two madam chairman I'm done.
Okay let's go to secretary
Romero.
Chair just to to circle back on
the ten million for you know
again the previous cares Act
money that we receive didn't
allow us to use it did allow
that used to be for back to back
fill revenue and so there's
there were no opportunities to
use in your backyard the new
money it does have language in
the bill currently that will
allow us to do that so at the
time that we submitted this
recommendation executive
recommendation there was no
can't that that was going to be
included as automatic back where
you're in just the opposite
there was no appetite to allow
it to be used for two point
tobacco revenue that's changed
so we have options.
Thank.
She I'm done.
Thank you madam chair so fair
all the members I'm gonna skip
ahead to page twenty four what
we're skipping over is the
section seven the I. T. section
that a different work just went
over but on.
He age twenty four.
Item number two twenty five here
I'm not going to go through
every one of these I just want
to note that this is that fund
transfer section that I
mentioned earlier that the LFC
recommended rather than specials
some you know pretty big
transfers of money from the
general fund to certain things
like three hundred thousand
three hundred thousand three
million dollars excuse me to the
unemployment trust fund you know
contingent on no federal money
coming through for that same
purpose
some money to the to the lower
payment funded teacher proposed
Ford ability scholarship fund.
Sorry I skipped over these items
number two twenty three and two
twenty four on page twenty four
easier to us special
transportation appropriations
for roads they're both as part
of transportation a hundred or
fifty million for us state roads
under million dollars for local
roads these are all things that
the LESC did that we're LFC ads
not in the executive budget the
very last page here we've got a
a sum up of all the items this
first one is section five and
six special supplementals
missions is all together.
Perturbations from transfers and
a total transfer this is where I
got that eight hundred five
million dollars and I mentioned
at the beginning of the
presentation and that's all I
have madam chair.
Andrew.
Thank you I have no further
comments at this time.
Okay.
The committee.
All
is Richard Jones staff staff
approved
I.
From GPS sizes hand up the
Senate and the.
I am on a few.
Okay I'll bring in the.
Okay
I don't see him.
Madam chair can you can you hear
me thank you now I see it okay I
can hear you go head all right
thank you ma'am and whoever I
don't know who that was I've
been having problems getting on
this is three o'clock but we had
a it's a mess that's all I can
say it's mass okay then on the
lips whoever just saw my hand up
I appreciate.
Okay well he's in the back of
the committee rooms are run back
there but go ahead I have as
early then we'll get.
I don't know if we can go back
up to ours but there's a few
things that I want to discuss on
there and I'm sorry of the okay
well line are you talking about
I think ours was about six pages
back I know but you know the
line number.
Can you help me on that yeah let
me.
Do you know what it was for in
particular Mr Johnson Kayla
assume its cars cars no Sir no
not that one Mr Abbey it was a I
just touch base on a few of
those if if I may.
Madam chair we've got a
department of public safety
specials starting on item one
twenty two on page thirteen
we've got although that there
just got hazard pay for two
point three million dollars
maybe that's it yeah so there.
Madam chair members of the
committee there was there was a
couple on there the first one
being the P. E. R. A. of due to
our merger I think I was on the
previous page
yes and it was indicated.
Madam chair it was indicated
that in two thousand fifteen DPS
stop paying that and and I don't
blame anybody for saying that
this this is very convoluted and
we would be here till two
o'clock in the morning if if we
anticipate there but it was the
merger from two thousand fifteen
the most of you remember and it
wasn't the DPS stop paying it
that was that was what the bill
said
so we we follow that and and
some into kind of retro pay are
put into the folks and the S. ID
folks into the state police
retirement of it's the cost of
the the fifties or the five
point seven million that you're
seeing.
We've got that worked out pretty
good I know Representative
Sweetser brought that issue up
so did you go go ahead go on to
your next item yes ma'am I just
the the other one was the of the
hazard pay reimbursement and and
the vehicles are obviously a big
deal and I I do know that the
secretary Romero is working with
us on the vehicle piece and that
and that has pay piece again is
very convoluted of due to all
the situations that were brought
to brought forth during the
COVID so those ones like we have
you know several talking points
on if this is the time to do
that or if you'd rather wait to
another to another meeting but
no I I'll tell you on this
hazard page thing I'm going to
help we're going to talk about
this in general when it comes to
federal funds coming into the
state I think the general
feeling about this is that at
least from the committee's
perspective is all this comment
hazard plate Hey work was done
by any of the departments
including your own you know
needs to be paid for because
that's what the federal money is
for you know also made it come
in and reimbursed we understand
that some of that can happen but
my question is is in and we
recognize that it wasn't allowed
the first time
we recognize that we're gonna
have to put some general fund
into it so we're we're pretty
familiar with that issue yes but
my questions you know before we
end today are going to be more
about future federal money that
we anticipate coming in.
John that we know what the
situation is and we know that
there was a need for hazard pay
money yes ma'am if I just put it
madam chair and members the
committee I did just leave on
one piece you are a bill is the
most important to us at and that
appropriation okay.
I think that one straightened
out at least
Thank our work group recognizes
that is that one of the number
one issues.
Thank you so much ma'am members
of all right thank you Sir
already
I need to ask is there any other
hands up that I can't see.
That was the only one okay.
Okay.
What I want to do because there
is I mean this gets to being
almost overwhelming because
we've got some things that are
eligible for federal money and
some things that weren't I
wanted to ask the secretary
Romero couple of things just so
I have a grip on this
we were talking about the Brian
well you had mentioned that the
executive recommendation was to
come out of capital outlay.
Madam chair that's correct okay
so so my question is when will
we be able to get your capital
outlay recommendations across
the board I mean just so we know
you know what we're what we're
gonna be looking at.
So madam chair we make progress
we got at least the re
authorization list into the
council service today
I have AT noted to the
leadership team to ask them when
we can finalize capital so I am
working on it I'm trying to get
it to you as quickly as
possible.
You can see why this is going to
be this is gonna come up as an
issue for us because you know we
don't know what your what your
capital request you're going to
be out.
The other
issue I wanted to ask you
secretary Romero
do you know how much more in
federal funds were expecting to
come into the state of New
Mexico and will your office be
working with the legislators in
terms of deciding how to spend
that money I know I don't I
don't want to have a a rehash of
what happened in one of our
special sessions we do one thing
and then you all do something
different I'm hoping that would
be able to work together do you
have a sense of how much would
be coming into the state and is
to do anticipate working with
us.
So madam chair
I have a break down and I will
get it and I will send it to the
committee so that you'll see the
discussions that are going on it
looks like this time around the
money is going to be coming to
the state and local governments
and so it's not just coming all
to the state so there are
opportunities for local
governments to be able to
identify their needs and and
again there's language right now
proposed language that will
allow to be used to backfill
revenue
but anything that we that that
does come to the state we're
always interested in working
with the Legislature I'm
identifying the needs.
Okay so what we're talking about
proposed back bill that's a good
that's really good and I think
that's probably what's got a lot
of our cabinet secretaries
worried to death is because
they're asking for general fund
and I'm sure it's because they
have to spend money
you know their general fund on
things that they hadn't
anticipated due to the COVID
business.
The other.
Question I had and this is for
our staff.
I I want to clearly understand
item one hundred again
We're it's the department of
environment and they put out.
Expenditures related to comment.
A COVID through the public
health emergency.
And they're asking for funds not
to revert.
Now I can I I need to understand
that because it sounds like
that's a pretty big deal for the
department.
What's what's that.
Embodied remind me about that.
So madam chair and I don't know
if.
But you know this is this is a
special appropriation they're
asking for it in you know
starting now and in through
fiscal year twenty to so these
are you know upcoming costs that
they're expecting be on their
budget and then thank you they
want them and they want them for
more than a year is is what that
non reversion language is
indicating.
Okay.
It's the secretary on.
Madam chair not sure of the
secretaries on I I was that it
would this is the general
section I would be for the
remainder FY twenty one and FY
twenty two and then just make it
what's that.
It would not if if this language
were in the in the appropriation
would not revert at the end of
FY twenty two select user for
years okay.
That's what we needed to know on
that
I know I know that there are but
I just looked at the attendee
list we've had several other
cabinet secretaries on today we
we did to ask them to come on
because we didn't have any
questions but
I'm going to ask the committee
one more time if you've got any
questions we don't need to talk
about the head piece yet be any
that because we haven't have
that work group meeting.
Or this I. T. that just happened
an hour ago so where we don't
have all that coming in yet so
if we could answer any other
issues okay just you
representative Garcia Sanders up
go ahead.
Thank you madam chairs which
were a signature Romero Chalon.
Yes yes.
Secretary Romero Representative
chairman love from glass
question of all the gears Act
money the first round of it she
also mentioned we need to work
together a new shared that
December all madam chair the
cares Act money will come to the
state and local government.
My question is is this money
coming to local government going
to be based on the first go
around some more communities are
to get anything opted the hope
is that based on what they got
the last time you actually
amount.
So madam chair Representative
Garcia actually the the the
Congress is determining how that
money will be distributed and it
will be distributed to
communities I believe I read
fifty thousand or or larger and
it's based on a formula that
they developed not that that the
state of New Mexico not that DFA
at your the executive is
developing so it's again you'll
see that in the information that
I sent out and and this is
proposed that hasn't been
elected we don't have a final
bill yet so this is what we're
what one of the recommendations
is in the current bill.
Thank you madam secretary thank
you madam chair.
Okay well if it's for
communities are fifty thousand
in greater will the state be
making accommodation for the
smaller communities or where are
they gonna have to go through
there county.
So madam chair you know I think
that's something we definitely
need to discuss you know we
don't have it yet we're open to
any kind of suggestions we know
what worked last time what
didn't work and so we're it's a
new day you money let's figure
out how we can best use that.
Yeah.
Degree day was gonna end up
happening everybody this fifty
thousand and smaller it's gonna
be COVID and knocking on the New
Mexico legislature store you
know when this comes through or
to the governor store because
they're not they're gonna still
have the same concerns they have
when they applied to your last
process in June.
So that that's not gonna change
and then if it's under the
county there's always a
correction between counties and
small all governments so I want
to make sure that we don't lose
sight at probably gonna have to
do some kind of set aside or
something with those smaller the
smaller governments.
Okay what about the rest of the
workgroup we have anybody else.
This is a lot of information to.
Wallow.
And we still have.
We're not we're not doing bars
today right
okay good right because that's
gonna take some time but anyway
Representative small because we
need to keep the ball rolling.
Thank you very much.
Go ahead thank you very much
madam chair I would move the
staff recommendation for the
special appropriation
supplementals and deficiencies.
And that would be excluding I.
T. and public education correct
yes ma'am excluding IT and
excluding the public education
okay I need a second I'm not
from the workgroup also the
manager.
Okay now any opposition.
Any opposition on this so this
at least a chunk of this is
going to be prepared for the
full committee and then we'll be
looking at the other sections as
we have the hearings that I know
I just met so that shouldn't
take too long for them.
Okay anything else on today's
agenda.
I don't see anything else are we
are we good.
Okay well thank you everybody
and thank you secretary Romero
I'm sorry I
didn't does I didn't snap I
always see Andrew is on our side
so I mean on the legislative
side so I didn't snap to it so I
want to apologize we always want
your analyst to participate with
us he's been a good long time
analyst so we sure appreciate
it.
Thank you thank you okay I see
Phelps your hand is not you have
a comment before we close Madam
chair system information about
tomorrow start time on the
Appropriations Committee okay we
don't have thank you we don't
have a committee meeting
tomorrow because we've been up
for a floor session.
So that means that everything
that we thought we were going to
do tomorrow is going to be moved
to one day so Tuesday HSC will
not be meeting will meet
Wednesday with public education
and then Thursday will be our
big committee reports coming in
including the revenue projection
I believe the school staff and
on Thursday.
Thank you madam chair right
thanks a lot I want to thank
everybody today and we'll see
you soon.
Thank you.
See for.
