out this document in your packet
it's called the public education
highlights and accomplishments.
I will not go through all of
this but I really wanted you to
have a document that highlights
some of the great
accomplishments in investments
that our state legislature and
governor has made some of the
things like the twenty five
production percent reduction in
teacher vacancies which can be
attributed to things like our
increase in salaries are efforts
to improve our licensure process
and to bring in more more
educators.
Also our efforts around micro
credential courses we've seen
our first cohort of six hundred
and eighty one teachers that
have moved through the system.
This system allows them to not
only improve their educational
practice but also to increase in
salary.
We've also invested in national
board certification for
educators which has a direct
positive impact on student
outcomes.
We've seeing three hundred and
fifty nine teacher residencies
be invested in these residents
spend a full school year
teaching side by side with
master teachers this is also
included three hundred and
seventy one mentor teachers as
well as principles to support
this effort.
We have rate our student
teachers as they work through
their pre service practice as I
mentioned we've invested in
letters the language essentials
for teachers of reading and
spelling this is the edges the
reading program that I mentioned
has been implemented in
Mississippi.
we've increased our investments
in career technical education
serving many more students year
after year.
We've had strong investments in
our learning initiatives for
students including free tutoring
programs
one focused at for for math for
algebra one for eight through
twelfth grades as well as pre K.
through eighth grade tutoring
and our title one schools.
We've also invested in our
indigenous language and that.
Please ensure they continue
okay.
We've invested in our native
language teachers and funding
salary parity for the five
twenty certificate holders as
well as tripling investments in
our Indian Indian education fund
we've invested in things like
open books which offered
financial transparency for our
schools so that we can see how
funding is being spent in our
classrooms.
We've expanded community schools
to sixty eight schools and
without the executive budget
planted extent expand to one
hundred.
We've also invested in our much
needed behavioral health
supports which are critical for
our supporting our students
learning and social emotional
needs we've also done this
through federal grants that have
allowed us to also grow our
behavioral health workforce this
is also supported by our effort
to expand Medicaid funded
services in schools for all
students who are Medicaid
eligible to make sure that they
have access to health including
behavioral health services on
campus we've expanded our
digital resources and I'll stop
there so I just really wanted
you to have a summary of some of
our.
Our accomplishments so now I'd
like to take you to this
document.
Fund slide to just provide some
additional details.
Funds are.
Thanks for the phone for a for
that one month.
It was it was not on this does
not appear that it was any of us
but please please.
I was trying to.
Trying to be.
No I think that please continue
Mr Kate thank you Mr chair I
appreciate that very much.
Slides to provide a bit more
detail and the difference
between the two budgets Simon
and answer both covered it but
just wanted to provide you a
little bit more information
specifically about to the I. T.
projects so I I I do projects
that are on track to be
completed on time they include
the renewable project which is a
longitudinal student and
educator data collection project
this data will feed into our
larger cradle to career
longitudinal data system we have
a data system that's focused on
educator prepped and tracking
those educators from higher read
and beyond our system to support
our grants management this is
really important as we get our
money out to the schools quickly
again I mentioned open books
earlier about financial
transparency as well as our
business data visualization data
dashboards.
So on to the next page this I
just highlights a bit more about
our request for
for positions so the department
currently has three hundred and
fifty four positions.
Of which two hundred and eighty
five are funded.
we have.
Are funded positions we only
have eleven vacant positions we
have really done a good job in
this department and feeling are
funded positions and I just
really want to highlight that.
we have a four percent vacancy
rate of those funded positions
and over to the right in the
blue box just shows that once
again the LFC recommendation is
for two hundred and eighty six
positions and the executive
budget is requesting three
hundred and one funded
positions.
So the next line just want to
quickly highlight what it means
when we don't get those funded
positions the types of impacts
that we see include everything
from our our data systems that I
mentioned before which are
really critical this allows us
to track what's happening in
schools and also help allows us
to report back to the
legislature when you want data
about how our students are
performing in schools we really
need to have not only the data
systems but the staff to
maintain that.
R. healthy schools bureau is
really critical to ensuring
school safety student wellness
and social emotional support
this is also the team won their
tragedies that occur in schools
unfortunately this is the team
that steps up reaches out and
supports the school's
accountability in our data
reporting again is important to
this legislature and to the
executive our fiscal management
we hear all the time from from
R. Ellie As the importance of
getting funding out quickly to
them we need to make sure that
we have the fiscal staff that
can process our our grant
requests and get those out
quickly.
Also all of our program staff
that support actual instructions
instruction for schools that we
see everything from fine arts to
LA to C. T. E. all of these
programs are overseen by by
program staff and then of course
this funding allows us to
reclassify existing positions to
make sure that we can retain the
staff it is really difficult to
retain staff you all know that
there's a lot of competition
higher rate jobs although our
staff is really passionate about
the work they do with the
department it's really important
that we can compensate us.
Our next slide.
provides a graph that shows a
comparison of the amount of
money that flows through the
department versus how much we
actually have in our agency
budget the HSD
processes and and accounts for
over five billion dollars
annually however our agency
budget has stayed relatively
flat around twenty million.
Thank.
I'm before I conclude and open
it up for questions I just want
to highlight quickly as a last
chance some of the things in our
public school support budget
request that it did not make it
into the LFC request.
the first one is that two
hundred and fifty thousand for
the software that supports the
and education plans that you all
required by statute you also
said these education plans
needed to be done by every
district and so this funding
will allow us to continue that
three million for our learning
management system known as
cannabis that helps with all of
our professional development and
instruction without this three
million dollars that entire
investment will go away Candace
will no longer exist.
One million to continue the
important micro credentialing
process for educators this is a
hugely popular
effort that we hear from
educators all the time they
really love this and this is
important in continuing that
investment the three million for
our salary parity for five
twenty language certificate
holders for native American
lands language educators this
bill was just passed by this
legislature last year and it's
important that we continue to
fund fund this effort.
Also three million dollars for
feminine hygiene products to
support students attendance and
positive school culture this
funding will pay for directly
for dispensers as well as for
product.
we also for our standards based
assessments the LFC budget
provided half of the cost this
is the true cost for what it for
what it entails to implement
assessments and our schools
without having the full amount
we cannot adequately adequately
implement a student assessment.
we also have seventeen million
for statewide M. attendance
interventions something that is
really important as we want to
make sure that all of our
students are benefiting from
instruction and they can't do
that and last we're addressing
chronic absentees T. ism in our
schools we have to be able to
find the interventions and
supports for students and
families.
also missing is that thirty
three point six five million for
special education learning and
hence mints and supports as well
as we in the executive had a
hundred million dollars for the
health care insurance for all
school personnel the LFC budget
had thirty two million and the
executive had a hundred so I
just wanted to point that out.
And with that I will conclude
and I'm happy to answer any
questions that you may have
thank you very much into the
secretary for the you also want
to recognize chairman funded us
from our from our house
Education Committee and
recognize
Gwen Perea Warniment our
director for the legislative
education study committee and
great to see Representative Lara
in here as well okay we're gonna
go members we're gonna go to
questions we're gonna go first
Representative Pettigrew and
Representative Trujillo then
we'll keep going from there.
Thank you chairman I was hoping
to go last locate for.
Thank you designate to the US
for stepping in and stepping up
and taking on.
The very.
Negative role.
When I say that.
The rest of the country realizes
where we're at in the state of
New Mexico.
There's a there's a body here
that doesn't want to realize
that.
When we say we're fifty First
and education.
It's not because of our school
boards it's not because of our
school superintendent this.
The direction we're going.
And.
I want to be careful because
there's not a blame.
There's a direction right now.
Does it need to do is.
Mr Chairman.
To this date.
We have no tracking system we
have no basis for graduation.
In other words there is nothing
that says there and says if
you're capable.
Here if you pass this test you
should graduate.
There's nothing there.
We have nothing.
Yes we tests are for students
yes we do this yes we do that
but at the end of the day.
We still graduate.
And I'm concerned about that.
We lost that several years ago.
Chairman and and doesn't need to
to the and that concerns me.
So what I didn't hear today was
how we fix that.
Where we focus on those kids we
yes we talk about the social
please yes we talk about this
yes we talk about that but at no
point did we talk about how
we're going to graduate capable.
Seventeen eighteen year old.
That concerns me.
And we're gonna continue and
we're going to raise funding to
do that we're going to continue
down the same road.
There's a sane chairman.
Designate Padilla the
continuing to go down the same
road expecting a different
outcome.
Well I'm not going to finish the
statement.
But we're continuing down the
same road.
And so.
We have.
I've I've had the blessing
chairman thank you for allowing
me for for maybe an on this
committee of have the blessing
of listening.
To.
So many different presentations.
That differ from the debate that
I have on the floor.
In other words.
In committee is like this
chairman.
We we compare ourselves to other
states.
On the floor we refuse to do
that because that doesn't work
in our favor.
Right now.
We have states that surround us
that track our kids.
Track our teachers in track the
progression and the programs
that we use chairman.
Designate the data.
Place them together.
Our teachers know what they're
getting.
When people when the kids come
in the class and our teachers
know how to deal with those.
Those children as they continue
to go on forward and we continue
to push them through and teach
them at that level we have no
system like that the state in
New Mexico.
We have no goals this just grade
one to grade three grade four
and that frustrates me.
That we continue to do that.
I would think that you
representative will ask you to
sort of bring some of these
together and in a question or
questions at the move into the
thank you.
I would provide you.
Chairman secretary designate I
would provide you to the ends of
the earth if we have those
goals.
I don't see him I don't see him
anywhere in any of the documents
you give you we give all of
these numbers.
Listen chairman and secretary
designate with respect to this
I've listened to our bases are
listen to our sped teachers
across the state.
We're not focusing where we need
to be focusing and.
I'm disappointed of I was hoping
to hear different stories of it.
Thank you thank you
Representative Trujillo.
Afternoon Mister chair members
of the committee of.
Secretary designate.
I'm glad you're here
I.
Looking at her when she.
The paper and I was
Looking at the implemented
pathways for educators to
advance from level one to level
two
explained to me the first
cohorts of the six hundred
eighty when teachers put
are they actually already in the
classroom or am I
misunderstanding.
Mr chair representative for you
thank you for that question they
are already in the classroom and
this is a micro credential
pathway that allows them through
the process of taking courses to
acquire those micro credentials
that move them up and they're
levels as educators.
Okay and then
the increase in students served
by C. T. E..
One of the issues of concern for
me is the disbursement of funds
to all those school districts I
know that they have to apply for
for state funds and I think some
of them are federal funds
through.
I forget the program not Johnson
o'malley what was Perkins
Perkins and it really depends on
the on the school districts.
Impetus to support to apply for
and receive those funds so
being from Albuquerque they get
a big chunk of money.
But what about the other school
districts how what is the
participation rate and how are
they getting the funding and the
teachers to ensure that they
have a full cohort of CTE
teachers and base teachers to
for example the math teacher
that's going to be working with
the carpentry teacher and you
know making sure that there's an
alignment between the actual CTE
teacher the math teachers so
that that student is getting
that real strong base of support
in moving things forward how are
how is CTE functioning and that
way thank you Representative for
you Representative please
secretary to Mister chair madam
chair Hugh you're right that not
every school has a CTE programs
those that have CTE programs
have a plan in a system in which
they identified the programs
that they would like to utilize
within their school systems.
Partner with with businesses and
industries in their areas to
help identify these programs as
well as to identify educators
that can teach within within the
CTE programs depending on the
discipline.
And Mr chairman my last question
is on page six of the other hand
out.
And and it's the one two three
four fifths bullet as you all
know I'm very passionate about
making sure that there's funding
for the feminine hygiene
products and it isn't just about
handing over money it's about
ensuring that those students
have emotional and behavioral
support systems in place can you
share madam chair fights
imperative that the PED this and
I we get the money the money is
funding for it thank you Mr
chair.
Mr chair representative Trujillo
thank you for that question.
We have found and this is known
nationally that that for for
students this can be a barrier
as to whether or not they even
show up for school if they do
not have access to to these
products
they would choose to stay home
it's really important that they
are available that they're free
that there in the in the
restrooms of our schools and all
of our schools so that students
know that they will have be able
to access these products and and
and attend school and be
supported in that way.
In my final comment Mr chair
these are not just like
dispensing paper and pencils
this is actually a completely
different components that is a
physical need for all students
and so I just want to reassure
that because I was told that by
someone thank you Mr chair thank
you very much for that for you
that's we're gonna go to
Representative Lujan than
Representative Garrett.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for percent state and your
service.
Mr chair I just want to I think
as of a couple of quick
questions
I'm just regard to your page six
that you sixes you gave us to
the one hundred million dollars
for health care insurance for
all educational person.
Your recommend here the
executive recommendation is a
hundred million and LCS thirty
two does this is this and I
assume and I'm the answer is
both are recurring correct Mr
chair representative Lujan yes
they would have to they would be
recurring so Mister chair
What is if we were to do that
hundred million what what we do
we have re recurring.
Funding for that amount so what
would what does that look like
with.
The future of us continuing to
do something that big in the
budget Mr chair.
Mr chair representative Lujan
these are investments just like
any other investment whether
it's educator salaries the
investments that we made to
increase the salary tiers by ten
thousand at each level
that's a recurring investment
salary increases that we make to
educators are state employees
those are reoccurring
investments these investments
allow us to again and address
our educator vacancies we have
over six hundred in the state of
New Mexico still even though
we've put we reduce that quite a
bit and allows us to ensure that
they stay in this prevent
profession that they're focused
that they have access many of
our our school staff do not
cannot afford health insurance
this includes our educational
assistance this includes are bus
drivers and are custodial staff
these are all the people that
support students throughout the
day that make the school
function and they're struggling
to pay health care costs so yes
it is a reoccurring cost but
these are the reoccurring costs
that we prioritized to support
education thank you Mr chair
thank you for that answer and
I'm sick with the thirty two
million then that becomes more
of a percentage rather than at
the with the hundred million as
well as a fuller coverage is
that my understanding Mr chair
representative Lujan that's
correct it's a it's a higher
higher employer portion would be
paid with a hundred million
dollar approach verses that
thirty two million they're two
different kind of approaches to
a
a break down of employer versus
employee cost here Mr chair one
last question on this subject is
would you be starting with the
with our education assistance in
our bus drivers before you
covered anybody else Mister
chair Mister chair
representative Lujan this would
cover all school employees and
these cost estimates have been
established by.
Hi the department of finance
administration in partnership
with with M. C. R. public's
School Insurance Authority who
oversees up insurance for our
public schools thank you Mr
chair of the patient the my last
question sure is it is to your
your hand out your one page on
on this page this is the back
page of access to behavioral
health services.
Increase in support school
security so.
On this issue which is very
particular issue by myself what.
What is what is being funded
what have you agreed upon with
the funding for this Mr chair.
In terms Mr chair representative
Lujan but we have increased our
funding for behavioral health
supports
through the through general fund
money but we've also increased
our funding for behavioral
health supports through Esther
money that the state has
received as well as through our
gear money the governor's
education emergency education
really funds that the governor
gets as well as the the the
schools the districts and
charter schools have invested a
significant amount of money as
well in these investments we
know that those us or monies
will go away soon and so we need
to make sure that we're
continuing those investments
utilizing state funds as well as
federal funds as we can that's a
big part of our efforts to
expand in the state of New
Mexico are Medicaid funded
supports in schools this is
efforts been in the works for
several years a partnership with
the Human Services department to
modify our Medicaid state plan
to get approval through CMS to
allow us to drive down those
Medicaid funding to support our
kids in schools how important is
it that our students can see a
bureau have a behavioral health
provider in the school setting
as opposed to having to leave
school to do those sorts of
things that goes a long way to
ensuring that kids show up every
day to school that they feel
good that they're receiving the
sports that they should need
that we have less discipline
infractions that we have less
bullying in schools all of these
things are really tied to access
to the services and supports
thank you I appreciate that
answer thank you to check thank
you very much Representative
Lujan next we're going to
Representative Garrett and
Representative how to meal.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Secretary.
Secretary designate thank you my
questions are on page six on the
budget items.
When it comes to the canvas
learning a system which I'm
familiar with this the micro
credential system does it use
cannabis is the one million for
the development of micro
credentials or is it a separate
system.
Mr chair Representative Garrett
thank you so much I believe it's
a separate system but I need to
look to my team I believe it's a
tough it's a separate system
it's not part of camp.
Taters well that's right that's
right thank you W. secretary
though the one million is
actually to support the the
mentors and facilitators that
actually are part of the course
the instruction four educators
as they move through the micro
credential system Mr chairman
without cannabis they don't have
the home for the actual money
versus if that's our case so
it's vital to both.
Yeah it's in their pocket there
is there is Mr chair thank you
if we need to have a additional
folks come up then that's okay
just please come up and identify
risk.
Mr chair representative Garrett
there wasn't additional flyer
that has greater detail on
campus if you're interested it's
a two sided document that's in
your packet so there's
additional information there
would be to be happy to meet
with you and and get in greater
detail on that system okay of
the service interested
understand kind of the big
budget you and can teachers
still use the dust your system
or is from level one to level
two now exclusively micro
credential Mr chair
representative Garrett it does
it actually is replacing the
dossier system is my
understanding that.
Yes Senator Representative Mr
chair here at my name's on a
plan again in the managing
director for the agency right
now level one to level two
depending on where you are in
here for third fourth or fifth
year will depend on if you're
completing the micro credential
pathway or if you're completing
a dossier the goal is to phase
out the dossier.
Okay thank you because of this
concern Mr chairman of if
there's not many to do the court
system for teachers it's
difficult to get through it and
then on the seven million for
standards based assessment this
is the federal requirement am I
not right.
Mr chair representative Garrett
that's right and also we this
legislative body in the
executive we want to be able to
see how our students are
progressing and so in addition
to a federal requirement it's
something that we expect to see
as well.
Thank you so Mister without the
money we can't actually do the
test Mr chair representative of
care that's correct okay and
then my final question Mr chair
is a seventeen million for the
statewide and local attendance
interventions do we have a bill
to amend the success for
attendance active session.
Mr chair representative Garrett
we do have a bill is it has been
introduced the bill number is.
Three the.
Okay we're getting that for you
Representative Garrett and I
know that Greg had sent that
over if you don't have it we
will make sure that you have.
So yes Mr chair representative
Garrett the seventeen million
does a company a revision to the
attendance for success factor
one that we believe will improve
the act
and clarify some concerns that
we heard from school districts
in terms of school board
approval as part of the process
but really the key to the this
legislation is focused on the
interventions that we provide
for students Bernalillo before
we get to the point where it's
excessive absenteeism we really
need to make sure that we're
coming in working with families
making sure that they understand
the importance of their child
being at school every day all
day but also to figure out what
are the barriers to being in
school what's happening in that
family do they have issues with
transportation something the
school could help with are there
issues with employment for the
parents are there housing issues
so really this is about being
able to
to make sure that our schools
are supported in this work I
will tell you that many schools
are already doing an incredible
job on attendance interventions
we have learned about incredible
models including right here in
Santa Fe public schools they're
paying for attendance
intervention it invests
interventionist primarily using
their federal relief money right
now and so we're going to need
to support them as that money
goes away they have seen a huge
impact in their attendance rates
as a result of these types of
interventions.
Thank you and and Mr chair if
you can just get us the Bill
number of Mr chair
Representative Garrett I haven't
is Senate bill three sixty
seven.
Thank you very much the service
thank you very much
Representative Garrett next
we're gonna go Representative
Lujan meal than Representative
Montoya than Representative
current.
Mr chair and and madam secretary
thank you for being here so my
concern has always been the
Yazzie Martinez
Madam and when I say that three
million for a native American
language and and cultural
teachers is not in the budget as
well as thirty three million for
special education learning
enhancements and other support
how will that affect them a
young C. Martinez.
Mr chair representative how to
me thank you so much for that
question these are key
investments to help us address
two of the priority populations
named in in the lawsuit the
native language salary parity
allows us to make sure that
schools have native language
teachers in their programs this
is legislation that was just
passed last year was an effort
on the part of the department
and representative Lente and is
part of the travel remedy
framework without continuing to
fund these positions schools
will lose these language
educators as for the special
education learning enhancements
we know we need to do more for
our students with disabilities
our students with learning
disabilities abilities have the
lowest
a proficiency rates they have
the the furthest to go we know
that we need to have very clear
focus on funding to support
their learning needs to support
our educators that are serving
them not just our special
education teachers and
educational systems but all
educators we need to increase
our our investments and so yes
this would have a negative
impact on our ability to further
address that lawsuit thank you
thank you Representative Hotmail
next we're gonna go to
Representative Montoya turned in
and then Representative setting
up percent Montoya please thank
you Mr chairman I just took a
bite of cookie.
I am I apologize for my.
The
Thank you madam secretary
designate I do have two separate
questions the first one being on
the.
Pre K. mixed delivery
system that we're going to have
to.
B. trying to figure out how to
implement that.
how do you see the breakdown of
of dollars between Public
education and.
ECECD and the and the.
Private providers to non profits
that are out there we have a
large group that showed up the
other day for ECECD budget
hearing.
And very interested in making
sure that the mixed delivery
system doesn't harm both
nonprofits and private providers
so how how do you see.
Of the distribution of funds
going to both public school and
to private providers and non
profits.
Mr chair representative Montoya
we need a mixed delivery system
where clear that we now need to
both options and we need both in
every community they don't
necessarily exists both in every
communities in some communities
you might have one or the other
my understanding is we're about
fifty fifty very close to that
in terms of the distribution of
funding and programs but I will
tell you we want to grow both we
want to grow our pre K. programs
both in our public education
settings and in our community
based settings I'll tell you
when I I'm a former educator but
when my kids were going through
pre K.
they are in a community based
program because that worked for
our family
I work long hours as you can
imagine and I could not make a
public school schedule work for
me so it I'm I'm very clear
families need options and
they're both great programs in
both community based in public
school program so we need to do
well thank you Mr chairman I I
just want to urge caution and
make sure that you work with
secretary ECECD because there
were in when we first started
down the road of
pre K. learning and funding for
that there were promises that
were made to private providers
and non profits and
I've heard come concerns from
both.
For profit and nonprofit
providers that if they lose too
many children to the public
schools because there are
options
that if that happens then some
of them may face closure just
because.
being over extended on
facilities and everything else
that they've done to provide up
to this point.
And I just wanna make sure we
urge caught them to charge
caution and make sure that.
the same family that has a child
in day care one two three years
old also is has maybe have a pre
K. student and they rely on on
they'll rely on both so I'm just
urging two things caution and
that we make sure that
Superintendents are actually
talking to providers in their
community because a lot of we're
just gonna see the the offering
of of funds and maybe just go
down that road without any
thought San Juan County
fortunately our private
providers are nonprofits and our
public school superintendents
have have been working together
and I just like to make sure
that what's happening in San
Juan County helped have a
statewide Mr Chairman one one
more question different topic.
And this is on the
There two.
House bills in the Senate bill
that are working their way
through all concerning
programming and financing of
public education and they're
all.
There's a the Senate bill one
thirty one house bill one thirty
and house bill one ninety four.
and there.
Of concern I'm I have some
concern the the possibility of
all three of these bills passing
is a possibility.
But I did serve in the previous
administration for the to the
governor Sanchez one of things
that I found out as of two bills
passed and they have similar
language.
they could all be signed but the
last one that that signed.
Is the one that becomes law.
I obviously bills could be
pocket vetoed and there's a lot
of discussion among house
members because one of the bills
has a lot of support from our
superintendents and our school
boards so I I I guess maybe I'd
like to ask where does the
administration come down which
one of the three bills.
Does the administration support
and and apply.
So Mr chair representative
Montoya I I can tell you that
the public education department
the governor's office the the
legislative education study
committee the legislative
finance committee have worked
together on these proposals
leading up to the legislative
session
each of the the three models
have similarities and
differences
they do all address the need for
an additional additional
instruction time that's where
you we can say that we're
definitely all in agreement we
also value professional work
time
and it's more than just adding
instruction time in the
classroom we need to also make
sure that that time is high
quality and so educators need
professional work time to
collaborate to look at student
data to get mentorship and
coaching each of the designs are
different
that that.
With respect I am we have
limited time we want to stay
focused on your department's
budget today if you want to
offer anymore comments please
feel free but we're going to
very much stay focused on
today's budget so Mister
chairman I I I with respect all
three of these have our budget
bills and so so I I I'll move on
but I I would just like to state
the.
as a representative.
and I think this is bipartisan
across the aisle as is
superintendents and school
boards all participated in the
interim process and they've made
it pretty clear where they stand
and I think a lot of our members
in a bipartisan way our our
listing to our to our local
school boards and
superintendents thank you Mr
chair thank you very much
Representative Montoya we're
gonna go to Representative
Herndon Representative Sierra no
Representative Bach
Representative Herndon please.
Thank you Mr chair and this is
here madam secretary.
Congratulations on your
appointment I just wanted to
have one place the case with
the.
Regarding a program that I'm
looking for I wanted to make
sure that you know they do in
the past summer that there was a
an effort to meet with students
all over the state regarding
mental health and wellness and
their goal was to have a mental
health and wellness room in
their schools so I'm looking at
your budget now and then but
they pay six of your budget
where you have thirty three
million
six hundred fifty thousand set
aside for special education
learning enhancements and other
support.
Mr chair representative Herndon
I am very aware of the work that
was done during the interim and
I was really excited to see the
videos that the students had put
together that had talked about
the the wellness rooms to see
some schools have I have they
have implemented those
they they I think I agree with
you that they do support
students wellness and are a
great integration into into our
schools we do not have that
currently in the executive
budget request I'm I'm sure if
it's in that the LFC request
perhaps Serra could could add a
comment on that I think you're
asking if the thirty three point
six five million could be
utilized for these rooms is that
what your question was this is
chair of madam secretary so.
Was the all of that thirty three
million is actually only three
hundred thousand okay so I'm
asking you what I am asking for
clarification on Mr Mr chair
madam secretary the about that
the secretary has listed here
these are additional else's
success commitment to.
Okay it's six.
Thank you thank you very much
Representative Herndon for the
question this is not in today's
this does not concern the public
education department this
concerns our public schools
support budget which we heard
the very beginning of this
process we appreciate the
secretary designate bringing
these but these are not any
numbers that we can adjust in
the budget today for this
department and if there's
further clarification that we
need from staff in some of the
areas that have been raised we
can ask for that.
So thank you Mr chairman and
secretary I needed clarification
all of it students around the
state asking for that and I'm
because that was completed that
study of that information
session with all of the students
very late in the summer then
it's very important to look for
it we're funding sources already
exists with money not dedicated
into a more into an area that
could be used for the mental
health and wellness so the
amount remaining needed is as we
look at the appropriations and
I'm also advocating Mr chair and
madam secretary for you to look
because it's incredibly
important
because this is a student
initiative and thank you so much
Mr thank you very much
Representative Herndon next
we're gonna go to representative
setting other than
Representative Baca.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Secretary for CENIC destiny
okay so as a teacher Mr
Chairman.
Attendance was huge attendance
was where we were dying in our
schools we did everything we
could nothing works.
Right here at the seventeen
million how is it different than
what we're doing now and is it
proven successful what we're
doing so you're asking for
seventeen million more what you
gonna do with the Mr chair
representative Sarinana this
money would go directly to
schools and so it would be based
on their there ma'am this the
number of students that they
have so would be at on the mount
of money that would be directed
to them based on the the size of
their student population with a
minimum of twenty thousand
dollars going to our smallest
schools.
But that didn't really answer my
question what how are you gonna
do it's because we cut we cut
kids the first day when they
registered and set and worked
with them we had a teacher that
comes with them we had we we
tracked them we work every
morning the caller you can be at
school so nothing worked and I
think it's getting worse better
so what are you gonna do with
this it's going to make it
better so Mister chair
representative school the
schools have identified the best
sort of interventions and
approaches that work for their
student population I know of
some districts and there's a
superintendent here in the
audience who is shared with me
that it's a very small district
they have one student who really
struggles to get to school so
they when he doesn't show up go
to his home.
Not on the door and say come on
for taking you to school they're
different different strategies
and interventions that are
unique to that school community
for some it would be a full time
attendance interventionist who
is tracking these things who's
making those phone calls who's
going to student homes to check
in and see if everything's okay
see what they need to try and re
engage them there are different
strategies and really this is
intended for for districts and
charter schools to really
identify what works best for
their for their students and
families.
How is it different for.
Mr chair representative this is
additional funding to support
those efforts funding that
doesn't necessarily exist now or
funding that is being utilized
state with pastor money that
schools have which will go away
so this will allow them to
continue those efforts.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Jana next we're
going to go to Representative
Baca please thank you Mr
chairman I've got three
questions so the person's easy
one Mr chairman
many of our districts struggle
with funding transportations so
my question Mr chairman and
secretary designate is how much
how much money is gonna be add
to this so that districts can
not at support transportation
with operational fund for others
I know of one district that has
four different bus routes just
to make use of this my own
district.
Has to run three different
flights of bus routes just
because of the shortage of
drivers in the funding so Mr
secretary sectors Secretary Mr
Chairman.
I see no other Antonio how much
more money are we looking at
this point to add to the
transportation budget.
Let's you know that Mr Secretary
Representative Mike I do know
that answer but if you he can
jump up here too if you'd like
some additional information it's
eight point six million is for
the additional transportation
costs and that's on top of what
we're already investing you Mr
chairman of answers the eight
point three million how was that
how do we get to the numbers
a Mr chair representative back
eight point six million and as
far as how we came up with that
number that really isn't until
on your question so I thank you
would you like to come up with
we need to touch base of funding
I I I do what I do think if we
are talking about budget all my
questions are budget
transportation having to set
there and overseen
transportation a district like
listeners Mr chairman we have to
add anywhere between seven
hundred thousand and eight
hundred thousand dollars of
operational fund so that is
somewhat of a burden so I don't
and Representative Baca it thank
you if if to in answer to
representative Bachus question
if the department can sort of
summarize how the the
recommendation was arrived at I
appreciate it.
Commitments just briefly Mr
chair representative Baca
basically the the amount this is
a the same amount that we
requested for K. five plus
extended learning K. twelve
plus.
Number.
Of the current budget.
What thank you Mr chairman I
will just say this is that
because of the number of
students participating that was
good the numbers much smaller
that of the routes and otherwise
for the for the extended
learning so we'll move on from
that but I just think that
transportation is another area
Mr chairman and madam secretary
I have a question regarding the
funded vacancies so looking
right here on your your power
point it appears we have a lot
eleven up vote unfunded
positions okay looking on the
back of the LFC I see a.
for the vacancy rate of or fifty
four positions that are funded
and I for the five point four
eight million dollars.
So Mr chairman and madam
secretary is there any
explanation for the differences
in the amounts on the two
presentations Mr chair
representative.
The fifty four point five funded
vacancy is based on the
department having two hundred
and thirty filled positions but
that they don't have two hundred
and thirty fill positions right
now they have two hundred
seventy four so the data pulled
into that chart may have been
from.
Yes Mexico thank you Mr yet miss
Holmes can you.
Yes I'd I'd love to explain
thank you Mr chair and
representative
so this was called right around
September for for hearings with
the LESC committee
and so.
In our recommendation there are
two things I want to mention
about this one we we've been
thoughtful about the trends and
vacancies funded vacancies at
PED and that is part of the
reason that we didn't suggest as
great of an increase in that two
hundred category this year for
the operating budget
additionally last year we were
one point eight million higher
than the governor's wreck in the
two hundred category and funded
eighteen additional FTE sore
being thoughtful about those
increases over time
and then
additionally when we receive the
agency requests which I do have
here with me they very much
emphasized the three hundred
category which and funding that
we provided a host of supports
across all of their I. T.
initiatives and for contractual
supports for those I. T.
initiatives but we did fully
fund their request at the time
about two hundred fifty six
thousand and their initial
request so well that there are
funded FTE or their fill
positions have increased from
that September point in time we
feel thoughtful about volatility
in their funded positions so
this is this is just thought
that part that they have filled
positions since then and the
thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam secretary my last question
is regarding the three different
approaches or three to bills
regarding instructional time
there are three different
thoughts about that but the
actual dollar amount Mr Chairman
is very different as far there's
a big thing so madam secretary
would you please just for the
sake of the audience talk about
the three different versions of
the instructional time in
relation to the end of the cost
of associate to associate with
them the LFC the LESC and the
executive thank you Jim they are
so Baca and ask you to be very
brief.
Mr chair very brief on the phone
that my concern.
so I think the big difference
pertains to.
fully funding the time the cost
to get to eleven forty so
they're different designs about
what that cost so the executive
budget fully funds all schools
whether they're already at
eleven forty or not fully
fundamental and forty.
D. L. E. S. C. budget comes very
close to signing in and the LESC
has a different sort of approach
sunny would probably be better
at describing that but according
to what we see it is that
doesn't quite fund all of the
schools to get to eleven forty
another differences house bill
one thirty am budget up to sixty
hours of professional work time
so it basically gives credit for
instructional time for
professional work time the
executive approach does not give
credit for that professional
work time it's an additional
eighty hours on top of the
eleven forty thank and then the
the LFC approach does not have a
minimum focus for professional
work time and so I don't know
Serra are setting like to
elaborate but maybe that's
enough for for this mean I'd be
happy yes Representative Baca to
sit down with you or any of the
committee members to discuss.
And Mr chairman I guess the just
the three numbers on the bottom
I don't as far as instructional
programs because there is a
difference so I mean Sir or Mr
chairman for secretary if you
just have the cost of the I
don't need a description anymore
I I've I've kind of seen it
would just the bottom line cost
that we will be funding these
will take to fund these programs
thank you Mr.
I'm gonna ask that we we let's
get that to the members that
that's in the public schools
support budget will get those
numbers Mr the if you have on
the top of your head please feel
free to to bring those up.
Or and and secretary doesn't.
Mr chair I will say
Representative that all three
approaches.
Attempt to keep school districts
whole.
The approaches are different and
so there for the funding levels
are different for the executive
it's three hundred forty four
million for the LFC it's three
hundred and two million and for
the LFC it's three hundred
ninety million so LFC being the
highest of the three and then
the executive and the LESC.
Three hundred thank you.
Mr chair I just wanted to
clarify the secretary just said
that there's was three hundred
eleven we actually counted the
thirty three for special
education enhancement as part of
that three forty four so you can
kind of look at that as two
different pots.
Thank you thank you thank you Mr
chairman thank you for your
presentation thank you very much
for some next we're gonna go to
representative Garcia
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
secretary I don't have a
question just a comment on on
special needs kids.
You know I really want to
emphasize how important it is
to.
Help these kids out you know I
told it's a little bit more
challenging but we really really
need to look at that and if any
more funding for that that we
need to do to you know we invest
a lot of money in education.
And then these kids Mr chairman
with the special needs need
aficionados to that's all I have
left thank you thank you very
much Representative Garcia next
we're gonna go to Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you Mr.
Turn on the microphone thank you
Mr chair welcome
congratulations you have the
chance now to make a lot of
difference in a lot of people's
lives I just wanted to speak
just a moment about I think the
the taboo subject here today
which is was brought up by
Representative Montoya and that
is that is ELT and there are
three different plans we just
talked about the budget for
those three different plans what
many of us have worked on that
for years we implemented a plan
it then working we've been hat
we actually have a fund of money
is left there that was provided
to implement that and and is
being other things are being
funded out of it because it
didn't work for our schools many
of our schools
Over time we we've hammered it
down to the little closer little
closer but they're still huge
differences in those plans but
there is one plan that.
I believe the superintendents
have signed on to the small
schools of sign on to any a has
signed on to and that was
reflected in the house bill one
thirty which recently passed
through the Education Committee
and I would just hope that that
that is the plan that is adopted
and the it just to let you know
that it reflects not just a
little bit of time but a lot of
time you probably participated
in that after yourself
it's.
It has agreement from groups
that never agree so.
That's it Mr Representative
Chatfield
we're gonna go back
Representative through for a
quick question if there's a
question.
Mr chairman if it's based on
whether authors question there's
not okay I I apologize we're
gonna have to we're gonna have
to move on we do have chairman
one echo some of will last for
an opportunity for him of a
absolutely absolutely thank
we do have a vice chair Dixon on
the list I have a few questions
so the first the interim
secretary Padilla.
Going back to attendance I did
not hear that there is anything
different in what this
department charged with
guidance.
And oversight.
For our schools is proposing
when it comes to attendance.
I heard and perhaps I heard
wrong that was essentially
replacing federal funds and
offering state funds in lieu
thereof.
But that Madam I guess secretary
designate.
If what we have now it is what
we have now working.
So Mr chair thank you for that
question and thanks for giving
me an opportunity to clarify
My reference is that there are
attendance intervention programs
that are occurring currently in
schools.
Those programs for some are
being funded with federal money
which will go away.
I did reference a piece of
legislation that is part of the
agency's priorities it's SB
three sixty seven this revises
the attendance for success
factor in that piece of
legislation it does have some
very specific requirements under
interventions
related to a specific sort of
types of communications
activities to engage students as
well as requirements for
developing educational plans as
students progress in their
absenteeism thank you a minute.
I'd like this I have a few more
questions by share Dixon is next
on the list so we'll go to her
in.
These thank you Mr chair
I realize that we have a link
the agenda today I do have a
number of questions but I'm
actually going to consolidate
into sort of one comment that
may or may not need response of
thank you Mr chair and thank you
interim secretary for The
presentation and if I'm
understanding correctly what
we're really talking about today
is the budget for the agency
itself so one of the concerns
that I have heard relates to
sort of a chronic issue with the
department and that sort of the
the reimbursements
for the
Sorry there a request for
reimbursement from our local
school districts and charter
schools and so my concern is how
are we going to get address that
I understand that that the
department is working on a plan
and so my hope is that some of
the increases that you that the
agency has requested will go to
address that.
Okay thank you because my
understanding is that we are
talking about a substantial
amount of money that is delayed
in getting to our our school so
we really need to get that
cleaned up thank you very much
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative and by
tradition and excellence is very
rapid consolidation.
And so the secretary designate
thank you I think we've we've
covered that many of the
differences you've noted in here
not part of the budget there's
if ma'am as members have some
questions we have an excellent
staff who can help fill in some
of the the missing parts that
and appreciate always to be able
to have a broad conversation
about that education is
absolutely vital
This is I I think secretary
designate.
What going back to sort of what
we heard was some of the
questions we are desperate to
hear some of the key.
Differences that you and your
team will be applying because a
couple of quick questions
secretary designate we have a
declining enrollment within our
K. twelve system correct.
Mr chair that is correct.
In two weeks thank you the
secretary doesn't do expect that
enrollment to yes even out our
projections for the enrollment
to continue to decline or to
climb.
Mr chair I I think that you know
enrollment varies depending on
the community and and what's
happening there we do know that
that birth rates have declined
slightly in their adjustments
that are made on a local level
however you know we're we think
that public schools have a great
deal to offer our students and
our families and thank thank you
secretary it said I I think
there is unanimous agreement
there secretary doesn't ask the
question simply because we do we
are seeing a declining birth we
were seen crying enrollment the
projections that we see are a
continuing drop in enrollment we
hope that that's not the case so
we have to be prepared for that
to be the case
And secretary designate we're
we're gonna be approaching
probably.
Would it be fair to say and this
is not just the PED budget so
there's been a one point five
plus billion dollar new
recurring investment in New
Mexico education in our K.
twelve education system
beginning in two thousand and
nineteen.
Mr chair I think if you look at
my accomplishments document that
would support what you just said
that we have expanded
investments and our education
system that's benefiting not
only students but also our
educators and school personnel
thank you madam secretary into
the to the pieces here in the
budget will we will that isn't.
The right I think.
We see a lot of progress in
investment.
We are desperate madam secretary
secretary to see that progress
reflected in our communities and
there are a number of issues
that committee members have
pointed to that have I think
highlighted while it's not an
overwhelming it is a key
responsibility that you all have
and you have now if the public
education department okay with
that members we will ask for the
LFC recommendations we do know
that there are a couple of areas
where we want to be very we you
know we're short on time we will
ask staff to take a very close
we've seen some updated
the differences in the
employment area with the strong
addition from the executive over
the last several months and so
we want to take a second look at
that to make sure that we're
meeting committing this moment
with that will call for the.
The motion.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
the LFC recommendations.
With the LFC recommendation
advisor Dixon second by
Representative Cruz
please raise your hand if you're
in opposition to that.
Kate please no Representative
Pettigrew what up that
Representative please thank you.
Chairman I appreciate the
opportunity I want to explain
something very clear.
When we continue to go down the
same road and we continue to
change worse consequences worse
results at some point and we
need to change it chairman if I
had my ability to date we would
completely do Fund the state
department.
We put enough people in place
chairman to where we could
handle for federal grants and we
would give it back to the boards
in the superintendents the know
how to deal with their children
and their communities and work
from that standpoint let's be
crystal clear oil and gas pays
for over ninety percent of this
business and we are getting no
results thank you thank you very
much for both of the thank you
Secretary days doesn't it's
great to see you thanks to your
team for being here today
members are on to our next
agenda item.
And that's going to be our
public schools facility
authority.
Four this is agency code nine
forty.
if you could start us off and
oil well.
Quickly kind of continued.
Thank you Mr chair keep is very
brief this's agency nine forty
under tab nine
what's gonna name Sonny Lee LFC
analysts for PSSA this Mr Simon
Miller from the department of
finance administration we've got
director my ticket because CS
and our CFO Brad Matthews here
with us.
In general this is a non general
fund agency charged with
overseeing public school
construction and replacements.
Across the state the
recommendations of the same I
would say the LFC recommendation
has a one hundred dollar budget
rounding error in the
spreadsheets of that's the only
difference Mr chair turn on to
Simon if he has anything else to
add Mr chair of members of the.
I don't have any additional
comments so I will pass it over
to the agency thank you thank
you.
Mr chair members of the
committee you should have in
front of you are are handout.
If all of you have it and I will
be very brief again my name is
but to see us directorate yes if
they and I'd like to take you to
slide number two which is a
picture of so the middle school
which is a product of what the
P. A. C. O. C. accomplishes and
first of all I've I'd like to
thank you for having us here
today and I think thank you Mr
Lewis Mr Miller for supporting
us.
So after that I'd like to
briefly tell you what the PSC OC
does we have a system slide
number three we have seven
different programs that we
manage standards based systems
based
broadband okay exception and
then the following slide talks
about the potential new funding
programs with Senate bill one
thirty one which has clear
Education pre K. facility
reduction and distribution as
well as one third reduction in
local Max one half reduction
local match for pre K. as well
as districts with less than two
hundred students.
Currently a slight six we have
two hundred twenty two active
projects district wide around
the state slide seven gives you
a little bit more information on
those the act projects anti
funding amount of those projects
as well.
Slide eight just give the total
amount of money that has been
spent since the beginning of
this program which is about two
point six billion and you'll see
by the heat match which
districts have received the
amount.
And then if we get to slide nine
it kind of
Indicates the a request that we
have I do want to point out that
last year we had a vacancy rate
of twenty seven percent and this
year we're down to five percent
vacancy rate we have three
vacant positions we have one
offer going out to advertising
for the other two.
And the final slide Page ten is
other photos of schools at the
PCC has funded and built around
the state with that said Mr
chair members Mr Matthews and I
stand for any questions you
might have thank you executive
director process
we'll go first Representative
Baca then representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for your presentation I want
to first compliment this of the
spores Department most of the
schools as benefited greatly
from PS that they are PSUC thank
you so my question Mr chairman
is you said that there was a of
course of about two billion
dollars that have been currently
funds so far.
With all the projects and
because I know that the right
what is the total amount of
projects that have not yet been
funded that are still out there
and pending is up to two billion
dollars for is.
Mr chair representative Baca
what I mentioned the two point
six billion dollars that is
projects of the past yes that so
that so my question Mr Chairman
is how many projects do we have
how many current.
Of request we have four
facilities are funding.
You know presently that have not
been yet funded.
Mr chair members I don't have
that number with me but we have
been going to the council on a
monthly basis.
Mister chair Mister Baca we will
have an event available amount
of funding going forward of
approximately the
Five hundred ninety five okay
nine hundred forty eight million
moving forward the.
and thank you Mr chairman my
other question on page four of
your flight.
When you talk about the twenty
five million for twenty twenty
four those are reoccurring funds
is that correct and we're what
will they be used for that all
for school security Mr chair
members those funds are going to
be an appropriation from our our
yes you are posted have outlay
fund and the the twenty five
million is for school security.
statewide for any school and
it's going to be surveillance
systems fencing goes to bills or
other capital infrastructure
related to security and thank
you Mr chairman are are the
similar to the grants that were
put out like in two thousand
seventeen or how would a
district access the money for
this security systems Mister
chair Mister Baca thank you for
that question it's different
from the grants that happened in
the past the past requests
school districts applied per
school per district for a
specific project we had process
res visited the school we look
at everything and we again the
awards but this funding is
intended to be spent quickly and
it's going to be similar to how
we spent Senate Bill to twelfth
with the districts apply for the
funding the state their need and
we just we distribute the money
to the districts and they decide
how it should be spent.
So yeah I I know that thank you
Mr chairman I know that school
state of safety security to
dress a number of different
parts of the budget so this is a
fun this twenty five million is
gonna be coming correct directly
from PS that fate MPSC OC the
correct setting Mr chair the
recommendations is her are all
line to this same.
Funding sources all of those
recommendations are pulling it
from the public school capital
outlay fund and it's in the
twenty five seventy five pools
that you heard earlier.
The my last question Mr chairman
is really as far as with these
projects and with the.
Are we seeing a huge increase in
the cost of the projects as to
when they were first initially
funded so let's say I put in for
a new school.
But based upon the workforce and
labor are we seeing a huge
difference in the amount of
projects the cost of the total
project Mr Chairman Mister chair
Mister Baca we were seed an
increase in construction costs
for the past couple of years
however it seems to be that
might be evening out but I don't
have those exact figures with me
but we did we did see a big
increase well Mr chairman I'd
still like to before I want is
close by saying thank you for
what you're doing I do know that
there are many other projects in
communities specially small
communities that will benefit
from additional funding and also
for the reduction in their local
match will be a big part of it
thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much present Baca next
representative Garcia thank you
Mr chairman of.
Director of the shut down to one
question away from me you know.
Actively thank you for what
you're doing to school district
one of water known as we serve
you and and.
When the prices go up that much
in the in Senate fifty million
to build a school now what did
do building sixty million.
We'll go over that different
from the funding Mr chair
representative Garcia if there
is an increasing cost that that
we can substantiate we go we
come to the council we come and
we work with the school district
we say there's an increasing
cost we bring the increase to
the PSUC and they consider
funding the state share and
distribute funding share.
Thank but of director Mr
chairman and lower the school
district would not necessarily
have to put out any more money
of the New Mexico the foot
Mr chair representative Garcia
that is correct thank you that's
the only question I have thank
you thank you very much
representative Garcia next we're
gonna go to Representative Lujan
than Representative Garrett
thank you Mr thank you
Representative Baki answered
some of the questions I had
but to build upon some of those
questions with the available at
nine nine hundred forty eight
million available in the funding
of.
Whatever whatever that is going
towards or could be I guess
potentially for for teacher just
Mr chair.
Mr chair Representative Lujan it
depends on which schools have
the need for the teacher to this
we have a teachers a pilot
program where you can apply for
teacher housing in your
community in a rural community
and additionally if you have a
school project like out and SUNY
the teachers are part of the
total award winner rebuilding
the school and the teacher shape
at the same time so the
percentage of the of funding for
teacher just depends of the
applications received so chair
so for the language without
being specific to rural
communities is that a federal
guidelines that something we
implemented to the state Mr
chair
Mr chair Representative Lujan it
is a a policy of the PCC.
The policy okay thank you Mr
president answer
I just want to bring to the
attention of our my school
district in Santa Fe County and
most of our educators and other
workers do not even for cannot
even afford to live in our
county because of the price of
the cost of living I would ask
that maybe we look at the cost
of living to be part of that
that functional language
especially in these these
careers in the and for educators
and what that looks like Mr
chair thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Lujan next person
Garrett.
Thank you Mr chairman I have two
questions first of all the some
of the budget for PS that fate
is any of that go to the
statewide education network the
center project.
Mr chair this Representative
Garrett yes it does.
it goes to the statewide
education network program in the
way of funding you right as well
as working on the creation of
that statewide education
network.
Thank you and may second last
question Mr chairman is how much
of your budget is dedicated to
H. FAQ improvements as they're
identified as they go through
your process how much money is
dedicated to that and about what
percentage of your budget is
that.
Chair small and Representative
Garrett that's a question that
it's very difficult to answer
because the H. FAQ is typically
mixed up in the whole project
depends on each school I can
however go back to the office
and and see if we can get you a
close estimate and get that back
to you an estimate only would be
fine thank you so much.
Yes.
Thank you for the.
Okay I don't see any other
further questions with that
we'll go to by our Dicks.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
the LFC recommendation.
That's great it's been a motion
by by two Dixon second by
Representative Garcia.
Mr chair and vice chair I would
say that both of the
recommendations are intended to
be the same but because of a
rounding error in the LFC
recommendation I would actually
recommend the executive be taken
for administrative purposes.
Thank you Mr chairman I withdraw
the previous motion and instead
make it's the.
Executive recommendation.
Thank you thank you very much
for the kids strategy Mr Liu
it's been moved into is there
any opposition to adopting the
executive recommendation.
Seeing none we've adopted that.
Okay
We at.
Thank you we're gonna.
We're gonna do a little bit of
public comment on the first two
these are are are two main sort
of for the day
would ask if anybody is here to
give public comment either on
the Public Education Department
or the public school capital
outlay please feel free to come
up.
This place Mr rounds.
Mr chairman members the
committee Stan rounds from the
state superintendents and the
college of education leaders we
support some of the things we
talked about with the public
education department I want a
special look to their staffing
issues we again I appreciate the
amount of effort they've made
over the last year the increase
donor recruitment have personal
retention we hope you do your
work the realize that in near
future product projections for
for cost also thanks for the
question about the new request
for reimbursement.
That process is probably the
most convoluted problem we have
a public schools and creates a
tremendous.
Difficult for local districts
sometimes you just Mr chairman
why do we carry such high cash
balances in public schools
that's not the only reason Mr
chairman but it is one of the
reasons for sex right months in
the light before you reimbursed
you've got to have money in the
bank to pay the bills and so we
thank you we know you understand
that I just need to make that
comment thank you thank you very
much surrounds.
And please feel free to take a
seat.
Thank you.
Hello chairing committee my name
is Nora Lee and I'm one of the
high school students who worked
as Representative Trujillo to
create land legislation H. B.
one thirty four mandating free
access to menstrual products in
school bathrooms today the group
of students are working on this
legislation are the only
students present in a rural
about education so we want you
when you're talking about
education to listen to our
stories first what we have to
say is that period poverty is an
issue defined by its impact it
is an issue of education it is
an issue of health it is an
issue of intersection ality but
above all period poverty is an
issue of equity what we're
asking you is for three million
dollars to fund putting free
financial products in school
bathrooms and I'll tell you why
the one million dollar estimate
you were getting today in
contrast to three million
dollars comes from studies that
look primarily at the first
bills that were implemented
nationwide in accordance with
this legislation those bills
were in the northeast they were
from states like Massachusetts
states with poverty rates that
are not comparable to New
Mexico's Massachusetts has a
poverty rate of child poverty
rate under ten percent our child
poverty rate is more than double
there's they estimated that
these nancial products would be
used only one to two times a
month only in emergency
situations well to be Frank
that's not realistic in New
Mexico we know that we are a
state endemic with child poverty
we know that we are ranked
number one nationally in child
poverty this for that reason we
ask you to support equity today
if you look at states that have
child poverty rates neutral
relative to New Mexico such as
Hawaii which still has a lower
child poverty rate The New
Mexico they have a third of our
student population and to
implement the exact same bill
for this school year they put
two million dollars dollars
towards their budget thank you
very much if you could
Representative it please finish
your thought and.
Where there is a stigma out
there is consequence students
are not of choice when we do not
have access to these products
today we ask you to make a
choice for the students who have
not thank you very much facility
we're gonna live it if this is
only come if there's any new ID
issues to address please do so
we do need to move on after the
next comment though please go
ahead.
Good afternoon Cherry committee
my name is Marley Fisher and I'm
one of the students advocating
for access to menstrual products
and public school afternoons we
don't know how each and every
story
FX we don't know each member's
story about how deeply period
poverty affects the youth of New
Mexico we can't know all the
individual experiences of
respect and dignity that this
program will create but I want
to tell you some of the things
that we do know we know that
nation wide twenty three percent
of teens who menstruate struggle
to afford natural products we
know the youth poverty rate New
Mexico is much higher than the
national average we know that
four in five minutes Reuters of
had to miss school because of
their period we know that New
Mexico's you has more stories
about period poverty than we can
count and we know that three
million dollars is the bare
minimum that can cover the
implementation of what we're
asking.
We urge you to listen to the
stories for to listen to our
stories with students that can't
tell their own we urge you to
allocate three million dollars
for this program thank you very
much.
Okay good afternoon Mister
chairman committee I promise
I'll make this quick my name is
many of us yes and I'm another
student who's been working on H.
B. one thirty for the miss rock
we bill for public schools as a
student and administrator I
understand this issue on a very
personal level what we are
currently understand is that the
current budget does not
represent the full needs of this
issue for New Mexicans students
New Mexico is a state with one
of the highest poverty levels in
the country with nearly eighty
four percent of female students
attending title one eligible
schools so we have to understand
that this issues is at the
intersection of public health
and education we have to
consider that this population of
our state and the communities
when allocating these funds for
for this bill New Mexico is a
very different states
Massachusetts as normally you
mentioned and that means that
New Mexico requires very
different needs for this bill as
well so one million dollars in
the state that already has high
educational outcomes in low
poverty rates cannot be
correlated to our home state
therefore we are asking for
three million dollars as
recommended by PED where their
initial recommendation was
actually five and a half million
three million is the base budget
for what we can actually
physically.
Construct with for this bill in
order to provide for all New
Mexicans students across the
state thank you thank you very
much.
Thank you Mr Chairman and Mr
Philemon I'm also a high school
that has been working with
Representative Trujillo on this
bill Representative I think it's
a point understands that the
reason we are working on this is
because of the rules results of
us doing it at our own school we
got these products on our own
campus our six graders wrote
thank you notes to stat to stick
next to the products where we
were once fearful of our periods
in sixth grade our sixth graders
were proud.
I know that this may seem like
one small tiny item and a very
large budget but to us the only
high school is in this room I
hope by making a correct
judgment there it translates to
our dignity implants are used
with confidence and all of it is
not possible without proper
funding Representative is today
I'm asking you to listen to your
youth and to listen to your
state please allocate to the
three million recommended by PED
thank you thank you very much.
thank you we're gonna now move
on to our general fund estimate.
Our long as presentation of the
day.
If I Mr chair if by August you
mean a minute or two and.
Happy to do so and hopefully
you'll have the memo that was
handed out to you
However this should be right
there in front of yeah.
And that Mr chair as you all are
familiar the consensus revenue
estimating group which is made
up of economists from the
department of finance and
administration taxation and
revenue transportation and LFC
conducted these revenue
estimates and determine whether
it's appropriate to update the
the revenues that we presented
to you on December and the group
reached a consensus that we will
not make a change to the revenue
estimate at this time that's
mainly because the economic
forecasts have changed
dramatically from what we
presented in December and also
some individual revenues are
sort of canceling each other out
in terms of the bottom line so
we know oil and natural gas
prices are down in FY twenty
three but it gross receipts and
personal income taxes are up
slightly in FY twenty four gross
receipts tax and personal income
tax largely offset each other
and so that bottom line get to
close to zero and I should
clarify that that doesn't mean
that we're you know extremely
confident that we're going to be
a hundred percent right there
still a lot of risk out there in
the forecast and so it's worth
taking a look at that memo on
the last page there we show you
all the stress tests that we
conducted in December just as a
reminder that the cumulative
downside to our revenue estimate
is four point seven billion
dollars through FY twenty five
so a lot of risks remain to this
forecast but at this time your
economists are recommending no
change thank you very much this
photos it's great to see our
secretaries here members are
there any questions as it
relates to our revenue update.
In the budget is if it'll be
higher or lower.
Thank you all very much for your
diligent work this represents a
is an excellent coming together
of mines we relied upon you were
to sort of a time of
unprecedented volatility and
appreciate very much the
incredible work that you all
continue to provide and your
teams continue to provide thank
you all very much.
Okay now we're going to we
deeply appreciate woman hop in
the field thank you for taking a
little extra time thank you for
being here today we want to ask
if you would come up with our
With our analysts and we we
start secretary secretary
certain of their.
And
With that the to go through the
house transportation and public
works committee report.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee it is
my utmost pleasure to come in
front of you and present house
bill three as amended before we
get into the nitty gritty and
like to recognize everyone
sitting at this table Mr
Chairman who all of had taken a
great hand in constructing this
fantastic bill that you're about
to hear about I first I want to
recognize Joey Simon from the
LFC he was our analyst always
been invaluable throughout this
process especially as a new
chairwoman the engine often
whose I'm the transportation
analyst who's also been helpful
and helping us get where we are
today of course Mr secretary
Ricky Serna from DOT and his
entire team and then I also want
to recognize the eight oh
Jimenez from DFA who's also very
helpful and
this this month in that issue.
And then and we also have
I'm sorry Mallory Munson us here
from DOT as well thank thank you
very much we're going to go
straight to our members we have
our different seats here.
let's we'll we'll start off with
any analyst presentation and
Mr chairman I think I'm the one
who's going to give the
presentation okay that's okay
Sir please take continue on.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee
House Bill three is amended by
the house transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee includes a one point
two six billion dollar fiscal
year twenty twenty four
operating budget for the
department of transportation
that represents a three point
five percent increase over
fiscal year twenty twenty three.
The operating budget was reached
through consensus process with
staff from the department of
transportation the department of
finance and administration the
legislative finance committee
and the house transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee the
department's operating budget is
composed entirely of other state
funds and federal funds then
underlined that for you later
House Bill three includes forty
six point seven million more
than the recommended that more
than the recommendation from the
LFC this is due to an increase
in revenue estimates of the
state's road funds as well as
the availability of additional
fund balance.
House Bill three targets
additional revenue for project
construction and maintenance
activities the project design
and construction program manages
the department's construction
projects is funded mostly by
federal revenue additional state
revenue was directed to project
designed for a hundred percent
state funded projects investment
did need to be made for
Department debt service payments
in fiscal year twenty twenty
four the good news is that this
is the department is that the
department is if it's debt
service payments falling in
fiscal year twenty twenty five
and in future years making more
resources available for
projects.
House Bill three hundred funding
to the highly appropriations
programs which is responsible
for maintenance activity on our
routes an additional twenty one
million over the LFC
recommendation is included which
is split between contract make
contact maintenance and for
supplies for in duty crews to
perform their maintenance work.
For the business support
programme additional funding was
included to allow the department
to undertake needed maintenance
activities on in in DOT
facilities throughout the state
for the model program.
The model Robert program House
Bill three includes an
additional five point four
million from the state aviation
fund for airport improvements
and an additional two million
from the weight distance tax
permit identification fund.
Section five to seven of HB
three is amended includes budget
adjustment language the
department the state which is
standard and included every year
to ensure the department can
respond to emergencies and
continue paying contractors for
projects across fiscal years.
Finally section eight of house
bill three includes a hundred
and ninety seven million dollars
in general fund recommendations
for transportation
infrastructure for
transportation infrastructure
projects this includes funding
for construction or maintenance
projects as well as local or
tribal governments on the
additionally there
recommendations to provide
funding to allow the department
to begin implementing a recent
wildfire wildlife corridor plan
and funding for airport
improvements the hundred ninety
seven million dollars included
in the amendment is within the
LFC budget project framework in
keeping with past practice
practice Mr chairman the
recommendations included spread
spreading project funding
throughout the state's
transportation districts and the
amendment anticipate sufficient
project capacity for the Senate
to consider project needs
throughout the state at this
time Mr cherry all of you should
have packets in front of you I
want to take the time to
highlight we gave you both a
letter that kind of gives more
of a detailed explanation of
Hospital three is amended and
the process we went through and
and the logic we utilized to
come home with this consensus
bill and it also includes
another letter Mr chair that
like to draw your attention to
and just for permission to speak
rather freely Mr chair we have a
once in a lifetime opportunity
with federal funding an
additional revenue to make
to make a difference in the
lives of everyday New Mexicans
with infrastructure we can be
able to fund projects Mr chair
that will make a difference for
decades to come and I hope that
members of the committee and you
Mr chair and and missed by your
will agree with me that the time
is now and infrastructure is one
of the most important needs to
the state has and if we have the
money to be able to make these
once in a lifetime investments I
hope we do I hope we can and
it's my absolute pleasure to
stand for questions thank you
very much Madam chairwoman thank
you and thank you to to your
team you.
Brought together today and we'll
go straight to questions we're
gonna start with Representative
electors.
Gentleman I your first want to
start by thanking chairwoman
Hochman Vigil on her diligence
and hard work for this this
particular committee I'm proud
to be part of this committee as
well
but what I think is important
for us to consider in why I
particularly appreciate.
The chairwoman's words is that
for for too long we have been.
Unfortunately too often unable
to invest in ourselves because
when when we invest in our New
Mexico infrastructure
particularly around roads and
bridges we are investing in
ourselves and in our future and
so I Irish support for for this
recommendation thank you Mr
chair thank you very much
Representative Chris next we're
gonna go to representative
Garcia the nursing care thank
you Mr chairman thank you madam
chair
Mr chairman and all.
I've worked in highways for
forty years I'm not going to
services and I know how bad the
roads are and you know I really
recommend the higher the pool
because it did the the control
Mr Mr chair now is the time the
money is here and we can not be
cutting back on on funding this
fishy for hi res and we've you
know on the vice chair of that
committee Mr and you talk to all
districts and we all have needs
and might it take of this is
really really need to step up on
the higher the pool usually we
take the lower but we really
need to consider what we're
doing.
Because you know our rules are
backbone if you don't have a
roll we don't have anything at
all so with that being said
madam chair thanks for the
presentation as for what you're
doing and like I said at the end
of the day the problem roled
infrastructures because rural
renewed confidence in New Mexico
thank you thank you thank you
very much Representative Garcia
that's we're gonna represent
their thank you Mr chair first I
want to compliment are you in
truth or you Secretary now
secretary St thank you Mr chair
representative would be
designate is.
Thank you I just want to
compliment you cause you to
overeat and over the summer from
one meeting to the next it was
like five hundred percent growth
each time thank you for the
investment Mr chair my question
is on section nine section nine
part of the specials and
therefore not included here.
Section lines like the mystery.
List okay.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
representative Garrett section
nine indeed is is one of those
Projects that as a new chair I
had to learn quite quickly about
and it's my understanding and
I'm sure one of the analysts
behind the wheel correct me if
I'm wrong section nine is
actually because it's general
fund nonrecurring money it's
going to be in house bill two
but it's also included in the
section in the amended house
bill three as well.
Thank you Mr chair I wonder when
we will see section nine.
Thank you Mr chair and
Representative Garrett it's
right here it's actually under
section eight in the bill that
you have in front of you.
So with section nine and section
eight Mr chair.
Thanks so it's Mr chair this
then on section eight number
four.
I
just wanna make sure we're clear
that affects all everybody.
I can Mr chair please secretary
service chair representative the
salt of the section line is you
know it Representative is one
hundred ninety seven million and
that's the sum of the paragraph
for paragraph one paragraph to.
And.
Everybody I think it would
behoove us to get a copy soon of
the exact projects.
Thank you the reserve your we
have the we have to areas listed
here perhaps we can ask the
secretary for additional
The tail on the projects that
are included here and just
replace provided to a secretary
in follow up I I absolutely Mr
chair and yes they're listed on
page four of that amendment
following
paired up for great thank you
very much.
Representative Garrett can we
are here for you to.
Okay thank you Representative
Brown then representative
Allison then Representative
Chatfield percent brown please
thank you Mr chairman
madam chairman Mr Sir thank you
all so much for everything that
you've done it is a pleasure to
serve on this committee the
house transportation committee
and are you it's a pretty
massive project Mr chair also
think or analysts to contribute
so much to our to our process
and I I couldn't agree with you
more madam chair Mr chair that
we need to make major
investments unprecedented major
investments in our
infrastructure and now is the
time I think the oil and gas is
going to be doing very well for
the state for
For a few years to come for sure
and this is the time to improve
our infrastructure and Mr
chairman chair when I travel to
other states I pay attention to
the road systems I think what
are they doing that we're not
doing and I've learned a few
things in my travels of of some
things that New Mexico might
think about doing if we have the
funding available but at the end
of the day Mr chair madam chair
it's about public safety and
ensuring that our users of the
roads are having a safe
condition as they can thank you
Mr chair thank you thank you
very much Representative Brown
listening representative Allison
immersive Chatfield and
Representative Baca
Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr chair with
secretary and chairwoman thank
you for bringing this to our
attention because of.
In my district we are very very
rural we're so rural that were
referred to as from tier of it
seems that some of the
appropriations to the highway
Department do not reach out into
the rural areas as much as we'd
like it seems that too much
attention is being paid.
Our state's.
Lost my train of thought for me
anyway
Thank you I have had many
requests recently with the
weather that we're experiencing
now that people are losing the
wheels and tires and axles on
the pot holes that are rural
particularly of the Cuba area
between Cuba and Bloomfield
there I get emails or of text
messages saying that the the
roads are so poor condition that
they're free to drive on the
outside so they have to stay on
the ends in early of I hope that
some of this money is diverted
to correct those pop heels and
then I'm still waiting for an
answer on my call back where the
left.
Is laughing off we're there was
a large rock that ruled offices
about six months ago now and it
just so happened that it hit and
just you right.
And the SUV made a taco sandwich
out of that rock and we were
just very lucky that the people
there was no.
Passengers in the middle
otherwise he would have been
part of the meeting in that top
coat but but that has not been
addressed and just.
Really disappointed in some of
the things that I hear and then
you know in here that for the
peace of the safety the roads
we.
the men and women who keep
roadways safe for the traveling
public by maintaining pavement
you know I'd really really like
to see that because in my area
of but between Shiprock and the
public to the ears of the line
their seventy seventh
significant dips and bumps when
I started campaigning now
there's over a hundred in the
four years that I've been trying
to advocate for that road
maintenance so I'm hoping that
one of these days
your media person will say Hey
we got real construction in that
district for area that's what
I'm looking for
thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
will thank you Representative if
I may respond to that Mr chair
actually this budget will
include an additional twenty one
million dollars for roadway
maintenance to be able to
address projects and issues such
as exactly such as yours
Representative Allison okay one
more thing Mr chair I get text
messages like I said about what
they can do about it and I have
been in contact with my district
I inginer and he said that the
people that suffer damages can
file a claim with their risk
management.
Is it possible to make that a
public notice other than just
being a communication between
myself and my district engineer
why why has a the New Mexico
state DOT maybe it public notice
so they don't have to hunt for
me.
Sure Mr chair representative
thank you Google the fifty
immediately to look to see what
we need to do on that stretch
between Cuba Bloomfield
if I have to I have the pleasure
I think on twenty days in to me
with the Navajo Nation president
and you know nation president
the subsequent week with him and
his chief of staff to talk
specifically about the stretch
that you're referring to see the
rock slides on how back and and
of course the roadway between
their Shiprock the reason for
the fall within the Navajo
Nation will be out there in a
month to do a tour with him to
see how we can come together
including with Arizona a deal
with a dog to to work on that
stretch collaborative the
mystically yes we we can
certainly do a better job of
promoting where drivers can
contact the department
transportation to make a claim
should they encounter damage to
the vehicle because the road
with also one more comment Mr
chair is in the thank you
Representative Allison go ahead
and then Representative at the
route from five to eighty five
billion Seth Roswell I would
like to see the contractor that
resurface that road to come up
to the four corners area thank
you thank you Representative
Allison Stewart go to
Representative Chatfield and
Representative pocket.
Your.
Microphone
Mr chair I know that.
From from what I hear it's
pretty hard to find engineers
right now we've finally come on
to so little not enough money to
start funding our roads and and
the engineers are are hard to
find in in the in the also some
of our construction companies
actually used to build roads
here have gone out of business
but it's startling the we'll
start rolling again we're
starting to get some people to
to do that job fill that
position I know that you all had
gone to the design build format
for awhile which seems to be
working pretty well the.
There is twenty three point one
million dollars left in person.
And an additional one point six
million in this budget
can you speak to to have all
those who interacted all.
Yes I can Mr you're talking
these are you asking
specifically account
representative about our our
personnel in the hires that we
need to make sure absolutely so
it right now Mr chair
representative we have about a
ninety percent vacancy rate and
that's consistent probably with
one of the state as a whole but
for us it's it's spread out over
a couple of areas that we are
concerned with them being in
some of the high cost of living
areas like here in Santa Fe and
among some of our high technical
positions like engineers so to
be sure we've been sitting
around you know a lot of tables
talking about what we need to do
to compete with consultants with
private firms to bring in
engineers and keep them here
with us and so we are focused
laser focus on how we keep our
highly technical positions
filled that's a compensation
matter that's a employee benefit
matter it's a leadership matter
it's a matter of employee
engagement and satisfaction so
we're working on that and then
we do have some other areas and
some of our entry level
positions like industries to
where we compete with some of
the oil fields for CD elves and
and and the mechanics in
particular so we we definitely
aware for we have to target by
location and by occupation Mr
chair I think one of these days
we will be setting around this
table wondering where all the
money with when we had a
windfall but all of the roads
that we put money into well we
got some money will still be
there we'll drive on them when
we come to Santa Fe will drive
on them when we go to the
grocery store so no we're in in
the state budget do I think our
money is more well spent that in
transportation it it allows us
it allows commerce in our state
these road to use what our kids
are taken to school when
anything that happens in New
Mexico happens over our roads I
think it's money well spent so I
just hope with that we take if
possible take the the large.
Thank you very much
Representative Chatfield next
we're gonna go to Representative
Baca please thank you Mr
chairman thank you madam
chairman there will start
Just since I'm new to the
process Mr chair can you briefly
talk about section nine
basically what is the purpose of
section nine as first question
just a sentence or two.
Up and is there a difference
between the recommendation from
the LFC as opposed to the
executive those are.
Mr Chairman.
Go ahead Madam chairwoman if you
want to or secretary Schardin if
you want to summarize the
right please summarize the
action that the house
transportation public works
committee is taken and the
recommendations that madam chair
is bringing us here today
absolutely thank you Mr practice
for me in transition still
Representative there are there
are four of the department of
transportation otherwise doesn't
receive general fund
appropriations they generate
most of the revenue from federal
formula funding and Senator tax
allocations the primary ones
being special fuels we distance
motor exercise tax eccentric.
So a few years ago when the
state's revenues allow for it
you all are identified a
mechanism for providing
additional general fund general
fund support to the department
of transportation to take care
of major projects and
initiatives and since two
thousand nineteen with the
exception of one year we
received a general fund
appropriation to what's called
section nine and so what the
committee has done here is put
together section nine for FY
twenty fourth the dollar amount
is consistent with the LFC wreck
but the distribution of that one
hundred ninety seven million a
slightly different in the LFC
wreck there's there's probably
more categories with a a smaller
amount to the general
construction portion which is
paragraph for and the committee
has approved the identical
amount as the LFC rack with more
funding going directly to
construction and maintenance
projects and thank you for that
explanation I I appreciate that
and Mr chairman and Madam
chairwoman I guess is to be with
the special projects for
additional cost I would like to
you know physically lobby or we
look at the request for the
second offramp the Lawson's exit
as you know
Mr chairman and madam chair when
we have a lot of growth in that
west side the project when
initially funded the increase in
the cost is there's a gap
between what was funded and what
the current costs is due to
labor parts and otherwise so
with that is that it is would
that be something that could
possibly be funded out of this
special section nine Mr stern
Representative Baca las Colinas
have no fear is definitely
included in our recommendation
here.
It doesn't say Los Lunas
specific reference of it but it
is.
Mr chair representative it is
listed as East West corridor in
transportation district.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you for clearing that up
for me the roofs of October so
Pettigrew.
Thank you chairman one question
one very simple question can we
agree or disagree that the
executive office did not give
you a section nine
appropriation and that the
section nine came strictly from
LFC and the DOT with no
executive numbers and that we're
actually half of the original
request.
Mr chair representative
Pettigrew I I'm.
Struggling a little bit I think
with with the way that you have
free reign to this I can tell
you what happened from the
beginning being in New chair we
did receive several section nine
requests from the department on
projects that they felt would be
well served by section nine
funding
it was larger requests than that
we split the the the not.
was given to us with the LFC
recommendation of a hundred and
ninety seven million dollars
quite quite a bit kind of a
larger however through the
consolidation process and the
wonderful work of every single
person at this table and and
also he was well Representative
Pettigrew and the rest of the
transportation Committee we came
together found consensus on the
projects that we did feel would
be best service section nine
funding and we also put it
within the LESC framework for
the dollar amount that was given
to us and I'm also sitting here
in front of all of you today
lobbying that for any additional
fund revenue that is available
that it also be put towards
these projects projects as well
because it would be money very
well spent thank you.
The.
Chairman and chairman.
I appreciate your.
Here response.
I have an original request of
eight hundred eighty nine
thousand five hundred.
Eight hundred eighty nine
million five hundred thousand.
Versus what we approved to route
four hundred sixty seven
thousand.
five hundred and R. four four
hundred sixty seven million five
hundred and I agree yes I did
vote for that bill for for
continuing that my questions
specifically.
Was.
Was there an approach request
from the executive office with
respect to.
The department of transportation
expansion with respect to fixing
and building roads.
I did not fill chairman that I
got that response read that
please Secretary certain of that
we're going to move on that so
Mister chambers explained our
and Representative explain just
a bit ago to Representative Baca
the the time line of section
nine is better is a fairly new
concept right and it was a
concept developed by the
legislature to support the
department transportation during
a time with strong revenues so
to that end it has and because
the department of transportation
doesn't otherwise receive
general fund the executive
recommendation doesn't include
the section nine allocation
because in practice it's been a
tool that the legislature has
developed to provide additional
revenue to the Department.
Chairman chairman secretary I
appreciate the political
response.
We're gonna agree to disagree in
the past our our secretary has
our our governor has put in
their estimates with respect to
that and I I'm frustrated with
respect to that I yes chairman I
voted for this I want to see it
continue to go through four.
It's not the number we need.
Thank you thank you
Representative group we're gonna
go next to Representative heard.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Mr.
Secretary designate my questions
are to and the first one is
related to the clean truck and
methadone program and I'm
looking at the department of the
environment that established
between the clean truck
incentive plan and so that our
transport intensification can
buy those legal emission trucks
buses and fleets and can you
tell me if this budget is the
money and then for making those
purchases incoming.
On Mr chair are representative I
believe what you're referring to
what is the are the allocations
provided by carbon reduction
program as part of the U. S.
department transportation
formula funding to the
department transportation Mr
chair the sector doesn't yes I
am perfect Mr chair
representative yes the those of
the estimates for FY twenty for
a formula distributions are
included in the budget there
among the or within the entire
allocation the agency holds
approximate well close to four
point two million dollars in
discretionary funding that
doesn't otherwise have to go out
to communities and that's the
that's the revenue we use
essentially for other states
supported projects okay thank
you Mr chair thank you Mrs that
could carry one of the question
I have so I'm looking at the
transportation project Fund and
so my question Mr chair and Mr
secretary are we working on a
mass transportation for the
state of New Mexico and is that
the fund it's been built to make
sure that that happens sure Mr
represented the transportation
project fund is actually is
actually a program established
to provide support to local
governments municipalities
counties and tribal governments
to address the infrastructure
needs that are outside of state
roads so will essentially do
that through a call for
proposals those proposals will
be priority ranked along with
the districts and and the
secretary's office and then
we'll dispersed funding so that
they can operate maintain the
roads that were not otherwise
responsible for.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
very much Representative Herndon
okay I would just thank you
madam chair we deeply appreciate
this we appreciate the close
collaboration between your
committee your leadership and
this committee we would also
note that there is there's
continues to be very strong
capacity that this committee is
identified in sort of the the
tax capacity where we can see
perhaps the motor vehicle excise
tax some potential adjustments
there that might be able to
support the sort of commitment
to maintenance to transportation
of all types that we have on
this committee.
So thank you very much we're
gonna go over to vice chair
Dixon for the motion.
Thank you Mr chair I move with
up to house transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee
substitute for House Bill three.
Okay I I see many set.
Thank you for
would set him up it's been moved
and seconded is there any
opposition to adopting house
transportation committee
substitute for House Bill three.
Thing then thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Mr.
The.
A members we're gonna continue
right on again please note our
public school workgroup report
will not be permitted presented
today we do have our
subcommittee a report that's in
front of us here.
We're so members this is a quick
sort of back to and that that
back to the future with that
sort of a a trip back a couple
of weeks we divide into
subcommittees in order to hear
the numerous agencies that are a
part of our state government
that are
Oftentimes have smaller budgets
for have very specific per views
we have here what we're gonna do
here members we're gonna ask for
a brief sort of summary from our
subcommittee shares which are
listed here and a giant things
are LFC in HSC staff for
preparing these through their
diligent work staffing and
observing the committees will
then ask if there are any
insufficient.
That either our vice chair for
other members want to make I
know that time is short
but that's what we're gonna do
that and then members the motion
will be essentially to adopt the
subcommittee report and then to
second that will ask for those
motions to be made by the
subcommittee chair and the vice.
After we get a brief explanation
of some of the subcommittee's
work.
It Representative partner for
just a quick question quick
question so as we look at these
and if we do have additional
amendments
my question is how much money
are we talking about the could
be reallocated are not thank you
Representative Herndon at this
point we're simply we're gonna
be noting if you do want to note
a concern with a particular
budget please do that briefly
that that we do not have the
ability right now to adopt a
different amount than what is
Representative in the
subcommittee reports but we do
want to be able to note that as
we continue to go through this
process.
Mr chair what does that mean
that we noted that there will be
some funding or not thank you
Representative turned in noting
the issue will allow us to
continue to work on that date
was driving so committee chairs
to.
Correct and will last thank you
for the suggestion what we're
going to go in order for and
we'll ask our subcommittee chair
to join Amanda up at the the
dice here what's with first
Representative Allison are chair
of soap Committee eight to go up
to the Dyess there with me with
Amanda just give us a quick
rundown.
Of the agencies.
and please feel free also
amended if there are additional
points that to add from the
additional staff notes thank you
Mr chair I had a great team we
reviewed thirteen agencies and
with all the agencies that we've
been of practicing with we
approve the lower budget but in
the thirteen agencies for a home
we recommend that the higher
whether it was LFC where the
executive budget and those were
due to personnel services and
benefits meaning that we were
losing some key people because
of their budgets and we're
losing some professional people
and then the fourth one is was
because of expansion with the
spaceport I don't we we can be
more brief than that thank you
very much chair Allison
Representative vice chair
Santana anything to add Mr
chairman of the past okay we
have a a motion to adopt
subcommittee a.
Is that there's a second by
Representative approved is there
any opposition to adopt and that
motion seeing none subcommittee
a is it up.
We're gonna now ask if our men
and vice chair.
Percent committee being.
I just wanted.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee.
Are you are wonderful
subcommittee be reviewed twelve
agencies for entities and we had
some wonderful discussions all
of which are noted in the sub
committee report.
I don't think that there was
anything particularly
Controversial for
Explosive that needs to be
highlighted
I am happy to stand for
questions if there are any of
them thank you very much
representative Dick vice chair
Dixon Representative pardon
please up yes.
That.
Is.
Happen to have been presenting a
bill and was not in the room at
the time that this was discussed
so what I see here is a request
to work with the grants
management team this is the
general fund organization help
me to understand why that was
the quest Mr chair man of Bill
Mr chair and subcommittee vice
chair the Martin Luther king
junior commission if I recall
correctly was interested in
securing some outside federal
grant funding for some of their
programs and so the
recommendation was made that
perhaps they of coordinate with
the department of finance and
administration's federal grant
zero for assistance.
Mr chair madam vice chair just
one of the things that based on
the budget that was submitted
for this organization so the in
order to do a matching funding
program with the with the
federal grants operation they
would have money to Max with it
and so I guess I'm just asking
is I look at that but that I did
not see that in there
Mr chair madam vice chair so DFA
does in fact have a matching
grant program from which the
commission would be able to
apply for matching funds if they
are pursuing a federal grant
that requires matching funds.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
very much Representative Herndon
okay seeing no further questions
well actually I will ask you for
Stanford and for the most.
I move that we adopt this
So good morning okay there's a
motion to adopt subcommittee be
their second.
Just say there's a second is
there any opposition to adopting
subcommittee be saying we with
the subcommittee.
Okay.
No.
Representative Trujillo and yes
I'm.
We you know in the committee we
discussed the issues and and.
Usually go with the lower
response that we bring it to the
big committee and we adopt the
presentation but what we do with
all those issues that we're
concerned about.
Thank you Representative trio
those of and we're tracking
those for catch up okay okay and
other other work as we go
forward.
Thank you very much.
Okay.
Madam chair chair siding on a if
you could summarize Committee C.
please thank you Mr chairman I
also had a great committee thank
you we had to that adopted the
executive level executive
Recordation and nine with the
LFC in related to real
and office of the superintendent
of insurance they had they
really wanted to expand the FTEs
that was a big concern of theirs
and in the parole board they
wanted extra money to
For per diem because they do so
much work prepping for these
things but it was found that
nobody else got extra money for
prepping so that one was kind of
not about.
Mr Chairman thank you very much
growth of funding
If anything the of to add
vice chair of the fund.
And so I would I would say that
those are that's correct and if
we're making notes of that with
the those with so I I would
concur and.
Unsatisfied with that Mr chair
make the motion that we are we
ready for motion.
Okay well whole whole please
hold a motion from the hunger
century for questions
is N. M. C. L. P. in here.
I
think that.
Ms it's on page three.
Three four.
The right.
Well helps but look at the right
thing pardon me bottom of page
three this the crime victims of
yeah I was just looking thank
you Mr thank you very much
Representative Trujillo okay
we'll go back to like to hunt.
Mr chairman commissioners we
accept the report there's a
motion to adopt subcommittee C.
report second.
I
am I remember Armstrong is there
opposition to adopting the
subcommittees C. report saying
none that opted.
David gone we're gonna ask
subcommittee.
Which.
We're now on subcommittee.
Good.
Gentleman the members of the
committee of.
In the.
Question.
I thank
of the and then January twenty
fifteen twenty so we met viewed.
Eleven.
Mission boards and agencies of
the eleven seven were
recommended LFC recommendations
for the executive the biggest
thing that we had a change Mr
Chairman was the item number
three sixty one department of
information and technology.
Hi
Got a subcommittee on the
subcommittee with the
Representative Armstrong
Representative procura because
it was a four million dollar
difference I want to other and
we have that ironed out the
restroom or normal savings and
of with that also for questions
roof.
I thank you very much
Representative thank you chair
Garcia
are there any questions with
subcommittee Representative
here.
Is
and this is higher education
right I'm beginning to get now
sorry members were on the
committee do okay these so this
is we're listening higher
education race right now okay.
Single questions is there a
motion to adopt subcommittee Mr
Chairman the my my question
might have some mental health to
a.
I think you were on subcommittee
do you have anything to add to
the subcommittee.
Secure.
Thank you.
Thanks to your chair for thank
you okay is there a motion to
adopt subcommittee almost up the
committee okay it's been.
Moved by Representative setting
and that second by
Representative Sanchez is there
any opposition to adopt and so
committee saying none we've
adopted separate the thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you.
Kate were rolling through this
Yeah let's go first to the are
coming computer systems
workgroup.
Did.
What.
Well on the side it's different.
Different view of.
I appreciate that thank you so
much Representative Garrett if
you could start us through on
our computer systems workgroup
report please you Mr chairman
and members of the committee of
the computer systems enhancement
fund met on the north we
reviewed twenty nine I. T.
project requests for maybe
eighteen different agencies we
had secretary Mentos secretary
designate mantles from do it
here and miss a very
representing a consortium of six
of two year colleges so the
difference
there was a five million general
fund increase suggested by the
HFC a scenario and we a doctor
with two concerts we had to
changes to language that
required reporting so we have
better accountability and then
an outstanding item is the
working group on the higher
education departments the six
two year colleges that are
working together with the up
front costs but budget down the
road so the LFC had
Representative had recommended
the executive at a recommended
fifteen point one million the
LFC had come in with four
million they added three million
which equals seven million but
our committee members felt very
strongly that we should get much
closer to the fifteen point one
million because prices go up
things change
and so we'd like to recommend to
the full committee the addition
of two million or more to the
project above the adopted HSC
scenario if there is additional
flexibility in the overall
budget and the other point is we
also re authorized projects
there was a question about.
Some of them the legislative
recommendation was adopted to
extend twenty nine of the thirty
six ones we looked at some
additional ones and added to I
believe at two one is that where
they had actually spent money
contrary to the previous report
so we did adopt those as well
but the outstanding question.
Is adding more money to number
twenty nine
on your page.
It's on page three higher
education department number
twenty nine so right now it
stands at seven million we our
committee actually would like to
see the whole fifteen point one
there's a recommended additional
two million if possible more if
more possible.
yes so that is what I have to
report.
Thank you madam chair are you
Read questions yes thank you
Representative Armstrong thank
you madam chair
I'm not a hundred percent sure
that the committee wanted.
Money and there I don't remember
voting on that and that I
remember this project is a sixty
million dollar project cost
overall this doesn't
cover all colleges and I'm
personally happy with the seven.
Million and would recommend my
my personal recommendation is to
not have the additional money
it's it's a company that's been
the project and the price keeps
going up in my opinion thank you
madam chair and madam chair
she's corrected but I believe
Representative Allison
Representative Baca both and
Senator isn't did express that
if more money could be up front
because it's over two years the
prices will rise significantly
so Representative Armstrong is
correct and also there is the
concern about rising prices if
we don't get as much done in the
two year contract period and I
don't know if any of the the
representative from the
committee want to comment on
that.
Representative Allison.
Thank you madam chair yeah on
that particular subject.
When we were told that.
Yes the scenario was raised
seven million we were told there
are five community colleges and
then in the process of the
discussion we picked up another
call it so there's six people or
six colleges that will be
splitting the increased so
that's when we said let's go for
ten million so that we can
adequately cover all the six
community colleges.
And that would be my suggestion
is to try to go for the ten
million.
And and
Mr chair the six colleges are
San Juan northern Luna C. N. M.
S. Santa Fe in Clovis those are
the six colleges that currently
involves.
Representative about please
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you madam secretary as far as
chairman chairwoman I just also
want to clarify that as far as.
I did advocate for a deep dive
of adding additional funds for
this project as we were told
there was of about five million
dollars we're going so my
understanding is it would not be
possible to allocate the whole
fifty million but I to think
that if we get up to three
million dollars to help with
this project would be I think
that would help communities are
otherwise underserved and these
community colleges are big parts
that if we can serve and help
them in any way for the good of
the community for the good of
the colleges I would
respectfully ask for the ten
million dollars Mr Chairman the
representative Baca.
I don't see any other questions
members this is let's go to
first we'll go to Representative
Mr chairman I.
Make a motion that we are well
we're not exit I'm not accepting
a motion right now okay thank
you members so that we have our
subcommittee report our computer
information systems first thank
you to the chair for noting some
of the differences members the
way that we sort to handle these
sort of the final details of the
budget with this very much is is
a process called catch up and
clean up
it's a program we have just the
report will ask to adopt the
report as it is today but I
think it's been very clearly
noted first in the work that the
second this group did that there
is potential additional need and
flexibility and that's something
for us to work through that'll
it'll bring us back on Monday
that'll be this will be one of
the items that we discussed on
Monday during the catch up
cleanup process we would add up
to the the report as it is today
but it's a great example of
that.
Okay now we will accept the
most.
Representative Sarinana the
chairman that the accepted
version of the additional
funding and remove it from the
CYFD additional budget okay I'm
not accepting that motion but
thank you we'll go now to.
Mr chairman I I move that we
accept the report from the
computer systems enhancement
fund workgroup great there's a
gentleman I second okay
there's a motion to adopt the
work the information systems
report we noted for catch up
clean up is there any opposition
to adopt and that please show
Representative Pettigrew in
opposition.
Okay.
Now as for our final report for
today.
Okay protection please walk us
through good to see you Mr
Jorgensen.
I thank you Mr chair
I'm here to provide a summary of
the higher education
working group and give you an
overview of our recommendation a
couple of things but we did we
are recommending that we.
Allocate twenty three million
dollars for the opportunity
scholarship for total recurring
appropriation of forty five
million.
we also are recommending six
hundred thousand for statewide
programs for autism diagnosis
rural physician clinical
placements and tribal dual
credit.
In terms of a nonrecurring
appropriation increases.
These are the working group
recommends fourteen million
dollars for the opportunity
scholarship which would be a
total of seventy four million
non recurring.
Ten million dollars for the
reforestation Center this
appropriation was initially made
to EMNRD but moved to NMSU at
the request of agency partners
one point we had a thorough
discussion on in the.
Please continue.
To.
We had a a thorough discussion
on on a one point five million
dollar nonrecurring
appropriation to mesa lance
community college for solvency
issues to be administered
through higher ed or another
higher education institution and
the working group also
recommends one point four eight
million dollars for facility
equipment and workforce training
programs you're working group
has to recommendations for
language changes no oh I'm sorry
it's multiple
So one is recommending
distributing forty million
dollars in reserves matching
funds directly to institutions
rather than making a formula
distribution through the
committee process at HUD we had
extensive discussion about that
and both of those just a much
more efficient and effective way
to do it
we also suggests setting a
deadline of July fifteenth for
disbursement of funds for B. R.
and R. and B. R. North.
We.
The working group recommend re
authorizing twenty million
dollars appropriated for work
study to be used for short term
workforce training programs and
for internships and
apprenticeships.
We also recommend broadening the
purpose of five million dollars
in nonrecurring special
appropriations
beyond just graduate
scholarships for master's
students in stem but also to
cover doctoral students in those
fields and finally adding
clinical supervision as an
authorized use for the twenty
million dollars appropriation
for the social work endowment.
Finally I would like to note
that the working group
recommends the following guard
rails for the opportunity
scholarship number one
Holding tuition and fees at the
fiscal year twenty three level
and number two discontinuing the
use of opportunity scholarship
funds to pay for Bridge semester
scholarships there is extensive
discussion within the working
group on the guard rails and we
feel that those are good right
guard rails for the committee to
consider.
and then with that I think I
would stand for questions and
have Mr Jorgensen here as well
right thank you very much for
the Dixon let's we'll go to
Representative Garcia than
representative on the line.
Thank you for we which will
question on the the.
pre lottery Remi Prieur
Education.
We have anything in language of
the.
Choir a student the graduation
to stay in New Mexico other than
to.
A spare Education the revision
if you are.
I'm thank you Mr chair and
Representative that was
certainly an item that was
discussed there was I would say
a fair amount of discussion on
that particular item however
that was not a guard rail that
the working group adopted.
Thank you know of Mr chair and
for general.
You know we put a lot of
dedication and then you know you
educate people on the New Mexico
what kind of these is that the
just my thought thank you thank
you Mr thank you very much
Garcia representative on and.
I I I thought the same thing it
maybe just for the doctoral
students maybe adding a
continued for a couple years.
But he said.
Adding that on to that.
Madam Mr chair and
representative are you
referring specifically to the
five million
For the stem fields okay thank
you okay.
Representative signing out of
next Representative brown and
Representative care.
The state thank you so much.
By Terry I do have a quorum.
I'm sorry Mr chair and
representative Mister Jorgensen
did point out to me that
the scholarships for the stem
programs a require that this be
recipients be graduates of New
Mexico high schools so they are
students coming from New Mexico
however it does not address the
after graduation concern thank
you for that thank you thank you
thank you Mr chair and vice
chair have a question about
something on page five the
General fund summary.
Page five one twenty two Mr
Chairman.
More vice chairman so this is
regarding the Burrell college of
osteopathic medicine of
executive requested seven point
five million for coverage for
minority students to enhance the
program and Mr chair made by
chair I am.
Concern with our doctor
shortages accuse it is that we
should be doing everything we
can to grow more doctors and so
I would like to see this being
funded perhaps Mr chairman and
buster you could explain why
nothing was provided here.
This is.
Mr chair and representative that
we believe that there is a
little bit of discussion but
obviously that was not
incorporated into the workgroup
recommendation however two of
the points I believe that did
come up number one that Burrell
College is a private institution
and number two that there is
funding elsewhere to back fill
In the health care workforce
expansion and sorry and the
nurse work expansion back but
also there are line items in
other locations of the budget.
Mr Chairman more vice chair
So I understand part of the
private institution
More to their ways to contractor
make it so it's services
provided more still course kind
of funding source for it but.
I don't think you would have to
carry the load for the state for
new doctors of the number of
incoming doctors is not that
high especially not and in
regard to the demand so I I just
wish there were something we
could do more as this affects
every New Mexico thank you Mr
chair thank you for knowing that
Representative Brown.
Okay it was I think
Representative Sarinana sorry no
is a Representative Garrett.
Okay in New.
Senator any name is fine Mr
chair.
All I'm relieved to see the
recommendations because they're
far more realistic thirty six
thousand students increased our
cultural four percent which
benefits our state our job dot
com and I would rate remind
people they have to scholarship
does focus on adults the average
age of college students is
twenty six I don't know what the
average age of the opportunity
for semester is but it really
helps older Christians I wish we
could give more.
All and I would just highlight
that is something to work on in
the next year.
for some kind of more permanent
recurring budget thank you I do
have one question
Mr chair.
The secretary of higher
education did she weigh in on
just can discontinue the use to
pay the bridge.
Semester.
Mr chair and Representative
Garrett let me know if I may
make a it just a brief comment
and then a potential I could
pass it on to Mister Jorgensen
for some technical remarks on we
had a good discussion on that
particular item and my
recollection is that the
committee discussed the original
parameters of the lottery
scholarship and the commitments
and that the universities make
when accepting those funds and
so that was a large component of
our decision making an impact if
I may have Mr Jorgensen
elaborate on that.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Garrett
I think there's probably a
couple things there so one
when the secretary was here for
the higher read briefing to HFC
it was stated that the position
of the governor's office was
that they wanted to continue
fully funding their anticipated
cost of opportunity scholarship
which included bridge.
Now at one of the things that
came up
Well first if you turn to page
eleven you can see the the cost
of that
is estimated to be around twenty
one million dollars in that to
cover that bridge semester for
FY twenty four and to directly
answer that the.
I'm sorry
Federal level line twenty two.
but ridge wasn't originally
estimated for and that's part of
what drove that cost from ninety
three to to the hundred thirty
five are now hundred forty five
million dollars and the other
the other issue you brought up I
think is is spot on and that's
the average age of those
returning students so
opportunity is helping a whole
lot of folks who've been out of
school for several years where
is the bridge applies to only
those lottery students in their
in their very first semester of
of college right after high
school.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
the follow up on this in time
that you devoted to it and I
hope we can continue to develop
more in the coming years thank
you thank you very much for
Senator Representative Trujillo
please.
Yes Mister chair I I just want
to concur with Representative
brown's comments about the fact
that you and them is not going
to be.
Capable of of producing the
amount of positions that we need
in the state and we really need
to reconsider Perot.
Thank you for noting that.
ranking member from please thank
you Mr chairman and on I hope
that
consensus with the the
Colleges on the forty million
and to I just wanted to note
that
it was not the colleges that
brought it up it was.
The working group so thank you
Mr chairman thank you very much.
Okay
seeing no further questions west
now to adopt the report for the
higher education working group
so much okay perfect thank you
for moved by Representative
Pettigrew second by
Representative Garcia is there
any opposition to that thing
then we've adopted that.
Okay okay members I think that
brings us to the conclusion of
today's this
If there is a if there's any
public comment the folks one
offer please do so otherwise
we'll wrap up.
Save Kate so members were
wrapped up for today if you're
part of the specials and
supplementals work group will be
meeting tomorrow at eleven this
We met once previously will meet
again tomorrow at eleven we'll
see everybody Monday for our
catch up and clean up.
And then will continue on from
there but members were on target
thank you all very much for
taken your time for your great
participation and as always
