Representative Brown.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Castellano I see
him.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield.
Hello there there.
Representative Dixon here.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Garcia.
Representative ada.
Representative Hochman the heat
here.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lara.
Representative study on on air.
Representative is with.
Yeah.
Representative Trujillo.
Here.
Vice chair small.
Here.
Madam chair Lundstrom air.
looks like we have a quorum so
we're going to go ahead and fire
up we've got quite a few reports
to run through just to quickly
review the agenda for today
we're going to go through the
house transportation committee
report.
And the proposed amendments to
house bill three we'll hear
subcommittee reports of a B. C.
and D. and then the various work
group reports that it will end
up after all the workgroup
reports the legislative finance
committee general fund update
which is basically our mid
session consensus revenue update
with that being said let me
start by welcoming chair woman
Rubio and the house
transportation and public works
team so go ahead please.
Madam chair I'm not sure if
she's on just yet she's in
another committee she said she
was calling in right now.
When we have the vice chairman
stepped down Harry Garcia with
Tom church in that will let
Representative Rubio catch up
when she comes in.
Madam chair yes I I don't know
all site I got maybe intend to
stay here but I'm here just to
yeah we thought we saw your
picture yes thank you madam
Garcia.
Representative Garcia.
I'm we're gonna fly get forum.
Madam.
Yes thank you madam chair I
think that Jr Rubio is in the
attendees which makes have to
make sharing her over all right
here in.
Thank you madam chair.
She.
Is here now madam chair.
All right.
Good afternoon chairwoman we're
ready.
Right and sorry about that I'm
in committee as well I'm so
thank you madam chair and
members of HFC I'd like to
present the committee report on
house bill three as amended for
your consideration of the fiscal
year twenty twenty two operating
budget for the New Mexico
department of transportation
because the committee report is
in the form of edits to the
original bill I'll explain how
the budget was developed in the
final recommendation from the
house transportation public
works and capital the committee
this past Tuesday the committee
pass this amendment tend to zero
a technical staff working group
was formed to reconcile three
documents the New Mexico
department of transportation FY
twenty two budget request the
legislative finance committee FY
twenty two recommendation and
the department of finance
administration executive FY
twenty two recommendation you
reject recommendations had minor
adjustments without any changes
to the total amount recommended
by the provided by the program
the first major adjustment came
from you revenue because of the
low June twenty twenty forecast
due to COVID nineteen
uncertainty the revenue for the
department which consist
primarily of gasoline and diesel
fuel tax weight distance and
vehicle registration fees held
strong in trying times the three
point five percent increase
budget between FY twenty one in
FY twenty two.
Revenue adjustment was an
increase of twenty two point six
million dollars the second
budget adjustment came from fund
balances thirty three million
dollars combined with the new
revenue this resulted in an
increase of fifty four point
nine million dollars over the
initial LFC recommendation
because of this fifty four point
nine million increase increases
the committee increase the
committee asked to be involved
in the adjustments rather than
leaving it to staff
recommendations as had
previously been done a
bipartisan working group was
convened and committee members
felt strongly that much of the
additional funding should be
applied to maintenance of
highways heavy equipment and
rest area improvements thirteen
million dollars of the new
revenues relying to highway
maintenance and the remainder of
the forty two million new
revenue was budgeted for various
uses as requested by the
department.
Permanent transportation is
budgeted in four program areas
the project designing
construction program consists of
state and federal highway funds
that will support a robust.
Program estimated to be four
hundred sixty five million
dollars for the upcoming year
the recommendation for this
program of three hundred fifty
eight person includes twenty six
point four million in salaries
and benefits three hundred and
forty four point five million
dollars in contractual services
and two hundred and forty two
point eight million in the other
cost category the total FY
twenty two recommendation for
the design and construction
program is six hundred and
thirteen point eight million
dollars representing a three
percent increase over the
department's request the highway
operations program represents
over one thousand eight hundred
forty hard working women and men
who keep the roadway safe for
the traveling public by
maintaining put pavement
clearing snow replacing guard
rails traffic signs as well as
the unfortunate and never ending
task of cleaning trash and
litter off of our state
highways.
Operation recommendation for
this program includes a twelve
percent increase over the LFC
recommendation one thousand
eight hundred and forty point
seven person one hundred and
nine point two million dollars
in salaries and benefits seventy
four point seven million dollars
in contractual services and
ninety three point eight million
dollars for a total recommended
appropriation for this program
of two hundred and seventy seven
point eight million dollars.
The business support program is
responsible for the financial
human resources information
technology and other various
services I must congratulate the
department for last year state
audit where they had zero audit
findings a testament to the
great work they do when
accounting for over a billion
dollars of taxpayer resources
the business support programme
consisting of two hundred and
forty nine point eight person is
recommended for a one percent
increase over the requested
amounts for twenty five point
six million dollars in salaries
four point six million dollars
in contractual services and
thirteen point five million
dollars in other costs for total
recommendation of forty three
point eight million dollars the
model program includes public
transportation and traffic
safety programs and the point of
entry program a five point nine
million fund a five point nine
million dollar fund balance in
the weight distance permit
identification administrative
fund was recommended for
improvement of the ports of
entry the model program
recommendation is an eight
percent increase over the HSD
request recommendation includes
a hundred and twenty one percent
now seven point six million
dollars in salaries thirty four
point three million dollars in
contractual services thirty five
point nine million dollars in
other costs for a total
appropriation recommendation of
seventy seven point eight
million dollars the total agency
recommendation for New Mexico's
department of transportation FY
twenty two operating budget
consists of two thousand five
hundred and sixty nine person a
hundred and sixty nine million
dollars in salaries.
Four hundred fifty eight point
two million dollars a
contractual services three
hundred and eighty six point two
million dollars and other costs
for a total appropriation
recommendation of one point zero
one three billion dollars this
recommendation reflected in the
committee report is the house
transportation public works and
capital improvement committee
recommendation for the
transportation appropriation act
of twenty twenty one so with
that chairwoman I would open it
up for questions I also have I'm
Tom church here to help me with
any technical questions.
Before we go to questions I will
ask the cabinet secretary Mike
Santa to make comments and then
the analysts DFA and LFC and
house transportation analyst if
they would like to make Madam Mr
secretary are you are you there.
We're promoting the panelists
madam chair already great thank
you.
Thank you madam chair I just a
got lead in the zoom so I
appreciate it first of all madam
chair members of the committee
thank you very much for allowing
me to make a few brief comments
on the budget I really
appreciate that
I don't have too much to add
other than to say I think this
is one of the largest operating
budgets the department had for
as long as I've been here and
I've been with the department
over twenty years so we
certainly appreciate that and
appreciate the fact that the
revenues came in better than
expected we really lower.
Revenue projections
based on the pandemic just to be
safe and be sure that we went
over spend we are happy that
revenue projections came in
about twenty two million over so
we're happy about that we're
also very thankful madam chair
over the last couple years with
specials we received about five
hundred and thirty five million
dollars of general fund money
that we've been able to put out
into the roadway in very quick
fashion in many different areas
I've be it to the locals through
maintenance and through major
investment projects we're happy
to answer any questions about
those but overall our our budget
is looking good projects are
looking good even though we've
been in this pandemic now almost
going on a year now our work has
not stopped and the the projects
have not slowed down and we've
been able to meet all of our
step in obligations and
commitments that we made with
that new money that was provided
to us so we're very appreciative
for the generosity that Madam
chair of this committee has
shown us over the last couple
years and we look forward to
this next year and we're
building will be happy to answer
any questions that were the
committee may have so thank you
madam chair for letting me come
all righty thank you our
secretary Santa I wanted to also
allow you from any of our key
analysts that help with this
consensus report together have
any comments.
or Connor is there any comments
that you all may have.
thank you thank you madam chair
this
you know that's years process
deviated from from the way it's
been done many years I think
that due to the large increases
the committee asked to be
involved and so with that I I
believe that it's a solid budget
for the DOT I I think that yet
you know overall every program
in the agency sought some form
of of an increase and that along
with as secretary Santa
mentioned you know special
appropriations money that may
come and I I think you'll see a
very healthy program I'm going
into the next year.
All righty anyone else.
yes madam chair this is Connor
Jorgensen with LFC.
I I also wanted to just point
out
This is the first billion plus
dollar budget the department has
had the
And it reflects I think the the
committee's priorities while one
of the things we bill notices.
Overall person funding was
shipped out a little bit to
reflect hi Baconsky rates that
have been ongoing however the
department has made pretty good
progress in lowering those rates
historically right now we see
about a half million dollars in
surplus person funding estimated
for FY twenty one when we did
this process last year I just
looked up our our PS out from
back then it was twelve point
seven million dollars.
M. funded vacancies so the
department has done
has done some good work on some
of those positions I also like
to mention there's some
There's one time not one time
there's some money in there to
support.
Forty three Basilides.
Hi and that's.
That is new this year I think
the that's the culmination of a
process to begin in twenty
sixteen to sort of consolidate
quarterback tree operations
under G. O. gene that's in there
as well as some pretty large
increases and contract
maintenance and and that's a lot
of the.
The sort of smaller resurfacing
projects you're gonna see out
and and districts statewide and
that was a big priority of the
of the committee I would yield
to I've I believe Mr Jimenez of
DFA have.
Thank you contact madam chair as
chair Rubio mentioned.
This year the process went a
little different and the
committee became involved in.
Determining the uses for.
The additional revenue and fund
balance this was done without
consultation of DOT or DFA.
So I just need to to express
that there's about thirteen
million dollars and the highway
operations programs that we
would rather see as was as it
was originally agreed to in the
tech group
unlike the other programs.
Thank you madam chair.
All right.
I did have a question before I
go to the committee on this this
is for secretary of Secretary.
Anticipate a new federal
infrastructure bill coming out
of Congress this year.
Madam chair yes we do as a
matter of fact we've gotten
noticed over the last couple
days that there is already start
in the Senate side to do a new
transportation bill the fast
acted
expire this September thirtieth
the just we're operating now on
a continuing resolution all
information points to increase
federal funding not only just as
a standard year to year revenue
formula based funding for every
state but also a new
infrastructure program probably
very similar to the our program
under Obama
part of the criteria that we're
hearing this and to be necessary
to access some of those new
grant programs like our of would
be that the projects be shovel
ready and so we're really have
made an effort over the last
couple years to get projects
shovel ready we didn't have a
lot when I first started just
because department to have money
but now probably by this summer
we're gonna be getting somewhere
between two hundred fifty and
three hundred million dollars
worth of projects that are
shovel ready and we think that
positions us well for not only
redistribution at the federal
level but should there be a new
transportation bill or a new
grant program we would be very
well positioned to access some
of that money so we're looking
forward to hopefully getting
some more federal money coming
into our state.
Already thank you very much I'm
gonna go to the committee now
and do we have any questions
from the committee members of
from the chair of transportation
or any of the presenters.
We do we have Representative
Ezzell go ahead ma'am.
Hi you're on you're on mute.
Madam chair thank you very much
I'm not on that committee or
anything but and and forgive me
I may.
First semester freshman on this
committee coming into the middle
of the semester so I I do have a
question and the.
My concern is after reading the
report can you tell me where any
dollars for the rail runner are
in this particular document that
we received.
Right I'm gonna ask the cabinet
secretary or Tom church to
respond to that.
Madam chair
What I and Tom can can also
answer if you wishes madam chair
there's not any money in our
budget for real runner the way
that that works is we do on the
track and I I guess I should say
let's say not money I mean not
money going specifically to that
but we do still have debt
payments that were required to
pay right around thirty five
million dollars per year but as
part of our operating budget day
to day operations for the rail
runner we do not have any budget
in our any money in our budget
for that we contracted out to
real metro they they do
appropriations based on fares
and federal money that they
receive so we don't funded their
operations all we're doing is
right now is paying the debt for
the track.
Madam chair secretary Santa
thank you very much for your
explanation.
All right let's go to
representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair of a
politician the committee for not
being able to speak a little
wobble technical difficulties I
was happening I just want to
thank the committee madam chair
for all the hard work to get the
department transportation where
it's at it's awful important of
the hard full but everybody in
the end of the department of
transportation committee work
really hard at it and
In result are good thank you
madam chair.
Representative Herrera.
You very much madam chair this
question is great secretary
Santa and I know that you bill
to ATM a highway have to the new
Facebook offices share when they
are when they put in that big
plants curious I know you also
sold fiber I think you so it's
fiber optic rights to be laid at
the same time so that they would
have the that it on the proper
broadband
with that they needed I I was
wondering how much does a
company like does any company
pay you and pay when they get
those rights to look at the
broadband cable I'm I'm working
on broadband I'm always
interested if there's money that
we can set aside for public
access for for people with low
incomes could you just tell me
how that process works thank you
madam chair.
Madam chair and representative
there's a few different
processes what when it came to
Facebook that was played done
about four five years ago and
the deal that was made with
Facebook was they could use are
right away to lay fiber so right
away along either interstate or
state highway in turn they gave
us seventeen access points to
the fiber and we can use that
fiber so currently the
department does does have access
to fiber that's in the ground to
make connections at a future
date for anything that we may
need that for and so in that
particular situation we
exchanged right away for free
fiber and free access so now
what happens when someone wants
to come and put fiber and we
either make that same type of
similar deal where will let you
use our right away if you give
us free fiber and free access
other place other folks want to
put up either a tower or some
type of of other facility all
right away and we charge them a
fee depending on where that is
and the value of that particular
spot of land and so this is all
a new process for us because
broadband is you know is not
regulated and so we have a
pretty clear process for
utilities and other folks that
want to use all right away but
we didn't have any rule in place
and now we do have a rule that's
in process it'll be very clear
on if you want to lay fiber in
our in our right away or put up
towers there's a certain the
costs associated that were there
certain fiber that you need to
provide to us for free and we
also are putting in a an
electronic permit system so that
that can be tracked and mapping
and everything else can be done
so we're kind of keeping track
of all of that in coordination
with do it so we have a few
different processes depending on
the type of I or the type of
facility you want to put on.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Secretary we're looking at that
process and procedure very
closely because obviously as we
expand broadband to the rural
and surface underserved parts of
the state that is going to
create a lot of access and we
wanted we want to be able to
have a fair policy that I think
chairman said investment because
really most of the cost is in
the digging not thank you so we
want to make sure that return on
really the state's investment is
fair to the system so thank you
very much madam chair I
appreciate.
Right Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair chairman
Rubio and Mr secretary Santa
aria just have a quick question
about the
the authorized FTEs and where
you're going to be a twenty
twenty two so you were
authorized for twenty twenty one
to our just over two thousand
six hundred positions and we
have about five hundred thirty
three they can is at the time
this was written and so I'm I've
I'm wondering if my memory
serves me I thought with the
vacancy rate not that long ago
was as high as even twenty four
percent are madam chair Mr
secretary could you refresh my
memory on that.
Madam chair representative brown
yes just to give you an idea
when when I took over in January
the vacancy rate was at twenty
one percent little over twenty
one percent.
we work really hard to get that
down in last March it come down
to fifteen percent in our goal
by the end of the calendar year
was to get down to about ten to
twelve percent and then the
pandemic it in March and from
March to about July August or
vacancy rate under the hiring
freeze went back up to about
twenty percent in addition we
also received a hundred position
new positions last year most of
those for the point
and so that also helps increase
our vacancy rate again because
obviously they were vacant
although they counted towards
overall number so we work really
hard again and we're down now to
fifteen and a half percent
currently as of today and we're
hoping that if everything
continues in the right direction
we're going to get down to that
ten eleven percent that's where
we think that we will be the
most efficient there's always
gonna be some vacancy there due
to retirements and just people
getting promoted but if we can
get down to that ten eleven
percent that's where we think we
operate yes but that's where we
are right now and that's kind of
the history over the last couple
years.
Madam chair and Representative
Rubio and and Mr secretary so I
I congratulate you on that I I
remember.
It was something that just seem
to be a persistent problem and
and you really managed to a lot
of correction there so I also
want to congratulate you for
cracking the asphalt sealing it
getting to a billion dollar
budget we knew you were getting
close last year but that's kind
of a neat number for New Mexico
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Brown
analysts go to representative
Allison.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Chair Rubio for a very good
point this question is for
secretary Santa do you think
that the.
Bill grant that we applied for
and were rejected is going to be
read to related or the new
program is place so that we can
fix some very needed roads.
Madam chair representative yes
we do plan to resubmit that
graph as you are aware
Representative we submitted a
grant for a road in your area
from Shiprock to the Arizona
state line the first year we
were directed we had a briefing
on it we resubmitted a grant the
next year with the changes that
they requested we made it to the
final round we're right up there
at the top we just didn't get
selected because there wasn't
enough money but all the boxes
were checked and it was approved
and we are at the highest level
possible without getting
selected so we do have that
grant application again once the
new grant LA cations are
released we will submit that
again we think with the
increased money and the
different process that we have a
very good chance of receiving
money to help with that road in
your particular area.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr secretary yes I'm very
anxious for that road to be
completed in my political
lifetime thank you very much
miss Terry thank you madam chair
all right let's go to
Representative Chatfield.
Your muted Representative.
There we have thank you madam
chair good afternoon Mr
Secretary
Glad to see that you know
another good big budgets the
this year and I will show up
Representative Brown got to some
of my questions do you think
this budgets go allow you to
fill all the positions that you
have open an economic team to to
get get up on this work.
Madam chair representative yes I
do I think
this committee and the and the
budgets always allowed us to try
and get to that ten twelve
percent there was just some
obstacles with the pandemic that
we ran into this year we're
looking forward to get get in
those positions filled in house
because if we can't fill those
positions the projects still go
on what ends up happening is we
end up hiring consultant help on
to do the work and that's much
more expensive than if we had a
deal to staffers and so if we
can get down to that ten eleven
percent not only is it be more
efficient business save us money
in the long run so we're looking
forward to working out next few
months so so madam chair that
leads me to my to my second
question which was really the
main question with more funding
and and obviously more roads are
going to get fixed do you do
what will you do all of these
projects in the house or do you
contracts some of them out to
road contractors that we have
across the state.
So madam chair and
representative the thing that we
kind of have a hybrid process
for the design process we do
have our own three design
centers of northern central and
southern design center that
support the districts if we have
staffing available that will do
the design and house if we don't
will contract out for a design
consultant however the
construction program is a
hundred percent contracted out
so large projects that you see
will go to a construction
company the smaller maintenance
projects the chip seals and
those things will sometimes be
DOT staff but the large
construction the construction
projects under percent contract.
Thank you madam chair that's
exactly what my question and
answers it thank you madam chair
thank you Mr secretary thank you
very much Representative
Castellano.
And so madam chair thank you I
think this might be for a
secretary up channel I see here
on the project designed to
construct and I think there is
to
Representative Chatfield touched
a little bit on it there's six
hundred and thirteen million
dollars that you guys have
gotten for I guess budget design
and construction
and and I'm new at this I I just
have a question how how do you
guys designate this money to go
to that six different districts
of either six districts.
And how do you guys get that
money to six different districts
is there is our priority stage
is there something that if your
shovel ready you can do a
project I just it's just a
question thank you madam chair.
Madam chair and and
Representative
yeah there's a few different
ways I mean we we follow our own
state process the state
transportation improvement
program process so that's the
kind of six year outlook into
the future and so are district
engineers look at pavement
conditions look at possible
economic development benefits
look at safety issues all of
capacity traffic all of those
things and they start developing
projects based on the priority
list that's handled through our
traf transportation asset
management program and so they
start developing projects they
put him in our staff and then we
work on funding is allocated to
each districts each district is
provided a certain amount of
money each year to try and meet
their obligations step and so it
is a a database project is a
need based projects.
I'm on the money that's provided
the extra money that's provided
by the legislature we work with
members of the lead on that has
been chairwoman Lundstrom the
kind of get people in the same
room and look at projects
outside this to compulsively be
funded or moved forward and so
that's a little bit different
process where we sit down and
talk about it and see what some
of the important projects there
but
for those for the most part
operating budgets of through
this.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr Santa quick question also
does this money also include
money that goes out for local
projects.
When we passed a bill of the
bill was in committee this
morning with that.
Thank you madam chair.
Mr
So madam chair and
representative yes it does we
get the the locals get a small
percentage of the gas tax and
then starting in FY twenty two
they'll start getting a small
part of the motor vehicle excise
tax so that money is included
and we have processes for how we
distribute each of those phones.
I thank you senator Senator
thank you madam chair more
questions.
Thank you Representative
understand thank you madam
chairman of madam chairman I am
just a quick question for
secretary Santa Sir is you know
in in southeast New Mexico we've
been working hard to get the
passing lanes every five miles
on US three eighty east out of
Roswell New Mexico to the Texas
line of is
I know you're aware of the
project my simple question is
this when we talk about federal
infrastructure money possibly
moving later this year is that
project going to qualify for a
shovel ready or what status is
that project in in your mind.
Madam chair representative
I think to answer your first
question is yes that project
would be eligible for federal
funding it's on the US highway I
will tell you that we have
submitted a list of potential
projects you both for
the the special that is now in
the LFC budget for this year as
well as if our bonding bill
passes there's some projects on
there as well and US three
eighty is on there in two phases
and so we're trying to get that
more shovel ready it's kind of
in the study design phase but if
we were to get any kind of money
that would certainly qualify for
federal funding.
Thank you Mr secretary I wish
you the best of luck it sounds
like you're going to have an
exciting year and
we're certainly pleased with the
good work you're doing on our
roads in the southeast part of
the state which you've been a
which have been heavily used in
the recent years and your
responses been much appreciated
madam chairman thank you very
much.
Okay in our last member
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and and
just a quick thought sing up Mr
secretary madam chair do you
have a look at top ten list of
the state's greatest needs are
are most urgent roadways that
need attention that are under
funded you have a list like
that.
Madam chair and representative
we do we submitted a list to the
to the committee the house
transportation committee and I'm
happy to share that with anybody
that has projects in each
district the priority for that
district we also have another
process that the federal process
that they require us to do.
and what they do is they plugged
into a formula that was approved
through our asset management
plan.
and then it ranks it could it
ranks those projects that are on
the list I gave you and it
doesn't take into consideration
equity among districts it just
rank some based on the
information that's provided
capacity economic development
pavement condition all of those
things I mentioned before we
have a use that for this
particular process because it's
state money to it is required
for federal projects I'd be
happy to share that with you but
I think what we try and do is
try and be equitable among the
districts as best we can and
that particular system of
ranking doesn't do that just
because the way the fed just
wanted to be done is doesn't
matter where it is in the state
we want you to do that project
it's most needed and so it's
it's we're trying to balance
those two processes processes to
make sure that we can address as
many statewide needs as we can
and try and be as equitable as
possible.
Thank you madam chair researcher
I really appreciate that answer
I think equitable and in the
spreading it throughout the
districts fairly it is a that
that is the right choice I think
you're doing the right thing I I
would like to see what the feds
are what their algorithm is
spinning out as the top ten or.
Whatever in in my question
following that is the the does
the federal dollars control the
priority at all to do they send
you federal dollars you have to
put in certain places or did
they give you that in in your
DOT has the authority to choose
how to use that funding.
So madam chair representative we
got about four hundred fifty
million dollars of federal money
every year that's about half of
this billion dollar budget it is
broken into a lot of different
categories some a particular
amount has to go to rural Irvin
I think there's twenty two
million set aside specific for
safety projects but under the
new fast act that happened five
years ago they made us start
going to this ranking process
and so what they'd really like
to see is one big pot of money
and then this ranking process
distribute that money based on
the ranking we've kept right now
hybrid process so we're still
giving the districts their
target so that each district get
something and then this first
year we took twenty million off
the top and we're doing that
statewide ranking process next
year will be thirty million
because that's the process we
have to use in order to receive
that federal money and so when I
say I'm I trained the equitable
to the districts we do it's not
gonna be perfect please you know
the same exact amount each
district but we know that every
district has needs and every
piece of the state is important
but the feds are moving towards
that ranking system and and
we're trying to balance that and
do kind of a hybrid process to
keep some equity in our state.
Thank you for that Sir and and I
I salute your efforts I I
appreciate your leadership and
and I hope you find a good fight
for as long as you can to to
maintain the the control of the
Mexico
and I the closer to decisions
are made to all of the better
off we're going to be so thank
you Mr secretary thank you madam
chair.
Thank you very much I don't see
any other questions I want to
thank our chair Rubio secretary
Mike Santa all the adolescents
and for those who are new to the
committee this transportation
budget is rolled into House Bill
to and that's what the
corresponding language will
show.
It is a piece of of our of our
general appropriations act so
with that being said I'm going
to go to
Vice chair small for the motion.
You madam chair I would move
adoption of the house
transportation public works and
capital improvement committees
department of transportation
budget.
As amended.
Well it was amended in house
trance I guess it's good as it
is so okay
do we have a second for the
adoption of this report and and
all that was presented today
also in that chair all right we
have a second from
Representative Garcia is there
any opposition to this motion.
Seeing none it has been approved
so thank you everyone for your
presentations today thank you
madam chair members of the
committee.
All righty next we're going to
go to our committee reports of
the first of committee and
subcommittee Hey which is
chaired by Representative
Anthony Allison so he's going to
take us through this report and
we will love take appropriate
action once we've heard the
report so go ahead
Representative Allison.
Thank you madam chair.
At times like this so.
You know I wish I had a
different last name sums like
Yasser some.
That's the and instead of being
first.
Anyway I had a great team and
subcommittee Hey and the I think
somewhere along the way I might
have to have my a vice chair the
Syriana take over for me because
I'm beginning to lose my voice
so all star you go as far as I
can of the first screen the
first is that the subcommittee
met on January twenty sixth and
January twenty eighth and.
We reviewed a lot of agencies
the first one that we reviewed
was agency a floral for the
board of examiners for
architects and the subcommittee
adopted the LFC recommendation.
And consensus performance
measures and targets the LFC and
executive recommendation were
identical and Representative
flat budget compared to FY
twenty one the board does not
receive any general fund
revenue.
This agency was for seventeen
border Authority the
subcommittee adopted the
executive recommendation that
consensus on performance
measures and targets the
executive recommendation
maintain general fund revenue at
your school year twenty one
operating budget level the LFC
recommendation reduced general
fund revenue by twenty two point
nine thousand four five point
three percent compared to the.
Fiscal year twenty one operating
budget both recommendations
fully from personal services and
employee benefits while reducing
contract pool service thirty
thousand dollars director Marco.
Focused on capital outlay
projects that are currently
taking place at the New Mexico
border Authority.
At this time I'd like to just.
Waste your Syria to take over
for me please okay we'll call on
thank you very much we'll call
the vice chair you don't need
you're right the whole component
just let us know what the
recommendation is for the
department all right thank you
madam chair all right and for
twenty regulation and licensing
department the subcommittee
adopted LFC recommendation.
And here's a good enough.
Was there anything because
there's quite a bit of typing
here was there anything of
concern that the subcommittee
picked up on.
Thank you.
Madam chair.
I think the the point on that
was the LFC recommendation also
transferred four hundred fifty
five point seven thousand from
the mortgage regulatory fund to
to District Court for
foreclosure settlement programs.
Okay yeah I would just be those
kind of highlights like that
Representative Syriana anything
like that that you might want to
point out to the full committee
so go ahead okay thank you madam
chair Inc or forty six board of
medical examiners.
the subcommittee adopted the
executive recommendation and
consensus performance measures
and targets.
In for forty nine four of
nursing the subcommittee adopted
LFC recommendation consensus
performance measures and
targets.
For sixty state commission this
committee adopted the executive
recommendation consensus
performance measures and targets
the executive recommendation
transferred funding
appropriation in at twenty
nineteen junior bill to the
office of African American
affairs for exhibit.
I don't remember.
Stood out in this one I'm sorry
madam chair.
You want to make a comment
representative Allison or any of
the other committee members on
this side of.
Madam chair it was that the
office of African affairs for
exhibits and performance of a of
whatever happens what ever they
had left a transfer to the state
fair commission.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair in for
sixty for the board of
professional engineers and land
surveys surveyors the
subcommittee docked at the
executive recommendation I think
it's just consensus performance
measures and targets.
In for sixty five gaming control
board subcommittee adopted the
LFC recommendations and
consensus performance measures
and targets.
For sixty nine racing commission
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation consensus
performance measures and
targets.
If I may on that I did have a
question is this noted here in
the minutes.
were asked whether racing was
exempt from the state's public
health order and there was some
review down on that there was a
memorandum prepared by the LFC
staff we can have that
distributed to the full
committee if you're interested
in getting that thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Four seventy nine board of
veterinary medicine the
subcommittee drive the executive
recommendation.
It's S. as performance measures
and targets.
Four four ninety Congress and
Toltecs scenic railroad
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendations and consensus
performance measure targets.
Four ninety one office of
military base planning the
subcommittee adopted LFC
recommendations and consensus
and performance measures and
targets.
In four ninety five the space of
forty the subcommittee adopted
the LFC recommendations and
consensus on performance
measures and targets.
I don't remember if there is
anything else significant this
one either madam chair I think
what was significant and that
was a the director Scott
McLaughlin stated that the space
port would not be able to use
all of the ten million dollars
in other revenue like in the
past due to the audit and
investigation that is still
ongoing.
Right thank you madam chair
thank you thank you madam chair
and I five thirty eight hundred
tribal ceremonial subcommittee
it up to the LFC recommendations
and consensus on performance
measures and targets.
Thank you madam chair.
All right I will give the
committee the full committee and
chance to to look at the
subcommittee report and ask if
there's any questions well we
have one hand up Representative
Anderson go ahead.
Thank you madam chairman of my
question of really is comment
that Representative Allison did
a great job of leading us to the
subcommittee and Representative
Sweetser not caring of
legislative finance committee of
bills that the committee of the
our committee will see later
this session by entail budgeting
biennial budgeting is going to
provide Senator if from future
HP to calculations on the
smaller budget agencies and
allow them to step into a two
year process of and you madam
chair runner also one of the
sponsors just wanted to get that
advertisement in thank you very
much I've done.
Thank you for not being the bill
let's go to Representative
Trujillo.
Thank you madam chair the only
question I had was on the
compressible tech rail road I
know that we had this the
gentleman
Concerns about having to offset
some employee pay cuts the.
The of the so of revenue income
but if we find the end up doing
their.
Do you member of madam chair
representative Allison.
I can sit on this so
Representative Allison what did
you guys decide on that.
We still adopted the madam chair
we still about that the LFC
recommendation I think the key
point in that meeting was the
railroad CFO has taken several
rate cuts in order to shield
other employees from receiving
pay cuts so he made some
sacrifices on behalf of his
employees I thought that was was
great and I think it was on that
that Representative Trujillo
wanted to recommend the
executive but the majority
decided on the LFC recommend
thanks.
Madam chair is there any
opportunity to revisit that
because you you know he's trying
to do the right thing and it
wasn't a huge.
The.
Once you know what I don't have
it in front of me but I do
recall the conversation of that
I read this and that it would be
shameful for him to give up his
salary.
Maybe okay why don't we what
will do I will I think what
we'll do is go ahead and drop
this report and then let us do a
little research on it okay let's
see that there is some research.
Representative and it also had
some input.
Okay well I'm gonna call on is
it on this issue or on something
else okay.
Herrera and I'm sure I think it
was only a fourteen thousand
dollar request okay okay
let's go representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair I have a
question on the item for twenty
yes the printing of other
federal housing.
Remember right madam chair that
Division was split up between
manufactured housing and
construction industry and my
question was where was the
funding for manufactured housing
because they never received it
and of.
Though the young again is in
charge of that Mr feel was not
aware of what was happening
because she knew what the
department you know that was a
concern because there is no
budgeting for manufactured
housing that was implied when
the legislation was passed last
year thank them of.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay.
I don't see any other I don't
see any other questions raised
by the committee.
So what I'm going to do is I'm
going to ask
One of the members of the
subcommittee to make the motion
for adoption of this report
alright.
And then what I've got here is a
note for item for ninety of
fourteen thousand I wrote that
down so we'll we'll write that
you know keep that as a note
since it wasn't resolved so
let's so I need somebody from
the subcommittee to move
adoption of this report.
Ensure I move adoption of
subcommittee April a report.
Motion second.
Can't Representative Anderson is
there any is there any
opposition to the adoption of
subcommittee a report by the
committee.
I see none it is been approved
so this is going to be adopted
and we have a note to check on
for ninety fourteen thousand
dollars.
Thank.
Thank you Representative Allison
and subcommittee eighteen.
That's going to serve committee
be tame and that was led by
Representative small and
Representative Hochman Vigil
hills Representative small.
Thank you very much Madam chair
committee I'm very pleased to be
able to present subcommittee B.
as you said Representative
Hochman Vigil was the vice chair
we're had Representative
Armstrong brown Crowder Dicks
and at at a the course yourself
madam chair representative
Sweetser beginning with agency
six zero three we adopted the
executive budget recommendation
which was slightly lower than
the LFC madam chair it was
discussed and so the committee a
but there was the transfer of a
previous supplemental
appropriation that has been made
to the office of African
American affairs but was and
dedicated to the state fair
Madam chair moving on to agency
code six zero four commission on
for the deaf and hard and hard
of hearing persons we adopted
the executive recommendation you
madam chair committee there was
significant discussion within
this subcommittee related
specifically to the status of
the telecommunications relay
service fund and the E. nine one
one fund madam chair committee
these two funds one has
seemingly work very well to help
fund dispatch and E. nine one
one services however the other
which is a percentage that is
supposed to go to
services that help deaf and hard
of hearing persons has struggled
as broad and far less revenue
and madam chair committee we
heard during the pandemic with
the isolation that is because
the difficulty and hard of
hearing persons to access these
services has been
very difficult for both this
department in the citizens that
it serves Representative Hochman
Vigil is part of for motion to
adopt the executive their
content is colluded continued
work with tax and revenue
department who is responsible
for helping to administer and
then distribute the
telecommunications relay service
fund.
Moving then to HSD code six zero
five this we the subcommittee
adopted the LFC recommendation
and consensus performance
measures and targets
Moving then to HSD code six zero
six this is the commission for
the blind the subcommittee
adopted the LFC recommendation
consensus performance measures
and targets
The.
The.
Trying to
There is a discussion led by
Representative Dixon about the
current funded vacancy rate the
difficulty in filling some of
these positions and the
relationship of that difficulty
to some of the technical
qualifications and or advanced
degrees that are required for
these positions none the last
commission for the blind said
they did have new hires were
pending.
And the minimum wage increase
would potentially have an impact
moving and agency code six three
two workers compensation
administration
of the subcommittee adopted the
LFC recommendation and consent
to consensus performance
measures and targets
there were no differences
between the LFC and executive
recommendations there was
concern with a minority of the
committee based around the on
going one million dollar
transfer from the workers
compensation ministration to the
workforce solutions department
the committee wanted to know if
this is been this is not new
that this is been ongoing as
a part of moving the agency code
six four four division of
vocational rehabilitation
committee adopted the LFC
recommendation along with
consensus performance measures
and targets
there was again discussion on
the in the PS in the B.
category especially around
Difficulty in in finding higher.
Finding employees
the HSD this is reflected in the
LFC recommendation that
was was targeted to help draw
more federal funds and to hire
employees and to serve their
customers and they had a higher
amount in the PS in the B.
category to address those
personal issues HSD code six
four five governor's commission
on this ability we've got the
sub committee adopted the LFC
recommendation along with
performance measures and targets
in there was not that much
discussion.
Related to the developmental
disabilities planning council
that the the PC.
The subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation.
And directed LFC and DFA to
address the general fund
difference madam chair committee
members the performance measures
were reconciled
there was significant
differences in a few of these
areas
Representative Crowder noted the
transfer revenues from personal
US PS W. B. along with general
fund reversions and the director
director will McCoy stated the
reason not it has been updated
that is lowered the reversion
amount and transfers out of
personal space spending.
The some of the major
differences madam chair and
committee
There is a two hundred and fifty
thousand dollar difference
That would bring the LFC
recommendation FY twenty two up
to the FY twenty one operating
level along with a four hundred
fifty thousand dollar difference
that would then to provide
guardianship services to people
wait.
Finally madam chair there was a
to honor I think the two hundred
fifty thousand dollar a new
proposal for a special education
but.
Moving quickly to HSD code six
six to the minors hospital
subcommittee did adopt the
executive recommendation along
with consensus performance
measures and targets there is
significant discussion.
And this is a non general fund
agency as I recall.
The talked about
the LFC recommendation for
revenue from the land grant
permanent fund and that there
was a one point one million
dollar distribution that had not
been captured in the LFC
recommendation what was the LFC
analysts
this SQL greed was there
there was further discussion
about the hospitals regional
appeal and their administration
currently of the Fizer vaccine
with some challenges to the fact
that they did not have an.
Ultra low temperature freezer.
Finally madam chair agency code
six six eight that's the natural
resources trust the subcommittee
adopted the LFC recommendation
and consensus performance
measures and targets.
The
Committee adopted and there was
positive discussion.
Around eighty two point nine
million dollar increase in
expenditures from the natural
resource the resource is trust
the fund balance those are funds
that the natural resource
resources trusts the collects on
behalf of New Mexico in impacted
communities after there's
various man made
disasters whether those are
spilt fuel spills or other
things the director noted that
with that two point nine million
dollar increase they're looking
at engaging and helping other
New Mexico communities around
the state who have likely been
impacted by the fast
contamination from federal
facilities are located in or
near those communities and there
was wide appreciation from the
subcommittee for their work and
excitement about their ongoing
work us space.
That's a quick summary madam
chair committee from
subcommittee B. we appreciate
the time would stand for any
questions.
All right let's go to the
committee are there any
questions.
Thank you like to ask.
The participants subcommittee
be.
I don't see any hands what I I
do have I do have a question on
this
Six so for.
Looking at the line where it
says that there's some
consideration to change the
funding mechanism.
And indicated more discussions
were needed was secretary
Schardin Clarke did that happen.
Thank you madam chair I'm not
sure if that happened I will
check in with the secretary
Schardin Clarke it's been an
ongoing issue with them and LFC
and I'll bring that answer back
as soon as I can well.
David Sanders David Abbey did
you want to respond yes I think
I miss so on the LFC staff have
a lot of conversations Mr Clark
we reviewed the fund balances.
On Saturday morning when you do
catch up clean up you'll see
some recommendations spoke to
add fund balances of that the
department reported as well as
frankly to go back to the LFC
recommendation rather than the
executive recommendation switch
I think those things go not all
the way to a significant way to
to certainly better than the
executive director the executive
wants higher than the LESC but I
I think it's a real good
improvement over both additional
recommendations sure.
Okay.
So what are in essence means is
that.
Do you all have adopted the
executive rack.
Which means that when it comes
to our next meeting it's gonna
be require are requested by
staff that we go to the other
recommendation.
Just keep that in mind how do we
need a bill or something here it
says that know bill is currently
being considered do we have to
change us or is that something
that can be done in this
recommendation thank you madam
chair.
The the bill discussion is
related to the
The split between the
telecommunications relay service
fund in the nine one one fund so
we will not need legislation to
adopt the LFC recommendation
which is two hundred and ten
point five point four thousand
higher than what we adopted in
the subcommittee we.
need legislation at a future
time to
change the distribution the
current distribution between the
telecommunications relay service
fund that serves this.
HSD and the nine one one fund
right now in nine one one gets a
flat fee while
telecommunications relay service
fund gets a.
If fraction a percentage and
there has been significant
difficulty as we were yes some
as we were told and and it was
testified to that.
The reporting from the
telecommunications
Providers that is been very hard
to get accurate reporting from
them in order to and then in the
current funding to to make the
current split that's it required
in law and that it may be better
madam chair to consider a flat
rate however any changes there
madam chairman committee would
affect not only this agency but
also the nine one one fund and
its support of dispatch so
there are other stakeholders
that would be involved in any
legislative changes
Representative Ezzell for
questions on subcommittee the.
Madam chair thank you very much
background on the rookie but I
do have a question concerning
six thirty two.
I'm kind of curious why the
workman's comp administration is
trying to fill that shortfall
from the department of workforce
solutions.
Short explanation from somebody
I guess.
Thank.
Go ahead go ahead yes thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative this is not this
is been a a a common practice so
it's not Madam chair
representative it does not seem
to us that it's meant to should
fill in any specific shortfall
rather it's a it's an approach
that's been adopted through
local administrator.
and then over the course of
multiple years.
Madam chair and representative
small.
I'm just kind of bothered by
that because.
Work workman's comp is a totally
different area in my opinion may
be maybe I'm just see it wrong
but workforce solutions I know
that they have a problem
because.
Everything that has happened
this past year but I just find.
That the two don't really need
to be mixed maybe it's just me.
David Abbey you want to make a
quick comment very quickly the
issue here is that the workers
comp is racing to a quarterly
fee more money than they can use
and if this wasn't done the
money what what the treasury in
a surplus and be ineffective so
it's just trying to trying to
find a way to make the best use
of the funds in the treasury
without increasing general fund
to replace that which would have
to be the old.
Okay thank you very much madam
chair.
Currently I don't see any other
hands up so I need somebody from
subcommittee be to make a motion
to adopt the report.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay we have a motion for
Representative Hochman Vigil do
we have a second thank you.
Representative Anderson.
Okay is there any opposition to
this adoption.
Saying it has been adopted and I
like to thank the subcommittee
B. team so let's go to the C.
team and that subcommittee State
led by Representative Christine
Trujillo and seconded by vice
chair Meredith Dixon going
Representative Trujillo thank
you very much madam chair
members of the committee are of
sub committees he had of
reviewed renewable energy
transmission authority and
because it is a committee that's
Voted.
Right we voted to do.
Especially a pope appropriations
requests the adoption at the
specials and supplements.
And madam chair I do for this
Right.
Chair made good because my dog
is trying to do the postman
excuse me.
All right let's go to the vice
chair to go through the
highlights of each agency in the
subcommittee go ahead
Representative.
Thank you madam chair starting
with the renewable energy
transmission authority
the committee voted to adopt the
LFC recommendation but since it
was a special appropriation
request of the adoption would
actually be done at the specials
and supplementals full committee
hearing.
Then with regard to three fifty
four The New Mexico sentencing
commission.
The subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation.
Regarding four thirty of the
public regulations commission of
the subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation which also
increased the general fund
revenue by seven hundred
fourteen thousand to replace
fire protection funds
that were transferred to the
department of homeland security.
Yeah and I mention that because
that's you know at a change and
then the LFC recommendation also
decreased other transfers by
seventy seven point six million
which supported the transfer of
the state fire marshal's office
from the PRC to homeland
security.
With regard to four forty the
office of superintendent of
insurance the subcommittee
adopted the LFC recommendation.
The.
Total presented in the fiscal
year twenty two but budget
request included an increase in
other revenue
in the amount of three hundred
and sixty thousand due to a
member on memorandum of
understanding with the New
Mexico health insurance
exchange.
For the livestock board number
five oh eight.
The subcommittee recommended the
LFC recommendation and consensus
performance measures and targets
the subcommittee did request
that staff review the livestock
boards special appropriation
requests for additional vehicle
and body camera funding from the
general fund which the LFC
recommended at three hundred and
sixty thousand.
The department of game and fish
of five sixteen.
The subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation.
Five twenty two the youth
conservation corps the
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation.
The.
Seven oh five military affairs
department the subcommittee
adopted the LFC recommendation
but subcommittee members
expressed a desire to add
additional funding if possible.
Item seven sixty parole board.
The subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation.
Seven sixty five juvenile public
safety advisory board the
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation.
Seven eighty.
This subcommittee sorry crime
victims reparation commission
this subcommittee adopted the
executive recommendation and
there was discussion
regarding transfers with this
agency and.
The recommendation.
Does potentially resolve some of
the issues I'm although if more
information is requested we
might need to involve other
folks in that because I don't
remember the particulars
specifically.
item at seven ninety five
homeland security and emergency
management.
This subcommittee adopted the
LFC recommendation and with this
chair Lundstrom also requested
that staff prepare a memo
explaining balances of and
reversions from the fire
protection fund as well as the
impact of making the fund non
reverting thank you madam chair.
Madam chair.
Representative Trujillo yes my
mail man is alive.
And I I think my my co chair for
doing the it took job the crime
victims reparation issue I had a
long discussion with the David
Abbey and we believe we resolved
it and it's stated right there.
In the.
Statement that was written so I
don't believe that there should
be anything else right David.
So with that yes I agree with
that Representative.
With that I think we have to
have the.
R. committee report complete
madam chair all right.
The questions before I turn to
the full committee seven oh I
deserve to add additional
funding how much and what is it
for.
Madam madam chair I cannot
remember.
Madam chair I believe that I
don't I don't know if there was
a specific item is the LFC
recommendation was five percent
lower than the fiscal year
twenty one operating budget but
perhaps other subcommittee
members have additional
feedback.
Right I thank you Representative
Garcia might and weigh in on
that.
Thank you already representative
Garcia do you have a comment on
the military affairs department.
I don't know if his computer
system is.
Okay he's not responding I don't
know if you can hear me Madam.
Yes it was it was a very good
presentation a long discussion
but it was not controversial in
any way I think it was simply
the fact that I think they were
under they felt like they were
under
They didn't have enough revenue
to move to do the work that they
needed to do.
Okay I'm gonna put a note
against that one also when this
report to Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair I think
one of the issues was they have
it and from what I recall they
had some additional funding of
that I helped get with it so
that they could hire if I'm
correct some yes a big thank the
column yes those.
and and they had hired yet and
Service okay I'm on the wrong
one this is military affairs
some sorry madam chair.
Okay I'll put a note to that one
is there any other questions
that any the committee members
may have okay representative
Garcia your hand is up go ahead.
Thank you madam chair I have
concerns on the item number five
oh seven the subcommittee
adopted the recommendations was
a five percent lower for the
current interns.
You're talking about seven oh
five yes seven five.
Okay we got that
I've got a note here sense so.
There was a five percent lower
amount taken so I I've got a
note here once this report is
adopted so is there anything
else anybody house on the
street.
Okay.
I need somebody from the
committee to make a motion
please madam job option.
Okay Representative Trujillo and
his seconded.
Up.
Garcia okay Garcia so we have a
Trujillo and Garcia.
Is there any opposition to the
adoption of this report.
Thank this will be adopted with
the note of agency Senator I
just got to suck Committee do
that would be Representative
Candie Sweetser is chair and
representative Susan where as
vice chair.
Thank you madam chair and I'd
also like to recognize or other
committee subcommittee members
representative Allison Armstrong
Cristiano Crowder in the hill
lane and small so this
subcommittee met January twenty
seventh and February six on the
state investment council the
subcommittee adopted the DFA
budget recommendation.
I did want to point out that
Representative Crowder brought
up some really timely issues
that could affect the state
investment councils managed
funds the recent executive
orders to temporarily suspend
permitting on federal land and
indefinitely suspend leasing on
federal land as well as the
effects of the of the proposal
this session to increase
distributions from the land
grant permanent fund and the
agency agreed to provide an
analysis to the committee and I
do not believe we have received
that as of yet but that would
certainly be helpful to know.
For administrative hearings
office the sub committee adopted
the LFC recommendations.
For public school insurance
authority the subcommittee
adopted the LFC
the executive director Richard
Valerio did note that spending
on COVID nineteen testing is
anticipated to cost seven point
nine million more than
anticipated in FY twenty.
For retiree health care
authority the subcommittee
adopted the LFC recommendation
executive director David
Archuleta reported a rule change
affecting the minimum retirement
age and the subsidy for years of
service will be implemented July
first and I also want to say
that he noted the board had a
new president and several new
members including former
representative Tomas Salazar so
very pleased to hear his name
once again and know that he is
continuing to serve.
The educational retirement board
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendations for yeah just
educational retirement board the
ERP uses an investment return
assumption of seven percent and
executive director Jen good when
said that given the investment
return environment it might be
difficult to meet that target
return so that was noted.
For the department of
information technology the sub
committee adopted the LFC
recommendation the secretary is
Salazar said that he had hoped
to get an additional three
million in general fund revenues
for cyber security upgrades and
assessments that were included
in the initial budget but we we
found out.
Initial budget was the end so we
we did talk about that some in
the importance of getting full
information when when it was
time to submit the budget also
are LFC analysts make Micaela
Fischer noted the multiple
federal funding streams for
broadband infrastructure
projects and as you know we're
hearing a lot of talk about
broadband this session.
Public employees retirement
association the subcommittee
adopted the LFC recommendation
the fund returned thirteen
percent per calendar year twenty
one a year to date also ERA paid
one point one billion dollars in
retiree benefits in two thousand
twenty.
A pretty impressive if you're to
note and the maps show that that
money was distributed all across
New Mexico so really quite an
and economic development.
Incentive there I guess.
Public records a subcommittee
adopted the LFC recommendations.
doctor Hendricks and noted that
space was quickly running out
despite efforts made to maximize
space and we all acknowledge two
important public records were as
we talked about that agency for
the state personnel board the
subcommittee adopted the LFC
recommendation director call
then talked about how state
salaries compare and she said
this was interesting generally
lower to mid level salaries for
highly competitive with the
private market for state
agencies but that higher level
paying jobs were underpaid in
comparison she also talked about
a geographic difference private
sector jobs in the southeastern
part of the state generally paid
better than state jobs in that
part of the state.
For the public employee labor
relations board the subcommittee
adopted the executive
recommendation and for the
ethics commission the sub
committee adopted the LFC
recommendation and executive
director Jeremy Ferris filled us
in on setting up a brand new
commission and all that had gone
into this year and and that they
were looking forward to and with
that madam chair we would stand
for questions.
Okay
let's go ahead and go to
questions will start with
Representative Crowder then
representative Armstrong go
ahead.
Thank you madam chair.
I just want to follow up on the
first item we looked at was the
state investment council there
is some wonderful information
and volume two eight sixty
three.
And they are to me it was very
revealing it kind of gives us a
look into the future the state
investment council they're
targeted right returns long term
R. seven percent for the land
grant permanent fund at six
point seven five percent for the
severance tax permanent fund.
In FY twenty the land grant
permanent fund in the server.
Severance tax permanent fund
portfolios returned point two
four percent eight point zero
six percent respectively way way
below the long term started
rates.
State investment council
council's annual investment plan
for FY twenty one expects the
next seven to ten years will be
a low return environment and
after accounting for returns
royalty enclosed distribution
the state investment council
expects it to grow at an
annualized.
I'm sorry it expects the land
grant permanent fund to grow at
an annualized three point three
percent in the severance tax
permanent funded grow at an
annualized one percent well
below their long term targets
but that's an outlook for the
the short term under the
umbrella of the long term
outlook I think that's a very
good for graphics and by two
okay sixty three thank you madam
chair in the thank you committee
chairman Sweetser.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you for the report.
I do have to say all my
subcommittee
chairs and co chairs were very
good and and handle the there
are job very well so kudos to
you but I did want to bring up
on the agency's six thirty one
that only forty percent of the
geographical coverage on the P.
twenty five radio only forty
percent of New Mexico is covered
with that radio and they're
they're wanting to do some
upgrades and so I I know in my
area we tried a lot of problems
with the the state radio
transmissions so just wanted to
make sure everyone saw those
comments and read that about the
broadband across New Mexico what
we're trying to do and also
brought up the fact they need to
be talking to co ops about.
Implementing broadband in areas
where we have to co ops thank
you madam chair.
All righty do we have any other
questions of the full committee
on this subcommittee report.
All right let's go to one of the
committee members for a motion.
Madam chair at move adoption of
subcommittees report.
We have a second thank you madam
chair.
Okay was that Ambrose state do
make that second yes madam chair
okay we have Castellano then is
the second on that is there any
opposition to this adoption of
this report seeing none of we do
can do you have a question or
adoption or you don't want to
drive it.
Go ahead.
Representative Ezzell.
Opposition okay all right we
have one in opposition and
B. that's not that is
representative result to
subcommittee already let's move
on.
The next is at least in my
listing here.
We're gonna.
Go to specials deficiencies and
supplementals workgroup.
Everyone should have a legal
size documents front of the the
says House Appropriations
section five supplementals and
deficiency section six seven and
so forth.
This recommendation in this
report includes everything that
the public education department
for public schools support we
haven't heard that yet I don't
believe we have public safety at
about at we have the committee
meeting
prior to get those two agencies
in.
If you look at the long she
looks like this.
We went through every one of
these every one of these
requests the first section is
under specials.
New York in its basically
language or an actual dollar
change.
If you go look at the pink
section where it says general
fund HDFC.
You can see where we are
recommending.
If you go down that call and if
it's blank it's not recommended.
Of the first page of course
includes the legislature in the
administrative office of the
courts.
Second.
Is still the administrative
office of the courts.
Where we have the general fund
agency recommend.
If you look at line fourteen on
page two.
You see that there are two
hundred fifty thousand.
This partial we recommended the
original agency requests for
five hundred thousand.
We feel are could be negotiated
and I also want to remote remind
the committee that if an agency
really feels like they're
shorter there they need more
help they can always go to the
Senate for help.
It's not unusual but that
happens it happens all the time
we'll put together our budget
will vote on it will move it
over to the Senate but that
doesn't mean that all there the
agency needs are matter
something else has come up or
they want something else.
Same with lying fifteen and
sixteen you can see where those
dollar amounts are.
What
three.
The only what we've recommended
there is line seventeen.
So this language gestures same
way with line twenty five.
You look at page four what
online twenty nine and thirty
language and it's recommended.
Thirty one actually has a dollar
figure to the five hundred fifty
thousand.
You know they originally wanted
one point five million but we
figure that we can get a pretty
good head start with with a half
a million dollars there and if
they need more than they can run
over to the Senate get it.
You look at page five.
There are some funding
recommendation under other state
funds are being called on.
Other state funds.
And that comes out of the
consumer settlement fund so for
the benefit of the new members
not only is it general fund that
we budget the budget all funds
for all agencies.
And they do have revenue sources
such as this that we are
responsible for budgeting.
The Attorney General under other
state funds line thirty four.
That's a million dollars.
Then we've got general fund
under line thirty five.
For half a million.
Madam chair when when.
We got a packet of information
and today with a lot of things
was this and that because I
cannot find it.
Okay.
Does everybody else have their
document the legal size
documents discuss special
supplementals deficiencies on it
are those folks already in Santa
Fe.
That might be why that that's
the reason madam chair okay that
should have been sent to you.
Madam chair I can send
Representative Trujillo copy
right now virtually you okay.
Everybody else that's offsite do
you have this Madam any want to
act I need a copy also madam
chair.
Okay.
All right let's get everybody
copying let's email it out to
everybody that doesn't have one.
The madam chair for the record
This Is Your House
Appropriations analyst and it
wasn't all the committee members
I'll go ahead and resend it out
to representative Lara sorry
Nara and Trujillo when you send
it out my I because I thought I
saw it also it was about eleven
thirty this morning I believe
okay all right.
We felt we feel like we sent
this out so we're going to keep
rolling here is there's a lot of
information click on page five.
AG other state funds.
I already talked about that
for interstate water litigation
costs online thirty seven.
I have other state funds were
recommending six point four
million.
That at the very bottom
department of finance and
administration line forty one.
Information technology
infrastructure structure upgrade
for three hundred thousand
everyone of these gets heard by
the subcommittee every one of
them and they talk about it we
got both sides talking about it
so I mean these aren't just
Patty Lundstrom going through
here and but numbers down I mean
this is a subcommittee regular
subcommittee hearing.
Okay let's look at the line are
paid.
Yes.
One hundred thousand general
fund HSC.
This is for Rita.
There's a.
this is an economic recovery
efforts.
We have specific language for
that I don't see that specific
language I approved it this
morning line forty three but
it's to help in economic
stimulus for energy impacted
areas but madam chair that will
come on Saturday on catch up
clean up and some adjustment
and in six million and it'll
reflect working with community
assistance council at the of
for.
Right.
Number forty for retiree health
care authority under there
I and T. H. A. Ives HFC as a
hundred thousand.
Authorizes from the retiree
health care trust fund because
it got an eight hundred million
dollar balance.
I I don't know that I'm gonna go
through all of these I've read
some of them to see you know how
to read it.
You'll say
What the original requests for
but the executive requests were
the point the piece to focus on
is the pink area.
And where you see a number or
where you see the word
recommended is what is being put
forth with this subcommittee.
I mean we put in fifty thousand
more for The New Mexico's
sentencing commission.
Secretary of state three point
three million dollars for an
election in case they've got to
replace that and gas
congressional district one
candidates that that we'll be
coming out.
where it turns on that was a big
issue with the tourism
department.
For twenty five million we put
in I.
We feel that the Senate has
committed to put more in I'm not
going to speak forum that lays
coming out of HSC would be I.
We recommend the language for
the tourism department.
Now for line sixty two hundred
J. tan.
It's seven million.
Four line sixty four which is
the way it is seventeen point
five million.
For that outdoor equity grant
Fund is a half a million.
And then the outdoor recreation
division's investment entrails
is other state funds it five
hundred thousand.
Public regulation commission
Andrew anything on that let's
flip to page eight.
New Mexico livestock board.
We recommended three hundred
sixty thousand.
And then there's an executive
that partially recommend again
for the New Mexico livestock
board mass for their state let
me inspection program.
Yeah there's a piece of
legislation floating through now
if that passes the get the money
and that's a half a million
dollars.
Energy minerals and natural
resources general fund.
Three million other state funds
at two million.
The other state funds come out
of the corrective action fund.
energy minerals and natural
resources they need information
technology hardware.
Skip down the state engineer.
We had a two and a half million
plus another two point eight
million.
That's for litigation of Texas
versus New Mexico that's big
water Madam going on right now.
Sure.
Yes.
One seventy four G. St three
million.
Right but it looks to me like
there's three million in general
fund to other state total of
five million is that correct
that's correct okay thank you
madam chair you're welcome.
State engineer on the line
eighty two.
Upgrades and replacements for
the water administration
technical engineering resource
imaging system.
We go on to page nine commission
on the status of women were
recommending that language.
Early childhood education and
care department
is four hundred thousand for
network and information
technology six hundred thousand
for the aging and long term
Services Department.
three hundred fifty thousand for
Human Services Department they
graduate medical education
expansion grants program I
believe that Senator school down
in Los crucis.
Is there but doctors throughout
different areas in in New
Mexico.
I anticipate developmental
disabilities planning council
half a million.
On page ten.
there's in the middle we
recommend line ninety seven for
the department of health with
these which is language.
Why ninety nine we recommend
that also which is language and
then at the very and the
department of environment on
page ten is a half million.
And this is to help offset.
Program and personnel costs that
were increase beyond available
budget for COVID response.
We're hoping that they'll be
able to use any new care money
that that comes in.
On line one a one page eleven we
recommend that language were put
under line one oh two.
Under other state funds two
point five million.
And this is to remediate sites
contributing to ground and
surface water contamination.
Department of Environment line
won all three and that's general
fund.
This is partially recommended
contingent on the deletion of
non reverting language.
We don't like we don't like that
you know we want to make sure we
have the ability to appropriate
funds.
one oh four is one point four
million.
US EPA Superfund site cleanup.
And you can see the rest of the
Veterans Services Department for
laptops and equipment hundred
fifty thousand we're
recommending language want to
wait and one oh nine is forty
five thousand dollars.
For monitoring and site
remediation at the Boleyn
armory.
On page twelve.
Recommended language for the
corrections Department both on
one ten and one eleven.
One twelve is two point six
million dollars.
This is tied to Senate bill
three fifteen.
Remember when we move the motor
trans officers into the public
safety department we're trying
to make sure that we're getting
that rescaled and re calibrated
under wages and salaries.
Department of public safety we
put three minute million dollars
and there.
For vehicles and then department
of public safety five hundred
thousand.
This is for body care are in car
cameras body cameras things like
that.
On page thirteen department of
public safety we recommend that
language.
On one twenty one page thirteen.
We're adding one point four
million dollars.
Because DPS is projecting a
shortfall of a little over one
point three million because I've
had such a big increase in
hazard pay you know for obvious
reasons.
Recommended.
Number one twenty two one twenty
three.
I guess one twenty three and a
half is five hundred thousand.
Emergency response efforts along
the Mexico border contingent
upon federal money or federal
funds not being available
understand from Representative
Sweetser and small that there's
some issues about.
Safety if folks coming back and
forth across the border.
That's one twenty three and a
half.
So one twenty four recommended
that language.
Okay I'm not gonna get it all
those public education stuff out
we said we weren't going to do
that.
I wanted to skip over that those
have to be re evaluated.
Fire and we can talk about that
starts on page fourteen.
I read Department.
We did recommend that fund
transfer.
On line one forty three.
Nothing.
One forty three and a half is
two hundred and twelve thousand.
For the New Mexico department of
agriculture to develop
administer the weather
modification program I think
that's that cloud seeding bill
but they've been talking about I
don't know what you know I want
to get it all that detail what
is this.
Representative Ezzell.
Madam what is.
Can you hear me OK yes what this
is is there wanting to put up
more the weather stations
throughout the state because
state the one that for the Santa
Rosa area is actually located at
Ruidoso and so what they're want
to do is have more monitoring
station to help help with
disaster payments that type
thank okay Representative
Crowder madam chair this funding
on this line is actually for
cloud seeding program at your
the language off to the left.
Of I know there is a bill for
the weather station this funding
on this line is not for the
weather station it's for cloud
seeding.
Okay.
One one forty four is for local
meat packing cooperative.
Okay Mike your hand so what.
Did you have a comment the madam
chair just briefly I just wanted
to correct the my previous
statement that spread she did
not go out hard copies were
distributed within the building
but my apologies so we have
reset itself so everybody should
have electronic copy okay what
we gonna do to my knowledge
alter or tomatoes specter
getting okay let's go to page
fifteen.
Public schools but now special
total special appropriation.
What we bring this to a catch up
clean up you have the final
numbers there I mean there's
some things that we're still
working on.
But the computer systems
enhancement fund.
Yes correct general fund at
seventeen million six hundred
thirty seven dollars.
Okay is there any questions on
this first piece which is
specials.
I've been trying to answer an as
I see the hands come up and that
way you don't lose your thought
you know or have to wait.
Okay let's move on to
supplementals and deficiencies.
One fifteen one forty seven we
recommend.
Court of a peels to correct an
over reversion.
Two thousand dollars with that
number is this Madam cherry
yes that's two thousand dollars.
Wow okay.
Two thousand dollars out of a
seven point three billion dollar
budget now you wanna talk about
getting to the not so I brought
here.
So let's keep going
first judicial District Court
the ninety thousand.
third judicial ninety third
judicial Senator thirty on here
but there for two different
purposes.
Then to the next page which is
basically these courts eight
conditional at eighty three
thousand.
Twenty thousand twelve seventy
one thousand thirteen to twenty
two thousand.
And we're gonna tax and Revenue
Department that's one point two
million.
General Services at six point
six this is to cover the
shortfall in employee group
health benefits last year we
gave them ten million this year
to six.
Regulation and licensing
department they've got a
deficiency in the boards and
commissions program to the two
hundred eighty four thousand.
State fair is two hundred
thousand.
Because they didn't have one
basically there don't have any
money same way with the number
one sixty two.
It's partially recommended we're
hoping that they'll be able to
re open it for FY twenty two.
One seven state which is one one
sixty three of the state racing
commission.
Prior year budget deficit it's a
hundred twenty five thousand.
Developmental disabilities
planning council two hundred
fifty thousand.
Okay then under the department
of environment line one sixty
eight to restore funds to the
air quality bureau title I
funding which is three million.
We're not gonna get into all
this public education stuff.
Public defender on page
eighteen.
That's out of all other state
funds and one million dollars
for document management madam
chair yes.
Sections.
Would be the computer work group
the I. T. workgroup which was
that okay so we don't need to do
their work forum.
Is there any other questions is
there any questions up to that
point.
Thanks for catching up yeah go
ahead Madam chair on the page
sixteen line one sixty seven
what does that mean to correct
an over our version of fiscal
year two thousand sixteen.
Representative Garcia.
Yes the majority of.
Six.
Nine one fifty seven.
Okay go ahead.
I can try to help answer this
and so for some of these small
agencies they'll have reversion
amounts at the end of fiscal
year they'll revert to much
money and even other small
amounts that it matters to them
because they're really small
budgets in past years we
typically just do one want the
procreation to DFA and have DFA
take care of it this year there
weren't that many over regions I
think there's only two or three
request request.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much.
Okay now how much of this staff
help me now as I T. is on what
pages is IT is at eighteen and
worked where else for what Jr
it's so basically eighteen to
twenty three.
Okay let's skip to page twenty
four.
Want to talk about stuff that's
near and dear to my heart and
that's line two twenty three and
two twenty four in the HSA.
Budget framework you're gonna
see general fund in the amount
of a hundred and seventy million
and a hundred twenty five
million hundred seventy eight is
four major road investments.
Those are statewide roads.
And then the B. five million
that'll be set aside out of that
for essential air service.
And then to twenty four is the
local government is road fund
but they put it into
a grant Fund so any local
government that's interested in
influx longing to the state for
road related projects would have
this funding source I need to
say we just heard the department
of transportation's budget their
operating budget they're not a
general fund agency.
And I I need to tell you that I
think it started when I became
chairman that we actually start
but in general fund in there for
projects over and above what
they were getting in their
construction budget.
I I just think we need to do
that infrastructure is a good
way to stimulate the economy.
And construction certainly does
it pretty quick and that's a
very effective efficient
department they're able to get
the money out quick and evenly
spread among highway districts
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair what is essential
air service.
Central our service is a grant
program that fills a gap between
what the federal subsidy will
find and what it takes to get
somebody in there to provider
service that's all approved at a
federal level student at town
like Los crucis doesn't have air
service which shocked me.
And if they wanted to get their
service their city want to fly.
And
They would apply at both levels
I mean they have to get federal
the federal application and.
You get federal money but
there's always a gap because
it's expensive to provide air
service in rural communities so
what this does is it helps fill
that gap between what the feds
will give you.
And what it actually costs to
get like a mesa airlines or
something like that in two
Harding County as an example
what is what we did is we.
Found this through a lost a
program the western area
transportation association it
was then Senator Gonzales that
attended that a few years ago
it's based on Wyoming model
where they actually set up a
collaborative among small
cities.
You take northwestern Mexico you
might have a Farmington grants
and Gallup together you're able
to dance with that up because we
know every day we're not going
to have users of of rural air.
But I'll tell you what during
the COVID times it'd been a heck
of a lot better to fly somebody
in to get help then it would be
to drive in two and a half hours
to accord  or five hours to
Phoenix.
Thank you that's a big deal to
me and I want to make sure that
that program gets off the ground
this year it really would help
rural New Mexico.
Thank you.
Okay let's go on to the.
Next part here so that's the
transportation piece.
David do we need to get and all
these other things these funds
transfers and all that are are
we okay on that stuff.
Madam chair there part of the
LFC recommendation.
And the they're continuing
mostly at those levels and there
are.
Morning money send funds that
will help down the road if we're
short on recurring revenue
right.
So they are in many ways and in
good place to put some money in
case things go bad in our
Revenue doesn't come in as it
should these are places we can
go to try to pull revenue into
an operating budget.
So I
the last thing in very important
thing on page twenty five.
Is the unemployment suspense
Fund.
We would like to in our
framework.
Three hundred and twenty five
million dollars.
Into that fund I think that's a
good way to help business and
they're not.
These are based on on.
To try to make that up.
But I think what you're going to
see is this is going to go into
the junior bill.
This childcare is going to go
into the junior bill that we
haven't started yet but I want
to make sure you all understand
that just inside the framework.
Representative Castellano.
I'm sorry madam chair on I think
on line item one ninety nine for
the department of health.
The page.
Twenty.
We should hold out.
First this is I guess LFC
recommending this money for
installation in planning
correct.
Is what yes.
But they I reached out and they
said that they already did that
planning and stuff and now they
need to buy the software.
And that the softer would
costume I think the three
million that they were looking
for.
Yeah we're going to do that
Representative we're going to do
the I. T. piece here just a
minute we're gonna turn it over
to another subcommittee so sorry
just hold that thought
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair on the.
I'm I'm a little bit.
Out of sync on the transfer in
the three hundred twenty five
million over to that during your
bills
I I notice there's a bullet
point on a.
Memo here this number six at the
bottom that says we're gonna
move their originally
recommended two million for
broadband a threat of million
for unemployment out of the
General Appropration Act in into
a separate supplemental
appropriations bill
it is there a bill going
through.
The senator the house or
somewhere in in do we know that
Phil numbers so that we can
encourage our colleagues to
support it or.
And all the junior discussion.
In a different meeting but yes
we're going to have a junior
bill is starting on the Senate
side.
in the framework they have X.
number of dollars to work with
my plan is to get a memo out to
all the house members.
Two subcommittees inside of HSCT
here these projects.
The two subcommittees will take
house district one through
thirty five the second
subcommittee will take house
district thirty six thirty seven
day.
And these projects will be
presented to our subcommittees
because there's certain criteria
that absolutely has to be
followed when you're using state
general non reoccurring funds
as an example you can't send it
to a nonprofit you can't you
know if there's just and and I
wanted to put that into them all
important so there's guidance
for the members.
We get our budget first.
One and only bill that matters
is this budget bill thank you
madam chair not get with Mr
Abbey later to help me
understand the difference and
why we transfer to three hundred
million out of the LFC
framework.
Renewable thank you madam chair.
All right all right I understand
all madam chairman I'm sorry I
was I was ready to make a motion
well I'm ready to have a motion
unless I see any other hands up
for this subcommittee.
Then madam chairman I'd move the
of the the special appropriation
supplementals and deficiencies
of.
As presented in the schedule of
that's my motion all right we
have a motion to approve the
madam chair.
Okay and a second by
Representative Garcia to approve
this specials deficiencies a
supplemental workgroup report is
there any opposition let madam
chair could I clarify probably
you would like to get the fund
transfers as well but you
program that we need to get
those fund transfers in here yes
I my point was not to ignore
that it's just I need to go
through every detail were people
are getting tired of hearing me
talk for thank you thank you
chairman there for special
appropriation supplementals
deficiency Roach and fund
transfer.
Thank you.
And do we have a second
representative Garcia the
segment your okay we have a
motion and a second is there any
opposition to that motion.
I don't see any state so it's
better prove this reports better
prove to sos go to the I. T.
committee.
That's computer systems
workgroup that be Representative
Anthony Allison.
And going back to your big sheet
here.
Those pages I skipped.
Thirty one item I think this
page eighteen resident staff
assembly.
Jumped out of yes Representative
renters it's page eighteen to
twenty three.
Okay I'm gonna go to a
representative Allison.
on your computer group.
Okay thank you madam chair.
I think I got my voice back for
a while.
The computer system workgroup
medical on Monday.
During the fifteenth the
workgroup adopted staff scenario
for information technology
appropriations and the staff for
the staff recommendation
encompass fifty six point five
million in IT appropriations
including seventeen point six
million dollar general fund the
total recommendation from LFC
and staff recommendation was
only two point three million
less than the executive and we
had a great team and we had
tremendous help from Mr Dave
your availability as and when we
got to analyzing all of the
lines we found that we only
needed to address for items so
I'll just refer to those four
lines starting with items one
seventy four which is on page
eighteen and that project is to
replace cameras in detention
centers and the judicial
information division you will
note that there is no.
Recommendation from that HSC and
that's the reason the reason for
that is LFC staff recommend
instead of special allocation to
that.
And then all the rest of the
page you'll note that the.
The recommendations from both
sides are equal so that's why we
didn't address all of the next
one we address is item one
ninety nine which is on page
twenty.
And that is from the department
of health to continue the
implementation of consolidated
pharmacy system.
Of the.
Station was three point five
million and the ATSC
recommendation was four hundred
forty two thousand that is the
question we're my colleague
Representative Castellano had a
question and when we talked
about it with bills he said that
we just want to assist with the
initial start up that is why the
recommendation for that HSC or
the LFC was made and we had a
total of Representative
Castellano that there would be
more discussion when we were and
when we are given in the report
to the full committee so that
madam chair.
Bill and David let's talk a
little bit more about this one.
Madam chair the information that
we're given after the LFC
recommendation was a phased
approach with this debate even
if it's not the planning that
that's not there stepped forward
and did not recommend the entire
amount that's basically all the
what the problem with the
situation once you know that the
health department say no we were
ready to buy the software needs
three half million but
apparently the analysis that was
done by the LFC it the taste
that maybe were stepped.
Too soon for that.
Maybe they can address it better
and I can.
Madam chair if I may.
this is Jessica over the LFC and
we we're given information from
the department of health during
their presentation to us
regarding this project that the
four hundred forty two thousand
would cover the initiation and
planning phases through at least
the first six months of the
project and the expectation was
that that project would begin in
June or July of twenty twenty
one I'm so we were told that the
planning phases were still in
progress also we recommended
funding at a level sufficient
for those phases and this is
particularly given the
department of health other I. T.
projects you're currently
requesting extensions on
probation for about nine IT
projects that are currently in
progress I'm so we as as
mentioned by Representative L.
does that we are indicating up
based approach in which we can
of you know we can put money
towards starting this project
and getting it push forward
while also prioritizing projects
that are already receiving
probation and I have already
been initiated by the.
Okay is there any other
questions on this one.
If I may madam chair go ahead
well and and that that's not
maybe they're gonna tell me the
truth that they they said that
the the initial planning stages
had already been done and this
was to buy the software to
install the software into the
database with a to do it I
believe.
So that was that's what was told
to me madam chair so I don't
know that that's why they needed
to hold three.
Three point five million four
thousand I would be would it
help out with their costs so it
was just a question madam chair
and I think you are Jessica.
Okay Representative Sarinana.
Thank you madam chair.
Things that this committee it
was really frustrating because
we didn't have.
We had I guess analysts but they
weren't the main people so they
didn't they could answer any
more questions so like
Representative Castellano said
we we actually went to the
department to get the answers
and he's correct they said that
the first part was done they
needed the software in software
is of the essence something you
can break apart it has to be
botanist chunk so that's why
they wanted the higher amount
that's what we would recommend
the higher amounts because of
what they told us but it was it
was pretty frustrating because
we couldn't get answers for any
of these
in our committee or
subcommittee.
Thank you.
Anybody else.
Okay let's go ahead Dawn
Representative Allison let's get
through the whole report here
and then.
Okay thank you madam chair
the next is item to eleven which
is on page twenty two and that
is a from the department of the
environment to continue the
implementation of enterprise
environmental information system
for the department of
environmental program of on that
the executive was recommending
one million and the LFC
recommended.
One point six million instead so
it's just an increase of
recommendations.
the last item was item number
two eighteen the public
education department as that too
is another one where the LFC
recommendation was higher than
the executive of.
That pretty much explains what
our segment was thank you madam
chair.
All right I want to thank you
all for this this isn't usually
an easy committee to get through
and.
You don't have all the history
behind all these
Forms of these different
agencies have been using or not
using or the amount of money
that span and they're not being
spent.
and it is just a little
frustrating across the board in
some ways about not getting you
know the right people let down
some of these hearings in
general not just this hearing
that I would suspect there's
others that there hasn't been
exactly who we need to have I'm
gonna put a note on that one
we'll we'll get that done.
Talk about a little bit more but
I want to make a correction on
subcommittee dis so we catch
this.
Representative Ezzell isn't
voting against the whole report
she just was voting against one
item and that was three thirty
seven so are make sure that we
we note that accordingly.
So with that being said with the
note on item one ninety nine
Department of Health.
I don't see any more questions I
need a motion on this computer
systems workgroup from somebody
that was on that committee I
make a motion madam chair with
the note on line item one ninety
nine okay we have a motion to
have a second I'm not second.
Okay we are second with
Representative Sariñana amount
thirty opposition saying non
this report is been adopted will
check on that I've got three
items checked on us move it to
the next work group.
We've got all kinds of other
reports here.
Representative small yes madam
chair thank you very much we're
pleased to be able to present
the public schools.
The working group report
Representative Trujillo as vice
chair Representative Brown
Representative Chatfield
Representative Dixon said laying
Lara madam chair and
representative Candie Sweetser
contributed greatly madam chair
this workgroup Matt recently on
February seventeenth twenty
twenty one and we did adopt the
staff scenario for public
schools support and related
appropriations.
Some significant changes madam
chair and committee was that the
staff scenario added seventy two
million dollars in recurring
general fund appropriations and
we reduce the use of non
recurring public education
reform Fund appropriations by
forty three point eight million
dollars we'll go through what
those additions were and also
madam chair the staff scenario
included language uh suggested
by you to use federal funds that
are coming to the public
education department to hold
schools harmless from any budget
reductions caused by COVID
nineteen right related
enrollment declines as members
will no the fear of these
enrollment reductions what is
was a an issue echo by
many within the public school
system.
Going down this list madam chair
committee first we note that
says the million dollars to
offer K. five plus the next step
in the learning time.
These swap general fund
recurring dollars with the
public education reform Fund
dollars in order to recover lost
learning time from school
closures and also address
findings in the Martinez Yazzie
law school lawsuit this scenario
includes sufficient funding to
cover all public school students
again all public school students
across New Mexico for extended
learning time and fifty nine
percent of all elementary school
students in K. five plus
programs.
Madam chair committee we
included err or adopted the
staff recommendation that also
lines up with the legislative
education study committee
recommendation for a two million
dollar increase for school
personnel salaries aligns the
section eight general fund
compensation compensation
recommendations for all school
personnel with processes that
were provided by the L. E. S.
C..
There is a five hundred thousand
dollar transfer between PED
initiatives this scenario
transfers five hundred thousand
from steam initiative to the
endogenous multilingual
multicultural and special
education initiative.
The transfer expands PED's
capacity to support at risk
students groups that are
identified in the Martinez
Yazzie lawsuit while maintaining
funding levels that are still
above the executive funding
requests for this the
initiatives.
As we noted madam chair there's
forty three point eight million
net reduction in public
education reform Fund
appropriations these are swapped
with that general fund madam
chair committee
The.
This adds new public education
reform Fund appropriations using
those dollars that were swapped
the general fund dollars and
those include twenty million
dollars to pilot the PED's
proposed family income index
support fund ten million over
two years for FY twenty two in
FY twenty three ten million
dollars for the community
schools fund in two hundred
thousand dollars for the black
education.
Going down the list madam chair
Sam there's seven point six
million dollars or more for
related appropriations including
one million dollars for public
school capital outlay for school
panic buttons five million
dollars from the broadband
appropriations to support tribal
broadband projects and one point
six million from supplemental
appropriation for tribal
education department initiatives
we would not madam chair that
these will come with language
ensuring their expended
transparently and effectively.
This goes into additional
language instructing PED to use.
Elementary and secondary school
emergency school relief E. S. S.
E. R. funds to hold schools
harmless from budget reductions
caused by COVID nineteen related
to enrollment declines scenario
further authorizes the use of
Pat initiative funding to
support and consolidate that
funding to support breakfast
after the bell programs and
provision of the hunger for
Houston Bill of Rights Act and
again allows school wide
extended learning time programs
to use prior years with
membership
comes for purposes of generating
that extended learning time
Fund.
That's the high levels right
madam chair of the staff
recommendation lists the
subcommittee adopted with that
we would stand for questions.
I'm very good I want to draw the
committee's attention to the
actual general fund high level.
All this ties back to what
representative of small had just
gone through.
So if you look at everything
that's actually in the US SCG.
We just line thirty three north.
And then categorical
appropriations and then what we
traditionally called below the
line sometimes it's easier if
you look there exactly and where
the staff scenario is and then
if you have questions you can
just go to the line so let's
start with Representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman of
Representative small I have a
question on the the second board
on your second page five hundred
thousand dollar transfer
between.
ET do.
And I know we're pressed for
time however in looking at the
next page which would be a page
one and it's the public schools
support page typically chairman
referred to lights fifty four
and sixty seven and seventy
three and it just struck me that
when we're dealing with the an
above line expenditure of three
billion three hundred and fifty
three million seven hundred and
twenty four thousand that work I
think the steam five hundred
thousand dollars of state then
with the request for four point.
One million
and the executive of two point
one million which is what I
really have a question we don't
have time today to pursue so we
stick LFC at three three million
five hundred and we see of the
committee at three million.
Up and then going back up to one
fifty four we're adding it in on
Oct in the M. S. P..
So my question is representative
of again in and I'm also
interested one seventy three why
we cut may set out mesa is a
program of kind of a stem
program within the public
schools that I'm very supportive
of and I I just don't what know
why we were so hard on science
technology engineering of.
Money into our public schools
and that because on a percentage
basis in short you raised of I
am in SG twelve percent over
over share this the executive
recommendation and you.
Twenty five percent off of state
online sixty seven so I'm really
hoping we can come up with a way
to see some reinstatement there.
Your please.
Thank you madam chair I will
respond briefly
and also just to point noted but
also madam chair committee we
would know that the addition of
the seventy two million dollars
in the general in the
reoccurring for K. five plus an
extended learning time some of
that madam chair committee will
undoubtedly go to the kinds of
after school programs that are
sometimes included in steam
initiatives also included in
mesa initiatives.
The fact that madam chair in
committee we are going to be.
Building into the recurring
budget the ability for all
students across New Mexico to
participate in extended learning
time where madam chair committee
many of these activities
including again mesa and others
take place
is highly important and
something to very much no
secondly madam chair committee
Mr Abbey just texted that New
Mexico that mesa also has one
point zero five million how's
that New Mexico tech and.
As a representative side I think
a lot of it is for is likely
taken up in the significant
expansions of K. five plus
extended learning and as
Representative Anderson noted
the LFC the the staff scenario
is still roughly eight hundred
fifty thousand dollars higher
than the PED recommendation
significantly higher
And we do madam chairman
committee the indigenous
multilingual multicultural and
special education initiatives go
straight to the heart of Yazzie
Martinez
so it's a very good point madam
chair very much noted but those
would just be some points of
information in response.
Thank thank thank you for that
answer and and I I certainly
don't object to line fifty four
in just would ask that we hold
sixty one sixty seven in our
committee action to date for
final review on Saturday thank
you.
Okay Representative Sariñana.
Thank you madam chair as far as
Representative small as far as
extended learning time that's
that's elementary so you're kind
of
you're trying to lose in the
middle and high school students
to as far as that argument and
the steam as a male teacher
that's where those initiatives
are where the you actually learn
the math you know we can teach
map but where they actually
apply it is when they learn it
so these these these are really
important initiatives steam
and the the and mesa so just
because this is where my heart
is math and science it's hard to
take away from this because it
also really helps our lowincome
in our in our in our kids at
risk so
We can provide money for that or
to put it back or something
thank you madam chair.
Charles from committee.
The first vice chairman small.
I thank you madam chair just Mr
Saly noted that the extended
learning learning time data is
is that K. twelve I think madam
chair that it would extend into
middle school and high school
For the
for for some of these
initiatives.
Okay anybody else on this
report.
Madam chair.
Representative Trujillo I agree
with Representative Sarinana
there's a distinct difference in
extended learning time between
middle school and high school
and elementary schools and maybe
we can we visit with Charles and
David later just to see the
significance in the difference.
Anybody else on this report and
One thing I also wanted to
mention you should have had a
few that looks like this.
That also has recommended
language.
It's the recommended public
education recommended language
different she.
I'm gonna have a Charles just
quickly run through that okay.
Mr will get into the details of
the language you to for that
process to chair you're going
Sonney jump in there.
Thank you madam chair so there's
really only two significant
differences from the LFC
recommendation on language that
would be changing the extended
learning time program
flexibilities.
To.
Find prior membership student
counts essentially letting
schools use prior year
membership to generate extended
learning funding and then of
course language propose to
authorize the use of the student
wellness and nutrition funding
for PED.
W. is for breakfast after the
bell programs as well as
addressing the provisions of the
hunger free students bill of
rights.
The remaining changes in the
language section simply our
technical they reflect the
changes that the scenario does
with swapping General Fund for
K. five plus extended learning
time programs and.
Essentially left aligning with
the changes that are in the high
level and if we have to go into
more detail there specific
questions on any of the other
components but those are the
major changes.
Thank you Sonny go back to
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair the Senate
can you give us the line item
numbers on the two that there is
a major I I play one of his line
eight or section eight are she
couldn't find the other one.
Certainly in first the second
time I will go ahead and put
those in the chat but
I'll have the dentist couple the
pages myself.
But I'll get that to you in a
second here all right thank you
madam chair.
Okay.
How do we have any other
questions on the report.
I don't have any other I don't
have any here so what I'm gonna
ask is that
member of this.
Public education subcommittee
public schools working group.
Make the motion for approval of
the report which includes the
language.
And once that's done I'm I'm
going to ask that
The chair of this workgroup also
visit with the cabinet secretary
I want my I want him to
understand what we're doing.
and I know that that be
important for them to also
understand because we're putting
more accountability on them in
some areas.
And I just want to make sure
that we get their input this is
a big piece of the budget so
with that Representative
Anderson just real quick madam
chair did I understand this
motion might included
opportunity to review the steam
funding honor Saturday elected
well I've got five things on
here that's number six so thank
you madam chair I'm ready to
make question I'm ready where
we're ready Fauria.
Madam chair I move adoption of
the report we just received
including the language.
Okay we have a motion and the
second was made by.
Sorry I didn't hear what I heard
two voices.
Thank you for all.
Representative Brown.
Representative Brown.
Okay we have a motion made by
Representative Manderson second
by Representative brown on
accepting of the.
Public schools working group
report which includes language
is there any opposition to that
motion saying none it has been
approved.
So let me run through with
everybody what I've got on my
list based on all this work
that's been done over the last
thirty days.
Which I'm real proud of that we
don't have a heck of a lot of
changes on here so you guys have
been doing a damn good job the
first one is looking at agency
for ninety.
That's a fourteen thousand
dollar review.
Trujillo an Herrera brought that
up that's a fourteen that I
think it's a salary issue madam
chair.
Well go ahead go ahead well I I
think I could answer that
question because.
The the budget general fund
total was about two hundred
forty thousand and a hundred
thousand or so was personal
sars and personal services
benefit so.
The balance was for maintenance
costs to pay contract or with
friends of the real world so to
the extent there was that there
was a difference of fourteen
thousand eight would not have to
amount of personal services one
occurred okay so we can get that
fixed then it sounds like.
That is that it's a fourteen
thousand dollar difference and
it's coming out of one person so
I'll raise what my understanding
is that correct why don't we I
would propose to move the
fourteen from contract contracts
into personal services budget
okay I need a motion from
somebody on that.
Some of.
Have a motion and a second
Representative Anderson second
by Representative Crowder will
move fourteen thousand dollars
on a contracts into personal
services we fix that okay the
next agency was seven oh five.
Because we took the lower we
took that five percent cut level
for seven oh five David do we
have anything on that not that
right now okay we'll look into
that will look at that one.
Next is this whole thing with
the department of health.
On the supplementals Wyoming on
the I. T. one one ninety nine
that three point five million
versus four hundred forty two
thousand we're gonna do a little
more research on that.
And then this reinstatement of
steam slash mesa line sixty
seven in public schools support.
So I got three items out of the
seven point three billion dollar
budget.
So okay now the next and final
thing for today committee is our
general fund consensus revenue
estimate everybody should get
one of these and today it's back
at.
You know we.
We do our consensus revenue at
the very beginning of the
session.
As day one for HSC we know how
much money we've got
and that's based on all the
smartest economists in these
different agencies coming
together to tell us what they
think their revenue is going to
look like.
Just want to quickly highlight
we do the revenue projection at
the beginning and then also at
the mid point.
That was now is the mid point
For an update if you look at the
February twenty twenty one
consensus.
Look at FY twenty one.
Which is now and then FY twenty
two which is the budget we're
building and you can say it's a
hundred and sixty nine million.
And then you go down to February
twenty twenty one consensus it's
a hundred and twenty six million
that's going into the tax
stabilization reserve.
And then the bills got the
summary of all of this
All the background for it we've
heard this once before the
beginning of the session on day
one with HSC what I'd ask you to
do is just take this with you
read it.
Become familiar with that and if
you have any questions on this
we can sure get the bill and
David to to go through it with
you.
Course the general fund
financial summary pieces
important.
But I I don't want to go through
all this detail today I want to
give you all a chance to read it
usually we have staff go through
it but it's it's in your hand
out there to review.
Okay so is there anything else
bill what we're supposed to do
today.
Our madam.
R. we're pretty much done with
today Richter member on Saturday
will have a number of items to
consider including those that
you're more brought up today.
Right.
The schedule here.
Okay
That one workgroup tomorrow and
then
we'll be doing a Saturday
meeting.
My understanding that will start
at nine AM.
That's correct Madam nine AM
thank you that at least to get
our so to get through catch up
clean up final agency review.
I'd.
That's an important meeting so I
want want everybody there.
They will do the final.
ET bill review on Monday.
And then I hope to have this
bill on the floor next Wednesday
February twenty fourth.
And we will have been completed
what really matters in the New
Mexico legislature that's a
budget.
So with that being said I want
to thank everybody for today's
work this is good work I'm real
proud of everybody and all the
committee's work is that we get
it done here we break it up not
one person could do this I mean
it's impossible so it's a good
thing that we've got some hard
working committee members
jumping in there and and getting
the subcommittee pieces done.
Were down for today and look
forward to seeing you all
Saturday morning.
And I.
Thank.
