On starting with our early
childhood education department.
So Kelly, if you can start us
off, and please feel free to
celebrate some of the successes
from last session, I think
there's a lot of good news.
while we have a lot of work to
go. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair Kelly Clint
with the Legislative Finance
Committee.
Yeah, I really don't like
touching these.
Uh, Kelly Plant Legislative
Finance Committee. For better
For Worse, she'll be spending
most of your morning with me.
But for the better, you'll be
spending it with early childhood
and aging. Also
So, um, we're on agency code 611
really childhood education and
care department with me today is
Secretary Grusinsky and my I, d
f A counterpart Mary Beth
Densmore, who you all are
familiar with, because you've
been spending a lot of time with
her recently as well, Um, before
I start on the different sheets,
I just want to go over some
things in the volumes because
this is
There's a lot of really robust
things in the volumes for this
particular agency, and a lot of
those is thankfully due to the
continued collaboration between
the LFC and the executive.
Um and very strong relationship
there. So, um, in your volume
ones.
There's a lot of discussion
about the historical, pre K and
childcare expansions that have
been happening over the last few
years and some of the outcomes
that starts on page 25 and goes
all the way through page 35. So
there's some really interesting
charts in there about, uh,
declining birth rates, increased
funding where we are on home
visiting labor Force
participation, so lots of really
Interesting pieces there as we
look through that on volume one
Um, on volume three, which is
your spiral bound actually went
ahead and opened that for you.
so it's pre opened.
To the funding chart, which you
can see historical early
childhood funding by program and
by revenue source in front of
you. But there's many other
charts in that area, such as the
next page would be, um your
trust their early childhood
trust fund projections. Um and
then in the online version.
Many members of this committee,
including ranking member
Armstrong is not here but had
previously asked for lists of
contracts of who who has pre K
and their counties who has home
visiting how many slots What are
the amounts? Who are the
providers and so the online
version of Volume three has all
of that. If you want to look up
your local communities, and
that's really thankful to
CCD for providing that
Direct information that also has
head start.
Um And then your volume Two, of
course, is the LFC
recommendation and the thoughts
behind that
So with that, I'm going to start
with your actual packet now.
And I'm going to start with your
high level, which is Page one of
agency code 611.
And there's three sections to
this high level. Usually when
you're looking at this, it's
just general fund revenue
because this agency has really
complicated revenues outside of
general fun, but are also in
state control. There's two other
tables so you'll notice the
first table, which is lines
arose.
One through 50 is General fund.
And then your rose 51 through 65
are your early childhood
education fund? Some of you
know, that is the trust fund.
And then rose 66 through 70. Our
revenues coming in from the
constitutional amendment, Um,
approval of the school permanent
fund that comes into EC seed
now, which is technically
counted as general fund, so
there's a little bit of double
counting, but we wanted to be
able to see the old to see what
that but those dollars are being
directed to
So, um, with that, we'll start.
there's not It seems like
there's a lot of differences in
this agency. But there's really
not. There's two main
differences once we go through
it.
Um and that's that's the lines
You're going to see online. Um
32
And then
Um, online's 19 through 29.
Those are the main differences
in these wrecks. And so that's
the main difference is a little
as pre k money going for four
year olds. And then, um, we call
it a T Q. R S, which is a tiered
quality rating improvement
system, which is when you hear
of like setter being rated as a
five star or four star. It's
that system.
That allows us to rate those and
give those ratings There's it's
more complicated than that, but,
um, that's kind of like a
overview. So there's that you
main differences between the
wrecks when we're thinking about
policy decisions.
Um, I will know that.
The LFC recommendation also
increases distributions from the
early childhood Trust fund above
the executive. A lot of that
goes to childcare assistance to
backfill federal revenues that
are ending. So our book, Risa
cares. All of those big federal
packages sent money to the early
childhood department, which
allowed them to increase
eligibility of income level.
So up to 400% of the federal
poverty level as long as the
family is within that income
level and has a qualifying
activities such as work. You're
going to school they they get.
They are eligible for childcare
assistance. Um, the agency also
did some work force pieces, They
increase rates. Um, there's a
lot of pieces in there but that
federal revenue has gone and
ended now and so we've used
early childhood trust fund
revenues.
To kind of backfill that so that
those policies can continue. So
you're not really paying for
more In some of those pieces.
You are in one piece, But for
most of it is a lot of it is
backfill a piece that you are
paying for with the expanded
trust fund is to increase
infinite toddler slots, which is
a big deal.
So we have broad coverage for
three and four year olds when it
comes to early childhood, most
families can get into a
childcare center or pre K
program. There's broad coverage,
but once you get to those
younger ages, infants and
toddlers, we have less provider
networks for those And why is
that important? Um, it's
important for workforce
participation.
So that families can work or go
to school. But it's also
important for, um you know
Children to be able to be in
those early education years
because that's the biggest
portion of brain development
happens in those first three
years, and so we want them in
happy, healthy environments and
having those really robust
interactions. And thirdly, those
are our Children who are most at
risk, right? They can't tell an
adult that something may be
happening. Neglect wise.
Um, And so they are in the
system in a way that allows the
parent to better themselves or
the caregiver to better
themselves and also allows for
those early education. Years to
happen, so you are buying new
new incident holder slots with
the LFC and executive
recommendations. Both
Using expanded trust fund.
Um, I know that was a lot.
That's not necessarily
Different, she presentations,
but I
Took liberties.
So with that, we'll just start
with the overview on Page two
and three.
Executive recommendation for
General Fund included 19.2
Million and 13 Million of other
transfer revenues more than the
LFC recommendation. The LFC
recommendation for federal
revenues, however, supported the
department request while the
executive recommendation reduced
revenues by 2.4 million.
Lfc recommendation also included
13.5 million and other revenues
above the executive.
In the contractual services
category of the executive was 21
million above the LFC, mostly
for infantile their wage career
ladder.
And for the state's QRS, which
we discussed that the tier
quality rating improvement
system update.
The LFC recommendation also had
funding for the infinite Holler
waging career ladder, but it's
not in Section four. This piece,
it's in the expendable trust or
the gate. I'm really not sure
calling it now.
Um, so that's there is funding
for that. It's just in a
different piece of the bill.
Um, in the other cost category,
the executive recommendation was
9 million above the lfc, and
that was mostly for expanded
prekindergarten services. Both
recommendations increased
prekindergarten services. The
LFC recommendation mostly
focused on three year olds,
given the large expanse of four
year old pre K that we did last
year, which was historical
funding.
And so are they. Also,
recommendation was mostly
focused on three year olds,
which is a smaller population
served in four year olds. Well,
the executive did both three and
four year olds.
The RFC recommendation was 12.8
million above the executive in
other financing, use in
transfers to the Healthcare
Authority Department, which you
all heard yesterday, and that
was mostly to do federal match
for Medicaid revenues for
maternal and, uh maternal and
infant health services to expand
services to allow for doula
support for lactation support
and for home visiting and those
are really important to help
improve our maternal health
outcomes.
And so that's a recommendation.
that's in the LFC recommendation
not included in the executive
recommendation.
It will note. It's not an
executive because it was not
asked for by the executive.
That's an lfc. Um,
recommendation.
In the language. A lot of the
language differences are just
about, um, the different revenue
sources that the executive
versus the LFC took. We both
funded very similar things, but
sometimes the executive used
trust fund where the LFC use
Land grant or the L. C. U. S
Trust fund, but in a different
and so it's all really about
kind of the different revenue
sources. There's not a lot of
policy discussions in that. I
will say there is one piece of
language
That is important. That's in the
LFC recommendation. That's not
including the exact and this is
a technicality. So when you
think about the trust fund, what
we have is a corpus that gets
invested, And then there is a
formula that distributes the
amount the formula into a
program fund and from that
program funds is what you all
Appropriate from now there's no
language in the creation of that
that anything that's unspent in
that program funds go back to
the corpus at the end of the
fiscal year so it can be
reinvested. And so it gets stuck
in that program fund, which
would then it would be non
recurring. So the LFC put in
recommended recommended language
to allow that money. If there is
any, they're really good about
spending it, So that's not
really a problem. But if there
was anything left over to send
it back to the corpus for
reinvestment for future years to
make money on that.
So
That's just a technical, um, lfc
recommendation.
For performance. We have met
consensus and on expansions. The
executive recommendation
included $900,000 above the lfc.
lfc included funding for that,
Just not in expansions. We put
it in the base.
So with that I will turn it over
to Mary Beth for the first
program.
Thank you. Kelly, Mr Chair
Committee, members of space to
see you all again. Um, Kelly, do
we have programs supporters the
next I just want to make sure
I'm on the same.
Path is you?
Perfect. Okay. Thank you. Mr
Chair. This is program support.
Um
So for program support.
Um, in the revenue.
Part of the budget. The
executive recommendation was
503.8000 above the LFC lfc
recommendation was 13.4 million
in other revenues above the
executive, and that's from the
early childhood Education and
care program fund.
In the base.
Well. Both recommendations do
increased personnel. The
executive was just slightly
higher by 41.1000.
The LFC recommendations
supported the department request
for contractual services and
other costs.
While the executive made
miscellaneous adjustments
resulting in the total 155,000
difference. Um and if I remember
correctly, I believe that was a
vacancy rate adjustment on the
part of the executive.
The LFC recommendation was 12.8
million above the executive in
other financing uses for
transfer to the healthcare
authority to match federal
Medicaid revenue for doula and
lactation support, Infant and
maternal health service raids
and home visiting
For language. The F D. L C
recommendation included language
for transfer of revenues to the
healthcare authority and also
included contingency that the
distribution to the early
childhood education and care
fund can be increased. Um I'll
note
Just very, very briefly that
this year, according to the
calculations, the agency would
be able to budget $155 million
of the trust fund. Both
recommendations, um, recommend
increasing that amount by, I
think one is 95 on the executive
100 lfc so you can see they're
very similar. Both would require
the legislation to increase the
fund for these initiatives.
Moving on the LFC recommendation
also included contingency
language. Uh
That the distribution to the
early childhood education and
care fund be increased for other
personnel and I t funds for the
program.
And then finally, the LFC
recommendation. Um, this is what
Kelly just mentioned included
reverting unspent early
childhood education and care
program fund back to the
Early education and care fund
corpus.
Performance measures were
reconciled. Um and then in the
expansion C executive did
include two expansion FTE or the
LFC. Recommendations included
one
With that, Mr Cheryl, Turn it
back over to Kelly.
Thank you.
We are now I've learned to turn
it off before I move it. We're
on now on Page six, the family
and family support in early
intervention programs. So this
is there's very few differences
in this, but in this program
budget
Um, the executive revenue was
94.9000 above the LFC. Um, the
LFC recommendation supported the
department's request. All the
executive reduced adjustments of
that 198 in federal revenue and
the LFC recommendation increase
other revenues from early care
and education Fund for an
expansion FTE.
The recommendation also included
contingency language that we've
talked about so that you're
gonna see that same language
kind of in every program. I
don't think I need to re explain
it every time um, and the
executive recommendation for
expansion of Ft was $100 above
the L. C and
Yeah. Honestly, I just needed
the math to math, so I had to
put in there. So you know what
that would do Well, but that all
turn it over to Mary Beth
Thanks again. Kelly. Mr. Chair.
Um we are going to be on the
early care and education
program.
Ah, this okay for the revenue
for this program, Executive
General fund revenues where
770.5000 above the lfc for
expansion of to eat.
The other transfers Revenue
recommendation in the LFC with 6
million above the executive for
from the early childhood
education and Care Fund for
childcare assistance in infant
and toddler care.
The LFC recommendation for
federal revenues supported the
department request while the
executive recommendation reduced
the revenue source. By 2.2
million. Um and I can let you
know that was again vacancy rate
reductions to account for, um
actual revenue expected to be
received.
In the base. The executive
recommendation reduced personnel
by the 2.2 million.
Yeah, Let's see recommendation
for other costs again with 6
million above for childcare
assistance.
Um again. I
As Kelly said, I don't think we
need to go through the language.
This is in basically every
program.
Performance measure, differences
were reconciled and again. Um
the executive has 7 70.5000 in
an expansion for FTE.
So with that, Mr Chair, uh,
I'll turn it back over to Kelly.
Mr Chair. If I could just make
two notes on this program
because this is one of the big
differences this program this
is, um one thing wasn't
mentioned. The executive
included 5 million of opioid
settlement funds for childcare,
and we did do that in the
current fiscal year. But the LFC
recommendation replace that with
trust fund dollars, while the
executive continued that opioids
that is a difference in
revenues.
Um, And then the second. This is
where we're talking about the
curious and quality measures.
That's why the executive so much
higher. So just being super
clear on what that difference
is.
Sorry. I didn't mean to over
speaking.
Um, so the next program is the
policy research and quality
Initiatives program. We're on
page 10 and 11.
Big differences here so overall,
the executive recommendation was
22 million above the LFC.
Hmm. Um, and most of this is for
the waging career ladder
funding.
So, and the curious update and
some pre k quality initiatives.
I will know that the LFC
recommendation does have again
the wage and career ladder
monies. It's just not in this
part of the billets in the
gates. Um so
That is a difference, but it's
less of a difference when you
take in that into account.
Yeah, and performance measures
have been reconciles, and that's
mainly the differences for this
program.
Mary Beth.
Thanks, Kelly and Mr Chair. The
last program is prekindergarten.
Um, in this program for this
year, the executive
recommendation was just about
14.9 million over the LFC in
general fund and other transfer
revenues from the early
childhood education and trust
fund. Both recommendations do
significantly increased funding
for prekindergarten services.
However, the executive
recommendation included 14.9
million additional above the F
the LFC and just for clarity.
That was the department request.
And
Again. Language No need to to
spend too much time on that
again. It's pretty repetitive,
um, and performance measures
were reconciled. Um
That is the last program. So
unless Kelly has anything else
to add, Mr Chair, I can turn it
over to the secretary. Thank
you. Both analysts, Kelly, we
have here sort of the special
and Mr Can we go through that
briefly, and perhaps you can
refer us back to also the, um,
the expendable trust so that we
Yeah.
Conclude with that before we go
to the secretary. Yes, Mr Chair.
Thank you. Um so on page 14 you
have the section five and nine
pieces. So nine being the wage
and career ladder, Uh,
expendable. Trust the gate.
Whatever the whatever. We're
calling it now, So Lfc had 20
million for that, And that's
over several years to allow the
agency to kind of scale that
program.
And then we had some similar
recommendations. In a lot of the
pieces. The executive had 3
million more than the LFC for
endowments. Um and the executive
had 5 million more than the LFC
for low loan interest rates for
financing. That's basically for
childcare centers to be able to
To apply for low loan interest
rates to do capital
improvements. We can't give them
capital straight because they
are private businesses, and that
would go into conflict with the
anti donation clause, so there's
are already a statute in place
for this program to exist. It's
just never really been funded.
It's not in the LFC
recommendation at this time, but
it is in the executive
recommendation.
And so those are kind of the
main differences for the back of
the bill.
Thank you, Mr Jones or anything
to add there before we go to
Secretary. Yes, sir. Chair. I
just wanted to clarify. I think
that the number is missing. I
believe the executive has 5
million for the home visiting,
um, pre child payment.
Pilot program just just so you
are aware
Oh, and yes, as a secretary just
reminded me the one below it for
the low interest loans. The
executive amount is 3 million,
not five.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Thank you
Both. Um yeah. Madam Secretary.
Thanks for being here Feel free
to introduce members of your
team and
And thanks for your care with
the microphones involved. Yes, I
watched some of yesterday and
the support Secretary Armijo.
Uh, well, thank you, Mr Chair.
Members of the committee so
great to be here. I do. Thank
you for the point of privilege
to introduce a few people one
Today we are meeting with our
early childhood tribal advisory
coalition. They travel around
the state today. They're meeting
here in Santa Fe and I want to
recognize our assistant
secretary Cotillions Nettie.
Who has been leading that
effort, along with Mark Hume,
who is our native American
policy specialist, and we have
two members of the coalition
here with US today. Tammy
Salazar from the Hickory, a
Apache nation and Marcia Lino
from the Zia Pueblo, When we
found out my hearing was today
and their meeting was today we
they pushed it back a little bit
so that they could be here.
I also want to recognize the
incredible staff at the early
childhood care and Education
Department, Our deputy secretary
Sarah Michaelson, We have our
brand new administrative
services director Mark Mark
Dominguez. I almost said Mark
you This is his fourth day and
he joins us from the private
sector. But he's 1/9 generation
Mexican from grants.
And so we're so excited to have
his energy in the department of
Valerie Garcia's Our budget
director. Shelley Strong is our
general counsel.
Helen Quintana is our director
of HR and Constituent Services.
Sandeep Patel is our chief
information officer. Leila
Wendell has joined us. She's two
months in. She's our director of
policy research and quality
initiatives joined us from where
she was serving in Arizona as
their child care administrator.
But born and raised in
Albuquerque, where her family
lives finally convinced her to
come back home.
Uh and Sandy Trujillo, who is
our director of early care,
education and nutrition, hails
from Taus but now lives in
Albuquerque and might have
Gutierrez family support early
intervention. Division director,
uh, might have joined US July 1
of 2020. She has been an
incredible leader in the family
support Early intervention
division, and she is moving on
to lead the statewide firstborn.
And other models office at the
end of next week, But we could
not be more pleased with the
leadership she's demonstrated,
and Dr Janice Gonzalez, our
chief health officer, so we have
an incredible team and I just
want to thank all of you and
wish you all a happy new year
And kudos for how far we've
come. How far you've all let us
in this journey of creating a
department.
Creating a trust fund passing
the land Grant permanent fund
making the investments um, huge,
thanks to Kelly and director
Sally for their leadership on
this budget. What a difference a
year makes. I think we've had a
ton of learning and growing and
building of relationships where
we're sitting here knowing that
we're all invested in
Childcare, Pre K families
Prenatal d five the workforce
that care for and serve them
every day.
As Kelly said in Maribeth, the
differences are there, but the
differences are not anything
that together. We won't address.
I think the one thing I want to
talk about is the quality work.
I think Kelly makes him you
know, good points is too in
terms of
We are in the middle of a focus
redesigned, so focus is what we
call our quality rating and
improvement system.
Based on research based on focus
groups with people all over the
state, working with the center
for early childhood excellence
at Western New Mexico University
and our national Ta partners.
Kind of boiled it down to four
key things that we need to be
looking at.
First and foremost ratios. New
Mexico has the highest ratios in
the country, Georgia and
Georgia, so we allow a provider
to serve 6126 for babies.
So if any of you have ever cared
for six babies at the same time,
who are six weeks to one year
old, you can imagine that that
type of ratio is not going to
lend itself too strong
interactions to opportunities
for responsive caregiving. And
so that's something that we want
to look at. And we plan to
engage the community and where
should we set our ratios and
what we call group size? How
many infants can we have?
In one room together right now,
if we're not at the higher
levels of quality, they can have
12 infants. Um and that's you
know, best practices we want on
demand feeding on demand,
sleeping lots of time for
interactions and tummy time and
all the things that I infant
needs to grow and develop and
have those positive outcomes.
The research has demonstrated.
So those are things we're
looking at Ratio group size and
I think it also fits to the
workforce.
Teacher interactions is the
number one
Outcome at the drives Outcomes
for Children.
So when the baby coos and youku
back or you talk back to them,
their brain is just that's where
the synapses are firing. That's
when we talk about that brain
development. It's all happening
as a result of interactions.
So we want to pay attention to
how strong our teacher
interactions in the classroom
and we want to use a research
based measure, which the lfc
recommendation does have in
there, But we know that once we
get those results, we want to
have coaches. We want to have
people who can go in there and
help the teacher understand how
to improve their practice so
that that's where the executive
ask is asking for more coaching
time or consultants.
The third thing is the
professional qualifications and
compensation.
Research has shown that teachers
with more and actually in our
focus groups, both directors and
early childhood educators said
that when they they were good
teachers, but when they went and
actually training and education
and child development and all
these things, they saw their
practice improve, and they see
in the research shows that
teachers with credentials with
degrees are able to again
support those interactions
support those relationships with
families.
And deliver the higher quality
care.
And if we want our educators to
get higher credentials, we need
to compensate them. So those are
the work and, you know again,
proud to be a new Mexico were
leading the nation as we build
the future for New Mexico,
Children and families by
investing in our workforce,
whether it's early intervention,
whether it's our home visiting
our childcare Creek, we have
made significant investments
thanks to your leadership.
In our workforce. But as Kelly
said, and it's in both of our
recommendations, it's so
exciting. We all agree. We have
to do more around the wage and
career ladder.
So I think overall, we stand in
a very good place a place for
lots of celebration, but still a
lot of hard work that we need to
do in the department in
partnership with community with
our tribal leaders, and with all
of you, so I'll stop because I
know you have a very full agenda
today. But I just want to say
thank you and grateful for the
partnership and the
collaboration that we've had
over the past three or four
years. But definitely this year
feels very special.
Excellent. And Madam Secretary.
Thank you. Thanks to your team,
Great to have members from the
tribal advisory group. Thank you
for being here today In. Really,
I think you've
It's been said you've said it,
But the fact there is broad
recognition building across the
board going straight to
questions. We're going to go
first to representative vodka.
then the representative Garrett
and continue from there.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you, Secretary. My
questions are just really, um,
really brief. It's going to be
On this presentation. We didn't
quite go over, but it's on the
it's on the special
appropriations request. Um
Can you please just give me a
quick overview about the family
support in early intervention?
The 5000 co pilot or pilot home,
visiting
And the coordinated intact and
referral system.
Um please.
Madam secretary I got I got so
excited. I forgot to do my
presentation. I do want to make
a few highlights on there. Thank
you, representative of Mr Chair
Representative. Vodka. Uh, what
we have proposed there and it's
something that came out of many
conversations here with both the
Legislative Finance Committee
And I think last year is, how
are we going to increase the
participation in Medicaid funded
home visiting
And how are we going to ensure
that families are staying in
completing that what came out in
the LFC evaluation of this past
year? And so we had talked about
an incentive program, something
that when a family enrolls in
home visiting these programs
would have access to, you know,
they could say.
Oftentimes families need, you
know.
Diapers, or they might need help
with the utility bill, Or they
might need formula and so for
that home visiting program to be
able to, first of all, support
them with either emergency
assistant but also recognize
parents who are engaging and
effectively participating in the
program, giving them an
incentive and making sure that
we're paying by child right now.
we're paying by family. And so
if
Uh, home, visiting home visitors
serving a family with two or
three Children. That program is
only getting payment for one.
One family.
Thank you, Um
Sorry.
Kelly, If you have anything to
add. Yes, Mr. I just wanted to
add that, um
There is an an L. C
recommendation regarding this.
It's just not in specials. What
the LFC recommendation did is
sent money to Medicaid $2
million so that it could be
matched with federal revenues
and do the pilot through the
Medicaid home visiting families
first, because that should be
kind of our most targeted
families. You want to get
enrolled into home visiting, so
we put 2 million that would be
matched by up to
Three additional million for the
total 5 million, while the
executive recommendation puts it
in a special directly to the
agency.
And thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you panel for that
question, I guess. And I'll tell
you what I understand the
importance of home visiting so I
guess might really my question
is about the criteria. Okay? The
$5000. Is there a rate of
participation do they have? I
mean is it by? You know how How
are we going to determine or is
it going to be a lot of lump sum
and then we never see the family
again?
Is it going to be paid out
Quarterly per visit is their
criteria that makes them
eligible for this, Mr Chairman.
Mr. Chair, Representative Baca.
So it's the 5 million that the
executive has asked for would be
part of a strategy. That would
be, um not
What we I think we estimated was
like a 500 allocation per
family.
But it could be used for a
variety of things that could be
for emergency needs. It could be
for incentives, some of that,
But I hear what you're saying,
And it's a great question, so it
would be very clear and explicit
in our contracts with home
visiting programs.
And thank you, Mr Chairman, and,
uh, Madam started. My last
question is really is about the
childcare building. Uh, low
interest loans. Um, could you
just give me a quick
Overview of that and just tell
me about that program.
Um, Mr Chairman.
Yes. Thank you. Mr Chair. Mr
Chairman, representative, aka
great question. It is
administered through the New
Mexico Finance Authority. It was
on the books. Um, when it was at
the Children, Youth and Families
Department, the childcare
Division or the early learning
Division.
Last year in M F A. I think had
a whole package of changes to
some of their programs, and they
made updates to the statute
connected to EC EC D. We worked
with an M F A with our federal
relief money. $12 million were
projected to create 2200
additional childcare slots
across the state. I've been at
ribbon cuttings the last few
months. It's been so exciting.
And so we want to just keep that
momentum because we know we
still have many childcare
deserts across the state.
Uh, thank you. Mr. Chairman,
have no further questions. Thank
you very much represented.
vodka. Next represented Garrett
represents to me. Thank you, Mr
Chair. And Kelly. Every time I
see you, your middle name is
braided funding revenue sources
such as
Always reminds me and I also
want to say the most powerful
sentence I heard in all the
interim hearings was teachers,
our nation builders. Early
childhood educators are brain
builders. So I want to really
thank you for the emphasis on
the infant and toddler.
Racial because it's vital and
also the department's focus on
integrating both public and
private childcare facilities
doing a superb job. I have two
simple questions on following
what representative Bacchus
said.
The sign up when families sign
up when I took care of an
elderly parent if we got the
home visiting arranged well, my
parent was at the hospital. It
happened. It did not happen if
My elderly parent went home. So
just are you looking at?
The sign of like the prenatal
care period that wherever they
have the baby, Um is that being
looked at because it's not. It
just doesn't happen if it
doesn't happen while you have
the mother right there with you.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garrett. Thank you for that
excellent question, And I think
it speaks to two things we're
doing. One is the family
connects model, which is a
universal in our birthing
hospitals reaching families, as
you say, before they leave the
hospital and say, and then
meeting them within the next two
weeks or three weeks for a
couple of visits.
Connecting them with longer term
home. Visiting childcare, Early
intervention, other programs
they may need. We have a very
successful pilot happening in
Berna Leo right now, 62% of the
families in the birthing Eubanks
Women's Clinic who are born
there are signing up or going
and connecting with a home
visitor.
The other thing is what you all
funded us last year, both for
the coordinated intake and
referral system and that
marketing and outreach about
home visiting, so we've been
working on a health care
specifically Health care
outreach program. We've just
launched our first Healthcare
Champion award. So we're taking
nominations for people who are
working in the health care
field.
We're doing a great job
connecting families too early
intervention home, visiting in
particular, and so I think
between those efforts and family
connects, expanding across the
state were getting them exactly
when they need it. We need to
reach out to O B g. Y N s. They
have to be a key part of this
because that's when we want
families connected.
But more needs to be done in
that area and also deepening our
relationship with the Medicaid
managed care organizations. They
are critical. They have the
members they know as soon as
they're pregnant, and we want to
be getting those referrals to
our home visiting programs with
a warm handoff.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Second
question is have you audited?
Um, I forget the number of two
year and four year higher
education institutions. We have
But we have an audit of
Who has not only early child
care, um programs but on site
centers, for example, you and M
has a whole campus because as we
refer people and fun people for
that important element that you
said the training
Um, those are key places. But do
we have and you don't have to?
do you have a list of Yeah.
Where there I know like CNN is
now developing that on site
thing, Mr. Chair, Representative
Garrett. We have that list and
we can also you can also find it
on our childcare finder. But you
and M Gallop just opened, um,
back reopened their childcare
center. Um, towels. Eastern New
Mexico. U and M Kids Campus has
a large program.
But we have that list and we can
Mr chair related to that, Um
I know when, um Amazon open
their huge facility on the west
side of Albuquerque. I asked
them Are you going to have an on
site childcare? And they said,
Oh, no, We're going to refer to
people well.
Do you have any? Um, Is there
any plan any record of the
largest businesses in the state?
And the childcare facilities
that they're building for their
employees.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garrett. Um, we we do not have
the exact list of employees. But
there was some federal mandates
around the chip act, especially
we So we do want to reach out to
Intel to see what they're
planning to do in terms of
providing childcare, But we did
meet at the end of November with
the Department of Workforce
Solutions. And so we're
partnering on this exact issue.
We've met with the premium
Basin.
Folks because they also are very
concerned. And Sandy Hill. Our
director has been down there a
few times and at the deputy of
are part of a working group, so
we haven't done comprehensive,
but we're on that path.
Thank you in. My last question
is
Has there been any effort in
Apollo this up also with K 12,
but
Health curriculum in middle
school and high school.
Awareness of child development.
We've all seen painful cases.
Of teen parenting and people in
their early twenties abusing
their Children.
And it's just as I thought of
it. What kind of curriculum are
we mandating for adolescents and
teens so that they enter
parenthood.
With a deeper understanding.
It's just a something to follow
up on.
Yes, Mr. Chair, Representative
Garrett. I think, um, absolutely
focusing on that, and I think
working closely closer with the
Grads program, and some of our
young parents and we are working
with our young parents, also
through our private sector
partnerships that are happening
across the state. But you make a
good point that you know we we
can't start early enough talking
about the importance of health
and
Safe because Mr Chair, it's
actually the pre grads. Yeah.
Okay. Right. Thank you. Very
much impact representing girl
represent representatives.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
Secretary Genske. Um my first
question has to do with dual
ear's So we're going going to
fund doulas. How many doulas do
we have in the state of New
Mexico?
Mr Chair, representative, Harem,
Eo. I do not have that number,
but we can get that in possibly
Doctor Gonzalez knows. No, we do
not know. Okay. Thank you. Um,
my other question is, Do we know
the average salary for early
care workers?
Have we done a study to kind of
see what people are making and
Mr. Chair, Representative. How
Romeo it what we have built into
our cost. Alternative
methodology would be that nobody
working in childcare at those
entry levels would make less
than $15 an hour and that the
higher levels of quality they
would be making closer to $18 an
hour at an entry level and $24
at a
An hour at a teacher level, so
we did do um and in our annual
outcomes report that will be
released next week. Well, you'll
see some of the data that we
were able to collect through the
competitive pay for
professionals grant opportunity,
and that showed you know where
they were before the $3 and
after, But I can follow up with
you and give you give more
details on that.
What we saw in that study.
And that study was used to
project the wage career.
Ladder.
Executive request where we want
to go.
Wonderful. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Kelly, please. Thank you. I just
want us to be careful with that
conversation just because a rate
is built with a wage in mind
does not mean that that wages
actually occurring for that
teacher, and so I really do have
more work to do in the state on
policy mechanisms to ensure that
that wages making it to the
teachers pocket.
And we have seen previously not
not with the secretary. But with
previous secretaries when we
increase the wage it didn't
affect teacher income. And so
there's more work to be done on
that piece.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and I
asked, and I just want to say
two things. One is the
professional development
information system that we're in
the process of building that
will be ready by December of 24
will collect that information.
We're also starting our next
round of the cost alternative
methodology. Actually, the kick
off his next week with our task
force, and we will be collecting
that data through that process,
so by May or June will have
updated information.
To what Kelly saying is did the
rates that we provide actually
result in higher salaries? Thank
you, Mr Chair in my my
Observation is that when we
increased teacher pay
Then it was more difficult to
get teachers in pre K
And so I think you may find that
those agencies who are offering
pre K had to really bump up the
salaries to be able to fill
those slots.
And so that was that was the,
um, although are intended
message was to increase. Um, K
12. I think it it had the other
intention of increasing pre
cake. So, um
So I'd be interested in seeing
what that looks like and and the
challenges that agencies are
having and feeling filling those
slots, especially since we are
now encouraging more childcare,
And are we able to find the
workers to fill those slots? I'd
be curious to find out Mr Chair,
representative Armenia Such a
great question. I had the good
fortune to meet with our
background Check unit yesterday
and they're getting 100
applications a day to be working
in childcare, So that was very
exciting for them. They're a
little
Crushed.
Is there kind of keep up with
the volume, but I was very
excited. We were all very
excited to hear that news. We
also increased the pre K rate
with the investments you made
last year to meet that 50,000
minimum for a teacher, But we
also have the pre K parody that
you and um set up and invested
in for the last two years. So
those educators who are working
in a community based pre K
Making 50, but they really
should be making the 70. They're
able to get that difference
through the pre K parody
program. So we are we have
mechanisms in place to keep that
mixed delivery system strong and
to be paying those wages across.
Both pre K and schools and
community based and head start.
We've opened that to head starts
as well.
Mr Chair and and and I recognize
that, um
Pre K early pre K had a mandate
that was to provide more hours
than we had for public schools.
And so those teachers are
working. Um you know, 10.
10.5 months a year. So then that
increase needs to be reflected
in that way. Otherwise, they
would, of course, go to the
school district and and do that,
so that's something to keep in
mind, Mr Chair and then in
closing, I just want to thank
Dr Gonzalez for hearing what we
said about I C d 10 codes. I
know I had brought it up that my
concern that Children who are
not just born addicted but
Children who are exposed
Is to drugs.
Ah, after after birth at 12
years old that we wanted to code
so that we can track those, Um,
those Children and and we were
provided with that in early
intervention, So I appreciate
that in hearing that, So Thank
you again, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much, Madam. Your
representative Garcia, then
represent dela Cruz. Thank you,
Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Secretary for the
presentation. I have a question
on program support.
Uh, mentioned that they're low
interest rates.
For providers. What does
consider a provider and I'll get
to the second part of the
question. What do you consider a
provider?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garcia. Thank you. For that
question. We consider providers
of what we call facilities that
are licensed by the early
childhood education and care
department or a what we call
registered home and they're
licensed exempt, but they
provide care for Children in
their home.
Thank you for that, Mr German
chicken, Terry, Uh, as you well
know.
In my dish break.
There is no providers out there.
So what's happening in my
district is, uh,
The grandparents are raising
kids.
How do we compensate them?
For crying to do what everybody
else is trying to do.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garcia. We actually have a
program in place right now.
Where if they wanted to become a
registered home, they could get
childcare assistance payments
for caring for their
grandchildren. They could also
get access to our child and
adult care food program.
And so that's something we
We welcome you to refer those
people directly to myself or to
Sandy and we can get them
connected with resources.
Thank you. That Secretary. Mr
Chairman, um
Within closing, as you want to
tell the committee.
And the audience that the
secretary and the deputy
secretary had been out.
Yeah.
Restoration.
Is it Valley startling about,
uh, Bridge Springs, where there
was 35 chapters prison at one
time. You know, this is good
outreach for these people
because they have no clue of
what's available for and you
know, we need to keep up the
outreach who helped these people
out because, like I said
earlier, uh, you know, there's a
lot of grandparents raising
their kids.
And they have no no source or or
funds to continue trying to do
so. I really appreciate your
deputy secretary. She was out
there.
In Lake Valley, and a few people
don't know where they valleys
that it is between
Right and by meeting somewhere,
and you know it's really rule
out there, but I really
appreciate you guys going out
there and I look forward to
working with you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr Garcia, Robson, dela Cruz and
represent Montoya.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Ah, thank you, Presenters. Thank
you, Secretary in broad terms,
and this is going to be a bit of
rhetorical, but in broad terms,
Uh, what is the purpose for the
state of New Mexico is expending
so much capital towards early
childhood hood, education and
preschool.
Mr. Chair, representative. Dela
Cruz. Um, can you repeat the
question? What is the state of
New Mexico expends a tremendous
amount of capital.
For early childhood education,
preschool.
In broad terms. Can you explain
the reason for doing that?
So I I
I don't know that there's a lot
of capital being expended. We
did. We did expend the 12
Million of federal money for
child care facility building and
I know in the public schools.
There has been a good investment
over. Kelly may be able to
answer this better than me in
terms of preschools in school
based there has been a focus,
but I think it's because of what
we have recognized or what we
call childcare desserts.
Where there are more than three
Children for every available
slot in a community is defined.
I think it's three is that is
defined as a child care desert.
So if we wanna create a cohesive
and equitable prenatal defied
system, Madam Sugar Terry, I'm
not talking about about that
aspect. I'm talking about
preschool.
And early childhood education
Capital Capital dollars. Well,
yes, it costs a lot of money by
that service. To the extent that
the state provides that service
Why do we do that? That's why do
we do that? Because that is
where we get the best return on
our investment because the brain
the child's brain in those first
three years.
Developed 80% of their brain
develops in the first three
years. So if we're not caring
for and taking care of our
Children at the youngest ages,
we're going to continue to see
the problems as they enter
kindergarten, not on track as
they develop other special
needs, And those are the things
that if we start early, we can
address many of these challenges
that we've seen as a state.
With juvenile juvenile violence,
child abuse school readiness
issues, So that's why I think
this state has made a huge
investment in the prenatal
defied period. Mr. Chairman in
In a perfect world.
After that happens after you
have preschool. What then would
be the vision the outcome for a
child?
Mr Chair, Representative.
Daylight cruise. I mean, I think
the governor has a vision of a
strong, high quality cradle to
career system that supports
families and Children all along
the life course. And then you'll
hear from the aging secretary
and we want to support them.
You know, Cradle to, um twinkle
twinkle. Um, but I think we have
to invest in our people and we
have to invest in our people by
investing in our communities
because when families don't have
someone said to me recently
Families don't live in programs
they live in communities and
Children live in families. So
we're focused in this
administration on building
strong communities that can
support families who convince
support their Children.
Mr Chairman. I applaud that
effort. I support that effort as
well.
Is there a gap is? What are your
studies? What are the indicators
that from pre school to high
school that this is actually
working or is it too soon in the
game for us to determine that
Because we're not moving the
needle in education? We know
that
So how can you address that?
Mr Chair and representative Dela
Cruz. I think Kelly Ken as well
from the LFC evaluation that was
done two years ago, maybe three
to show the six almost $6 return
for every dollar invested in pre
K.
I believe we're going to see
similar and even more
compounding benefits and returns
when we have high quality
programming prenatal all the way
through third grade and beyond,
But in those early years, I
think the evaluations have shown
that we see tremendous growth
for Children and you're right.
We have to start early that that
evidence and research
It is clear, but how we provide
those services and who provides
those services is a key part of
the equation.
Mr Chair. If I may. I just want
to be clear in a couple of
points. Yes, This is a
cornerstone of the states in
early prevention before harm
happens, right? That's where
we're focusing these dollars.
But I want to be clear that not
every early childhood program is
a silver bullet and fixes every
problem right. And so when we
look at our early childhood
system, we have core programs we
have home visiting.
Childcare cyst Insp
Prekindergarten and family and
Finn taller. Those are we have a
lot of other things, but those
are good the core programs in
each one of these programs is
really good at doing a separate
thing. So, for instance, when
you talk about our educational
outcomes, the LFC is done. Many,
um
Evaluations on prekindergarten
and what we see is low income
Children who received full
prekindergarten services are
graduating high school at a
higher rate attending college at
a higher rate. That's how long
we've been studying pre K in New
Mexico. I'm not talking about
nationally just in New Mexico.
We also see that they have lower
special education designation.
Um, and they have higher
attendance at school and so
prekindergarten is really good
at addressing educational
outcomes home visiting is, um,
earlier intervention for
families when they have young
Children to have really high
quality interactions between
caregiver and child, So we see
outcomes on that piece.
Child care assistance helps
families work and go to school
and helps economically and so
depending on the outcome that
this Legislature or the policy
wants to focus on. That's where
you put your dollars if you're
looking to put more educational
outcomes, you would put money in
pre K if you're looking to get
more families working going to
school, you would help a child
care if you want to help with,
um, reducing possibly CPS
involvement or birth outcomes.
You would look at home visiting
And so it's the combination of
these programs together and
stacking them so families should
be receiving kind of all of them
if you're in a high risk, um,
area so that you see that
multiplication effect of
education and family stability,
But they're not all doing the
same thing. Like if you just
received one, you wouldn't
necessarily see that
multiplication effective
outcomes.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
When I was a little kid, I
attended Kid Carson Elementary
School.
And when I was in the fourth
grade, one of my classmates who
also won is was one of my
neighbors and my neighborhood.
Ah!
Was nominated for and and went
to a spelling bee and in
Albuquerque in Berlin County and
and and was a winner. She was a
winner and we were all so proud
of her as Children. We were just
amazed by that.
Later, Mr Chairman. She, uh she
was dead and in the earth in her
early twenties from a heroin
overdose.
And so my concern is that we
make sure that we do everything
that we can
That we connect that child even
when they're doing well at an
early age to later because if we
don't do that, we spend all this
money but we we neglect that
connector at that point, then we
have failed, Mr Chairman, and so
I just wanted to highlight that
because it is a critical issue.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you. Representative
accrues represented Montoya,
Alison.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
Similarly, I'm I am concerned,
and I've been skeptical.
To some degree.
Um, about taking the Children
away from the parents too early.
Um, I think
Many of the problems we have.
Are related to, um
That family.
Connection.
Just disintegrating across New
Mexico.
Too many homes have single
parent
Uh, single parents, uh, raising
Children.
And, um
Even in homes where
There is a parent at home.
It does seem as if our effort is
to take the child out of the
home.
And to try and get them into
Uh, a program.
First I would I would suggest
That
Uh, our best money spent is in
the home.
And helping that
That child and that parent
connect.
Because
As they get older.
And as I think, was the example
that was just given by
representative Delacruz. I think
we are, um
When the when there is not a
base at home to help keep that
child focused.
Um
And attending school and
Doing the right things after
school and not getting involved
in
The wrong extracurricular
activity because that's that's
something that
That can't happen necessarily in
the school.
When when school lets out,
Children go home.
And then the bad behavior that
takes place a lot of time that
that comes because there's no
Family structure in place.
And I think we've
The discussion about early
childhood education.
To me.
Has been in my mind to some
degree at the undermining of the
Family structure.
I think that's a big cautionary
tell. I think, if you if you
look at poverty in New Mexico
and across the country
The number One indicator is if
that child grows up in a broken
home.
Or in a single single parent
home. That's the number one
indicator
If that child is going to have a
likelihood of ending up in
poverty.
Poverty is not just related to
education.
There are several ways that
That a child can enter.
What I what I would call
generational poverty.
Or or the cycle of it. Even the
beginning of that does. It
doesn't have to come from a
family of poverty. If that child
gets involved in
In drugs.
In crime.
Or if that child if the parents
are not making sure that that
child's home we have we have
Other problems that come around.
We have, uh
Unwanted pregnancies that
happen.
Uh um, which then? Put a stress
on everyone.
Involved.
And what are the decisions that
have to be made at that point?
There are several
Ways to get into into into
poverty.
And I think a lot of times we
look at education as a silver
bullet.
Education is is just
Enhancing the opportunity that
child has to success.
But we can invest all that we
want to on the front end.
If we
Do not have good family
structures where the where the
parents are parenting.
And making sure that the child
remains focused. I have two
Children that went on and an
engineering
I had two other Children that
when they graduated, and they
gave the diploma to my Children.
I thought that the presenter
should have said, and a special
Thanks goes to their parents for
making sure this happened.
Um so
That is a concern that is a
great concern of mine. I think I
think that the discussion has
become
Parents are not good at helping
our kids get off the ground.
So we've got to take them out of
the house early. Put them in
childcare put him in early
childhood education to get
better educational outcomes.
I would suggest
My focus, and this is a big lead
into a question.
Is on the Earth is in the early
childhood intervention
intervention at hope.
And and then and then making
sure those parents understand
this is a lifelong commitment.
So to that, I would like to look
at the supplemental page.
And I have a question on the
very first item, which says a,
uh
This is a
For for
Visiting, um, per child payment.
Program Pilot program, but I
don't see
Any money in there. I mean, I'm
wondering why that line is even
there. I don't see.
Any dollars that is recommended
by either the executive or LFC.
So thank you Represent. I think
this is where we got
clarification. If we could ask
for clarification, we were told
that there is a $5 million
executive recommendation is that
accurate?
Yes. Okay. 5 Million briefly,
Just sorry just to make sure. Is
there any corresponding Kelly
lfc in other parts? Yes, Mr
Chairman. There's $2 million
going to the healthcare
authority to be matched with
Medicaid revenue.
For that as well. So it's just
different funding mechanisms. Go
ahead, please. So so we're
stating that Lfc is stating that
that 2 million from the federal
is
Enough. Is that what we're
saying versus the 5 million that
the the 2 Million would match
Probably another 2 to 3 million
in federal revenue to get to
that total, so we we just wanted
to pull down more federal
revenue to pay for that.
Okay. Thank you. So
Once again, it says, uh,
Pilot program, but we're doing
this already.
Are we not?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Montoya. We are providing home
visiting the incentive idea is a
new idea. And so that was what
we talked about, I think in
Chama not last year, the other
year before and then we also
talked about it in farming
tonight. Uh, this year during
the L. A home visiting
evaluation here, So this is a
Incentive to the parent. Yes.
So we're going to pay the
parents to have
Us go into their homes. Why are
we
Why is that needed? Why is there
needed an incentive?
Mr Chair represented Montoya. I
think it came maybe from first
from Vice chair Dixon at the
trauma meeting, and then we've
had more conversations. I think
the idea is to be able to couple
of points I want to make. All of
our programs are voluntary, so
nobody is trying to take
Children out of the home. We are
two and multi generation
approach in all of our programs.
So if you're a high quality
childcare program you're
thinking about building the
support of that parent and their
ability to connect and attach
with their child.
As you said, we have many single
moms in our state and single
dads. If they want to go to work
or school, they have to have
access to some kind of care. And
so I just want to make the
point. They're they're choosing
the care. We're not taking the
Children home, visiting their
building the skills of the
families. That's what they do.
They go in and say You are the
child's first and most important
teacher.
Early intervention. They go
right in the home. They work
with a parent to build their
skills, So I just want to say
that we are doing these programs
and they do lift up. The family
were fortunate to be led in this
state by a family Leadership
council that helps advise the
department and helps make sure
that families are driving our
decision making and the way that
we design our programs. So I
thank you for that answer. I
guess maybe I asked it the wrong
way. If we're providing this
service
Why are we needing to provide an
incentive are people not taking
advantage of early childhood? Is
there a certain amount of money
that's going towards that that
is not being used.
Mr. Chair, representative
Montoya, that has been what came
out in the LFC evaluation of
home visiting we could be
serving many more families. And
so the idea was if a family
enrolls maybe we can. I just
just representative Baca's
question earlier. Maybe they
need help with something so we
could give them an incentive.
Sometimes we've during the
federal relief money we gave
them gas cards, other cards that
they could go and get groceries
so just things to make the home
visiting program connect more
directly.
With what the families need and
ideally incentivize them to
participate. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Let me shorten the
question, maybe just a little
bit.
The monies that we have for
early child education. Are they
be fully expended right now, or
are there some people who are
needing an additive incentive to
join?
Or to take advantage of the
program.
Mr Chair. I would say that we
are leaving a lot of federal
revenue.
On the table that we could be
bringing down to serve more
families. So we're
Very lowly enrolled in Medicaid
home visiting. We only have a
couple 100 families.
Enrolled in Medicaid, home
visiting and when you think
about that 80% of our babies are
born on Medicaid. That mechanism
could be the major mechanism for
both enrollment because you're
coming from a medical
enrollment, so it's less
stigmatized. And then the feds
are paying for.
You know, two thirds of it.
But we're not referring those
dollars were just not pulling
them down. Okay, So thank you
for that. So I guess the
question is
There are some parents
Who are just not
Interested in the service.
Are we then saying that they're
wrong for not wanting to have
Someone from the government to
come to their home or someone
who represents the government or
is being paid or funded by the
government. I'm just wondering
Why are we determining?
That we need to be in more
homes.
Um, Mr Chair represented
Montoya. I think it's been
consensus. Um, here, both in the
legislative and the executive
side that home visiting is a
very important evidence based
approach to reducing child abuse
and neglect to improving health
outcomes for young Children and
to strengthening parent and
child relationship. And so we
see, As you pointed out, we have
meant high
Um, adverse early childhood
experiences childhood
experiences in our state.
Earlier, we intervene and
address those as representative
daylight, Cruz said, and and
support that family, the
evidence is clear. We can get
much better results for family
outcomes and child outcomes.
Okay. Thank you. I I think I'm
gonna have more questions with
you on this offline. I am one.
The air. Yeah. One last
question, Mr Chair.
Uh um.
The
The private providers.
Um, we, um
There's just many places Still,
you mentioned these desserts
that exist.
And the desert appears to be as
if there are three or 44.
Children, and there's one slot
available 321, okay?
Um
Now there are some places that
are maybe not a 3 to 1. But
there are obviously there's more
need than there are slots.
Um, what are we doing to make
sure that those
That we're still growing.
Providers in those areas. Chair
representative Montoya and we're
doing a couple of things when I
mentioned was the supply
building grants that we used
with the federal relief money we
also have with the federal
relief money, a new childcare
business development RFP. That
should be a contract that should
be in place very soon. And then
the second thing that or the
third thing we're doing is we
have some private sector funding
and we're commissioning a full
study of the states.
Childcare supply and we're gonna
the vendor will be required to
create an interactive map so
that we'll be able to really
zero in on census tracts and
area zip codes to see where we
need to focus our investments. I
just like to always make the
point that most prenatal d five
programs and services are
delivered in the private sector.
So are
Department is deeply committed
and connected to our private
providers all over the state.
And thank you, Mr Chair. Um, um,
Madam Secretary, where those
dollars um
Defined in the budget, or is it
is there a discrepancy at all
between the LFC budget and the
and the, uh, administration's
budget?
Mr. Chair represented Montoya.
If you're talking about
childcare supply building the
executive did ask for 3 million
to go to the New Mexico that
would go to the New Mexico
Finance Authority to offer low
interest loans to private
childcare providers. And there
was it was not in the LFC.
I could not find that
Language. Supplementals. I'm
sorry, Mr Chairman.
Is that the chair represent my
toilet page 14 and your package.
Okay, Thank you. Mr Chair is
that the to increase endowments
to New Mexico's higher education
institutions? I'm not seeing it.
Mr. Chair representative. It
should be the second item on the
list for low interest loans and
partnership with New Mexico
Finance Authority.
To increase infant and toddler
care in the states. Childcare
desserts
Thank you. And that was my
question that because I was
looking at that I saw childcare
desserts. But does that also
apply to
Those that are not
Not a 3 to 1 match but are you
know are 3 to 1 deficit is that
does that apply to all Because
Okay, because it says deserts
there if it says desserts, I'm
wondering if it only goes to
Mr. Chair, representative
Montoya, given this
A small amount of money. We've
probably prioritize if we get 10
requests and violent them were
in deserts, and we could only
fund five. We probably fund
those that were in the most.
Okay. Thank you.
Um, last question, Mr Chair. I
forgot about this. Uh,
We were providing, uh
Your department was providing
before some salary assistance
that was available for a while,
but those dollars have gone
away.
Um, have those providers been
able to continue?
Are we aware of the provider has
been able to continue paying the
money that was initially
provided an incentive to them.
But now we're not doing that.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Montoya. I can't say
specifically, I haven't surveyed
all the providers. But as I
mentioned earlier as we do that
cost alternative methodology,
and we kick off the task force
next week. Um, those will be
good questions that we can get
answered. But we did build in an
additional almost $3 again to
Kelly's point. It doesn't mean
they're paying that, but we did
increase the childcare
assistance rates.
Um, right before that Grant
ended.
So we're hopeful that they were
able to make the expectation as
the providers take that increase
for salaries. Is that
explicitly?
Explained.
Mr Chair represented Montoya. It
is not. It is explicitly
explained in terms of how we
Arrived at the rate we did, but
there is no requirement in our
relationship with the providers
that they must pay those
salaries. Okay. Thank you for
that, Mr Chair. We're going to
go now to represent Alison then
represent Herndon.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
madam Secretary for your
presentation a week and a half
ago.
We sponsored a town hall in the
community of Shiprock.
And we had an excellent
presentation by your deputy
cotillions Nettie.
She answered a lot of questions
that I had in my mind, and she
also shared with us how the
rural communities are taking
advantages of the services that
you offer.
Sometimes we think that our
Navajo Nation government will
take care of us and not pay too
much attention to the services
that are offered by the state.
It has opened my eyes in that
sense, and I have received a few
questions after that of the
services that new Mexico
provides. So with that, I think
Oh, cotillion, probably going to
get more calls, and my only
regret is why didn't I do this
town hall sooner so that we
could have shared a lot of good
information, so just to
compliment and I believe that
When are you?
I believe that your agency is
one of those agencies. That is,
uh
A good investment where we can
look for an R O I. I use that
term from my mining days where
we worked on projects where we
always look. Always look for an
R O. I return on investment. I
think your agency is one of the
best investments. So thanks for
that, Mr Chair. Thank you, madam
Secretary.
Thank you. Mr Allison represent
Herndon, then representative
Brown.
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you, presenters and Madam
Secretary at first just want to
say thank you for your vision to
make sure that people are being
trained. So you talked about
tummy time? I don't know if
everybody here on this panel
understands that I spent this
summer visiting families with
new babies, and I learned about
tummy time. So thank you for
that. You might have to explain
that.
And then there are also learned
about packing play, so I am very
excited about the vision that
you have for educating people
who are engaged in child
childcare. One of the things
that we talked about yesterday
and I'm interested in how you
may be involved in. It is the
when we talked to the Health
Authority Act.
I'm sorry, Uh, agency. They
talked about a new program for a
father's, and they were putting
more money in their my question
to you is Are you working with
that organization with that
agency at all in terms of that
program, and so that we are
helping young families? I hope
fathers and mothers and so I'd
like to hear what your inside
ideas on that.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
representative Herndon. I'm glad
you learned about tell me time.
It's such an important part of
the development. We do work
closely with the Grads program,
which I think is what Secretary
Armijo was discussing yesterday
and we have a focus on all young
parents Partnership for
community action here in New
Mexico is working with, um, I
think the Hilton Foundation is
funding them also to help
support a group of young parents
and we have met with him regular
Early, both myself and Mariana
Padi and the governor's office,
many of them fathers, educating
that us about what how our
services need to be differently
designed
And how we need to be reaching
them in, you know, with
different mechanisms in
different ways. So we are doing
that We've met with them. New
Mexico Father's A couple of
times they've also met with our
tribal education leaders, so we
have a lot to learn in this
area. But there is a commitment
and a focused intention in the
department of working with young
parents.
And both mothers and fathers.
And thank you, Mr Chair, and
thank you, Madam Presenter, So I
do want to go just for a moment
to the home visiting program if
we can talk about that one of
the things looking historically,
when the government became more
involved in child wealth and
child bringing what we saw was
more and more Children of color
being taken from their homes,
and that became a huge issue.
And so visiting home care became
a crucial question is whether or
not families of color where they
were going to participate in
that program anymore. So, Mr
Chair and Madam, um, presenter
my question to you, and it
follows up on something we've
been talking about for a long
time. How diverse or Europe
Individuals who are going into
the home care, uh, home visiting
program and I know you've been
working on it. So maybe you can
tell us how you're progressing.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon again. Our annual
outcomes report that is our
legislatively mandated report
will be out next week, and it'll
have a breakdown. I believe of
the race and ethnicity of our
providers. Yes, I'm getting a
yes of the people doing the home
visiting as well as their
credentials. But we can get that
specific information to you. We
have a very robust data system
for head start.
For head start for home visiting
that we can share because I
think what your point is, is
who's going into the home
matters very much in terms of
the family receiving that
Receiving that and building that
report. The report is critical
to staying in the program and
getting the results that we know
are possible with
When they stay in the program
and have a positive rapport with
their home visitor.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Secretary and Mr Chair. I do
want to just say that I applaud
this family support early
Intervention Polat Income
program and you know there is
something called the Guaranteed
Income Program Act of 2023, and
this seems to follow that
program quite a bit.
And if we look at what happened
down in Las Cruces, New Mexico
with respect to utilizing
universal guaranteed basic
income with families, we saw
huge improvements in terms of
the families and what they were
able to accomplish and just the
family gathering altogether. So,
Mr Chair, Madam secretary, I
just want to applaud you for
being a part of that pilot
program. I highly think it's
going to be, uh
Successful, particularly as you
grow the the diversity of the
people going into the homes and
utilizing this and watching
families developing growth based
upon the program, and it's
outcomes. So thank you. And then
Mr Chair and Madam secretary,
there is one last question I
have for you that is causing me
some great concern.
As I look at this program at the
different sheets, Madam
secretary and you have asked in
the program support or whether
I'm sorry. The executive
recommendation included two
expansion FTE while the LFC
recommended only one. Please
explain what those FTE we're
we're going to be utilized for.
Yes, Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon. I believe in the
program support they were for
our CEO, team or security and
compliance are cheap.
Information Officer Sandy Patel
has built a strong team, but we
do have concerns about the
security and safety. We have a
lot of data. We have a lot of
data systems, and so he wants to
bring into
Security to reduce our risk and
ensure the support for the
agency.
Mr said Mr Chair, and Madam
Secretary. What will happen if
you only have one instead of the
two you requested
Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon. We will, um, work with
what we get with our resources
and and will help the federal
government comes through on
investing in childcare as well.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much for upset.
Herndon represent families.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Appreciate the presentation.
Mr Chair and Secretary Greg
Genske.
First of all, I just want to say
that I really admire the work
that you've done that you've
built and department
That? Isn't that old. Actually,
you started just a few years
ago. And look at where we are
right now with it, so I I
appreciate
Um
Just the achievement of all of
that. And, um
From what I know of your staff
and what I hear it's really a
top notch staff. So thank you
for that, putting that all
together.
Uh, Mr Chairman, I do have a
concern about the $5000
incentive payment for parents to
sign up for Is it for Madam
Secretary for home Services for
visiting? What? What? What
exactly?
Um, Mr Chairman members, the
committee can I have first have
a clear?
First have a clarification. Lfc
actually did fund those f T E.
It's just not in the expansion.
Um it's in the base, and it's
using expanded trust fund
revenues. So it's in both
recommendations. It's just
showing us a different
Uh, revenue source and not in
the expansion. So
Um there's not quite different
there. Secondly, Sorry. Um, Mr
Chair on the 5000. That's
actually not a 5000. I think the
confusion is coming up. So
that's in thousands. That's $5
million in the agency's
presentation that's supposed to
represent the total amount of
money going to the program and
then families would receive up
to I think $500 in
Um, whatever their need is, if
it's like gas cards or whatever
that they apply for, think
that's the confusion on this
slide. Okay, Mr Chair and panel
that is an extremely important
verification.
And I I just my concern was this
might violate the anti donation
clause, even whether it's 5000
or 500. Whatever it ends up
being
Have you? Have you considered
that aspect of it? Mr. Chairs
Secretary.
Mr. Chair, Representative Brown.
Thank you for the wonderful
compliments and, uh, we have and
you do raise a raise an issue.
That's why we wanted to kind of
build it into the rate and to
the support for serving a family
and having a portion of that
what we give the home visiting
program ability to use it for
some of these other purposes,
But, you know, we may need to
look into it further and get
guidance from
General Council on an executive
and legislative side to see if
this is even allowable, But I
think the LFC has it going
through human services as part
of
Yes. I don't know how
Um, Mr Chair. So the one of the
keys to the anti donation
clauses that it has to show a
public good is being served or
given. And so, um
It could be questionable. I
think we're safe in that we are
delivering a public good in in
both serving the family a
curriculum because I'm visiting
is a set curriculum of parenting
support. Um and also the
outcomes of hopefully
stabilizing families. But have
we were happy to send that for
additional analysis if there's
concern
Mr Chair, and, um, Secretary and
the rest of the panel. I do
believe it is an issue. Um,
public good is not the only
consideration, otherwise
everything would qualify.
For that, so I really do
recommend that that be
investigated and evaluated so
but moving on Mr Chair. I want
to talk a little bit about the
home visiting
And ask First of all, Mr Chair
if there is a wait list for
home, visiting
Mr. Chair, Representative Brown.
Um, I was just speaking to the
president and CEO Kate Noble
from growing up New Mexico, and
she has 60 families on her
waiting list. So we need to talk
about that. I think some
programs have weightless others.
Um, we need to help connect
again to Kelly's point through
the Medicaid funded home
Visiting those are the dollars
we want to draw down.
While investing in firstborn,
Our new Mexico grown, you know,
home visiting program so we
don't track wait list at the
office. But it's a good point.
You raised that maybe we need to
start taking that and I don't
know if we do possibly keep
track of the waitlist, but,
well, um, survey all of our home
visiting programs and get back
to the committee. Okay, Thank
you.
Mr Chair and Secretary. Um
Tell us a little bit, please
about the home visiting
credentials that you require for
the people you hire.
And then I guess a question also
related to that Mr Chair is how
many home visitors are, um
Mr. Chair, Representative Brown.
We don't have a credential
requirements for home visitors,
But most of our home visitors
have at least an A, if not
higher. Again. This will be in
our annual outcomes report. Um
And then your second question
was how many anything about 350
in between three and 400. Home
visitors growing workforce.
Mr Chair and Madam Secretary.
What is I hate to use the word
caseload, but
Her home visitor. How many
families are being served or
Children if you wished it?
Answer that way. Yes, Mr Chair
Representative Brown, depending
on which model they have
different caseload size, but our
new Mex are New Mexico. Home
Visiting standards don't allow
more than 20 for families to a
home visitor.
Okay, 25. Okay. Thank you, Mr
Chair, a couple more questions.
Are the home visitors required
As we said, no credentials per
se. That's a different word than
qualifications. Perhaps
Are they required to have some
parenting experience themselves?
Mr Chair.
Mr. Chair, Representative Brown.
No.
That's not in the home visiting
standards, but they do have to
participate in very high quality
professional development, and
they do that, on a routine
basis. Many of them are
credential through the infant
mental health endorsement. And
so we have just recently
yesterday. I think we did
training on Narcan for all of
our home visitors and our
family. Infant toddler had over
650 people participating.
We did the trauma, informed
care, professional development
training for our home visitors
as well. So, Mr Chair and
Secretary, I think that the
training is very important,
especially if a
Home visitor doesn't have
parenting experience that you
learn a lot from
On the job as a parent, so
Um, Mr Chairman, um
Hmm. I
We call them home visitors, but
Are they really functioning as
caseworkers? Morse a week we
like the term home visitor, it
seems friendlier.
But is it really a caseworker
function in terms also in terms
of connecting them, as was said
earlier to resources. So how do
you How do you see their role?
It's pretty expensive. I imagine
chair Representative Brown. We
do not see them as case
managers. They are home visitor
who's trained. They are trained
before they go out, and their
job is to really
Help that family achieve its
goals and make sure that child
is on on track so again,
depending on the model, But
they're really there as a family
support, and I think one of the
things that they do best is
connecting the family to other
resources in their community,
which can be challenging and
some of our rural communities
where there aren't as many
resources, but they become
somewhat of a lifeline in some
of those communities to
Yeah.
Whatever needs they can They
have that home visitor being
able to connect not only with
programs in their community but
with the home visiting network
that we have across the state,
okay?
Mr Chair and Madam Secretary.
What is the average age of a
birth mother served by Mr Chair
Representative Brown. I will
have to get in in home Visiting.
Yeah, I will. We will get that's
a great question.
Okay, Thank you. Get that back.
Curious to know. I'm guessing
it's fairly young.
But I could be wrong in, um and
so just kind of closing up here,
Mr. Chair. Um
I'm concerned that we not
broadcast the idea that parents
have to have state help to raise
their Children.
I give credit to parents. I
think there are some
Parents who really do need the
help because they don't have a
good example in their own lives
of good parenting.
Sorry. I just want to make sure
that this stays voluntary, and
you've emphasized that a number
of times.
It does need to stay voluntary,
and I think we could all say, Mr
Chair that any parent can
benefit from additional
information and from
encouragement and things like
that that home visitor would
give
But I don't believe that there
I believe a lot of parents just
don't need the services because
they're doing the job well,
raising their Children, So I
just want us to remember that.
That the parents have primacy
and we can never
Demand anything of them. Now, if
it's a drug addicted, baby, I
see that a little bit
differently. Of course, that is
a form of abuse and we do need
to. We do need to save that
child from those types of
experiences so
Um, I just want to say, Mr Mr
Chairman and
Madam secretary that I'm gonna
I'm gonna kinda toot the horn
for Carlsbad. Um, we have a
great need for daycare. And
that's true just about
everywhere but local, uh
Businesses and organizations and
elected officials have gotten
together.
And I believe we are going to
see a brand new state of the art
daycare facility.
Within the next year and a half
And so all the preliminary
discussions have been extremely
good, and there's a commitment
in our community to do this. So,
um, hope to have you down for
the ribbon cutting? Absolutely
when that happens, But I'm very
optimistic. So thank you, Mr
Chair. Excellent. Thank you very
much represent brown and great
questions.
Madam secretary, I think, um
Had a great committee hearing
this morning. I want to
emphasize the focus working with
Medicaid. Yes, you know, we know
that that's 80 plus percent of
the births in New Mexico.
It is where we're investing sort
of.
Very extensively. So with that I
would ask you, Uh and Kelly and
the team to sort of work through
you emphasize that while there
are different places there are
not their differences overall in
approach and perspective and
even level of investment are
pretty minimal.
If you all could go back, sort
of bring those closer together
in execution and implementation.
I think we'd really appreciate
it. But one of very much
recognized the work since even
just from last year your work
today again, the members of your
team members of the community
who are here we really
appreciate you all. And I think
this is a shining
Sort of story of new Mexicans
coming together all across the
state. Whether we're opening the
We're gonna be guests of
representative Brown down Band
or up in the Northwest part in
Lake Valley was represented
Garcia shining success on the
road to success.
Thank you all very much. Thank
you.
Okay, remembers. We're going to
go on to our next agency.
A secretary that we've seen
before in a new role. I'm sorry,
Mr Chair. Can I have a
clarification? We didn't have
emotion for and I
was like, Ah, if I could ask for
the vice chair to make a motion
for the to adopt the LFC
recommendation. Thank you very
much. And then we'll again look
forward to you coming back on
the implement.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move that the committee adopts
the LFC recommendation for this
agency.
Okay, It's been moved in second.
And is there any opposition to
that motion?
Okay, I see none. Thank you all
very much. And thank you for the
catch. Kelly.
Okay. Good afternoon. Good
morning, Madam Secretary. Great
to see you. Congratulations on
your new role. Kelly. Thank you
for staying up here if you can
get kick us off with aging and
long term services and specify
which where we are in our books
to thank you so much, Mr Chair.
Um so we're on aging Long term
services agency code 624.
Um, and we're here with the
acting secretary and my
counterpart from D F a lorry.
Sayaka, Um
And so again, we're just on the
high level. This is another big
agency with a high level.
Ah, so you can see the major
differences are, um, really in
the aging network and that the
executive had requested a
Reorganization that the LFC did
not support.
It's not a cut in money. It's
just we didn't put it in a
different program. So the the
agency had asked basically to
put all of the area agency
Monies into a separate P code as
just a flow through to those
providers. The LFC
recommendation kept that money
in the aging network, the other
major differences are in adult
protective services. Um, I don't
know New Mexico program is a
fairly new program in New
Mexico.
And basically, I'm sure the
secretary will sub describe it
much better than I could, but
it's a support program for to
keep people in their communities
by giving stipends to families
or other caregivers to help
them, Um, remain independent
executive recommendation put
almost $2.3 Million in General
fund recurring towards that
program.
While the LFC put 12.5 million,
um in the expendable trust for
that to be implemented over
several years, including money
to do a hopefully randomized
control study. Nobody else in
the nation is doing anything
like this program, so it would
be really interesting to kind of
study what this program does,
and to see that in a really
robust waste so
That's a main difference that
you can see on the high level.
Uh, with that alternative to the
agency Roll up page, which is on
page two of your packet. Lfc
recommendation for General fund
revenue was 3.9 million below
the executive. Uh, but 83,000
above in federal revenues
resulting in the $3.8 million
difference in all revenues.
Majority of this difference was
the new Mex care program, which
I just discussed. The executive
recommendation included General
fund while the LFC used funding
through the expendable trust in
the base majority of the
difference in personnel from the
LFC recommendation was to reduce
the vacancies rate and for
expansion FT. The difference in
contractual services was mostly
as a result of general fund
revenues in the executive for
the New Mexico program and in
the other category.
A majority of the difference was
the result of the reorganization
by requested by the executive
but not recommended by the LFC.
We have come to consensus on
performance measures, and this
is an important note on the
language piece, so the LFC
included language that the
executive have some non
reverting language.
In the adult protective services
program. That's not normally
else. He doesn't necessarily
come out with non diverting
language because it does reduce
the Legislature's appropriation
abilities.
We did do it in this case
because it's a special
circumstance. So what's going on
is in the adult protective
services program They have been
trying to build for Medicaid
revenues for some of their FT,
Which is a really good, robust
thing to do that we should be
doing.
Part of the problem is the
timing of reimbursement coming
from H s D two aging, so it's
not necessarily coming in at a
timely basis, and that's meaning
that the exact this agency is
not receiving the money on time
so they can't hire people as
quickly and it's it's causing
some personnel funding issues.
And so the LFC recommended
language that for this one
program, and for one year they'd
be able to keep that non
reverting to kind of backfill
for the next year, while
They worked with HST to improve
that timing.
And we don't have to do this
again. So it's not something we
normally do. But I do think it's
important that we consider that
to keep this federal dollars
coming in and to stabilize the
program as well. So with that,
I'll turn it over to my
counterpart to go over program
support.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee. I
would like to note that the
executive would also support
that non recurring language or
non reverting language for a P
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee. I
would like to note that the
executive would also support
that non recurring language or
non reverting language for a PS.
Um now program support P 591. I
believe that's page three of
your hand out.
For revenues. The LFC
recommendation was 479.3000
above the executive, including
458.7000 in general fund
revenues and 20.6000 in federal
revenues for the base. The LFC
recommendation for personnel was
526.8000 above the executive.
To reduce the vacancy rate.
The executive recommendation was
47.5000 above the LFC and other
costs for miscellaneous
operating costs, such as risk
rates and again. Performance
measure target differences have
been reconciled between the two
And with that, I'll pass it back
to Kelly.
Oh,
Okay. We'll move on to consumer
and elder rights. Um, that's
page four of your packet. The
executive recommendation for
General fund was 365,000 above
the LFC while the LFC
recommended 66.5000 federal
revenue more than the executive,
resulting in the total
difference of 299,000.
Both recommendations included
increases for personnel for the,
UM but Zeman program. However,
the executive included 300,000
more than the LFC lfc
recommendation was slightly
above the executive and other
costs for agency operational
costs, and we have reconciled
performance with that alternate
over to Laurie for adult
protective services.
Okay, We are Mr Chair members of
the committee.
I'm having nothing but problems
this week. I do apologize. We
are on page five of your hand
out.
It's P 593 Adult protective
services.
For revenues, the executive
revenues recommendation was 2.3
million above the LFC, the
majority of which was from
general fund revenues.
For the base. The executive
recommendation included 2.3
million for the New Mexico
program across the spending
categories, Um
Well, the LFC recommendation was
or includes 12.5 million from
the expendable Trust to fund New
Mexico hair.
This is the P code that has the
recommended language for the non
reverting funds in personal
services and employee benefits
to assist with the operational
Medicaid revenue timing issues.
Uh, And with that, I will pass
it back to Kelly. Thank you so
much. Okay. We are in B Last P
code. We're on Page six. So the
L C recommendation was 37.6
million above the executive and
this is mostly due to that
reorganization.
Um, we spoke about earlier. Um,
the LFC did not recommend the
reorganization and kept that
money in the aging network
instead of transferring it to
the new program. Um, the
executive recommendation funded
In the base for community health
workers for Senior Olympics and
volunteers. Food initiatives
that were not included in the L.
C recommendation.
The executive recommendation
also transferred the 24 million
to the new program for the
Triple A's. Um and I was wrong.
There is one more program, so
I'll turn it back over to Laurie
for that.
Alright. So P 595 the area
agencies on aging. This would be
the new P code recommended by
the executive.
Um, as you can see, we are
recommending transferring $28.2
Million in General fund out of
aging network and into this new
P code and transferring $11.1
million in federal revenues for
a total of $39.3 million for
this new P code.
The LFC recommendation did not
transfer any of this funding.
and that is the majority of the
differences you'll see between P
594 aging network and then P.
595 the area agencies on aging
with that I will pass it back to
Kelly for any additional
comments.
Mr Travel if you'd like me to go
through specials as well, like
the last. Yes. So that's on page
13 of your packet. Um and you
can see the major differences
between the executive and the
LFC. They're both
recommendations have $600,000
for emergency funding. That's
been pretty historical agencies
received that so
For instance, if an aging
centers freezer went out, Um
unexpectedly, they could get
that money out quickly and
replace that freezer while they
apply for more permanent
money's, so that's pretty
standard for the agency to
receive that recommendation. Um
The executive recommended 25
million for the Kiki Saavedra
fund. Um, the LSC recommendation
included. Obviously, that
12,000,012 0.5 million for the
New Mexico Air program.
Uh, the executive also included
3 million for personnel
services, employee benefits, and
a lot of that has to do a big
chunk. But I don't see all of
it. A chunk of it has to do with
that billing issue so we might
be able to deal with some of
that with language instead of
the full amount, But that's
something we we probably need to
work out. Um, separately from
this
And then the executive put a
million and a half for
technology advancements in the
network.
Um And then the LFC put in a
million dollars for marketing to
better connect individuals to
local services in their
communities so that they know
what's available.
And with that, I'll just turn
over too large to see if she has
any comments on specials,
Supplementals.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. The only thing that I
would like to clarify is that
the agency request for the Kiki
Surveyors Saavedra Senior
Dignity fund was 25 million.
However, the executive only
funded it at five.
And with that I will pass it
back to Kelly for any other
comments or to the secretary.
I think you've heard enough for
me, so we'll turn it over to the
secretary.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. Thank you for
having me here today. Um, truly
honored to step into this new
role and serve the constituents,
um, across the state
specifically for senior services
and disobeyed disabled adults.
Um, I'm from I'm I'm in a
sandwich generation right now I
have little little ones. My
daughter turns forward tomorrow.
And I have a six year old and
then I have elderly parents. And
so this is truly a wonderful
opportunity for me to take
something I'm personally very
passionate about and move
forward to better serve new
Mexicans and all corners corners
of the state. Um
We have such a wonderful team
here at aging, a long term
Services department very
dedicated staff, and today we do
have some of our leadership here
today that I just quickly would
like to recognize Deputy V Hill.
Deputy Jacobs. Dennis King, who
has been that the director
division director of our aging
network.
We have Andrea Lawrence, who has
joined us recently as our
external affairs director.
Laetitia Ortez. She is our
acting ASD director and is doing
an incredible job.
We also have Jennifer Scott, who
is the acting ombudsman and
recently stepped into that role,
and it's just doing a fantastic
job building up that
infrastructure for that program,
and we have Anastasia Martin
here.
Very thankful for for her
guidance with legal counsel
Anthony Romero, who has been the
acting division director for
surgery for years, Acting
And really very thankful that he
has stepped up to the plate and
taken on that leadership role.
Sonia Beta, who is our acting,
Um, I see. Oh, excuse me. Um Or
I t And then we have 261
employees across the state
serving the needs of our seniors
and adults with disabilities,
and I'm very grateful to them
every day for what they do.
Here in New Mexico. We have a
growing senior population
rapidly growing.
And our current system will not
sustain and serve.
That growing population enough
As we move forward, and so we're
looking at the gap between what
our population is looking like
per county.
What those special needs are per
county.
And then how do we
Prepare and grow and fix the
overall network to best serve.
And that looks different in
every county, and it takes a lot
of time to really do the
analysis and look at the data.
To make sure that we're coming
up with the right programs for
the right locations across the
state.
And that's exactly what our
staff is dedicated to doing as
you heard from both Kelly and
Laurie, Um we have the Ombudsman
program. We have the adult
protective services program.
The 80 R C, which is the Cole
center that supports people to
connect to resources, and then
we have our senior center.
Triple A network. Um, both for
we have both non Metro as a
partner and the Metro Triple A
as partners who are here today,
and I'm very grateful they're
here today and then we also
have, um, the office of Indian
elder affairs.
For the I. Triple A
So if you could please pull out
your
Boy, I'm going to go to page
two.
I want to start by thanking the
analysts, the exact and the LFC
lfc budgets. There's a lot of
alignment there and I feel like
there was a lot of collaboration
and identifying what the
priorities are and how to make
those investments and also doing
some restructuring.
Um So thank you, Kelly and and
Laurie for those discussions and
supporting a lot of what is in
was in our agency
recommendation.
Um so funding for FTS funding
for the Triple A's the REORG
programs some of our special
appropriations, um and then,
especially the language around
non reverting funds for the
Medicaid reimbursement. That is
something that we're working
diligently with HST to make sure
that we can figure out a better
system to have those funds
transferred, but I definitely
want to make sure that we are
drawing down as much federal
funds as we can.
Just support the agency.
So on Page three.
Um
Again. Thank you for the support
on reorganizing the agency. Um,
this is really about modernizing
our operations and improving our
programmatic outcomes. Um, over
at tourism. We had one
effective, efficient system.
That machine moved and I want to
make sure that we have the same
type of systems within our
operations to be able to serve
the seniors across the state.
And so this was one of the first
steps that it was fundamental
for us to be able to do that. So
thank you for that support as
well as mentioned that P code we
did want to create a P code,
which is in the exact budget.
Um, essentially, that's taking
the money that goes. It's a pass
through to the triple A's into
it in a separate P code, and
that's really for our internal
Controls are internal processing
and our preference on how we
want to do that. Accounting. Um
lfc decided that they did not
want to take that approach. Um,
but that that came directly from
our team wanting to do that.
So on slide four. We have the
The specials and supplemented
supplemental comparisons. Um and
really, I think this this
requires more conversation and I
respectfully request. Um, to
have this dialogue today around
the Kiki Saavedra fund as well
as the supplemental for, um, our
personnel.
We have if you look at our
vacancy rate
It is 24.5%.
However, I don't have any funds
to hire any additional
employees in our two hundreds. I
would have to borrow money from
programs and if I did that I
only have enough to hire 20
people.
And right now I have 64 vacant.
So I just want to draw attention
to that because
Providing direct services to
seniors.
Throughout the state takes
people and talent.
To be able to execute
efficiently and effectively and
to have high quality.
So with that we're going to turn
to slide five.
Um, we do have several
stakeholders here today that I
just want to recognize and thank
them for making the drive from
Albuquerque. Many of them, um,
and the weather. Um
So I want to thank Neil with the
non Metro and Monica Beta with
the non metro, triple A, Um,
they have done a phenomenal job
of really being creative. I've
asked them to have really pushed
and said, Look, we have really
complex problems in corners of
the state that deserve to have
services. We need to do better
and I really grateful that they
have been extremely creative.
And working with me to solve
some of those issues somewhere
easier to solve than others. But
I'm very grateful for for them
doing putting in the extra work
to be able to serve the people
that need it. Most.
Um Cecilia Costa was senior
Olympics is here today. Um, we
do have in our budget. The
comparison between the exact the
LFC. There is some funding.
That's not going to
Senior Olympics.
And every penny matters to make
sure that we have this program
around the entire state.
So seniors across the entire
state can participate. Not just
those in larger metropolitan
areas. We also have AARP that's
here today. Joseph and OTA Amba
and I just want to say thank you
so much for being here and
supporting the seniors. Um,
especially through your
organization, but also
partnering with us on a regular
basis.
Um And finally, we have Michelle
here with the Metro Triple A,
Who has also done a phenomenal
job and we're looking at how do
we better?
Infuse.
Our Triple A's with investments
and systems, so that way they
can provide more of that care
management.
As well as transportation
services that are not covered by
Medicaid.
Um, that is something that we've
seen a gap across the entire
state. And so we're looking at
how do we build programs with
them to support them to fill in
those gaps? So, looking at the
comparison again, I'm going to
draw your attention to New
Mexico. Um, the exact budget
does have that in the base
budget. However, the LFC budget
has it in the accountability
fund.
And I I just have some concerns.
This is a new model.
I love the innovation, but I do
want to flag a couple of things
for you.
One.
Is with recruiting talent and
being able to hire employees we
would not be able to do
permanent positions. We'd only
be able to determine positions
that something of concern to
think about. Um, it's hard to
recruit as is with our labor
market shortages and people
would prefer a permanent job.
Um to with a new model and be
starting
This July is my understanding.
And that doesn't give us a lot
of time to build the systems in
place to be able to execute.
So it is our preference that we
would have the the New Mexico
funding in the base budget.
I also want to draw your
attention to the gap between the
New Mexico grown program in the
executive and the LFC
comparison, New Mexico Grown has
been not only phenomenal from a
nutrition standpoint to make
sure there's there's fresh
produce and healthy food for our
seniors across the state. It's
also helping farmers.
So we because we're buying
local. We're creating more of a
demand here in New Mexico for
our own food. And so it has
economy. Um, implications as
well.
Turning the page to Page six.
I wanted it to flag some
language that's in the
executive. LFC doesn't always
include language in in their
budget. They thank you, Kelly
again, for, um, putting in the
language around the non
reverting funds, but there's two
different additional, um,
language requests that our
agency has put forward for
consideration.
Um, one is for the increase. Um,
for the aging of our first
Excuse me the conference on
aging fund balance. Um, we do
quite a bit of fun development
from private sector. So we have
organizations that sponsor the
event. So money comes into our
agency.
And we want to make sure that
with those investments we can
use those to improve the
conference and have more
services available at the
conference. Um, so that is one
request.
And then the second is for an
increase of $1 million for fun
balance for the Kiki Saavedra
fund. Um, this far language will
allow the agency to increase
above the operating budget if
additional funding is available
in the Kiki Saavedra fund.
Turning, Madam secretary. I
think Kelly has just one brief
edition. Sorry. I just want to
clarification. He does have that
language in the recommendation
as well. Excellent, little
little less difference. Thank
you even better.
There you go. Okay. Um And
lastly, I just want to draw your
attention that slide seven. We
are absolutely thrilled to have,
um, Dan Buettner. Come to New
Mexico. Um, for those of you
that might not be familiar. Not
only is he an international, um,
author bestseller.
He produced the Netflix series
live to 100, and he's also a
national geographic fellow. Um
I'm feeling like I am not
ambitious enough in my own
career. When I list off his
credentials, Um, but he really
is coming to talk about. You
know how communities across the
world
Are changing their overall
communities to to really support
health and well being so people
can live to 100.
And so he will be here on
January 24th. You have all been
sent an invitation If you have
not seen it and have questions,
Please let me know. Um and we
want to make sure that you
there's space for you there
because we are sold out.
Um so I want to make those
accommodations and then also, we
will have senior day that
afternoon here at the
roundhouse. And with that, Mr
Chair members of the committee,
I stand for questions. Thank
you. Thank you very much. Madam.
Secretary. First we're going to
go to the same dela Cruz and
ranking member. I'm sure
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Mhm. I appreciate the work that
you do. It's critical.
Especially since you look at
this desk and
I'm about half of us are seniors
up here? Okay represented,
Garcia said for me to speak for
myself.
Can you describe the function of
the Tripoli? What do Triple H
do? There's five of them, right?
Um, Mr Chair members of the
committee representative, Um
The federal government. There's
enabling legislation for the
Triple A's, and it's a
requirement to draw down federal
funds is to have triple A's that
the money flows from our agency
into the Triple A. We have two
here in the state. We have the
Metro
And the non Metro and
essentially they have the
critical role of identifying
providers and supporting senior
centers to provide those key
direct services.
Glad you mentioned that. What's
the difference between a meal
side and a senior center?
Mr Chair members of the
Committee representative. It
depends.
Um, there the senior centers
that are part of our overall
network. Many of them have
congregate meals.
There are some senior centers
that do not then there's also
that's not part of our aging
network. There are
multigenerational centers in
some communities that have meal
sites.
And so within, which is not part
of my agency.
But
In respect to the Triple A aging
network. We provide congregant
meals to senior center, so we
helped organize that with the
senior center directors.
And Mr Chairman Air in area
three.
Uh, who is the Triple agency?
What? What entity?
Mr. Chairman of the committee
just wanted to confirm that
would be non metro.
I'm sorry, Say that Metro is
that an organization called non
Metro, So the non metro Triple A
is part of one of the cogs.
They're here today in support of
our budget. Um and I'd be happy
to organize a meeting afterwards
or saying that that the cog is
the operator of the Tripoli.
Mr Chair Members Committee? Yes.
Is that similar elsewhere?
Mr Chair members of the
committee the way that we have
our triple A set up a new Mexico
is different than other
States.
Um, we have less.
Less triple A's. Many states
have more than two.
Um, but I don't have a
comparison side by side. But I'd
like to turn it over to Deputy
Jacobs to provide a little bit
more context.
Thank you, Secretary. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Representative. If I
can just I think I can go into a
little bit more detail about the
question you were asking about
area three.
So the federal government
requires that states have area
agencies on aging, Um, to serve
planning and service areas
within the state. And so our
state is divided up into five.
So I think that's where that
five number is coming from that
you're talking about, Um, we
have one planning and service
area in Bernalillo County that's
served by the Metro, Triple A.
And then we have our non metro
Triple A that serves the
remainder of the PSAs, which
would include P s a three that
That you're talking about.
Those planning and service areas
are supposed to inform what
services are needed in that
particular area so that the
community there is getting the
services that they need and
likely those are different than
somewhere somewhere else. So but
that that's a federal government
requirement.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Uh,
You mentioned planning? So
besides burn Leo County City of
Albuquerque, is there any
similar
Organizational setup.
Between the Triple A
And the service provider.
So the, um the triple A
providers have to have, Um ah
advisory bodies that inform
those planning and service areas
And, um, our director of the non
Metro Triple A is here, and I
think they could speak a little
bit better to how they function
in regards to those advisory
councils that inform the service
area. Would that be helpful, Mr
Chair and representative
Mr Chairman.
I don't need it that complex.
Thank you for that.
Uh, I'm trying to get to the
bottom line, and here's the
bottom line.
In Berlin, Kelly
The city of Albuquerque is the
Tripoli
Correct in the city of
Albuquerque.
The service provider is also the
city of Albuquerque.
Is there any other location and
staying in Mexico that is
similar to that? No, They are
unique like that, Mr Chair and
representative, I apologize.
Mr Chairman.
Frankly, it creates an
incestuous relationship.
And the reason it creates an
incestuous relationship is
because the core interest of the
city of Albuquerque is the city
of Albuquerque.
And I say that because I
represent an unincorporated
population.
That means they have no other
government but burn Leo County.
With the exception of the state
in some cases,
And so that being said
The planning aspect for that
particular triple A
Usually the unincorporated area
takes a back seat.
To the needs of the city of
Albuquerque.
Mr Chairman, I have a question.
How many senior centers as
described by that particular
Triple A are in the
unincorporated area of Berlin
County.
Um, Mr Chair and representative.
I don't know that exact number
right now, but we do have Metro
triple A here. They may be able
to speak to that.
If we can, if, if they if they
want to speak to it, that's
great. If we want to follow up,
we're happy to follow up as
well. Representative, But I
Yeah. Mr. Chairman, this is this
is an important item. And I
really the bottom line is I
would like for the state of New
Mexico to work on this issue
because I can tell you
Being a senior citizen, having
been in the community all of my
life never lived anywhere else
that
There are no senior centers in
my South Valley area.
There are a couple of meal sites
and they are vastly different
than a senior center, which is
multifaceted provides an amazing
amount of services, and there
are none.
The cell belly, which is not
just my district, which is a
larger part of that used to
serve as a county commissioner
is approximately 60 plus 1000
residents.
And of those 60,000 plus
residents were it and
incorporated area, which it is
not.
Would be about the fourth or
fifth, maybe sixth largest city
in the state of New Mexico and
yet does not have a senior
center.
That is what I'm trying to drive
out. Mr Chairman and I would
like to state to work on that.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you very good points,
Representative Delacruz ranking
member Armstrong, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank
you for your presentation. Um I
too want to thank Neil and
Monica. I
Was vastly informed this morning
on how it works, and I didn't
know a lot of what the
information that they gave me.
Um and and I hear representative
de la Cruz's issue. There's
different issues all across New
Mexico, so rural New Mexico is
very different than the city of
Albuquerque. I can whine.
I'm not going to, but I could
wine that we don't have the kind
of
Stuff that's offered in the city
of Albuquerque. But we don't
have also, we don't have the the
amount of people so I'm I also
found out today was so vastly
informed, which was so awesome.
Thank you.
Um, of the breakdown of the
percentage that the federal
Government provides that the
state government provides that
the local government provides
and those percentages are highly
weighted on the state of New
Mexico and and then the local
government. And then the feds
and how that's all spread out,
So I appreciate what you do.
I want to help you with what you
do. I also found out that the
federal government doesn't give
as much to a certain, uh
A as they do.
Uh, then last 22 pizzas than
they do with the other P s a so
All that being said is we need
our federal delegation to step
up and make sure that it's all
equal.
The whole state of New Mexico
should be equal in the dollar
amount that the feds are
sending. And I appreciate, uh,
Secretary. Congratulations. I
appreciate you. I've worked with
you on tourism for several
things, and I have full
confidence that you can help.
Guide this into something.
And and the people that we
should be taking care of Our
veterans are seniors and our
Children. So thank you for what
you do. And thank you again.
Neil and Monica. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you very much.
Ranking member. Armstrong. Next
representative outfield.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. You know
what? I really just want to
thank the secretary first off to
start with for coming out into
our remote real area trying to
help us. I think you all have
seen us on TV. The last couple
of nights. Uh,
First one was the people being
housed at our school because of
the blizzard.
The second one was our sheriff.
Pulling people out of the snow
drifts. It's life threatening
out there and to add to that the
biggest probably 60% of our
Population are senior citizens.
So we rely heavily on this
agency.
Ah!
So some of the things that I was
picking up here as I was
listening
Was the language to allow non
reversion of funds.
And the language over the
explainable trust.
And I'm not sure which trust
that was I was digging through
my papers while we're talking. I
finally just gave up on digging
and start listening.
Uh, Kiki surveyed their fund has
been really important in our
area for some of the things that
we're trying to do, Uh,
It's tough out there for all
people. But if you're elderly,
and you can't drive and you
can't get groceries, uh, you
can't save yourself from a
blizzard. You rely on other
people to do it and our
community comes together. You
all can see that We do that.
These guys are part of our
community and we appreciate
them.
And looking at some of the
differences between the
The governor's recommendation
and the LFC recommendation and
the need that these folks have.
I wonder if it's if this is not
an agency where maybe it would
do to take a little bit of time.
Talk with the secretary and make
sure
That
That her needs are met.
Mr Chairman, So
In
Secondly, I just would give
Secretary Schreier a minute to
Speak to that.
Please. Madam Secretary, Mr
Chair members of the Committee
representative. Thank you so
much. And thank you for your
support of this agency. Um, the
Kiki Subedar fund is critical
and that needs to continue to be
funded as as we see across the
state, each county each
community has unique needs and a
one size fits all approach is
not going to work. We have our
triple A's that do a phenomenal
job. But then we need to create
unique programs to serve the
needs within those communities.
And the exact has a $5 million
appropriation into the Kiki
Saavedra fund. The LFC has has
zero
Um So I really encourage, um,
this body to take a look at that
piece as well as the
supplemental for this fiscal
year of those are two of the big
differences within the
appropriation in the
supplementals and then third,
um, the new mix the New Mexico
program that we piloted this
year and have expanded already.
Um, in the executives are base
budget.
And in LFC, it's in. It's
It's the expendable trust.
The trust and I think there's
there's just some concerns
around operationally how that
trust is going to work. Um, it
would be great if that was
Communicated a little bit with
with US secretaries because
we're the ones that have to
execute and then were held
accountable. Um, And so those
those are the being differences,
and I really appreciate the
opportunity just to highlight
them one more time. Thank you.
So, Mr Chair. Uh, thank you for
allowing me the time there
probably is, is no other.
Although each of these agencies
are important to us, this agency
is one of the most important to
the to the folks where I live
were remote rural were
Aging.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much. Representative
Chatfield. Next, we're gonna go
to representative Sanchez and
represent behind
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Can you elaborate on the 5
Million you're requesting from
the Kiki Saavedra fund the uses
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee representative. Thank
you for that opportunity. Um,
There are several different
programs that we initiated this
year in particular since I've
come into this role. We did an
analysis across the state of
looking at the growing
population and understanding
where the gaps are between the
Senior infrastructure if you
will, and that the aging network
and what we need to be able to
accomplish, we need some more
data. So one of the projects
that we're working on is called.
We're calling it the overlay
tool. Um, it's technology where
we're looking at where all of
the difference. Current service
provider areas are.
Um and looking at the population
and overlaying different data to
see where the gaps are on
service area, Then we're going
out to work with private sector
to say, Look, there is an
opportunity a business
opportunity for you if you are
willing to increase your service
area into these areas that
seniors need those types of
services.
Um
One of the big One is food.
And transportation.
So we are also working on a
pilot program to support Roy in
particular. That was one of our
pilot programs, and we're
looking to expand it to other
very frontier communities that
do not have grocery stores and
access to fresh food.
We also have been working on
looking at all the
infrastructure of the senior
centers.
And
We can do better.
Period do better for our
seniors.
Um, there are senior centers
that just don't have the right
equipment. They don't have the
right transportation when
they're delivering these in home
meals. Um, it's not safe to go
in a car when there's snow into
these rules, areas of dirt rose
to serve seniors. Um, again, we
can do better.
And so we are doing a complete
conditioning index of all of the
senior centers across the state
to look at not only what they
need from a maintenance
standpoint, but then also, what
do we need to do from a capacity
standpoint to make sure that as
our growing population increases
our senior centers have the
capacity to be able to serve
that population?
And right now we don't have it.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Could you
also elaborate on the additional
funding you're requesting for
the aging network?
Yes, Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Um
Representative for the aging
network, the real differences or
New Mexico grown, which is again
that nutritional program making
sure that our seniors have
healthy, nutritious food and
also that we're buying from our
farmers right to
Our senior Olympics.
So there is a difference between
the two budgets on investing in
a senior Olympics to make sure
that their programming is not
just an Albuquerque
And that seniors across the
state can take advantage of
that.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Uh,
I just wanna commended the new
secretary in your short time.
I'm actually on the board for
North Central, which helps
oversee the non metro, triple A,
uh they've just spoke very
highly about the relationship
you're building. So I just want
to thank you for that. And, uh,
I just want to see just like
veterans or seniors are
extremely important. And I think
this uh
Committee needs to make sure we
make them a priority and get
them the funding they need to to
serve these
These are people that are part
of our families were going to be
there someday. Um, and it's a
growing demographic, so I think
we need to
Fund as much as we possibly can.
And
And help as much as we can.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much. Representive.
Sanchez. Next, we're gonna go
represent Luhan and Garcia.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
Thank you, Secretary for first I
want to thank you for for your
your work for our state.
Not just in the script, passing
this robot for others that
you've done and staying with us
and moving into aging has been,
um
Has been a changer for us, and I
see that and working with you
and some of your efforts and
Um, um I don't have to say a lot
of things. We know that this is
a huge growing population. We
know that I believe there's over
400,000.
You Mexicans who are over the
age of 65.
And growing. We have the fastest
elderly growing populations in
the nation.
And we need to provide for the
services for them.
As stated. We're looking at
those those most vulnerable. Um,
populations. This is one of them
that we have to, um, take care
of
Um so
With that said, Um
I'm looking at some of our
charts and everything, Mr Chair.
Um and looking at the aging
network it in some of the things
we have listened from Lfc and I
want to thank Kelly for all her.
Her work to and all this and
everything you've done, and it's
so diligent, and it's like
Um
At our fingertips with
information, But what it tells
me is where those gaps already
are. I think as you're working
towards doing an overlay of
information
Uh, A lot of this work is done
with our lfc. And I want to just
give that credit there. And as
you're looking for that
information in the data support
But what is telling me is that
we need to do more.
And we have, um, Alzheimer's
associations. We have AARP here
and I like all the Triple A's
there in the room to raise your
hand. I understand there's a
storm out there, so maybe
there's probably more online
with us. But as we're talking
about this and understanding
that work and just
You know they're they're
different types. There's there's
just a lot of needed
coordination.
And you've said that you've
stated that and even for us to
understand that is
It is as talking amongst
ourselves to coordinate that
information. To be honest with
you. Um and to me what That
means is something that I and
representative Herndon kind of
zeroed in on during the interim
and working and talking with the
Alzheimer's Association, and
it's something that was in your
budget for an FTE for an
Alzheimer's.
Coordinator if you will, and if
you wanted to elaborate a little
bit on that, Madam secretary.
It's something that I am.
I fully support in your budget.
I see that we don't have the
recommendation from LFC.
But this is something that I
strongly pointed out during our
one of our hearings when we were
in readjust. Oh,
Great Jayce s. And I want to say
that this is something that we
have actually been working on,
And it is part of your budget.
And I want you to maybe
Mr Chair. Members of the
Committee representative. Thank
you for elevating this, Um, you
know,
I
I've had family members have
dementia, and it's it's heart
wrenching.
Um, to watch people go through
that awful disease. Um, and one
of the things that we have been
doing at our agency is really
making sure that our frontline
staff is trained, um, to be able
to provide the best customer
service possible, not only to
the resident that has some sort
of dementia, but then also
working with those caregivers to
make sure that they're connected
to resources.
Um, overall, I will say that I
mentioned this before.
We don't have funds to hire more
people, and our request is to
have additional funds so we can
hire some additional people to
provide those services. Um I to
all your point. Where all gonna,
We're all aging.
And we're all gonna need that
help and assistance in those
resources as we get older, and
we want to make sure that this
agency is properly funded so we
can provide that excellent
customer service specifically to
the representatives point for
those that have dementia and
Alzheimer's, So thank you so
much representative for bringing
that up.
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you for that. I just
I don't think there's not
anybody here that hasn't been
touched by a family member,
friend or
Anybody. That's that's been
that's either have this disease
or some sort of type of dementia
or
Been incapacitated by a stroke
or any of those things that
affect them.
And debilitate them completely,
but to give
Two.
Highlight really what happens
with the Alzheimer's disease is
is really, really important
because it's growing in that
population is growing
Alzheimer's and dementia and
we're looking at the health care
providers out there that are
giving the care um
It's very different, and it's
very, um intense driven, and
it's something that we need to
really focus in as our as I
mentioned as a growing
population.
It means that as our group elder
population is growing, so is so
is this disease.
Um and I know we have a lot of
things that are going on
medically and looking at
prescription drug use, but all
that is not really hitting us
now yet.
But we're going to need more
care and we need we need some
attention really driven towards
this disease and what it means
in our already vulnerable
population. So, Mr Chair I just
wanted to focus in on that
because it is part of the budget
that was given to us from the
executive in agency, and I
wanted to say that I think
Um, I'd like to go back and look
at that and see what we can do
to help with that FTE and
supporting that that part of
your budget. Thank you, Mr
Chair. That's all I have. Thank
you very much for presentable
hunt. Next, we're going to go to
represent Garcia then represent
brands.
Oh, thank you, Mr Chairman,
Thanks for the presentation. Uh,
First question I have is Agent
long term cover senior centers.
In the reservation.
Mr Chair. Members of the
Committee representative. Thank
you for bringing that up. Um, so
we we do have funding that comes
through our agency.
For the office of Indian and
Elder Affairs. That particular
office coordinates across the
state with tribal governments,
um, to support services in
Indian reservations.
Thank you, Mitch. To the reason
for that question, Secretary is
because
We had a good in the first
committee meeting about two
months ago here in Santa Fe.
And then I will nation that our
presentation
Mr Chair, and I noticed on their
hand out that there was 17
senior centers. They were going
to lose your funding. They could
not reauthorize your funding.
Have you were aware of that?
Mr Chair members of the
committee. Um, I do not have
more information about that, but
I will look into it and circle
back with you immediately. Mr
Chairman. The reason I brought
that up because you know, we
give capital loudly.
I do to my district and it goes
to senior centers.
But this this deal was with two
agent long term, I think
And there were 17 of them.
They're gonna not they could not
reauthorized.
The capital lately.
Um Mr Chairman was going to
Yeah, that capital outlay. Um
I'm not really sure if those
have been re author, not I
believe you have a capital
outlay hearing coming up, but
I'll definitely get with Callie
cars. Well, our capital analyst
and know your concern on that
That's not necessarily in this
operating budget, though.
Mr German could talk about it.
I'll find Yeah. I'm happy to get
dogs appropriate staff because
these people are in a frenzy,
overdosing what they have. Okay.
Next question, Mr Chairman.
On on senior centers in New
Mexico, like the one in grants
where I live at
Their vehicles for
transportation of seniors or
transporting of their food
products for done for meals or
so.
Old and outdated. What can we do
address those issues.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee representative. Thank
you. I just want to make sure I
heard you correctly. You said
that the vehicles are outdated.
Yes, bro. Some of those regards
someone has got 300,000 miles on
it.
And you know they're afraid to
use them for the transport.
Israel Medical
Or for recreational use or for
meals.
Um, thank you for sharing that
that that is a perfect example
of why we're doing our
conditioning. In next of all the
senior centers across the state.
We're in the process of
procurement for this project
right now is to look at all the
senior sinners to see what the
capital outlay needs are
regarding the building
infrastructure and also vehicles
and equipment.
So that is something that we
absolutely should should discuss
in further detail.
Thank you much chair and
secretary and you've heard it
from a few legislators today
that are from Luna, Mexico, like
the Metro and gets all the good
stuff, everybody else kinda gets
put on the side burner and you
know, I've seen it happen
because, you know
Some of my district court ruled
that they don't have a senior
center.
And they don't have a
transportation. But you know, we
need to really work on that. Mr
Jerry. And the last thing I
have, Mr Chairman, Secretary
I loved it. Veterans program.
Can you touch on that briefly?
On slide three.
Mr Chair members of the
Committee representative. We do
have a It's a small federal
program through the V A, um,
where we support veterans that
are in need of care and
different services. So that
particular program we only have
a few veterans that participate
in it. We've been having
conversations with the Veterans
Department here with the state
to see how we can do better
outreach.
Um, and to draw down additional
federal funds. Um, there is
discussion from the feds that
they want to move that
particular program out of New
Mexico into a service into
Colorado, where they would still
be servicing New Mexico from
Colorado. So we're having a lot
of conversations right now,
about that particular program.
That we
And regards to slide. Three.
This is just communicating that
we moved the veterans program
from certain to a P s.
Within our accounting system.
Thank you, Madam Secretary, Mr
Chairman, as you noticed they
mentioned senior citizens quite
a bit and I'm probably the most
senior in here.
And I am in United States.
Marine Corps. Vietnam veteran
veteran's issues very close to
here.
You know, I appreciate you
bringing that up and you know,
we need to make sure
The whatever funding comes out
is equally divided between
everybody in the state of New
Mexico. Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you for
representing Garcia next episode
Brown and rubs out of Herndon.
Thanks, Mr Chair, Madam
secretary and Panelists.
First of all, um, I do want to
say that. I'm very pleased that
you're the secretary designate.
And I imagine you'll be the
desert you'll be the acting,
you'll be the secretary.
Very soon, but
I've always enjoyed enjoyed
working with you and your other
previous capacities. And so I
I have high hopes for moving
this agency forward.
I do want to give you Mr Chair
and Madam Secretary. A little
bit of a thank you for page.
Five in your slide deck.
It's very well done. This is the
FY 25 base budget comparison.
And you've given a very good
distillation of where the
executive and lfc budgets
differ.
And it's just so easy to grasp.
What? Your message to the
committee. So thank you for
that. Whoever put this together
did a great job.
I did want to ask one question.
It's about volunteer programs at
the bottom of the chart.
And there's a reference to CHW
program and I don't I couldn't
find out what that is. Mr Chair
and Madam secretary.
Mr Chair members of the
Committee representative. Thank
you. I'm still learning acronyms
as well. So that is a community
health worker program. Okay? And
so one of the things that we're
really looking to do and to
expand upon is to to actually
hire more community health
workers to be out in the
community, especially our senior
centers. We feel like there's a
huge opportunity to count
connect seniors to more
resources and to have that
engagement.
We're also in conversations with
HST. They have proposed to the
feds, um, to to make community
health workers reimbursable
expense, but that has not been
approved yet. Um, so we're
hoping that we can have state
funding to be able to enhance
this program and then and then
be able to draw down additional
funds from the Feds. Thank you.
Very good. Mr Chairman and
Madam secretary, Um this
question might be more for Lori.
So let's find out. It's on page
five.
Of the difference worksheet, and
it's a reference about the base
budget.
What you get there.
Hmm.
So, Mr Chair. It says that the
and this is regarding the base
budget. The executive recommends
2.3 million.
The New Mexico program.
And then it says 12.5 million
from the expendable Trust. Uh,
it's a little bit hard for me to
understand what what is
happening there.
If you would explain is the top
0.5 million a separate chunk of
money.
Um, Mr Chair, Representative
Kelly might be better able to
explain the difference, but
basically the LFC this year has,
um
Holdout identified various
programs, Initiative funding,
um, opportunities to pull out
from the bass recommendation and
put into this, um, expendable
Trust fund to kind of give more
accountability.
For the executive.
We just put it in the base. We
just kept it in the base. The
LFC also funded it. But just
separately. It is a separate
fund. Um and I will turn it to
Kelly to very much more clearly
explain this.
Thank you. I'm not sure that's
going to be true. But yes. So
the executive put just 2 million
in the base recurring to go for
this program.
Now The expendable trust is you
all are aware is that Section
nine where we have multiple year
appropriations lumped in so that
we can do pilot programs and
evaluate them for multiple years
to make sure that they're
receiving the outcomes that we
all want to happen and then
review after those years to see
if they
Need that recurring funding. So
lfc put in 12.5 million so that
over several years we could
implement this program and see
what the outcome is were. The
LFC also has language in that
that asked the agency to do an
actual evaluation of the program
so we can make sure that what
the program promises, which is
to keep seniors in their homes
and more stable and help family
members provide that care is
happening, so that's the
difference.
Okay, Mr Chair and panel, So I
think there was just a type.
maybe an and missing in that
sentence, and I was just
confused. So thank you for that.
Information and Mr Chair, Um and
and panels, So I did want to
understand the pilot program
aspect of that expendable trust.
Um, ask
So, um, I take it that's in
view. So, Mr Chair, um and for
the secretary
Um, older abuse has been a
really big problem.
And just recently in my
district, I received a phone
call from a very concerned
citizen about, um uh,
It looked like elder abuse of
one of our local citizens.
Could you tell me, please? What
role the agency has when there's
reported
Elder abuse and it becomes a
court matter where the private
parties are duking it out in
court. Do you retreat from what
you do or do you stay involved?
Mr Chair?
Mr Chair members of the
committee representative. Thank
you for asking that question. I
didn't. I didn't really dive
into our adult protective
services division and just the
critical work that they do on,
um
On really the looking for and
going out into the community.
when there are reports of
neglect, abuse and exploitation.
Um, like many of you, you've
probably heard horrible stories
about our vulnerable population.
Um, either.
Being exploited, and there's so
many different ways. This does
happen, whether it is, um when
they're still living on their
own or with a family member or
within an assisted living
facility or nursing facility.
Um, so this particular division
has extremely and very critical
role. Um, and one of the things
that I have noticed since I've
been here.
Is that
There should be more reporting.
There should be more reporting
because with that, that means we
have someone coming out, even if
it's even if it's a situation
where it's not as dire. We still
then have one of our social
workers going out into the
community to connect our
community members with
resources, which is a wonderful
preventative measure.
To do.
Um And then, of course, if there
is exploitation neglect than
they do in an investigation.
And if there is suspected
criminal activity, then the
police do get involved.
Um, when it comes into the
court, um, scenario, I'm going
to have to defer to one of my
deputies.
Um, Mr Chair. Representative,
um, can look to sort of
different ways so if there are
actual criminal charges and our
adult protective services staff
was involved with the victim in
the case, they would likely
serve as a witness. In that
case, um, so that's how that
would work the other way that a
PS staff gets involved in court
matters and in a civil matter.
Is regarding potential
guardianship for the alleged
victim, if that is the case, but
that's really based on capacity
of that.
Um, alleged victim and not
necessarily on what the actual
abuse allegations are, because
that is a criminal matter. Um,
but that is a very temporary,
um, filing that are adult
protective services attorney
does so it's essentially just
asking the court to appoint a
guardian and then the court
would do that. Appointing and
oversee that guardianship.
Great. Thank you. That's very
helpful.
Mr Chairman, I am
I do have one quick question
about the Saavedra Dignity Fund.
I remember when that fund was
created.
It's my understanding. It's more
of a discretionary fund for the
agency. Would that be
inaccurate?
Mr Chair. Members of the
Committee representative. Yes,
it's discretionary and is to
serve seniors in rural areas,
which is
Good part of our state. Okay,
Thank you.
Um, I do want to point out Mr
Chair and Madam Secretary that
on page 284 of Volume two.
The LSC has given us a little
bit of a note here that
The Legislature should be
cautious in the use of non
recurring revenue regarding this
fund.
And, um
If it's recurring, or non
recurring deaths of factors. I
just want to point that out,
paying attention to think I had
One more question, Mr Chair,
Madam Secretary, uh, there is an
item for ombudsman reform. Could
you tell us what the problem
there is? Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair.
Members of the Committee
representative. Thank you for
that question. Um
Like many of our programs that
our agency they are structurally
mandated federally.
And were created decades ago.
And the Ombudsman program in
particular, is really based on
volunteerism.
And over the last decade, we've
seen a drastic decrease in
volunteerism of time.
Um so we don't have those
volunteers anymore.
To be able to make sure that we
have ombudsman advocating for
residents that are in long term
living facilities.
And while our particular
particular state is doing a good
job and comparison to other
states of making sure that we
have it on Bud Spin, um,
visiting facilities, at least,
um
Quarterly.
Our nursing facilities. We are
able to have it on. But Zeman
there at least monthly
That is not sufficient to make
sure that these vulnerable
adults are not being abused,
neglected.
Or whatever, and we need to make
sure that we have
More ombudsman.
And in the facilities visiting
on a regular basis because
visiting once a quarter or once
a month does not allow them to
develop relationships with the
people that are living in these
facilities where they have
trust, and they are willing and
comfortable to share. What
they're the other thing. I will
say that there has been a
significant closure.
As our assisted living
facilities across the state.
Um, we've lost 40 in the last I
think six years.
And so what do you think of
people living in their
communities? Whether it's rural,
especially rural
They're going to have to leave
their community.
When their loved ones can no
longer take care of them.
And so this just really enforces
and validates not only the need
for the New Mexico program where
retraining and supporting and
providing stipends for
caregivers so people can stay in
their homes and stay in their
communities. Um
This is also why we are doing a
complete study on the assisted
living facilities here in New
Mexico.
Because it
It's a need
It is a need, and we want to
make sure that those are as high
quality as possible and safe.
Thank you very much for that
information. Mr. Chair, Thanks
for the time. Thank you, Sam
Brown. Great questions Next,
We're gonna go to rip to Herndon
represented Garrett. Thank you,
Mr Chair, and thank you,
presenters and, uh, I too wish
to emphasize the importance of
aging in Long term services
department, just particularly
looking at
Basic facts that New Mexico is
13th among the 50 states with
the highest population of
individuals, ages 65 and over.
So your request Mr. Chair, Madam
Secretary for the 64 additional
positions is absolutely
important, but my question and
I'm gonna ask Kelly to help me
with this one.
As I look on page 158.
And I'm looking at the river
versions. Kelly did do they not
have
Um, bar authority. And why are
they looking for 64 positions
when I'm looking at this high
level of re versions
Um, Mr Chairman, members of
committee so the agency is not
asking for 64 additional FTE.
That's what they have open and
available, but they have some
funding constraints that
They're struggling with and
partially some of that has to do
with some of the federal
reimbursement rates that are
coming in slower than they
should be.
Thank you, Kelly. Mr. I don't
think she's she's done. No,
please, Mr. Chair, please. Madam
Secretary, Mr. Chair members of
the Committee Representative. Um
what?
We are not asking for 64 more
employees. We have 64 unfunded
positions.
But
In regards to the reversion.
What happens is that because
we're trying to be very diligent
with public money, we want to
make sure that if we can get
Medicaid reimbursement for some
of the positions we do have with
an adult protective services. We
want to be able to apply and get
that reimbursement, so we're not
using state money.
But what happens is that the
process to get the funding from
HST over to my agency.
There is a pretty significant
time delay.
And so those funds are not
received until the next fiscal
year.
And those funds revert.
Which is why we asked for the
special language.
This particular year so that
funds do not revert for fy 25.
Um
While we work out with HST, too.
Build a better system so we
don't have that lag any longer.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. So perhaps that
would
If we go back to the question
that was raised by my colleague,
representative Luhan looking at
the Alzheimer's FTE that was in
the agency request, but wasn't
funded by either the LFC or the
executive was that funding
Does that funding for that
position? Is it someplace else
that we don't see in here? Um,
in terms of your operations and
assistance with the L out of
Alzheimer's disease in our
state.
Mr Chair representative, the
executive recommendation
increases the funded vacancy
rate across several programs
within the aging of Long term
services division to allow them
hopefully to reclassify as
needed and fill the
Madam. Mr Chair, Madam. Um,
presenter. I'm not sure I'm
understanding to. Hopefully
there's a feel the vacancy
position or not.
Mr. Chair, representative. I'm
gonna try.
So the agency requested the FTE
as an expansion request instead
of giving additional FTE when
the agency has vacant positions
and is lacking the funding to
fill them.
In exchange of giving the
additional F T e the executive
recommendation.
Boosts the funding for the
personnel category.
That could, in theory, provide
the funding for that position
Should the agency choose to
reclassify and existing FTE but
No to be very short. No. The the
executive recommendation does
not explicitly include that
particular FTE.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Madam Presenter. I put I
focus on that position,
primarily just because I'm
looking at facts specifically
related to the state of New
Mexico and calls that have come
into my office, so the
Alzheimer's Disease Association
Mr Chair. Madam Presenter, for
example, says that right now
we're looking at 43,000.
Individuals in the state of New
Mexico with Alzheimer's disease
and then the next year, so we're
looking at 53,000 is the
prediction so that focus on that
Alzheimer's Ft is incredibly
important. Mr. Tear members of,
uh, the presenters, and so I'm
also wondering Mr Chair and
presenters and particularly
Madam Secretary.
How are you are working with the
Alzheimer's Association because,
say, Braves three major
questions that are great
concern, and and I will raise
them with you. But first, Mr
Chair, Madam Secretary, How are
you working with them?
Mr Chair members of the
committee representative. Thank
you. For that question. There
has been a longstanding
relationship between this
particular agency and the
Alzheimer's Association. Um,
there have been long term
contracts in regards to
providing services that
actually, the association would
provide around respite.
This last year.
Prior to me, coming on. The
agency did an RFP to renew that
contract, The Alzheimer's
Association decided not to apply
for that RFP.
And there was a nationally from
nationally There was a directive
that they're focusing more on
outreach and preventative and
education and not direct
services. So that's why they
chose not to pursue that. RFP.
But what that meant was that a
longstanding, um dementia
Respite program.
Stopped.
So my team came together and
we're building a whole new
program within our agency to to
really fulfill that void.
So right now, I will say that
the Alzheimer's association and
our agency or in transition, um,
but we're really looking at what
their goals are and what they're
looking to achieve. How that
aligns with our agency and what
new Mexicans need and we're
going to step up and make sure
that we use we support New
Mexicans.
Thank you for that response, and
Mr Chair and Madam secretary.
there were three major issues
that had been raised. The
respite care was number one. The
second one was funding for their
annual Alzheimer's Caregivers
conference because they need
assistance with those who are
providing caregiving to their
Alzheimer's relatives. And then
the third item. Mr Chair, Madam
secretary.
Was the Alzheimer's Association
office in farming tonight and
the concern about the care
that's been given in that in
that city within our state, So,
Mr Chair and Madam secretary, I
hope that those are high on your
list as you're looking at how
you will in a engage with them
And as we also look at funding
for what you providing for up to
53,000 people who may be
suffering from Alzheimer's in
our state.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee representative.
Again. I want to just point out
that the association chose to no
longer fulfill this function.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam.
Secretary. And and Mr Chair.
just a couple of the quick
points in terms of coordination
and working as we look at the
aging in Long term Services
department, I am I was really
happy that you pointed out. AARP
and this being here in the
audience and the work that they
provided in assisting
Members of our senior citizen
population and also I you
focused on looking at that New
Mexico grown and helping to make
sure that senior citizens are
eating well. It's highly
commendable for you and I'm
looking also at based on some
research that the Presbyterian
Uh, senior citizen care, Uh,
health care facility what
they're doing in terms of
something that they developed
called a wealth program to make
sure that senior citizens are
taking their medication and that
they're eating And then, um,
looking at all of these working
together is absolutely
wonderful. And I'm just making
sure and and looking at how we
are coordinating with these
organizations, so that together
we are assisting our senior
citizens much as possible. Mr.
Chair, Madam Secretary.
That is a yes you are working
with those organizations, Mr
Chair members of the Committee
representative. Yes,
Collaboration is key. That is
something that I firmly believe
in and really understanding the
network as a whole and where the
services are provided and where
there's gaps and how we can link
a line of leverage to make a
greater impact in to serve new
Mexicans. Absolutely. And Mr
Terror. I have only one last
question that I will raise with
Madam Secretary
And that is looking at the fact
that in this state that there is
a great concentration,
particularly this year on
something called paid family
leave, and with respect to that
question that has often arisen,
Mr Chair, Madam secretary is
with respect to those small
businesses and how they will
continue to, uh, to grow and
rather to function if
Some member of their of their
team has to be out because of
paid family leave, and the
question was raised. Mr. Chair,
Madam secretary on whether or
not aging in long term services
was able to keep a record a
list, for example of individuals
who may have retired but still
want to work sometimes and they
could fill into those positions
in those small businesses
getting paid the same thing that
those individual
Girls who left we're getting
paid because those who go out on
paid family leave would be paid
by an insurance plan.
So if it's not something that
you've been looking at, I offer
to you to please continue to
look at that. And Mr Chair,
Madam secretary. The senior
Olympics are incredibly
important. I have been talking
to individuals who if we don't
have senior Olympics and those
who have been involved in
transplants, forget example.
They've gone to the world
transplant games where we want
our senior citizens to compete
right here in our own state. So,
Mr Chair, Madam Secretary, Thank
you for looking at all of those.
Girls and indulging my
questions.
Excellent. You're next.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Quick
question. Welcome.
Um, you know, we get capital
outlays requests from numerous
agencies. One of the ones it's
meals on wheels. So for delivery
meals from your department
You do contract with different
agencies such as meals on
wheels? Is that correct, Mr
Chair? Members of the Committee
representative. Thank you for
this question, because I think
this is a really important thing
to keep in mind is that we have
a model and a system that is not
only federally mandated, but
it's how we're set up as an
agency to be most effective and
efficient.
And so we have the Triple A's
that we had talked about earlier
that do the subcontracting and I
have talked to meals on wheels
about their desire to expand and
one of the things that I did
share with them that it's really
critical that they connect with
the Triple A's to talk about how
they would like to expand
because that is how our model is
set up.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
That's it. Thank you very much
of Allison.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Madam secretary.
Back in November. In your
presentation before Lfc. I had
shared that there was a vast
difference in the menu that was
served to my
Um, aging counterparts on the
reservation.
Versus the menu that was served
in farming tonight.
And it was mentioned that
Perhaps the services or the menu
that was served between the two.
The vast difference between
The menus was perhaps the word
or
The problem with the Triple A
and the area.
And I was told that the triple A
in that area would be looked
into
And I'm just wondering if
Uh, you would have a feedback
for me.
Because in one area we were
served.
As I shared tomato soup and
crackers.
A couple of days later in
farming tonight.
I thought I had worked, walked
into first.
We were served five course meal.
vast difference between the two.
So I'm just wondering if there
was any, uh,
I think that was done to look
into the Triple A in the area.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee representative. Thank
you for bringing that to our
attention. Um, one of the we do
have the triple A's that, um
metro and non Metro and then we
have. Our agency has a division,
an office of Indian and elder
affairs that works directly with
the different tribal
governments.
To be able to provide those
services when it comes to the
actual purchase and operations
of the senior sinners in in
tribal communities.
Sovereign nations. Those those
operations are done by
The tribal governments.
And so we worked very closely
with the tribal governments to
try to continue to increase
quality and providing that
funding to be able to ensure
that that is something that we
need to do a better job and
we're going to continue to do a
better job and you have my
commitment on that.
Okay. Um, Mr Chair.
Madam secretary. Thanks for
explaining that this is the
first time that I was told that
the tribal government as a major
part and
Pulling their share. Thank you
very much for that. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you Represent
Alison. Next, we're gonna go to
Vice chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I just have
a brief question for Kelly. What
is, um, standard in terms of un
Funded vacancy rates.
Ah, Mr Chair, Representative
Dixon. So that's a
Not a standard like there's not
a really center. To be honest,
some agencies really struggle to
recruit like C Y F D has, you
know a lot of funded vacancy
rates and not unfunded? Does
that make sense to like, uh,
aging has a very low, um
Funded vacancy rates, so they
have very little money. That's
they're not spending on
personnel that they're supposed
to be spending on personnel. So,
um
Yeah. I mean, I think they if
they if the question is do they
need more money Personal,
Probably.
Yeah. Thank you, Mr Chair, and
Kelly. Just it's not something
that we see as often as
vacancies, and so I just wanted
to check on that. Thank you so
much.
Thank you, Vice chair. Thank
you, Madam Secretary designate,
I share the sentiment that be
great to have you confirmed in
one of thank you for taking on,
uh, a challenging but deeply
important role in here, sort of
your personal residence. Madam
Secretary First. I want to go,
uh, with with Kelly just through
a few things one.
Uh, to be clear lfc is
proposing. Is it a 7.8% increase
in General fund, although that's
not the entirety of the proposed
LFC increases that correct,
correct, And that is not
including the 12.5 for the New
Mexico program, Okay, and so
with the New Mexico program,
what would that bring it to?
Well, it's the that program was
was evenly put over.
Three years, and they it It
depends on how we spend
honestly 12.5. Um, but it would
be relatively close to the
executive. The
Uh, it would be relatively
close, right? Because you as we
see here, Sort of. Um, uh, we
break that up sort of 4 million
a year. We're closing in on
where that request is, Yes, The
difference between the two Rex
is about 4 million. There you
go. Okay, madam, so and then
briefly at Kelly. This compounds
on past increases with aging is
that accurate as well?
Correct Mr. Chair this agency
has seen
Significant growth compared to
other agencies in the previous
years of you, the committee
looks at their volume two
Um, you can see that, Um, thank
you for the right page on page
283, the agency's fiscal year
that just closed they spent
about 65.7 million and the LFC
wreck.
Right now is 93.2 million, so
30% above the actual spend of
the year that just closed So
there is there has been growth
in this agency
and I bring those out. It really
is. I think one it reflects
clearly what we've seen with
this committee and the
Legislature is a very strong
commitment to New Mexico seniors
to Sunday. I think we can all be
proud of
I think we've seen that here
today as well. Which is good.
Um, moving on, Madam Secretary.
Well, maybe come back to Kelly
briefly, Madam Secretary.
The Kiki surveyed refund
Appreciate represented Brown's
question. There are few, if any,
sort of specific legislative
guidelines to that is that
accurate?
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee. Correct right now. It
is pretty broad. Okay. Uh, Madam
Secretary, obviously, from an
agency perspective, that can be
good. But how do you sort of
Determine in understanding, I
think, noting that you're coming
into this relatively fresh
How do you prioritize? How do
you look back and say Here's
what worked. Here's what didn't
Ah!
When there are no none of those
legislative guidelines or a few
of the legislative guidelines in
relation to most other areas of
your budget. Sure, mr Chair,
remember? Excuse me, Mr Chair.
members of the committee. Um,
excellent question. I would say
that as we build programs, One
of the things that we're looking
at is not only the research on
the front end
Um, to see where the needs are
across the state and what those
needs look like, But then also
we put in place, um, key
performance indicators as we
move forward with the program,
and I think New Mexico is a good
example of how we've been able
to achieve that with a new
program and then also looking at
the R O Y on the back end, and
how
We take that program and make
modifications to make it a
stronger program every single
year, and that's how I created
every single program at the
Tourism Department. It is data
driven. We track the data as we
go and we make sure that we're
solving the root issues that our
seniors are facing that same
Madam secretary, and I think
that certainly, um
Your track record at tourism
clearly sort of shows that
Can I have this sort of jumps
ahead, but we need to do more of
that. It seems like there's a
strong commitment to continued
increases if we look back to
2223
Ah Actual General fund was 51
million.
And so we're looking
At very significant growth.
Uh, we need to work with you to
To target and implement across a
wide range of areas from
specific program areas to a very
wide open fun with New Mexico.
maybe somewhere in between a lot
of agency
Uh, flexibility with still some
legislative guidance. Or
although maybe not, um
So okay. Thank you, madam
Secretary And as you sort of
Uh, prioritize.
How does it
What is the Kiki Surveyed?
Refund? How do you prioritize?
That is their data from previous
secretary that reflects that
sort of data driven process Can
you share with us? Sort of any
of the analysis or evidence that
went into
What's been budgeted before out
of the 7 million that
the Legislature is designated.
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee, Um, in regard to the
Kiki surveyed refund when I did
come in to this particular role.
I did an analysis of all of the
projects that were identified as
potential projects.
And really dug into
Are were they
Rooted in research before
launching.
Somewhere and somewhere not, and
so there were several that I
posit or canceled And I said, we
really need to understand the
ecosystem for seniors before we
just move forward on all these
different pilot projects, and so
one of the things that was the
first thing one of the first
things that I actually
commissioned was the study on
the different services providers
for the Triple A's across the
state to understand the service
areas.
For different types of services
and where the gaps are and so
that's in process right now, and
so we'll be able to visualize
what that looks like, and then
we're going to be able to
actually solve the root problem,
which is the service areas in
the different types of services
provided to seniors.
I think another component I
mentioned earlier when
representative Brown brought up
the ombudsman program, and I
talked about the long term
living facilities and how we've
seen several several close
Um the question is why, right?
So we are taking again a data
based approach or using some of
the key. Surveyed your funding
to commission a study of what
that industry looks like and
what some of the issues are, so
that way we can make smarter
decisions not only
programmatically, but
investments and so we'll have
that study available for the
legislative body to review as
well.
So I think those are two really
strong examples. They are huge
investments, but they're
critical to make sure that your
next programmatic implementation
is set up accurately.
Excellent, Madam Secretary.
Thank you. Really? And truly,
thank you for that, uh, wrapping
sort of getting close to
wrapping up Madam secretary and
presenters. Um, what ranking
member? Armstrong referred to
earlier think that breakdown of
sort of funding. Uh,
responsibilities.
Curious there because you know
the state bears the majority of
funding responsibility sort of
half of that. What is seems like
it's at the local level.
The federal level even and
acknowledging discrepancies in
federal funding.
Between the different areas. Um,
is that sort of out of whack
would when we look at other
states seems like there would be
a stronger federal
Mr Chair members of the
committee. That is another, um,
research request I made when I
first came in. I wanted to
understand the funding
mechanism what Local governments
were contributing what the state
was contributing and what the
federal government was
contributing. And I have that
analysis completed and I'd love
to share that with you. I don't
have it with me.
But it really shows that the
state is putting a hefty amount
of investment to support
seniors. There are certain local
governments that I think are
contributing quite a bit, and
then there's others that are not
so one of the things that we are
taking an initiative on is
really connecting with the
county managers across the
state.
Um, And in the past, the
relationships have mostly been
with the senior center
directors, not necessarily the
county manager that's making the
decisions on investments and
presenting those two to their
county commission. So we are
presenting next week to the
Association of Counties, and
then we're going to be working
directly with those county
managers to really help those
communities that aren't making
that big of an investment
compared to their percent of
population that are seniors and
making sure that the locals are
also providing that investor
Mitch. Okay, Thank you.
I want to thank the member
Armstrong for bringing that
forward for the committee. Very
helpful. Um
If there are if I think, as
there is a federal ask, we
should be open to that.
Obviously, it's not something we
can share our perhaps our
sentiments as a committee or as
a legislature. So if we could
ask you and Kelly to ask you all
the executive and the LFC to
understand that a bit better and
provide us with recommendations.
Um
Okay. Ah!
There seems more to dig into.
I'm going to ask the vice chair
that we accept the LSC
recommendation. Think clearly
from the committee. There is a
commitment to increase that.
I would ask the analysts to
work.
To sort of balance out
understanding that a significant
recommendation is in the the
government Accountability
Expendable Trust right now to
understand how that may be
looked at, perhaps shifted, um
and then to also consider
potential general fund. Um
Changes and or but I think, as
we all know as a committee
You know?
We're coming out of two years of
double digit overall budget
growth. We
Are in that point where we have
two very much taper. We don't
have to cut We can continue to
invest. This is a clear area of
priority for the committee. And
so we want to ask the analysts
to come back with increased
recommendations and investments,
but understanding Madame
secretary that
Uh, there are
The limitations when
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move that the committee adopts
the LFC recommendation for this
agency.
Has been moved in second. And is
there any opposition to that
motion?
I don't see any in committee. I
want to thank you all very much
for really robust hearing there.
Okay. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. Okay. We have one
more agency just as a quick
note. We will have public
comment at the end of
Ah, the final hearing for this
morning session. We will be, uh,
poster
Rescheduling our afternoon to
start probably at 230 again
given that we want to take
No. Ah!
Actually, it was excellent.
Okay, We're gonna get started.
Mr. Secretary. Great to see you.
Um, we're Of course, we'll start
with our analysts. Mr.
Secretary, when we get to you
please feel free to introduce
your team member.
And as folks are here from aging
will ask that everybody sort of
give us the space to
Continue with our hearing today,
Mr Sanchez, Go ahead and please
kick us off.
Good afternoon, Mr Chair.
Members of the committee at my
name is Scott Sanchez on the
analyst for Public Safety at
LFC.
Today, we'll be talking about
the Department of Public Safety,
which is agency code number 790
behind Tab seven.
You can find more information on
the LFC recommendation in
volume. One pages. Uh, 133
through 139. I believe
And volume two page four or 5 to
412.
There are also charged showing
projections for state police
force strength, Forensic lab
Case backlogs and Mexico's crime
history. Crime rate history in
Volume three on pages 50 through
52.
First me today is Kevin
Secretary Jason Bowie, My
counterpart from the Department
of Finance Administration, Mr
Diego Jimenez, chief of New
Mexico State police, Troy
Weisler and Sylvia Sona from
DPS, the administrative services
division director believes in
the audience.
The key differences between the
recommendations are that the LFC
recommendation includes a 3%
increase in general fund
revenue, whereas the executive
recommendation includes an
increase of approximately 4%.
In the law enforcement program,
which is mainly the new Mexico
state police. The wrecks are
very close, but the main
difference is the inclusion of
2.5 million for body and in car
camera overhauls, which the
executive fully funds the LFC
recommendation instead, and
instead, funds 1.5 million of
this in the base budget and
provides a $1 million Special
Corporation, which you can see
on page 12 of your packet.
In the statewide law enforcement
support program, which supports
the work of law enforcement
agencies throughout the state.
The LFC funds expansions
totaling approximately $2
million in the forensic
laboratory and I T Department,
whereas the executive incentive
adds approximately $1.8 million
for vacancy rate reduction and
targeted pay raises in the base
and expansion of $617,000 for
the law enforcement records
Bureau.
Finally in program support or
the administrative services
division. The base budget wrecks
are identical. The only
difference is in funding for
expansions with MFC providing
$86,000 for one position to
administer the Law Enforcement
protection fund and the exact
funding instead for physicians
to the tune of $376,000.
And with that all handed over to
my counterpart from the effect
Uh, thank you, Scott. Mr
Charron, Members of the
committee, um
Scott quickly went over all of
the main differences. I'll touch
on it a couple of key ones from
the executive perspective.
In the law enforcement program.
I
Mr. Scott mentioned the 2
million
Dollars that the executive
recommendation ads from the law
Enforcement Protection Fund. You
may recall that a couple of
years ago
You are.
Amended the law governing that
fun to, uh
Entitled the Department of
Public Safety State police
specifically to
To utilize
$2 million from that fund, if if
there is sufficient revenue last
year, there was a revenue
concern.
You all fixed that. And so the
executive recommendation
instills that $2 million into
their operating budget.
Additionally, I believe both the
executive and the
recommendations for DFA include
the $2 million so
Uh, and the LFC recommendation.
It's a little lopsided there
Where d F A has the money? DPS
is not receiving the money.
Additionally in this program,
Scott mentioned the the body and
car cameras. This is a recurring
expense that really should be in
the operating budget.
Whereas the LFC recommendation
Uh, included about a million of
that.
As a special appropriation.
And that a similar thing
happened last year with
I mean, it's shin and Taser
costs. It was partially funded
in the operating budget by the
By the LFC recommendation, which
is ultimately what happened. And
now here we are again.
Backfilling. What? What? The
remaining recurring cost is and
from the executive perspective,
it just makes more sense to put
it into the recurring budget
now.
Um, finally on this program, I
would be remiss if I failed to
mention that the recommendation.
Also includes about $11.6
million for the state police
compensation package. It's about
14%.
Increase for for the officers.
Um, and the statewide law
enforcement program.
Uh, the primary difference here.
Is that
The LFC recommendation includes
additional FTE and provides
funding for those. The executive
recommendation provided funding
to fill
Currently vacant possession
positions and also includes, um
About $600,000 for the
Um
The forensic labs. Um
Compensation study that that spo
Completed this year and and is
now in effect. So if
Um, the LFC recommendation is
taken.
About $600,000 of that will have
to be taken from these 11 New
FTE and will be
Implemented to to current
existing positions and
additionally, from the executive
perspective, it doesn't make a
lot of sense to include 11 New
FTE will there are substantial
vacancies in both the the labs
and the it departments, Um,
finally and program support. Um
A couple of years ago. You all
created the the Law Enforcement
retention fund.
And, uh,
Along with that.
Which is a great tool for for
law enforcement agencies
Statewide, DPS was tasked with a
substantial amount of work and
monitoring and distributing and
creative reports on how that
funding is used.
Thank you, Mr Chairman with that
on hand it over to Secretary
Bowie.
Thank you very much. Mr.
Secretary. Please go ahead, Mr
Chair. Members of the committee.
Thank you. I've already been
introduced and I will go ahead
and start with introducing
staff. As I often say, Well, I
have the privilege of serving
this position. It's really all
the people that DPS that do all
the work. I'm the figurehead for
the organization. But the people
behind me are the ones that do
all of the work day in day out,
and they do a phenomenal job.
Have a great team that works at
DPS. I won't be able to mention
everyone by name. There's a lot
of people behind me. I'll
mention some key people,
particularly I would start with,
uh, presenting with me. Toya
Whistler, chief of the medical
state police since July, most of
you guys know and introduced
also my deputy secretary for
operations, So your surname is
my asked. The director sitting
over here in my left eye might
lean on her for some
Information as questions arise.
Don't be remiss of just
recognizing my partners here for
both the A and Loc. We worked
well together, and, uh, Scott
has replaced Ellen as you know,
and we've had a good
understanding and working
relationship over the last year,
so we really appreciate that
Especially acknowledgement
Manager he Oh, Louis Ruby and
Michael Regensburg had worked on
This presentation over the last
several days very much.
Appreciate all of you guys
input.
And then secretary if you could
have the mic pointed toward
Yeah, Just certainly. No
problem. Thank you. Thank you
for that reminder. I think I
struggle on that every year.
Quite honestly, Um Herman
Lovato, deputy director for
technical support division Can
Augustine chief information
Officer Information Technologies
Katarina Babcock, our lab
director. And as you know, we
just took on a new lab. She's
She's got a brand new office.
You should go visit it. It's
it's It's very nice.
And then she's not here with us
today. Sonia Chavez are Elia,
director today Um
I got to mix now. Okay? Um,
would recognize in the Mexican
state Police command staff for a
moment sitting behind me, the
deputy chief's That'd be cheap
win Deputy Chief Broom and
Deputy Chief Wagner and all the
commands that they didn't come
up as far as from Las Cruces to
be here for this hearing, um, to
make sure that we have
representation here, so it's not
just what you're seeing here,
not just the state police
officers that work local our
command officers.
They lean into every challenge
that you know, happens across
the state. They make sure that
the state police gets mobilized
each and every time and again.
They made it all the way up from
all parts of the state here to
be here for this presentation.
So again, Thank you for all of
them. It's really to their
credit that DPS as successful as
it is, and then before
registered my presentation. I
would think it's important to
think all legislators for the
good work they would do not only
in these committees but
Three years Now. This is my
third year going into session.
We get a lot of support for DPS
a lot of support for the
domestic state Police have a lot
of good projects that are
working good bills, and we
really just I just really
appreciate it. And so does our
staff. And so I just want to say
thank you again, not for not
just for for the budget hearings
for for all the good work that
we do together. As far as the
presentation goes, I'll do it as
as your similar. There's
information in your packet. I
won't kill you with Pirate
Point. I won't go over all of it
verbatim. It's there for your
review. I'll just highlight a
few things. I don't want to know
why standing
Queen. You you all in lunch, and
I don't want
Truly we take your time, okay,
but we appreciate
Yeah, I'm sure we'll have
questions, but don't feel
rushed. Truly, Mr said. I
appreciate that very much. Um,
I'll give you kind of a high
level overview of each program
that we have within DPS just as
a reminder. Some people might be
new, so maybe people may not
have heard it before, So I'll
give you a little bit of an
overview of the program. Why
we're asking for the request
What the priorities are and and
point out. Maybe again. Some of
the variances between the
executive and the LFC.
So I'll start off on slide two,
which is, um DPS statewide
priorities are
Thank you. And and perhaps, uh,
no, The microphones are great If
you can walk us through if
somebody can advance the slide
into perfect, and I think Mr
Sanchez can do that as we go
through. Thank you. Thank you.
Um, again, Statewide priorities.
Our priorities are to support
and fund information
Technologies division or
laboratories, Law Enforcement
records Bureau. We want to make
sure we recruit and retain our
domestic state police officers
will go in a little bit of
detail about proper salary that
we're looking for. Hopefully,
step placement and the
implementation of a longevity
plan.
And then training and technology
We need to obviously keep up in
that space as well. So that will
provide the best services across
the state as much as possible.
So if you go to slide three,
this might seem familiar to you.
And and this is usually what I
emphasize is that we get a
tremendous amount of support and
GPS for the domestic state
police and we very much
appreciate that they are public
facing part of DPS.
And that's the piece that most
people always recognized as the
Department of Public Safety.
I also feel the higher breasted
secretary. I'm responsible to
advocate for the other half of
the agency were about any given
time between 1112 100 employees
and so the other half working
very hard to provide law
enforcement services and support
across the state of New Mexico
as well. So I'm going to
highlight that just for a moment
and again, I'm not underselling
domestic state police. I just
know that they already have a
tremendous amount of support.
And they all everybody knows who
they are. Um, we have three
filling forensic laboratories
across state Domestic. Oh, we
have a brand new one in Santa Fe
As I mentioned Las Cruces and
Hobbs are grants Management
Bureau distributes literally
millions of dollars, uh, for law
enforcement agencies.
City and state. I'm sorry city
and county across state of New
Mexico.
Information technologies You can
think about every police cars
out there working, that's you
know, putting information on a
keyboard that comes through DPS.
It's It's authorized by the FBI.
But DPS is the one that makes
sure that every law enforcement
officer out there has the
information that it needs along
with our criminal justice
Partners Enforcement Records
Bureau. I'll expand on that in a
little bit. There's a tremendous
amount of services that are
offered there.
And we have three dispatch
centers across the state of New
Mexico.
And so we will often tell you
that, you know, really, when
you're investing into DPS, and I
always seem like a broker record
in that space, but you are
investing in all of the law
enforcement services that
everybody benefits from all of
our criminal justice partners as
courts and corrections and and
and and whatnot.
Um
Make sure I didn't miss anybody
here. I don't wanna again under
represents. Also in Asd.
nationally, we have a finance
and procurement. Are you human
resources? Our budget bureau
grants as I mentioned already in
our legal affairs, another one
of the state police that
sometimes doesn't get the
recognition that they deserve.
Probably is our commercial
vehicle commercial vehicle
enforcement.
We have a lot of officers out
there that are making sure that
all of the inspections are
taking place for a commercial
motor vehicles, commercial motor
vehicles.
Um, just in the month of
December alone, 9000 inspections
were done. And for the entire
year, almost 114,000 commercial
motor vehicle inspections and so
that again, that's something
that falls under the charge of
DPS and I again I just didn't
wanna undersell that.
So starting out on slide four
again. Power Point Structure
wise, I'll give you a quick
overview of the program.
Services of that program
provides and kind of what the
goals are. I always find this
slight, interesting because it
really demonstrates the New
Mexico State police and the
services that we provide for
other organizations, and you can
see them for yourself while
point out, for example, the
tactical team 48 missions for
domestic Oh state police.
71 missions for other agencies
Bomb team right there in the
middle 35 missions. Domestic Oh
state police 70 for other
agencies. Crime scene 35 to 34
crash scene reconstruction, So
your fatal crashes or major
injury crashes 47 for the New
Mexico State police in 26 for
other agencies.
Just two nights ago as an
example of Espanola Police
Department had an officer
involved shooting our state
police went out there at the
cyst almost immediately. Our
investigation bureau is handling
that investigation for the
shooting. A lot of the officers
were involved around shift, and
so the domestic state police
took over calls for service for
the city of Espanola for the
duration of whatever it took to
To get the next, uh, shift back
out there working again. And
these are just examples. You
know, day in the AL, we answered
that call as an initial state
police to make sure that you
know we're there to answer the
need for New Mexico on Page
five are priorities for the
message. State police again
recruitment, retention and
technology similar as you've
seen in years past. We're still
struggling in some ways to make
sure that we're adding people to
our ranks and law enforcement
across the state. Domestic state
police is no different.
We want to continue to employ
technology to address crime to
support the criminal
investigations they would do
across state domestic O or
traffic investigations, Public
safety services and again our
commercial vehicle inspections
and enforcement. Moving on to
slide. Six. I'll start out with
our request, starting with the
New Mexico State police again.
There's three sections for
compensation request.
We had proposed an officer pay
plan Longevity Plan proposal and
officers step placement. This
first slide represents the
officer pay plan if you look to
the table that's on the left
hand side there you will see
what our current domestic state
police officer pay plan is, and
the proposed is just right off
there to the right Still in the
middle of the page, proposed
domestic state police officer
pay plan.
I would propose the officer at
two year officer for the New
Mexico State police paid at
3848 in FY 25. This is about a
$5.13 an hour increase.
Or a 15% increase and then well
below their three tables that
you see at the bottom is if that
increase war, um appropriated
and how they were fair and
compared to a p D, or B. C s O
Uh and you can take the the
dollar amount across the table
there. The yellow would be the
domestic Oh, state police in FY
24. That's our current rate of
pay 25 with the current rate of
pay as well. That last chart on
the right hand side would
demonstrate with the increase
would look like and how it
compared to the other agencies.
And and part of the reason for
that is we want to really be
competitive with other states if
you look at our surrounding
states.
Um we're we're behind still in
salary for New Mexico State
police and we want to really
want to recruit from out of
state. We're doing a tremendous
amount of effort and how breach
out of state to bring people in.
We have our recruiting officers
traveling to other states to
bring New Mexico State police
officers in we're going to
military military installations
do recruiting. We've been, uh,
you know, all across the United
States and different places
where reaching out our social
media platforms, news radio
billboards and that kind of
thing.
In community events and summons
and what not to try to recruit
people.
To New Mexico in order to join
to join our workforce.
Moving on to, uh slide. Seven.
Mexico State police currently
does not have a longevity
longevity plan. Historically,
that's something that's never
been part of the New Mexico
State police and our request for
implementation. We're hoping
that by implementing it again
that we can be competitive.
There's a lot of agencies that
offer longevity pay.
Additionally, agencies offer
sign on bonuses and that's
something that we don't have. So
we have a lot of other
incentives, obviously to get
people in through the door. But
this is a space where we're not
competitive and so are proposed
proposal was for the longevity
pay if you look there the
portions of the left for the
domestic state police have 15 to
19 year officer would be at
$7500 per year. If you compare
that a P D Even that same
officer at a P D would be
receiving 12,000.
Year for BCS. Oh, about the same
figure about 11 78 20 to 24
year, officer $10,000 per year
proposed for the domestic Oh,
state police comparative to the
16,000 for a p, D and 15,000 for
BCS, so and so forth. Um
If this legislative body is not
inclined to fund our pay plan,
we would encourage consideration
for this longevity Pay proposal.
We really believe that remaining
competitive in this space that
would help us with retaining the
police officers that we have if
we can't necessarily bring him
in the door. Hopefully, we can
at least retain the ones that we
do have. And I know that
longevity certainly is a
positive.
In that direction.
We're gonna slide eight
represent our officers. Step
placement are step increases or
proper placement, as you know,
is an annual reoccurring request
each time that we don't fund
this. It compacts the issue,
saying that we don't have
officers placed and they're
still in their proper step This
year. It's 205 officers that are
eligible that minor might not
receive funding. You know, next
year That number will grow too,
You know.
Possibly double that. And so for
fiscal year 2023 we had
received, you can see their base
funding of for $4.7 million for
fiscal year 2024. We received 2
million and again we requesting
to make sure the funding is is
there in order to address the
compaction issues so we would
ask that for your consideration.
So start off a slide. Nine. This
is the law enforcement program
of Roll up program. 504 1st
table represents the base
increased requests as you can
see there. The executive fully
funded our request and as has
been pointed out by my
colleagues here at the table,
Lfc recommended a million
dollars less for the body
warrant upgrade. However, they
did place it into a special and
we'll go over that here In just
a little bit. You'll find that
on page $17 million is there is
just
It's just in a different part of
this presentation.
Table two is funded by the
executive recommendation.
Um and unfunded by LSE. Neither
the executive or the LSC funded
again the longevity pay or the
step placement for their
officers.
You will find on page 10. It's
really just the justification
for everything we just covered
If you need additional details,
you can. It's there for your
review certainly will be able to
answer any questions related to
that as well. But the Taser
purchased the ammunition and so
forth. All of that. There is
really just, uh, you know for
you to be available, I would
highlight on this page.
Uh, one of the governor's
initiatives is the organized
Crime Commission. It's a special
appropriation for $5 million to
combat human trafficking, human
smuggling and trafficking of
guns and drugs into New Mexico.
Uh and also money traveling back
to New Mexico definitely a
priority for the governor. It
should be a priority for the
state.
I'm a seated member on the
organized crime Commission as
well, and there's a lot of good
work being done there and the
funding there. The $5 million in
a special appropriation would be
the higher staff purchase
equipment to fund traveling to
begin. Really those earnest
efforts of supporting
intelligence and enforcement
operations between us between
Mexico all the law enforcement
agencies that that would be
partnered with that.
And and the goal really of the
organized Crime Commission is to
support law enforcement
operations through that effort,
And so we would ask that you
consider that special
appropriation as well.
We're going to statewide law
enforcement support. SLE s as we
refer to you will see that on
the next seven slides or so
again. I want to go through
every one of these. They're
there for your review, but I'll
touch on a couple of things that
were pretty proud of when I came
on board in 2021. The New Mexico
Law Enforcement Academy was
really struggling. It was one of
the number one complaints that I
got, um, coming into the
position. People wanting to see
a change there.
It was a priority for the
executive and we were really
poorly staff there. I think at
the time when I started, we were
at 36% staffing. I mean, we're
really hard for us to provide
the level of services and we've
really turned that service
around. We're now sitting at
almost 90%. I think at the time
this slide was was was put
together. It was 85%. I think
we're in the nineties now.
Um and we re trained, more law
enforcement officers and here at
the domestic Law Enforcement
Academy and all the satellite
academies combined across the
state and and beyond the basic
training. It's really been our
goal at DPS to make sure that
we're not just training officers
at the basic level. We've been
wanting to make sure that we
train our officers at the
advanced level as well. So we've
opened up our doors where we can
find funding with people have
been very generous there and
that space as well. Uh, we're
offering monthly training
advanced training for law
enforcement. So
So law enforcement across the
state of New Mexico is welcome
to come to our facility.
At no cost to them. And whatever
the topic is that we feel is
necessary to raise the
professionalism of law
enforcement. We've been offering
that for more than a year now,
so we really been successful of
their training and then not to
be forgotten about naturally
retrained public safety,
telecommunications there as
well. Our dispatchers across
this for for the state of New
Mexico also, we have many
graduations there.
Information technology and this
lodging kind of city advancement
of of what policing might have
looked like in 2000 compared to
2023. These are all things that
you would find inside a police
car currently, and these are all
things that require application
support. I t support We have a
tremendous amount of need for
cybersecurity which you guys
have funding year passed. And so
really, the bottom line is that
as advancement in technology,
take place enforcement of public
safety advances in that
Space as well. And there's an
increased demand on GPS
information technologies. Asai
introduced
Can't Augustine. My CEO doesn't
amazing job and that space
making sure that we provide the
services not only for the state
police, but as I mentioned every
police car did you see that's
getting information on the
keyboard. That information comes
through DPS and not just law
enforcement of the criminal
justice partners as well. So
it's really a statewide service
that we're funding there.
Forensic laboratory and other
service that has statewide
outreach. Every year. We're
taking almost 20,000 articles of
evidence for, you know,
thousands of criminal cases in
our lab does an amazing job,
ensuring that the needs for New
Mexico are addressed through our
forensic laboratories.
We're always looking to expand
services. We had requests from
the Fire marshal's office to do
fire, debris testing and again.
It's It's something that we
welcome and we'll get people
certified in that space as well.
And we'll make sure that we can
help our fire marshals with
fire, debris and arson
investigation. Also, so again
are three labs do a tremendous
job in that space and my bureau
um
Director Katarina Babcock. There
you are right there. Um, does it
does a wonderful job in that
space?
And for some records Bureau.
You've seen this slide before,
but I'll keep kind of driving
this home. Um, if you look at
the first kind of column there
in 1987, New Mexico state
repository and the computerized
criminal history unit was kind
of where law enforcement Brexit
Bureau started. When you hear of
law enforcement records bureau.
That's what you think of. It's
just just records. Well, it
really isn't
Earth every time there's some
other needs that the state has
it gets added to blurb and sex
Offender registration unit
concealed carry computerized
criminal history and so forth,
Missing murdered indigenous
people as an example, and the
challenge that we have is a lot
of times the ideas are great,
and we we take on these
responsibilities willingly if
it's good for domestic. Oh,
we're certainly willing to lean
into it, but we don't always get
the appropriation that goes with
it.
And so we in law Enforcement
Records Bureau when we asked for
FTS, or we asked for support and
funding lot of times, it's
because there are initiatives
that we felt were a good idea
with the appropriation did not
come along with it, and so
That's one area where we
typically stroke struggle here
Recently, we had to hire an
attorney in the law clerk as an
example to provide guidance and
some of these areas to make sure
that the staff there has
appropriate guidance to in order
to implement the programs the
way that we should.
So going on to page 15, which is
R s l. E s roll up page The
first two tables outline our
base increased request the third
table there. Below that you will
see will show the especial
appropriation for the job task
analysis. I'll start with table
one. You'll see a variance for
the Santa Fe laboratory
expansion positions. It shows
unfunded by the executive and
funded 1.5 million by the LFC.
However, as I pointed out before
executive funded through an
additional based recommendation,
and we'll go over that in a
minute on page 17. So while
there is a variance there
It is.
Partially funded on another
page.
Table two. You will see, uh,
points to I t proper salary
alignment hardware software
maintenance infotech membership
in the agency inventory
replacement was funded by the
executive and funded by the LLC.
I will say that this is still a
need for the organization. And
we certainly expand upon that if
this committee so desires
Again. The next space that you
will see is just really
justification for further
detail. That's there for your
review again. Any questions that
you might have? We're glad to
follow up on that. But I won't
go through those one by
Slide. 17 is the one I've
referenced now a couple of times
their additional recommendations
from the executive and from the
LFC, the first table there is
executive additional based
recommendations of the second
table there, uh, is from
Specials also recommended by the
executive. What I would point
out here is our initial request
for Fleet is definitely a
concern for us. We had initially
requested 10.5 million for
fleets. The executive
recommended $7 million there and
we don't have a recommendation
currently from the LSC. We do
have we do hope that to turn
that around and change its like
a salary, compact minute
compaction issue if we don't
keep up with the replacement
cycles of arm urgency,
responding vehicles
Eventually we're certainly going
to be paying more to replace
those. So we have a replacement
cycle that we're currently
working on with our vehicles in
past years of FY 22 9 million,
uh, and in FY 23 7 million was
placed in capital non
reoccurring, uh, appropriation,
but this is definitely a
reoccurring need every year and
I just wanted to emphasize that
on page 17 slide 18 is R S D.
Our program support on table one
of the executive fully funds.
All three based inquest. Uh,
increased request, Lfc only
recommends partial funding for
ASD expansion for the positions
For the Our love program. You'll
see only a $290,000 variants
Their second table on the slide
is the justifications of this is
a pretty small program, so I
didn't want to create a second
page, but
These are just the
justifications again there for
your review as necessary.
Down to the last page, as has
been mentioned by my colleagues
here at the table is really an
agency. High level roll up of
the variances relatively similar
As has been mentioned. The
executive recommends a 4%
increase LFC recommending a 3%
increase with the 1% variance.
And with that Mr Chair members
of the committee would stand for
questions. Thank you very much,
Mr Secretary. Thank you for all
your team who are here today
we'll go straight to questions
first was represented vodka than
the represent chapter. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. And thank you.
Panel, Mr Secretary.
Oh,
For someone to thank state
police and all the first
responders for the job that you
guys do for our communities. You
guys are the unsung heroes and
we appreciate you very much.
Um, Mr Chairman, and, uh, Mr
Secretary. It's been highly
documented, and it's been You
know what the publicized about
the number of times that the
state police has been called in
to support the metro area
throughout this year?
My question to you, Mr.
Secretary is what other extra
efforts has a state police
provided or services have been
provided to other parts of the
state.
Mr Chair representative, aka,
You know, I'll turn it over the
chief in just a minute. But, um,
they do a phenomenal job in that
space. I I reported to this
every every month to the
governor in Cabinet. We have
crime suppression unit that not
just serves Albuquerque. Albury
gets all the attention and that
gets news. But they're all
across the state making sure
that the needs of different
communities are met. I know
we're working very closely with
Santa Fe. We did operations, uh,
in clean clothes, alternate over
the chief for him to expand upon
that.
But again, uh we mobilize
conservatively amounts for every
quest that's out there, Chief of
you in mind.
Thanks, sir. Thank you. Mr
Chair. The committee
representative Baca, Um
So, yes. So one of the things
um, Obviously we want to make
sure that all the communities
around the state of New Mexico
Receive extra attention. And
and, uh you know the services
that they need one of the
thirsty first things that we did
when I took over as chief of the
state Police has recreated a
crime suppression bureau to help
Um, help with that, you know,
with the focus on specialized
investigations of fugitive
apprehension, drug trafficking
investigations, auto theft
Um, and that unit, you know, the
purpose of that is for it to go
out around the state to do those
operations that a lot of the
small communities don't have the
resources or the personnel to
focus on or is it feasible? I
mean, if you have a tin Man
department doesn't or 10 Officer
department doesn't make sense
for you to have a lot of the
afternoon it or narcotics unit,
but you might still have those
some of those problems in your
community.
Um, And so that's definitely
been a focus as the Cabinet
secretary mentioned. Um, since
we've created that unit, we've
run operations in Socorro. Um,
for a couple of months. We've
run operations in Clovis.
Currently running Operation
Santa Fe and we, uh, have a
itinerary of
Locations that will be running
operations focused operations in
throughout the state.
Uh, thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you for that answer. I can
I can give, you know testimony
as far as me being a public
school employee.
The support that state police
has given us in the loss of the
school district.
It's busy as they are with that
10 person pours. They attend
their monthly meetings in any
given time.
We have extra support to our
school, So I know that the you
guys are spread very thin. I
know that there are efforts to
get more and retain more, but I
do appreciate as a parent is a
community community member as a
legislator, the work that you
guys do. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you very much. Represent
bucket Represent Chatfield,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you all for what you do
every day. We appreciate it.
It's it's a tough job, and you
all do it well.
You mentioned several times your
fleet.
So my question to you is, you
know
Would you rather than 100 and 30
Miles an hour after after the
bad guys, you kind of want to
know that that car
Underneath you as mechanically
sound at the tires are not bald
and everything works right. It's
better for it's safer for you
and in everybody that's around
you.
Ah, so
Where do you sit there far as
your
Mr Chair. Members of Committee
representative Chatfield. Thank
you for asking the so obviously
with state police. I mean, most
of our officers, their their
office. Is there. Is there a
unit so it's a very important
piece of equipment. As you
mentioned, Um
So one of our maintenance issues
concerns for this. The current
budget right here. Um, is that
lack of funding, so we have a
certain amount of baseline
funding every year 3.6 million
that we have in our baseline
budget, But we're very
dependent upon supplemental
funding. Ah.
In order to maintain our fleet.
I mean, 3.6 million. Obviously,
it sounds like a lot that
doesn't even pay our gasoline
bill for the year. Um, and so,
um, I mean without that funding
would be about a 70% reduction
from the last couple of years on
Fleet. Um, as a Cabinet
secretary mentioned before, Uh,
The longer if we don't replace
vehicles, the mileage starts
creeping up. We started having
higher maintenance costs one of
the things that we are currently
doing is we are rolling out of
Fleet Wide telematics system so
that we can be more efficient
with our fleet monitors. All
everything that's going on with
our units. One thing, um that we
just recently finished our pilot
program with that, and now we're
rolling it out statewide.
But one thing that we noticed,
for example is, um, so we have
several hybrid Ford Explorer
units that we have, um
In our fleet. We have a handful
of them want to do an analysis
to see what kind of fuel savings
you might get on that Because
we've had this issue the last
several years, um of having to
move some money because we have
a shortfall due to cost overruns
for fuel. Um, as part of that
study, you know, we've realized,
uh, a substantial amount of
savings that we could make by
switching, Um, part of our fleet
to that, So that is something
that we're looking to do.
To implement in future years.
Um, obviously, uh, electric
vehicles currently aren't viable
for the
Police force here in New Mexico.
Um but, uh
With the research we have. We
would like to move for cost
savings measures and other
reasons we could start updating
some of our fleet, but we
obviously would need additional
funds to make that to make that
happen. And just
We have a fleet about 1000
vehicles, so
It takes a substantial amount of
money just to keep that up and
running every year, Sir, Mr
Chair. Did I hear you say 70%
reduction.
So I believe yes, Mr. Chair,
Representative Chatfield. So as
currently on the LFC side, I
think we just have the baseline,
which is the 3.6 Million, so the
last two years in addition to
that we've had either a 9
million
One year and 7 million the other
year. Um so we we
This issue comes up many years
has come up many times, before.
Uh
Fleet. You would think
Probably makes the most sense
that it's in baseline budget
because it's a recurring cost
are recurring cost.
It's probably about 10 million a
year for fleet. Um, there's
usually a discussion about it.
I've been involved in it several
years. But that's a big bump to
baseline, so usually it doesn't
get increased in our operating
budget, and it ends up getting
filled out of special or out of
capital. Um
But I mean, honestly, I mean,
that's operating is probably
where realistically should be
just because it is an ongoing
cost that happens every year.
Thank you,
Mr Chair.
Where else in this budget
Is the most important thing to
you. That will help you to do
your job. Better that we're
missing. Is there anything we're
missing here?
Right, Mr Chair representative
shot field, so I'll speak
briefly on the state police side
and then I will turn it over the
Cabinet secretary for any thing
he wants to mention on the other
side of DPS. Um, as it relates
to state police say we've
already touched on the vehicles.
I think the other area um
Obviously, we're in favor of the
executives recommendation
underpaid, But if that's AH,
Turns out not to be possible. I
think what would be very, uh,
But I would ask that the
committee would take a second
examination of is
One. The longevity pay, um, that
the Cabinet secretary has
mentioned.
Um, we have a fairly senior
department right now.
Um and so, retaining
individuals I think is
critically important to get us
through this next couple of
years. Is that we as we bring
more people in the front door.
We need to slow down how many
were losing out the back door. I
think that would be very
beneficial to that for and it
also does not.
It's an improvement internally,
but it does not adversely affect
any other agencies, which I know
has been a concern that's been
brought up in this committee.
previously, um in addition to
that, I would also point to the
funding for the step increases.
You know, that's not changing an
hourly rates. Uh
Of our individuals. That's just
allowing our personnel to move
up to the next step in the pay
plan, which they've met the
requirements for, um, but just
due to the way the paper on is
structured that has to get
funded every year for us to be
able to do that. So that would
be just basically taking care of
our current personnel. Um, so
those two things, uh
In combination with the 4% that
you currently have on the across
the board, I think would be
would be beneficial. I'll turn
over the Cabinet secretary, see
if there's anything else he
wants to add to that Mr. Chair,
representative Chatfield? Yes,
the only I would add. As I
mentioned at the beginning. My
job as a secretary is to
advocate for the entire
organization and, uh and I would
like to make sure that the the R
I T.
Information technologies has
that same support Law
enforcement breakfast bureau in
our labs. They do a tremendous
job really servicing the state
of New Mexico. For all those
needs, you know, daily. We see
enforcement officers from across
state come up to DPS for the
services that they need through.
Our laboratories are always you
know, we're processing all the
evidence, making sure that we
have a turnaround quickly as an
example on those things that
impact
Crime and violent crime if we're
not processing the evidence at
the rate that we should be,
naturally, there's people out
there still reoffending and we
want to help them obviously have
success with the closure of
their cases and then get it
through the adjudication
process. So the labs is very
instrumental there again. I T is
a space where we simply cannot
fail if we come up short with
information technologies, an
officer out there in the field
is not going to get the
information.
That they need and expect and
again our law enforcement
records Bureau. Um, as you can
see by by the graph that I
provided here, there's a
tremendous amount of service
being provided right there
within within law enforcement
records, and so I would have
continued. Always advocate for
them. Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Mr Secretary and captain.
Thank you very much for
presuming Chatfield. Next. We're
gonna go to represent Montoya,
please. Then we'll have
representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and Mr
Secretary.
Once again, uh
I don't think you find many
people on this, Uh
Committee that are not very,
very supportive of law
enforcement in particular. Uh,
safety is
Of our
Of our constituents is
paramount.
Um
Based on that I I do need to
bring up
Concerns about the pay package.
Um, looking at that. That's
that's us fairly.
Substantial increase. That's in
the governor's request.
Uh, that's over $5 an hour.
That's that is substantial.
Um and just looking at it,
you'll be going essentially from
It's just hard talking rounded
numbers.
Versus a P D and the burn Leo
County Sheriff's Department
would be going from roughly $2.5
less in pay than what they're
making to roughly $2.5.
More in pay than what they're
making.
Um
Has been mentioned many times in
this committee and other
committees.
Um
Uh, a lot of times we in state
government.
Find ourselves having to
Compete with Albuquerque, and we
just can't do that. When when?
When we wouldn't when the focus
is always Albuquerque.
It leaves off a whole lot of
other information, which is
comparison to other communities
and a lot of times in in
Our efforts to to maybe repair
or fix the problem that
We're experiencing with the
Metro area.
It.
It doesn't take into account
what it will do to the other.
Communities in the state.
And so
Several members on this
committee expressed
Uh, on the first day some real
questions about this pay
package to the M D. F a
secretary.
Um
And, uh,
It's just a concern. The
Um, in my previous life, Mr
Secretary, and Mr Chairman, um
I
Was a union steward for coal
mine that I worked at for.
So I'm recovering union thug.
You might appreciate that.
Um, but
Out. One year I was on the
negotiating team and I came up
with
Uh huh.
Very effective.
Line to get an increase. Um, are
Are the company that we worked
for, had split the two
Coal mines into two different
Ah!
Agreements to different union
agreements, so there were two
different compensation packages.
And literally what we started
doing with the other union.
Was
We negotiate for a higher rate.
Negotiate for higher rate and it
created this arms race.
Was unsustainable.
Uh, to do that?
And
In New Mexico there further
consequences and then by the
way, we we we were able to do
this is we were stealing the
same employees.
From one under one union
contract to switch over and to
be under another union contract.
It didn't never it never really
harmed the
The retirement plans.
Because they just like we have a
new Mexico. It was one plan. So
we have the Para plan here and
And law enforcement across, gets
to participate in that so
I really just cannot support
The increase, not because I
don't believe that that we need
to
To see how we compensate better
and it's a hard job.
Um
But
I'm afraid of the damage it will
do.
To those other communities
because what we'll start
happening
With this, this 14% increase.
Approximately two
To to better pay and benefits.
The other communities just can't
match that. Maybe lost. Cruces
could
I don't see how farming can do
it. And I know that the
sheriff's office in San Juan
County can't do it. That's a
large that's a large
Department.
So, um
I would rather see something
that you met that That's that's
actually the chief mentioned
which I agree with.
I'm much more sympathetic to
seeing this money goes towards
longevity, Pay something to
longevity Pay.
And to try and retain our our
folks, so they don't
Maybe leave and go to a p D.
Or earlier county sheriff's
office and just have them stay.
I think longevity pay, I think
is an easier ask
Um, but I think the best ask
would be if we
When they when the governor and
your office pursue a budget.
That we look statewide.
Um, that's kind of what we did
with the recruiting.
Plan with the retention plan was
to look statewide.
So
I know there's a number of folks
who we've had this conversation
among ourselves. This is just
the arms race. We can't get into
Because it will just stair step.
And
I would rather find a way I
believe, Mr Chair.
I would love to see us Go and
allow some of
The concern has been with Pere
that we don't want to have
people w double dipping.
But the reality is we have a lot
of law enforcement folks who
have stayed in New Mexico who
would
Who would love to go back to
work or continue working.
I would love for us to find a
way to fix that problem.
I think that's really the
gorilla in the room and we're
fighting against ourselves
because our
Are
Retirement funds have been
stressed. I think we need to fix
our retirement funds and
And if we're to put extra money
anywhere, I think retirement
funds as a place to do that,
plus require
Uh, something more maybe from
the employees who are going to
benefit from that.
But
Um
I I just once again I would love
to give love to be able to vote
for this increase. Understand?
I really with all of my
considerations, and I am a local
elected official who represents
a local populace.
I can't in good conscience. Do
this. The local guys, Mr Chair.
Are the guys who deal
With crime and in areas where
where they don't have that local
Participation in it, and we end
state police are having to fill
that role or local police
officers should be involved.
The response time is just not
what we can get with the local
police force.
So, um
I appreciate your predicament.
I'm sympathetic.
But I can't do harm to my local
community. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much Represent
Montoya. Next, we'll go to
represent Garrett and represent
Herndon.
Thank you. Um, Mr Chair. Thank
you so much for being here
today. Some of my questions are
from representatives Narayana,
who had to step out for meeting.
My first question is
From the last session to this
session. What
Did you do differently?
Get budgeting that you feel
really made improvements or a
difference for our state.
Ms Gerald turnover, the chief
for a state police changes We
touched on briefly regarding
change that we made within the
state police in order to handle
crime suppression and so chief
of your mind.
Uh, Mr Chairman of the
Committee, representative
Garrett. Thank you for the
question. Um, so I think state
police has moved forward in a
lot of areas. Um, over this past
year, um, in various areas of
enforcement, Um
2022 to 2023. We had a 25%
increase in citations. 25%
increase in D W i. R s 13%
increase in overall arrests. Um,
we've also been asked to do a
lot more when it comes to major
crime. We handled 47% more
homicides as the primary
responding agency this past
year.
Um, but but aside from just the
enforcement part, you know what
we've tried to make strides in
many other areas as well. We've
done a lot in the community
engagement area The last few
years, um over 250% increase in
the number of community
engagement events that we did
this past year, um, and training
the Legislature funded for all
state police officers. We said
that we would get everybody, uh,
advanced crisis intervention
training.
Um, by this By the end of this
upcoming June, we currently have
88% of the department's been to
that training. Well, should have
the entire department done here
in the next month or two. So a
couple of months months before
the
Legislative deadline that we had
on that.
Um, so overall, I think we have
a lot of things moving in the
right direction, ma'am.
Thank you. My next question is
how many laterals to the state
Police get from other agencies
within the state. Do we have
those numbers?
Ah, Mr Chair, Representative
Garrett. Um
So in 2023 state police we had
eight lateral officers from
other agencies, so we did. We
did have some, um I mean,
Yeah, it's not a significant
number of in 650 officers. Uh,
But yes, Yes, We did have eight
in this past year.
Thank you. My next question. I
want to thank um
The deputy chief, Caroline, Uh,
I don't know if I'm saying this
right When, when? Thank you. Um,
I want to thank the department
for getting the federal funds to
do the red flag or purple study,
And, um, we do have amendments
that we're making, deputy chief
and we're waiting for the report
because we want to make sure
that the amendments incorporate
the feedback from law
enforcement And for those
interested, the herbal
amendments are coming from law
enforcement throughout the
state, So we're looking forward
to that report.
Uh, my next question is, there's
really a new definition of
fleet. So we've been talking
about cars, but it seems like,
um drones are becoming involved.
What's the price of the kind of
drone you need for forensics?
And and, you know,
Whatever you do with the drone
versus a car patrol car, Uh, Mr
Chair, Representative, Garrett.
Um, so the boss of a patrol car,
but fully outfitted Mark Unit
right now, after, uh
Pretty good jumping, uh,
inflation and everything in 2022
is about $85,000. About half of
that is the vehicle and about
half of that is equipment body
camera computer well saw a list
of on the slide earlier. Um,
when it comes to drones, I don't
have the exact number, but I do
know it's going to be in the
ballpark dependent on what
particular drone
What particular type of
equipment that has on it because
we have drones that do like us
can still do all the scanning
for
Scene reconstruction, So that
adds to the cost, But I would
say between 10 and 25 to
$30,000.
Thank you. And then my final
question is, um
It's not so much a question is,
but the importance of
Fully equipping fully, um,
having the FTS for forensic
labs.
Because with three labs serving
what is it 300 agencies? It's
vital, uh, that we fully fund
the needs of those forensic
labs. So
Just any comment and thank you
for
Signifying it. But any comment
on that
Mr. Chair representative.
Absolutely. You know, we have a
backlog, obviously, in cases
that we prefer not to have
naturally when we take in cases,
there's times when the lab
director has to make decisions,
which cases get priority, and I
don't want a victim ever to have
their case prioritized right At
the end of the day, I would hope
that we became we could be
contemporary and in assessing
evidence, the moment it comes in
The reality is, is that things
get prioritized by the probably
the violence of the crime. If I
had to speculate I don't want to
speak for her. Um and so you
know, it's a space you want to
get away from. We have a
tremendous obligation to the
state of New Mexico to make sure
that all of forensic evidence is
processed so that victims of
crime can have timely results
are actually particularly the
agency can have time in the
results so they can make
progress.
And so with a brand new
laboratory, we hope to provide
an expansion of services across
state of New Mexico. It's a
beautiful facility. We need the
people to do that. And so part
of we we have employed as well
as a course of salary study to
make sure that we can employ,
uh scientists and and again.
Currently we're just much like
policing. We're almost a
training ground. We bring people
in. We train them they go. You
know other places in order to
get better compensation and we
hope to turn that around. We
hope that New Mexico can be on
the forefront of advancements
within the forensics laboratory
and making sure that we can
provide the services for New
Mexico that we deserve.
Thank you very much. Thank you
very much Represent Garrett.
Next five Represent Herndon,
then rep said, Well,
we'll cut represent ahead and
Well, thank you, Mr Chair, and
thank you, presenters. I am
looking at the different sheet
and there was a request for for
additional
FTE for the organization, and it
looks like that only two we're
going. We're author were
May be authorized.
Under
A recognition or between the
Executive in the LFC. My
question, Mr Chair, and Mr
Secretary. What were the
positions that you were trying
to feel?
Mr Chair. I'm gonna get
clarification. Which page you're
looking at. Representing looking
at page one of the different
seats.
Do you have it?
Um, Madam Chair representative.
Heard. Are you looking at the
DPS high level? I'm looking at a
Yeah, the difference. Work ship
sheet Page one department line
floor. Sorry, uh, FTE positions.
Sorry. Give me one second.
Okay?
I'm looking here.
And it was a reader.
Alright, madam. Sure,
Representative Herndon. Thank
you for the question again.
Sorry for the confusion there.
Essentially, it was a difference
If we look at how some of in the
law enforcement program
specifically there were four FTS
that we're just miscellaneous
adjustments. Um, again, that's
usually the elimination of term
positions.
When we look at the overall FTE
differences between the two
wrecks, it looks like we come
out on the lfc side with a net
of about eight to positions and
in the exact wreck, there's a
net of about nine new F D E.
Such a difference overall in the
role of the one position.
Yeah, A madam madam Chair of
Mr Analysts. I'm just trying to
understand, And there's a
reduction in one request for an
FTE position. Is that correct?
Madam chairman, representative,
the FTS work.
A line based on what the request
worker expansion. So, for
example, the
Executive recommendation
provides additional funding and
no new FTE for the forensics
lab. Right. Um, that represents
within that one program a
difference of about 11 FTE
because the LFC expands those
positions.
If we look into the program
support
LSC funds one new FTE for the
Law Enforcement Protection fund.
The executive recommendation
funds for new positions So when
we look at the overall net for
the entire program, there's
there's an addition of about
nine new FT under the LFC wreck
and about 10 under the executive
right.
Does that answer. Thank you, Mr
Adolescent. Thank you, Madam
Chair as I listened to the as I
listened to the conversation
today I am very concerned about
workforce and one of the things
as I look at is I look at the
Presentation made by the
secretary looks like that there
would be
Maybe an 85% feel rate.
Of those that were needed in the
law enforcement academy. And if
we look at that, that number
compared to what I heard, and in
an earlier testimony about that
there will be a loss of
individuals because they were
reaching seniority level. My
question then is how many
individuals are nearing.
Senior retirement. And what is
that going to do with respect to
our workforce?
Uh, chair members of the
committee representative Herndon
Appreciate you bringing that up.
Um, so specifically, uh, I think
we have a couple of different
things there. One you mentioned
the L E Academy. Um
Uh, fill rate and I think that
we are in pretty good shape
there, but specifically as it
relates to the overall workforce
for state police
Um, we are a fairly
Senior agency. Um right now, we
over the last two or three
years, basically, uh, the number
of individuals who are eligible
to retire at any given time or
that we have eligible retire
right now, as has doubled, Um,
so that's one of the reasons
that you've seen The longevity
pay plan mentioned several times
today is because we're very
concerned about being able to
retain all those senior
individuals.
Because that's that's put us in
a somewhat susceptible or
vulnerable position. If all of a
sudden everybody decided to
retire tomorrow that was
eligible, um and so we wanna do
everything that we can to help
incentivize them to, uh,
continue working for a few more
years.
At least
I hope that answers your
question, Ma'am. Thank you very
much. Yes. And and Madam chair.
And thank you, presenters. I
That is a concern. So the the
the fact that you are requesting
a pay increase for longevity to
maybe keep people on the
On the team a lot longer, so
that those who may be
considering retirement because
they reach senior age won't that
would be really important in the
step placement is also it sounds
like it's incredibly important,
so we need to emphasize that we
want to make sure that you have
the workforce that you need and
considering the possibility of
retirement the way we can keep
people.
Is to hopefully giving give them
competitive raises and wages and
Mr Chair and madam and, uh
Mr Secretary.
Of the last time we met one of
the items that was brought up,
was looking at the information
that you presented on page 14.
And with respect to that, you
talked about a disposition unit,
one of which was the missing,
murdered indigenous women and
relatives that are listed there
and my question to you is it
was, it's still unclear to me.
What the what the state police
are doing with respect to that
group of individuals. Are you
helping to find the ones that
are missing? Are you working
with the Attorney General's
office in the helping with the
position that they should be
creating? And maybe you could
explain that Mr Chair and Mr
Secretary
Hmm. Mr Chair Representative.
I'll answer part of that
alternative for the state
police. But, um, we were
involved with all missing
persons. Naturally, the moment a
missing person is reported in
the community. It's our
responsibility to God not only
take the field report and make
sure that persons entered into
the national database to make
sure that if any other law
enforcement officer comes into
contact with said person that is
missing that we are aware that
this person has been reported
missing out of out of any
community so
There's engagement by the
domestic state police. Almost
immediately of the moment it's
reports us if the information
was reported, initially to say,
a municipality or a county that
information will be available to
us as well. So statewide law
enforcement's responsibility and
responds to that is is to make
sure that we gather all the
It's during that time that a
person goes missing to
potentially even processes scene
and then from there really start
building a case and determine
under what circumstances a
person that's missing. So law
enforcement in general that that
would be their response in the
Mexican state police is no
different. As you know, things
get reported to them, so I'll
turn over the chief a little bit
as far as any initiatives
specific to them. I am I P
Mr Chair, representative Herndon
so under state police side
because there's a couple
different parts of this. There's
one part that's uh, in the law
enforcement Records Bureau
related to this. Um and there's
recently I think, in some
changes in exactly how some of
this is going to be tackled,
but, uh
On the on the law enforcement
side. State police is involved
in the monthly meeting of the
task force. Um a lot of the
issues that are involved with
the missing murdered. Uh,
indigenous, uh, women's, uh,
Missing persons Task force is,
um there's a lot of agencies
involved.
When you have all the tribal
entities and so communication is
a big issue. And so that's been
one of the focuses of the last
several years, is trying to get
better communication between all
the agencies so we can help
identify where the problem is.
but we're regular member of that
task force. There's like, say it
depends a lot on the particular
case of which agencies are
primary in it.
Um, but state police tries to be
the facilitator and GPS on the
other side tries to be the
facilitator as much as possible
for communication and
coordination. Um so that we can
bring resolution, uh to some of
those cases.
Look. Thank you very much. Thank
you, Mr Terry. It really is
important. This is a major issue
in the Indian Affairs
Department, also with respect to
creating the position to look
into the number of missing
murdered indigenous women and
relatives that are not found
that position being created at
the attorney general's office.
We're still waiting on how that
is rolling out. But then it is
quite impressive to see that the
state Law enforcement Department
of Safety is also
Ah!
Being a part of that group that
is working in collaboration to
try to help find answers to
those questions. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you. Thank you very
much for episode. Herndon. Uh,
we're going to go to represent
Brown, Please. Thank you. Mr
Chair. I'll try to be really
quick. Um, I'd like to go to
page 40 or Excuse me. Page 12 of
these.
This has to do with information
technology division.
So, Mr Chair a couple of
questions for the secretary, Um
So I believe I heard you say
that, um
Well, First of all, you were
asking for $7 million for the
purchase of Fleet vehicles.
And I believe I just heard Mr
Chair that the average cost of
one of those vehicles is
$85,000, which includes the
equipment that would be on
board.
And on this slide, Mr Chair. I
think it's really stark that in
20 in the year 2000
Uh, basically, each patrol car
had an officer, paper ticket
book and a rating like that. But
here we are in, uh, 2023 and I
look at the list of all of the
equipment and it's It's pretty
amazing.
What all is there and I won't
take time to read all of it. But
It's very high tech. It's of
course very expensive and I
don't know by the time you add
all that to a vehicle, how you
have it.
But so it goes, Um so I did a
little calculation. Mr. Chair
for $7 Million, with each
vehicle costing about $85,000.
You could get 82 patrol cars out
of that. So, Mr Chair, Mr
Secretary. Is that about right?
Um not all vehicles perhaps will
be identically equipped.
But is that a good ballpark? 82
more vehicles?
Um, Mr Chair representative. I
believe that's a good ballpark.
Not every vehicle gets equipped
exactly the same again. The
chief of Britain, you know,
giving a ballpark figure would
it take to up fitting I see a
marked unit that everybody
drives in March units, some
people drive on more cars have
less equipment in them. And so
sometimes we can't stretch the
dollar little further. It really
kind of depends on again.
Mileage of the vehicles are
replacement schedule and cycle
of every year and our fleet
managers make a decision on that
to see where the vehicles are at
and its service life and
determine the best value in the
The most amount of vehicles that
we can get for that particular
fiscal year in order to replace
those vehicles that are regular
regular replacement, But
Again. This is an example of a
marked patrol vehicle. Not every
vehicle would have this.
initially have people with
investigations. Bureaus are
different needs within Mexico
State police We have people
within bomb squads, or e, o, d
or tactical. They have different
needs within their vehicles, but
in general terms speaking, Yes,
you're correct. That's a that's
a pretty round, good figure.
Mr Chairman and Mr Secretary.
How are these vehicles used by
the state Police ensured self
insured. I didn't think about it
for a minute. But risk
management. Yes, ma'am. Mr. Mr
Chair, Mr. I didn't quite hear
what you said. But, um, is this
operating cost? I assume of
ensuring vehicles included in
the 7 Million representative Mr
Chair. No, it's not.
Okay, So the next question that
is Mr Chair. Mr. Secretary.
Whoever wants to answer
Where in your budget, Mr. Chair
representative. I'm getting at
the table that the GSD, uh,
handles that portion is that
correct?
Through risk management. Okay,
Very good DPS budget, Okay. And
then just kind of a sub
question, Mr Chair.
Um you have the vehicle insured
is the cost of all the
technology and the vehicle
included in that coverage. Yes,
I would assume Mr. Chair
Representative. Yes, it is. I
mean, when we have a loss or a
total loss on a vehicle we
typically do get part of that.
And then a follow up question,
Mr Chair. How often do you lose
a vehicle to a crash?
One of the state police, Mr
Chair, Uh, Representative Brown.
Um, so one just follow up on the
earlier part.
So we have a $2000 deductible
when we have a crash, so we pay
our risk premium every year and
then for any crash.
We pay up to 2000 and then after
that risk management covers the
rest. Um
Any particular
Uh, time. I mean,
As far as total replacement of
vehicle I probably would have
had probably to get back to you
on that, because there's a lot
of variation. I mean, obviously,
any time we have any sort of
little fender bender or they hit
a, uh, a mile marker on the
interstate or or anything like
it gets reported technically as
a fleet, so the number of fleets
is, uh, not really indicative of
the number of total vehicles.
I want to say well.
I can get you get you exact
numbers and get those to you. If
you prefer, I won't put you
through that work, Mr Chair, but
I'm just curious to know how how
you cover these things.
Um, Mr Chair when you if you
were to get the $7 million and
you added vehicles to the fleet,
would that be some in some out?
You're going to retire vehicle
so you're going to have a net
game.
Uh, Mr Chair, Representative
Brown? No, we have a
replacement. Uh, cycle that all
the vehicles are on. Um,
especially on the on the
uniforms side because one of the
things we do monitor as for
specific types of vehicles.
Specific types of mileage is we
know when the maintenance costs
start to drastically increase,
so we try to meet those for
retirement.
The mileage is, for example, we
used to replace vehicles um 115
to 125,000 miles. Uh, there was
a couple of years that our fleet
funding was lower so that
mileage crept up to the 145 to
150 range. Uh And so that's kind
of in the ballpark where we're
at right now. Um and so
So yes, the the answer Your
question, though, yes as
vehicles come in. Other vehicles
are going out. We're not. We're
not stockpiling or anything. No,
ma'am, we have an auction once a
year.
Uh, they get rid of vehicles,
usually in the fall. Mr Chair. I
said I was going to be quick.
but I do have one question for
LFC analyst.
Um, so this is a special request
from the department and Lfc did
not include any money for it.
Could you give us the rationale
for that?
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair,
Representative, Brown. Um,
Ultimately, the original ask was
part of the capital framework
did not speak up Just
originally. The $7 million ask
was part of the capital Ask it
was not included in the special
appropriations whenever we went
through and kind of did this
specials, and when LFC approved
this
Uh,
Budget, including the special
appropriations It was not
showing up in the system is
something that was being
requested so because it didn't
make it into the executive
budgets, capital Framework As
of, you know, a week and a half
ago. Then it popped up as a
special appropriation that we
could see in the system. Um, so
I guess to answer your question
Brief. We didn't know it was
being asked for
Okay, so
Mr Chair, sir. Is lfc amenable
to adding this $7 million as a
special
Mr. Chair, Representative Brown.
Thank you for the question.
Ultimately, this committee can
make any changes they would like
to the LSC recommendations.
Okay, just to clarify that.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I think
this is a very important request
that we honor it. Thank you.
Thank you very much represented
from we're gonna go to represent
Vice Chair. Dixon. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Um, thank you to our analysts
and Secretary um and chief
appreciate the presentation. I
will try to make sure that my
questions don't overlap too much
with anything previous and I'll
try to keep my self succinct and
hope that you can have quick
answers as well.
Um, with regard to neighbors,
Um, our LFC reports show that as
of September 2023 74% of the
States 130 law enforcement
agencies were reporting to the
system and that covered about
86% of the population. My
question is, why does it matter?
What? How many of our agencies
are reporting to neighbors. Mr.
represented Dickson probably
turn it over to my technical
support division director
I'm the first woman.
Oh, sorry.
Chairman. Um
Representatives. So the primary
responsibility of that is
That data will
Better inform you in policy
decisions about where money
should be placed in the state of
New Mexico and that law
enforcement agencies
Thank you, Mr Chair and deputy.
Um does the neighbors
information also informed the
FBI and other law enforcement
agencies on crime statistics in
New Mexico. That data is
directly reported Mr Chair.
Representative. That data is
reported directly to the FBI.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
So it is very important that we
have our local law enforcement
agencies.
Reporting that data is that
correct?
Mr Chair, Representative. Yes,
that is true. Excellent. Just
wanted to flag that next. Um,
question relates to federal
equitable sharing. Um and Mr
Secretary, I'm wondering, Um, if
you by chance, have a rough
estimate of how much money the
state police and Department of
public safety has missed out on.
Um, buying New Mexico not being
able to receive its fair share
through the federal equitable
Sharing program. Alternative
over Mr Chair. Madam Vice Gerald
turned it over to the chief and
just second, but I can tell you
that as it's it's a tremendous
impact. There's a tremendous
amount of work being done by law
enforcement agencies,
particularly domestic state
police, obviously, uh, making
sure that investigative
resources are spent.
Making sure that people are held
accountable for the trafficking
of narcotics and that kind of
thing, and it certainly would be
very helpful to see. Uh
Some of those funds come back
for the efforts that are
expended all of the chief
grinding spindle nut.
Uh, Mr Chair, Vice chair, Dixon.
Um So I want to say it was 2015.
I think that equitable sharing
went away. But prior to that
state police, on average, any
given year would receive 2 to
2.5 million. So I mean inflation
and all but nine years at that.
I don't know 20 to 25 million,
probably in funding.
For state police.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Chief. If I remember correctly
from the research I did last
year this state itself had
missed out on over $43 million,
And so the reason that I asked,
that is when we have a $7
million special appropriation
request for new Fleet vehicles.
Um, you know, there's the state
has done itself a disservice.
Um, by not, um, taking funds
that it
Has been a part of, um and so
I just wanted to make sure that
my fellow committee members were
aware of that little hiccup that
we have in the law, and I know
that the secretary has been
supportive of efforts to amend
the law and so
Certainly appreciate the
highlight in your time today.
Thank you.
Okay. Thank you. Committee
members. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary. Thank you for your
team. Couple of quick questions,
Mr Secretary and cannabis
enforcement and sort of is there
How can we expand DPS role given
sort of the sort of across the
state nature of some of the
cannabis industry?
Uh, how could we expand that
role, Mr Secretary?
Mr Chair. I think the first
thing really would be to look at
legislation to really put teeth
back into the legislation.
There's really not a lot within
the law. Currently that allows
us to take certain amount of
enforcement, a lot of his
regulatory and not necessarily
criminal any longer. And so, um,
you know, there's like a present
example for trafficking illegal
marijuana cannabis.
There's really no difference
between amounted to stick into a
backpack where they melted ice
sticking to U Haul truck and and
so you know, you're looking at
petty misdemeanor offenses or,
in some cases, noncriminal
offenses and so in order for us
to be able to take law
enforcement action on it, it
would need to have some some
teeth. Um
Particularly as well. We start
talking about illegal grows and
that kind of thing, it becomes
very cumbersome for us, and it's
very difficult for us to even
sees that if you have a large,
illegal grow, and there's not a
lot of, uh again teeth into the
law, and if we had to seize,
rather as you know if we went
out supporting a different
agency to take care of an
illegal growth, what do we do
with it all? Where do we put it
for the misdemeanor charge that
it is, if it's even that
And so I can love the chief
expand further on that, but I
think that's probably the
biggest the biggest issue there
is putting more teeth into the
regulatory piece.
Okay. Thank you for that, Mr
Secretary. I appreciate the
answer my sense and maybe this
is more on the regulation and
licensing division. There are
clear requirements that are out
there. And if folks are in, um,
sort of not operating within
those requirements, perhaps
that's not as much as state
police issue but there
There are clear requirements if
folks are outside of those
requirements, we have to enforce
the requirements. So, um
Something I'd like to maybe look
into offline with you. Um, Mr
Secretary. I think a number of
great questions have been asked.
It seems like a couple of items
have been really outlined one
around the special
appropriation. Uh, to
understanding what if any, sort
of work on the pay side
understand, knowing that a great
deal of work has already been
done, But you're bringing to us
today, important additional work
that needs to continue.
I'd ask the analyst along with
you in the D F a to sort of try
to hone in taking into account
some of the committee concerns,
particularly around local and
regional law enforcement, and
that sort of the
Step would ask you all to sort
of go back to and we can work
offline to look at increased
investments in a few of these
key areas, understanding the
committee constraints that
exist.
With that I would ask for the
vice chair to make. Thank you,
Mr Chair. I move that the house
appropriations adopt the LFC
recommendation.
Okay. Okay. It's been moved and
seconded. Mr. Secretary. We
expect further work and
increased investments building
on this committee's years in the
legislatures. Is there any
objection to that motion?
Seeing none. We've adopted that.
Thank you all. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Absolutely want to
briefly go. Is there any public
comment on this morning's
meetings?
Now we're sort of moving
quickly. I see no public
comments, so we'll move forward.
We're going to break for lunch.
We're going to kick off this
afternoon Subcommittees
