New Mexico office spreadsheet
here and go section by section
with a high level highlights and
then we'll just go back and
forth.
Alright so just a brief one on
one on reading this table if you
look at lines one through twenty
six those are added from top to
bottom you'll see the base
amount online to that's the
prior year operating budget and
then all these items below and
are added to that base number to
get you to the state
equalization guarantee I do want
to start by saying the above
recommendations as was mentioned
earlier are only about a
difference of one million
dollars of recommendations sort
of increase the overall budget
recurring for public schools by
about twelve percent and just to
give you some highlights on the
LFC recommendation which is that
far right column on might eight
there's a recommendation from
the LFC to authorize PED to
increase the at risk index two
point three to four supplemental
at risk services online twelve
you'll see that back feeling
fifty one million for the
extended learning time program
to replace what was nonrecurring
revenue in the last operating
budget.
Line thirteen is size adjustment
factors for those small
districts that are trying to
find extended learning time
programs.
Line seventeen eighteen nineteen
and twenty are sort of your
compensation recommendations
all together about two hundred
twenty five million to one
increase staff salaries for
schools by three percent
beginning this fiscal year and
then another four percent
starting in FY twenty three so
the total seven percent and
following that on line eighteen
that's an increase in the tier
minimum salary levels to forty
eight and a half fifty seven and
a half sixty seven and a half
for level one two and three
thousand and it also includes
the cost of increasing principle
salaries accordingly to their
responsibility factor.
Hi line twenty one.
That's the increase to the in
the E. R. B. contribution for
the employers side there's the
scheduled one percent increase
for this fiscal year this adds
an additional one percent off
that scheduled so all together
two percent which is contingent
on legislation and then the last
big item I want to highlight is
of course line number twenty
three which is the insurance
line that's a increase of six
percent for the health care
premium side and the language in
the LFC recognition caps it at
six percent so that it won't
exceed that and I'll turn it
over to this Martinez to talk
about the executive
recommendation.
Thank you Sonny good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee so far the executive
recommendation does total three
point eight eight eight billion
and this includes more than four
hundred million in general fund
spending and a hundred million
from the public education reform
Fund so this is the total budget
but in way of looking at those
lines that Sonny just went over
one through about twenty six I
just highlight a few items that
are in the executive
recommendation and so in total
the executive recommendation
provides for three hundred and
one million in compensation
increases and so with that on
the first one you'll see line
eighteen that's two hundred
million for minimum teacher
salary increases for licensure
levels one two and three in
those level shipped up to fifty
sixty and seventy thousand
respectively.
The next item is on line
seventeen for seventy six point
nine million and that provides
for competitive salaries for all
school personnel that's a seven
percent increase.
The next one which funny just
addressed is on line twenty
three and that's twenty one
point seven million for
insurance increases now this is
closer based to those rates that
Nipsey Act adopted and so this
is closer to that were as the
LFC has about twelve million
which caps it at a six percent
increase that's not would never
see a doctor they they adopted
higher rates so this is closer
to that.
the next which is just a little
bit further below but it's part
of this compensation package is
a seven percent increase for
transportation employees at a
cost of two point eight million
and then lastly on line one oh
five which is a different part
of the packet but it's yet
references line twelve which is
continuing to keep that extended
learning time funded but to the
public education reform Fund so
that basically keeps a flat to
the director and with that I'll
turn it back over this tiny.
So madam chair moving on to
categorical appropriation that's
lines thirty five through fifty
two at just two big items line
forty three is your subtotal for
transportation the LFC
recommendation is one hundred
sixteen million from the general
fund that also includes three
million dollars from the public
education reform Fund for K.
five plus transportation so
overall bringing the total to
about one hundred nineteen
million for FY twenty three
online forty seven there's a ten
million and ten million dollar
increase in the Indian education
fund as a Mr Slee alluded to
earlier this is a increase in
distributions to help tribal
education departments libraries
native language programs stand
up some of their operational
costs and then I'll turn it over
Cindy describe the executive
press yes thank you madam chair
so
from eight thirty six to forty
two that's the transportation
spending you'll see that the
executive recommendation is a
hundred and nineteen million.
In general there's a twelve
million dollar each increase
compared to current year and
that in in general fund and
that's supports increased costs
to maintenance operation fuel
and of course supports those
services for K. five plus an
extended learning so those
transportation services as well.
Moving on next to lines forty
four through fifty one which are
supplemental supports couple
items I'd like to call your
attention to line forty seven
you'll see there's nine point
seven million it which is an
increase of four and a half
million to the Indian education
fund so this is important
because the funding to maintain
the current standard
distribution in addition to a
per student distribution so
there's increased funding in
their online forty eight there's
ten point two million for the
native American student
education this funding will
expand and enhance the program
such is indigenous language
initiatives native language
database support and grow your
own indigenous language teacher
pipeline.
also online forty nine four
million dollars for the black
Education Act.
And this funding will provide
important top quality constraint
quality training innovative
friends and local professional
development this also supports
compliance with the H. B. twenty
nine.
And lastly online fifty nine
you'll see two million dollars
for continued support for the
community schools sustainability
and so there's also some
additional funding further down
in the spreadsheet of ten
million so these will be couple
together and with that I'll turn
it over to sunny.
So madam chair just before I
forget so starting with
categorical appropriations you
want to read the appropriations
from left to right so these are
just changes year over year and
same with starting online fifty
six this is what's referred to
as below the line.
Appropriation directly to the
department for initiatives these
you also right from left to
right really simply the LFC
recommendation essentially made
maintains relatively flat
funding for most of the existing
below the line appropriations
there is one increase on the
second page line fifty nine the
LFC recommendation does provide
an increase in early literacy
and reading support initiatives
and it also includes funding
from the public education reform
Fund and I'll turn it over to
sandy for the executive
recommendation.
You madam chair members of the
committee so the total
what we called below the line
funding or the special
appropriation so for the
executive recommendation at
forty five point six million and
then nineteen point seven from
the public education reform Fund
so couple together a couple of
those supported by general fund
we like to call your attention
to our line fifty nine that's
early literacy and reading
support and.
Yes eleven point four million
for just eleven point I heard
about that in this provides
training and a structural that
Garcia to teach grades K.
through three and it also
focuses on those not reading at
grade level and middle and high
school so important part and
services.
The next one is line sixty six
and that's part of the General
Fund eight million dollars for
Martinez Yazzie student program
supports additional provide do
escalation training training for
teachers with students who have
IEPs and English language
learners.
Next it's a little bit further
down but there's ten million
dollars and this is from the
public education reform Fund but
this is for before after school
and summer enrichment programs.
And then
In a vote move over to center
for the nonrecurring items.
Thank you sent a madam chair if
you look at line seventy eight
to eighty one this is your
public education operating
budget line the difference here
is that the LFC recommendation
is a four point nine million
dollar increase in operate
appropriations and for the
executive a two million dollar
increase in operations
altogether when you look down to
line eighty six your grand total
for operating
recurring section for
appropriation is about three
point eight six billion for both
recommendations and if you like
we can look into some of the
nonrecurring recommendations or
stand for questions.
Thank you madam chair so moving
quickly through sections five
six and seven starting online
eighty seven and down all are
all your other state funds a
nonrecurring appropriations the
first one I like to highlight is
line eighty nine about thirty
million to these state support
reserve fund to pay for a
potential FY twenty impact the
liability that still outstanding
if you look at lines starting on
line one hundred to wind one
thirty one on the next page
these are all the appropriation
recommendations for the public
education reform Fund and just
as a refresher this is funding
that came from unspent K. five
plus extended learning time
programs of for the LFC
recommendation on lines one
await threw one thirteen you
have a combination of several
alternatives for extended
learning in K. five plus models
to provide more flexibility for
school districts to implement
the program and then I'd like to
also highlight on the third page
lines one eighteen about fifty
million from the public
education reform Fund flooring
down faculty positions at
colleges of education.
One hundred ninety eighteen
twenty million dollars for the
preparation affordability
scholarship fund and ten million
online one twenty one for the
teacher loan repayment fund and
I'll turn it over to Cindy for
some comments yes thank you
madam chair
Going over those same lines one
hundred to one thirty one just
like to highlight a few of those
items of course all of these are
from that same public education
reform Fund.
And we have the executive
supports ten million for career
technical education and as we
know this funding supports high
school students by providing
access to rigorous industry
aligned CTV's and allows middle
school students are access to
career exploration.
the next one is one own nine and
that's eight million dollars to
couple with that two million I
spoke about earlier in funding
for community schools this
funding will continue to a just
build on the success of the
program it'll also provide
thirty new planning grants and
maintain the current a lot of
requests that are already out
there.
Online one sixteen there's
eleven million dollars for the
teacher residency and this
funding will maintain programs
at as established by the teacher
residency Act and expand the
program to traditional teacher
candidates who are in their
final year of education for
educator preparation.
And with that
we'll turn it over to the
secretary I just one last
comment and madam chair of the
pages four through eight are
your performance measures for
the public in public schools
support of the analysts have
come to consensus on targets and
then you can find language
starting on page nine through
twenty two there's a lot of
language and if you like us to
go over anything and
specifically what happy happy to
answer questions about it but if
it pleases you madam chair like
to turn it over to the secretary
for some concluding remarks.
There was a lot of those
thousand.
I like the idea that you also
included the line.
As members of that time.
Okay that carefully so that we
can have a.
So
secretary of.
Thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee thanks for the
opportunity to be here as as you
just heard it is a pleasure
going into a thirty day session
with so much consistency
incongruence between LFC and
executive recommendation to the
differences are relatively minor
can be worked out our thinking
and presenting a budget proposal
to you is based around three
major concepts the very first
one on madam chair members of
the committee as we sit here
right now we have a thousand
classrooms in New Mexico without
a license teacher so in here is
a suite of recommendations to
help meet the workforce crisis
in New Mexico so that's point
number one point number two.
As as you have been out there
talking to your constituents I'm
sure you've noticed that we've
got a problem out there with
workload mental health
behavioral health and the flat
out need for more support not
only for teachers but it but for
teachers for our school
counselors and all of the
personnel that are help in with
the the learning process you've
got your entire public education
team here and part of the reason
why we're physically here is out
of solidarity with our teaching
staff they are on the front
lines today facing the home
across New
just like the rest of us and so
that's the second piece the
first one is the workforce
crisis the second one is mental
health and social emotional
learning and all the supports
the third madam chair is to
address the eight hundred pound
gorilla in the room the Martinez
Yazzie lawsuit and the as a I
presented to you last week we've
got a specific set of
recommendations in here that has
the Martinez Yazzie ruling woven
throughout all of our
recommendations and without
madam chair we're happy to do
our very best answer questions
or follow up if you need
additional information all right
wanted to end of introduce your
staff and tell tells you they
are please to my immediate left
to your right def W. secretary
Gwen Perea Warniment.
Next is W. secretary caught the
scent of all.
Next is our Assistant Secretary
for Indian educationalist all.
And next to them is our policy
director Johnson and that's the
the team we have for you it's
sitting immediately behind me is
the superintendent of the
Alamogordo public schools very
good welcome welcome here today
well we're gonna start
Mr secretary I think you'd be
appropriate person
Representative Allison had a
question I don't know if you had
a chance to hear that I'm asking
to restate that question and
then we'll go to the rest of the
committee.
Thank you madam chair.
Mr secretary I have sent you a
note asking for your assistance
in of explaining the disparities
between the educators that are
in the urban areas versus the
health care premiums there is
being paid by the rural people
why are the rural people pay in
three times as much and what can
we do about it
Madam chair representative
Allison thank you for the
question I I did take a look at
what you sent me so thank you
for that heads heads up and let
me go back to the way the system
set up so for all the school
districts in New Mexico except
APS there's a common set of
insurance the public schools
insurance authority and so it's
not divided up rural and urban
but the Albuquerque public
schools is so large that for
years they have run their very
own insurance program and that's
why you see a difference the
analysis that you sent me had
some truth in there but there's
also some confusion that happens
out there in school districts
Representative Allison in the
the the type of insurance that
you saw last so you we all know
this they're one of the options
of school districts person can
choose is sometimes a call that
the Cadillac version and so in
the analysis you sent me it was
comparing that that more
expensive version we also have
quite a few school employees
that do not take the insurance
at all Representative Allison
because they have a spouse that
provides insurance for their
families so that's that's my
understanding of the analysis
that you would send me.
Okay thank you for that Mr
secretary of the interior one
more question of.
I had a meeting with my
constituents the other evening
and that's where all this fact
finding came out and there is
also a concern with the.
Of the way the school board is
running their school system in
our district is there any of
already that the New Mexico PED
can have on specific school
boards to make them improve
their actions.
Madam chair representative
Allison thank you for the
question and and the answer is
yes and part of this is
reflective of my approach with
school boards and the very first
approach that that I will always
take is to partner with Mister
Joe again the head of the school
boards association and provide
additional professional
development and training and so
in the school distributors
that's the first step that we're
taking and related to your
question and madam chair members
the committee I am pleased to
report to you that as of this
month Los Lunas and Floyd is no
longer run by the Public
Education Department I have
worked on a transition along
with training representative
Allison to have that school
district in Los Lunas and Floyd
run by the local community and
that's that's what you have put
in statute so that's that's
point number two the second one
Representative is to conduct a
site visit with the
superintendent and the school
board and if we can conduct a
site visit with them provided
the kind that technical
assistance that they need I mean
I come from Madam chair said
this many times to me to speak
as a school district
superintendent that's the chair
I sat in for many years before I
sat in this chair and there are
tools and strategies the
superintendent can learn to work
with their school board so that
would be the the second process
and then in statute if things
become completely dysfunctional
on the financial side and that
school district can no longer
manage their books the public
education department is ready to
come in and assist to provide
that kind of
needed assistance at the school
districts so the very high level
that's that's the approach.
It's that I will be taking.
Thank you for that Mr secretary
thank you madam chair I still
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr secretary my mic where I
just have three professionals
there for the analysts actually
on the to spreadsheets the just
to help me understand and and
sunny and I don't know where the
young lady went to your wishes
oriented fund line eleven it
talks about enrollment growth
units this morning we we heard
definitely was Mr Abbey mention.
That enrollment in schools over
the past ten years has declined.
And I I remember the number of
it is several thousand I think.
And and so I'm having a hard
time understanding the term
enrollment growth units if our
if iRobot has technically
declined that much and.
Mr secretary you know the number
I think her twenty thousand or
some this twenty five thousand
huge numbers on it you know.
Madam chair.
I'm sure Representative we could
look it up Madam chair
representative if you looking
your volume three on page one
twenty one this will give you a
history of student membership
and as you'll see in fiscal year
twenty one to fiscal year twenty
two there's about a drop of.
Twelve thousand students and in
membership.
As a result the pandemic and
it's kind of been decreasing
since fiscal year two thousand
sixteen okay so I guess the
number R. twenty or twenty five
thousand probably pretty
accurate over that long period
of time okay so I get sunny can
you help me understand what
you're in Roman growth units
means if you're wanting to spend
thirty four million dollars.
For growth but yet technically
we're experiencing loss help me
make those line up please Madam
chair representative can I start
is there with you and I will
pass this money we we've talked
quite a bit about this and when
you look at a statewide level
you are right there's a drop
as Sonny just sent I twelve
thousand students from last year
let's go back to the original
idea why you as a legislature
put enrollment growth in their
it's because the legislature
switched in those of you that
have been around here for a long
time remember that we used to do
current year funding in the
forties they was a big deal
because that district's budget
was based on the forty that they
that school year well that
didn't work for the legislature
cause some pretty serious
problems so the legislature
switched to prior year funding
and when they switched to prior
year funding they said let's be
careful and if the school
district to the individual
district is growing at more than
one percent it's a little more
complicated than that but that's
kind of the basic idea then
we're gonna build a factor in
their you would get the district
money to adjust for that
increase in enrollment and so
the number that you have here
for enrollment growth is for the
school districts that have an
increase in enrollment and we do
have statewide a reduction but
there are individual school
districts with growth and I'll
just give you a quick example
from the school district I was
managing last year we submitted
a budget with enrollment growth
because during the pandemic we
had quite a few students that
switch to home school and then
when we decided as a state to go
back to in person learning for
this school year I had projected
a growth of about two point one
two point two percent and so we
submitted a budget with
enrollment growth units and
that's.
Why that's built into the budget
and I appreciate that I think
it's going to take a longer
explanation for me to get it
problem my colleagues if it if I
see that overall were declining
like that this money is for
those that are increasing then
that's a that would in my mind
that would be a small number of
schools that are increasing
thirty four million of the a lot
of money for small numbers
schools and I'm I don't know how
you work fairness into that
expectation but I I just here's
setting everything you want to
add or I just madam chair
representative the.
When you are saying like you
said an overall growth in
student population statewide it
does make sense to add more to
the base to account for that
increase cost of educating the
students but when you're in a
overall shrinking population
scenario if you do at that money
and it's just going to inflate
the unit value essentially in
the formula and just because
each student and generate more
per pupil funding so
While that may help with some
flexibility and sort of
transferring funds between
schools as those students move
months districts
overall it's just a basin crease
at the end of the day if you
that this thirty four million
into the formula.
I appreciate that and then my
next question is on line twenty
one.
We talk about the informers
employer retirement
contributions can increase one
percent to twenty two.
PED is zero LFC is two percent.
it is up is it going to be a
bill proposed that the employee.
We'll have an increase in their
percent of contribution to match
these funds as this one hundred
percent employer.
Funding and there's not a
contemplated match of any
nature.
And madam chair this only
contemplates the employer share
increasing by one percent in the
LFC recommendation and I
understand L. E. S. C. last week
endorsed a bill to.
For the bill to do this exact
increase this increase will for
the employer nothing further
ploidy that's correct okay I I
just want to kind of have a grip
on that as I go forward and
think about it and then online
seventy one it talks about
parity for
the five twenty certificate
holders I don't know what that
is can you tell me what a five
twenty certificate holders
please Madam chair
representative Crowder the
public education department has
a formal agreement with some of
our tribes and pueblos and
nations in New Mexico and in
that agreement it says that the
Pueblo can certify native
language teachers from their
Pueblo or their tribe for their
nation and those teachers are
currently paid at the level of
an instructional assistant.
And if there's one school
district that said no that's not
right these language teachers
should be paid at the same rate
as a regular level one teacher
and so this proposal is to move
our five twenty certificated
teachers who are teaching native
languages to our students from
the current salary which is at
the level of an instructional
assistant to the level of a full
teacher that's the request I
appreciate that I just didn't
know what it meant
Senate I think that's all my
question I'd like to get with I
have to through other.
LFC questions I get with you
later on thank you madam chair
Representative Lara.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for the presentation Senate
thank you US Mr Secretary I
haven't had the pleasure to meet
you yet but I the point speaking
with you I I have I just have a
of the as Medicare point point
please on the line seventeen
setting to the increase for
school personal care goes online
and would that include war would
first writers who work for the
private contractors be included
in that.
Enter.
Miss madam chair representative
so the amount for us school bus
contractors would be online
thirty nine the rental fees.
And that would be a function of
the contracts that are.
Negotiated between the school
district in their their
contractor specifically but it
is not included in line with
seventeen.
Thank you for that so you madam
chair so since it's I'm I'm
assuming that it's very
ambiguous so that doesn't
obligate them to increase the
salary for their employees
correct.
Madam chair representative.
to my knowledge it is only the
district.
No and operated school school
bus drivers that are required
under the current language
that's written in the
recommendation I believe the
contractors would have to
determine that individually.
Okay okay thank you thank you
for that sunny and managers just
that's one of the things that
really concerns me because it's
in my school districts among the
two local school districts in my
in my legislative district both
use contractors for a for
transportation and we had some
issues just recently and in Los
crucis four we had a some
employees are striking because
of the rate at the rate of a
disparity in pay yeah and I was
wondering if if any of this was
built into their to to help the
increase the salaries of for
these hard working individuals
so I I guess all of a look into
it more thank you madam chair
thank you sent.
Well we're not going to do on
the on yeah I'll put you on the
list so all right let's go to
Representative Eli thank you Mr.
Madam chair for special.
Enrollment form of.
I assume that what that means
is.
we had a practice of doing
enrollment counselor for the
comment does not punish us goals
so is that what the normal
market forces.
Madam chair representative if
you look online nine
traditionally the policy
recommendation has accounted for
that student enrollment decline
in adjusted the budget.
If you look at line nine from FY
twenty two that would have been
a hundred and twelve million
dollars a decrease for a four
percent drop in student
enrollment.
Line ten which you highlighted
which is ninety seven million
essentially reduces the impact
of that adjustments to sort of
keep schools whole inflate the
unit that you and maintain some
stability through the pandemic.
Thank you madam chair so look at
the LFC record line fences that
mean that we're going to go off
of.
Current enrollment figures them
pre pandemic numbers madam chair
the recommendation to LFC is to
essentially adjusted as if there
were normal declines about one
percent in the.
Enrollment of the statewide
population it's just making the
assumption that we're continuing
the pre pandemic trends of
declining enrollment.
And madam chair line twenty one
Mr secretary of state the.
As I look at the executive
recommendation there isn't a
recommendation for New York V.
contributions.
Can you help me understand what
what the rationals are madam
chair representative lane to be
very blunt I think that's a
mistake on our part I think in
statute we should have included
that additional one percent.
It's a pretty yes.
And.
Madam chair there was a a line
item for career technical
education.
I'm not sure I did some
research.
Madam chair representative
that's line one fourteen.
So yes vendor line one fourteen.
The LFC rectus seven point five
million the executive ten
million it is private little bit
before we houses are for that
and one of the point.
And what the funds to be used
for I'm thank you for the
question madam chair
representative Elaine the us and
stop me if I'm getting data path
it's not helpful to you so our
high school students for years
and years were encouraged to be
ready to enter college and as
we've learned more over the last
five or ten years there is
another set of careers that are
just as honorable as going to
college and that's auto mechanic
and and all the different areas
that that show up in career
technical education programs and
so in and working with our
school districts and asking what
their needs are it became pretty
clear that they are expanding
and as a superintendent last
year might welding classes a
double of because I had so many
kids that we're interested in
becoming of a welder and so this
would be money to help expand
those programs and if there's
money available built into the
budget it might also be to
expand the equipment and the
training for those CTE teachers
to make sure that we're
preparing our kids with the
kinds of information that is
valuable when they move into the
workplace right after they
graduate from high school.
Chair thank you Secretary these
competitive grants to schools
we've point four I'm not sure
yes the mid manager last point
one right
if I noticed in our.
Volume.
To
in the SCG work double we were
putting an additional ten
million for mentorship so no
mention as a couple of times and
I've had discussions with John
on this and I would just really
appreciate this and
legislature's indicating this is
an important initiative
that I appreciate of the
maintenance of prior as well
whether the staffing.
What the competition those or
something else altogether but of
being able to utilize that
additional ten million permits
or do
and features a I think so I
think you thank you very much
yes the representative of small.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you Secretary thank you Mr
Liu
Madam chair and Mr Secretary Mr
Liu the there there are proposed
changes to guide the investment
of in the spending at the
district level for at risk units
in both the executive and the
LESC.
Is that correct yes I'm sure
great thank you madam chair I
know there's some differences in
those we can go into those at a
later point but one of the core
concerns this summer was that
the massive investments in at
risk have not been met with some
of the intended successes and
some of that is perhaps it is
very likely because of those
resources not being invested as
they needed to be at the
district level so it's great to
see both taking it on
Madam chair
Mr Secretary Mr Liu.
In both recommendations for the
extended learning time and I
guess first to Mr Liu we are
we've heard a lot about the
desire from families and
educators for
to be able to not just do the
same thing right to to be able
to offer maybe more music maybe
it's robotics maybe it's FFA can
be many different things that
are a core part of learning in
communities
R. the LFC approach to the
extended learning time
investments will that allow the
creative application of
for districts and schools to
utilize those funds in creative
ways Mr Liu and madam chair Mr
vice chair so the LFC
recommendation simply require
schools to meet the hourly and
day requirements but as far as
program designed that's entirely
a local decision and I think it
some of the best extended
learning time programs have been
when those communities have
created those targeted you know
robotics programs are music and
arts programs and so that's
that's entirely a local decision
and
the recognition provides the
flexibility to do that thank you
Mr Lewis and Mr secretary I know
we talked a lot about over the
summer with extended learning
time as we go through this
session it would be great to see
I think the very strong what we
see especially in the in the
legislative proposal which is
the need for these extended
learning time funds to be
utilized we've heard from many
different quarters that that
extra nudge is important but to
be able to also both ensure the
flexibility that Mister Liu is
laying out and I know the
executive
you guys really include C. T. E.
you include community schools
you include maybe a slightly
broader umbrella eligible for
those extended learning time
funds is that accurate.
Madam chair Mr vice chair the
answer is yes and I'll just add
a hard lesson that I learned as
a superintendent last June Iran
just what you described in
extended learning time program
that went way beyond kind of the
normal and the hard lesson that
I learned is you need to give
teachers the time to plan for
those extra lessons because it
just doesn't snap your fingers
and you're done teachers need
the extra support and so that's
part of what we've built and our
recommendation thank you madam
chair thank you Mr secretary hi
I'm very encouraged I know
there's some cool there there's
certain core similarities
there's also some fairly
significant differences in
approach there but it just seems
so.
Incredibly important that we get
this right this session and so
really appreciate the incredibly
diligent work
Just really
three other things briefly to
raise one we we know that we're
near we hear repeatedly that
we're we're near or at full
employment the LFC
recommendation is for a thirty
three percent increase to
secretary to your shop
that would include hiring a
number of new people is that
right Mr Liu.
I yes madam chair Mr vice chair
does include an expansion about
eighteen FTE okay you know as we
go thank you madam chair thank
you Mr Liu I'm excited to for us
to dig into and learn.
Why LFC why staff believes
that's not only important but
also possible in this case I
think I tend to agree but as we
face
these back and forth
conversations we have money can
we hire someone or is it just
going to be impossible to hire
someone for this position
clearly there's this is one of
the areas that that we and LESC
have really wind and upon
The NMCA issue that the madam
chair Mr Secretary Mr Liu the
insurance issue that
Representative Allison and
Representative lot of raised.
It sounds like there are some
more new wants to that issue
nonetheless.
Coming from a district outside
of Bernalillo county
it is a it's an issue it's a
real issue for constituents and
educators on the ground not in a
blames sort of a way but in a
how can we work together to
maybe hello folks
pay for yeah how can we equalize
or or better help folks outside
of the metro area as we work to
recruit educators meet some of
these insurance premiums so it
sounds more complicated but I
too am very interested in
addressing it and appreciate
also represent a lot of raising
the contractor issue again for
the vast really now for the
folks who are will be part of
the new house district thirty
six really almost all in Los
crucis public schools serve by
Transit contractors that that's
an important issue for us to
address thank you very much much
very much madam chair tribal
state representative Armstrong
thank you madam chair and thank
you for the presentation the
sunny I on I had a question
on line fifteen the eight
million dollars for elementary
P. E. and student wellness
programs is that left up to
individual districts as a grant
how is that going to be.
Utilized Madam chair
representative so back in two
thousand eight right before the
recession the legislature had
instituted new elementary P.
program into the formula and is
supposed to be phased in over
four years eight million each
year.
After the revenue crash that she
basin was stopped the formula
was frozen and so only those
schools that had been
prioritized initially for those
units were receiving those units
and that's been the same since
two thousand nine and so this
essentially.
One makes one more down payment
on that phase and releases the
for the freeze on those units in
Laos the formula to right size
itself and fully fund that
program within the base okay
perfect thank you so much and
the only other question I have
madam chair is
Language online thirty four and
I just wonder why we keep
bringing that back other than
we're pushing more time in
schools.
But I I just wonder why we keep
bringing up the.
No forty school weeks.
Madam chair representative so
there is a concern this year
when the moratorium on new four
day school weeks was lifted from
the governor's veto there were
two school districts that
essentially went from a five day
school week to four day school
week and then date K. five plus
just to go back to essentially a
five day school week so it was a
bit of a concern about gaming
of.
That system and so I think the
more time is being reinstated to
serve counteracting tail we have
more participation in the
program.
Okay thank you madam chair
that's all for ready
Representative Anderson.
Your.
First.
support.
Which presentations to be given
to.
And for.
The.
Yes it is.
representation of the current.
Twelve percent increase.
So.
Follow us on that issue.
I feel to.
And your school district has
flexibility and power is off.
That do that includes hours per
day
Because I was talking to this
recently really work for us for
that flexibility as well will
that be on the recommendations
I'm Madam chair representative
Anderson it's I think there's
two parts your question the the
example I think I explained from
the school district I was
running was days.
Days we were expanding the
number of days and there is some
research out there that says
that adding an hour does affect
in a positive way student
achievement and the social
emotional status of our school
districts and if if that is the
research is value is verified
we're going to be collecting
data from school districts
beginning of the year metal here
and end of the year and we're
going to look and see that that
extra hour making impact in a
positive way and the two things
we want to impact one of student
achievement the other one social
emotional learning if the answer
is yes to that and it's
affected then our recommendation
would be to allow that.
Thank you for that answer.
Doesn't sound as though it has
been.
I.
To
The world is for I can't speak
for not.
Station.
Ask for that flexibility in
their yes.
Mr chair and those on page nine.
That that is not the only eight
boxes for three point three
billion dollars of expenditures.
Officials that so with that
being this.
No.
Faster of seventy seven.
So.
What is the.
Hello all who's doing better
who's not if we're not looking.
Testing funds to our.
Madam chair representative
Anderson thank you for the
question and this school year we
will know we're testing on
student progress beginning of
the year middle of year end of
the year so we will have data at
the end of June to share with
you about that.
We we agree that that's not
acceptable.
Senator did you want to get in
on that I just wanted to add to
the secretary's comments to the
previous question madam chair
that's okay just really briefly
Representative the LFC
recommendation does allow high
performing schools to provide
the extended learning in the
form of ours so the language is
on page thirteen of your packet
and it's number twenty thank you
for that we're not supposed to
stay on their performance yes.
Madam chair representative I
think as the secretary explained
they are currently providing a
test as we speak this winter and
so I think it'll be.
Comment upon the department
wants those results come in to
make that determination.
Representative need that because
we have been testing there are
no hard for new schools yeah.
Madam chair representative to
our knowledge well we don't have
a representative sample of that
yet.
Thank you very much for that
another one is a seven percent
which.
Both.
Rules that we're trying to
achieve was such a.
Sectional increase is right back
to flexibility I heard some
superintendents express.
These one size fits all is not
always.
It can cost of wage compression
inequities that the call
somebody to say why the hell
would be in the system
principal.
When I could be a teacher level
three
so I just want to give your
recommendations usually there's
flexibility for the individual
district to apply that seven.
Or is it mandatory it is seven
percent if you work for the
school district period.
Madam chair representative in
the LFC recommendation there is
average language for the three
percent and the four percent
additionally online nineteen
you'll see there's ten million
for targeted compensation so
that districts can make local
decisions about hard to staff
positions that they'd like to
adjust further on the minimum
salary increases on line
eighteen it does account for the
differential for principles so
that there's not that compaction
issue that you we're discussing
although in an instance where it
level three teacher is doing K.
five plus and and National Board
certified process they may be
getting statements to the extent
that they would make more than
assistant principals.
Thank you for that answer the
I question and chairman.
at the school where I listen to
some superintendents expressed
of their concerns in the near
term for public school education
funding in New Mexico.
There was quite a discussion
about average on the.
I have no idea of that is
waffled around the way that we
have districts we go from.
Relatively low at risk doing
here later.
It's we're going to a in the
next year we're back.
So I think you know what that's
going to be tough on the school
board trying to.
Of the budget for how much
funding they're going to have
there is a superintendent in
love in New Mexico.
Mr secretary really encourage
you to talk to you.
Because of other life a lot of
people in the world he has
really brought that they have
and has to make one of the
presentation that this is why
the the swings and hit the
student populations down five
thousand we have twenty thousand
more at risk students no that
was my mask or what.
I think it is funding is
important and I don't understand
whether or not we have a grasp
on the methodology upon which we
awarded it specifically New
Mexico being one of the three
states that uses title one as
part of the criteria.
That's all I am thank you Mr
thank you Representative
Barreras.
Thank you madam chair thank you
presenters and really thanks so
much for this very helpful I
guess I guess I don't know have
phones
Dr Stein has to have all school
districts adopted the extended
learning program.
Madam chair representative that
know we would like every single
school district to figure out a
way to have more time with kids
engage with teachers which is
the extended learning time time
program so we would like your
help in making sure that happens
next school year.
So how many school districts
under the eighty nine school
districts how many school
districts have not adopted
extended learning.
I'm at the answer I just heard
was will have to check and we'll
get it we'll get that was
setting might have it Adam chair
representative if you look on
page one thirty eight if you're
I agree that blacks by real this
has a list of all the districts
and charters and which ones are
participating in K. five plus an
extended learning.
What cages at one thirty eight.
I also wanted to know chair and
Either if you can answer this I
know that we were looking at
this program so that the last
year of the the teachers
undergraduate work we've given
them the residency of I think it
was about thirty five thousand a
year so that they could finish
that last year and be in
residence and school district
and be mentored by a principal
and a teacher it was it was seen
as a great way to kind of keep
our students are our educational
students in this state I know at
the time you were projecting
that we needed twenty million
for that to make that work
statewide that we had about five
hundred students in their last
year of of the undergraduate
work is it has nothing has that
been covered in enough both
budgets I guess that's what I
what I know.
Madam chair representative that
I it is built in the executive
budget yes.
Madam chair representative if
you look on page two lines one
sixteen that's your tier
residency line and then if you
look at line one seventeen the
LFC recommendation also includes
six million four rate student
teaching for.
Those traditional pathway
programs as well.
Well would like to thank
everybody for taking care that I
just wanted to make sure that
was there and then can
I don't know any of this
question is for you or Dr
Steinhaus again early literacy
can you talk to me about that.
And what it entails there's a
huge recommendation and the on
in the executive budget for that
side I'm just curious about what
that what kinds of programs that
would cover.
Mr chair could you repeat that
there is early literacy that
cover what is the purpose.
Inherent in early literacy.
Mr chair representative I
believe the majority of it is
four letters training that the
department currently provides to
kindergarten through second
grade teachers and I'll let the
secretary leverage if there's
other uses of that funding Madam
chair representative that what
city just said is exactly right
this is to teach our proposal to
you is to go from K. through
three to every single elementary
school the science of reading
and the letters trading is by
far according to our teachers
the best training that they've
ever had and it's also showing
great success in a couple of
other other states throughout
the country so it's to take the
success that we're seeing and
the success we're seeing in New
Mexico with the training in some
of our earlier grades to make
sure that our teachers know the
science of reading.
Thank you for that chair I I
remember that from us to court
up slate now that we know that
you brought it up I just I just
know that the Dolly Parton
reading program or it could get
every baby gets a book for the
first five years is about three
point seven million stuff you
know if if you did that by five
years not a bad investment maybe
we have to think about that in
the future and then my last
question Mr chair and others is.
I I'm having trouble reconciling
the difference between the
executive budget and the LFC
budget on staff salaries I
understand that everybody says
it's equal but I'm not sure it
is you know I I no one calls for
a seven percent increase in and
seventy five hundred for the
three tiers the other calls for
ten thousand for the three tiers
could each of you give me a
brief explanation why why you
think these budgets are equal or
or maybe you can just submit
that to me later because I I'm
really having a hard time
figuring out if they really are
equal that's I guess what I want
and now.
Mr Tony head of okay I'm off to
you all right Mr chair
representative so.
You are correct that the LFC
recommendation is about a
seventy five hundred dollar
increase in minimums and that's
taken after the fact once you've
applied that seven percent
across the board increase for
all staff.
If you include the extended
learning time program on top of
that new anymore of the seventy
five hundred for each level then
you get to about fifty one sixty
one seventy one thousand
essentially because the LFC
recommendation is really
promoting the extended learning
time program participation and
alter of dissect a standout to
talk about the executive
recommendation chair
representative had a
executive recommendation is to
set teacher minimums at fifty
sixty and seventy.
Exit the LFC is a little bit
lower than that the executive
recommendation is to build in
enough money to give every
school employee a seven percent
raise the executive
recommendation the reason why it
gets confusing is because it is
tiered based on the extended
learning time program so that's
basically if that's fair citing
that the how I see the
differences.
Mr chair and I I was looking at
that you know to give anybody in
that in that salary range of
forty to sixty thousand dollars
a year a seventy five percent as
seventy five hundred dollar year
raise or a ten thousand dollar a
year range is huge I mean you
know I working in the private
sector I mean maybe you'd give
us a five percent raise would be
a big raise us so so these are
huge races no matter no matter.
No matter.
What what branch you're
referring to but I I also then
went back and did the math is a
former employer and said well
because of our ERP these people
have to pay ten thousand dollars
a year in retirement that's huge
and I mean five thousand
retirement and then and that's
because the state hasn't
protected that retirement system
so people are paying huge
amounts out to pay it was ten
thousand it was ten percent
equaling about for fifty
thousand dollars teacher about
five thousand dollars a year to
retire it's huge I mean most
people again and private sector
you wouldn't have that kind of a
retirement benefit to pass
insurance in rural areas being
about sixty percent of ten
thousand another five six that
set and and so health insurance
or ten thousand subtract that
from fifty thousand it's and
your your down the.
Forty thousand dollars on a
fifty thousand dollar salary and
then you know a think of it the
other ten percent of that you
pay for unemployment like all
the other things I don't know
that for many more it's almost
Dale for fifty thousand dollars
it's almost five thousand so so
really when you're talking about
fifty thousand the really who
walked away from the table for
at about thirty five thousand.
Thirty five thousand divided by
twelve is about three thousand
dollars a month so I'm just
talking to the committee of you
know we said we're going to do
moonshot we came in we did in a
like a four percent raise we
tried really hard as a
legislature to do this then we
went back to one percent and I.
I'm really struggling with this
because I'm looking at a young
teacher graduating
at fifty thousand which sounds
like like a lot but it's really
thirty five and then.
Most teachers are first
generation of college students
which means there's no one to
ask for help that's really what
that means so I'm just saying
when we look at things in the
long run I I hope we I hope we
figure on that on the larger
side of a you know and I would
like to I'm gonna look at these
formulas more closely but I'd
like to take it down to the
practical level I mean as an
employer when we gives you know
raises I really looked at that
you look at compaction you look
at the long long term sustaining
revenue it's it's difficult for
everybody but I think when we
have a shortage I've heard as
high as really seventeen hundred
it could be a thousand but we
have a huge problem and I I
think we've we've this is the
time to do the full court press
on making the salaries as as as
good as we can make them given
the fact that these are
recurring monies and it's always
difficult so all in with that Mr
chair thank you very much
Representative neck
Representative Trujillo thank
you Mr chairman and thank you
all of that.
Quickly.
Make some comments about
Representative added us
questions and the Sonny's.
Explanation of of the seven
percent increase.
For the increase at once a seven
percent financing seven percent
using the increase for for
teachers and you're using you're
you're you're saying that that's
for teachers that are working in
in extended learning program and
you're saying that that's.
That that's
The bonus or the increase but
that's not really a bonus that's
compensation they were are
working that extended time.
And that's the compensation for
that extended time so that's not
an increase so I guess I would
support the the executive
recommendation because there's
no other tied to it it's simply
an increase so I just wanted to
be clear to everyone that the
the LFC east.
Explanation of an increases
really compensation and not an
increase it's it's completely
different than what the exact is
is recommending the second thing
I wanted to do was actually.
Clear get clarification
Representative Lara talked about
the school bus drivers in Los
crucis and there are several
others in the state that are are
contract employees they're
looking for private contractors
running bus companies and the
same thing goes for food service
workers are working for private
companies companies and they
have negotiated agreements.
And the the question was will
they get the pass through with
the seven percent directly into
those contracts and no state and
they could but generally they're
negotiated agreements the
dilemma is at that comes with
with that is the fact that does
the school district receive that
seven percent then give it to
the contractor because you guys
don't give it to the contractor
directly you give it to the
school district right so give it
to the school districts seven
percent for whatever number they
say our school bus drivers does
that mean that the contractor
keeps the difference.
Mr chair representative so my
understanding of that rental fee
that's provided the contractors
is essentially based on the
number of school buses that
they're up for replacement and
so there's kind of a sat right
on what they receive from the
state on the specific contracts
as far as whether the school
could pass through additional
funding to cover those
additional raises I I would turn
to doctor sentenced explained
that Madam chair representative
Mr of course I'm not a lawyer
but my understanding of how it
works is the school district
will get enough money to
negotiate that raise for their
contractors Seether the
employees are working in food
service or the bus drivers
whether that happens or not is
between the school district and
their contractors but it Madam
Mr chair that's not the way the
negotiation works the
negotiation works with the
employee and the contractor not
the school district the school
district is this passed through
that's all they do so that's my
my question so the chunk of
money that's going from the
state to the school district and
the school district to the
contractor do that does a
contract to keep the difference
because it's not the the the
school district that's
negotiating that contract it's
the.
The school employees and the
contractor.
Madam chair Senator Hemphill I
understand exactly what you're
saying and you know negotiations
as well as anybody and the way
you're describing it is accurate
but this the the contractor the
company should not be pocketing
that additional money they
should pass it to the employees
that would be our expectation
then Mr chairman and members of
this committee and doctor saying
house and sunny and everybody
else then you guys need to look
into those contracts because
that's exactly what's happening
in those school districts and
Representative Lara made a very
very good point because with all
due respect to that school
district that's what happens.
And that's my point thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Trujillo next we
have Representative setting and.
Mr Chairman
thank you Mr after missing has
been here and thank you for your
presentation center I have a
question on page six.
Thirty.
If.
So purchase culturally and
linguistically appropriate
construction material so we're
getting all this money to that
particular area and.
Teachers.
Maybe with
Receive the math book in a long
time when I once I know that was
the biggest issue with parents
they want their kids to have a
math book the thing was that the
kids could refer back to and
they haven't received one I
think the lesson we look with
two thousand eight so we have
have you read that we had all
these other systems overall
online and all the answers are
online but when we gonna give
our math teachers school books.
Mr Chairman representative so
regarding your questions about
math books being received the
state used to be on adoption
cycle and that was through the
instructional materials fund and
in FY twenty the state stopped
making appropriation see the
instructional materials fund and
instead made appropriations to
the SCG and essentially.
Your marks loosely and amounts
that would be dedicated for
instructional materials to give
schools maximum flexibility to
make that determination and
self.
The teachers that you mentioned
are getting and new updated math
text but that is because the
district has not.
Maybe that replacement and made
that decision using their SCG
dollars for the.
Mr Chairman thank it was done
before that it was too when I
was still teaching and it never
happened so okay so.
So what we do the parents really
want to map book so that the
kids can sit down and do it we
know we're not scores of.
We if you do stuff online you
can just put your yeah there's
so many ways to not learn and
just get the right answer so at
least with the map they have
since the parents can help them
they can sit down with them.
It's really.
Madam chair representative
Sarinana I'd I appreciate the
question and let me speak as a
parent with kids in math yes we
need a book to refer to so
you're absolutely right to to
build on what Sonny just said as
a school district superintendent
you is a legislature
appropriated enough money for me
last year to replace the text
books I needed to replace so we
need as a as a state agency need
to work with that school
district to look at their
priorities and how they're
allocating those funds to make
sure that the kids and the
parents get the text books they
need and that there are up to
date textbooks.
This is a thank you very much
Representative and Mr Secretary
listening representatives of.
Mr chair thank you very much.
What loan as well as the.
Representative Hennessey.
Flexibility that we give our
local school districts.
Yes there are going to claim
that the parents are going
through the state.
Isn't that are built to make
these kids go to school to be a.
The flexibility needs to be
there I and that's what I've
been hearing of these meetings
that I tested my particular area
and I do have four different
school districts in my.
And I think the two of those as
well.
As far as ours versus studies I
think that's important
especially for rules whenever
we're at one hour instead of
adding an extra day their
budgets are tight in.
Do offer that flexibility
together go to jump on these
kids are going to be time lower
because they're not it's not
being interrupted.
And I can that that.
I think it's also very important
is.
The two.
Look at the
I think it's also very important
that whenever we do.
To our local school boards and I
I know there's an eighty nine
of.
But it is it up to the schools
to be able to customize these
instructional programs for their
students I believe the.
Because.
I'm gonna take for example like
are there is a whole lot
different than the Albuquerque
public school system.
More information is different.
Let.
Each school needs of local.
The and the program is.
Navigate for the government to
do crack.
Also I think that we need to
madam chair and this is very
important especially in our
rural areas.
I think we need to take a look
at the modification.
To get our retired teachers
thank you the.
We have is to ensure that all
came about several years ago
whenever.
We raise to be tested the system
to be tested.
There were a lot of people that
do sit through can't do the
same.
I think to sit out period for
retirees return to work.
The.
Under a microscope and.
Let's get back to teaching our
kids that's what we.
Your job so that do you agree
with that Madam chair of the
Senate Mr secretary Madam chair
representative yes and I I have
gone beyond just agreeing on it
I have contacted the executive
director to exit of the
educational retirement board and
asked him to work with us to
figure out how to do just that
it turns out that it's much more
complicated than I thought but
it I think it is possible we've
seen it happen in other states
so let's make it happen in New
Mexico.
Sure Mr secretary that's that's
a concern I have.
The other states are implemented
by the Mexico City of no we
can't do that it's going to be
going too far it's time we got a
lot of the you know what I'm
updates okay let's get busy and
get it done I think our kids
futures to services it needs to
happen in a timely manner am I
wrong Ms Perea my right in that
chair Mister six I I I
appreciate your madam chair I
appreciate Representative your
direct language and and that's
what I communicated with R. E.
B. E. R. B. executive director
and that's what I'll continue to
work on as hard as I possibly
can to get this figured out
because as we talked to we've
got a lot of teacher vacancies
out there in one of the ways to
get those positions filled as
the deuce do the same thing I
did I was retired for two months
and guess what I'm back to work
twelve hours a day so I'm an
example of what you're talking
about and I'm not afraid of it
and I think it's the right thing
to do.
Sure Mr secretary that we've
talked.
Yeah teachers need some guidance
mentorship of these teachers
that have retired from the
system being able to come back
in need of help Senator teachers
I think that is from mental what
we're trying to accomplish to
our state madam chair thank you
very much thank you very much
just go to Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair.
Secretary Stewart in house I
have a question on how to read
the high level the budget sheet
there are places where the
hyphens.
In in the columns in places
where there aren't and I'm just
wondering what's the
significance as we're we don't
see hybrid where we do.
For example let me give you
One one thirty.
that's the black Education Act
it was receiving four hundred
thousand dollars.
In that FY twenty two operations
budget or is receiving of there
are dashes under the executive
and LFC columns indicating I
guess zero funding going forward
but there are other places where
dashes to appear for example
down the down the line here page
one one forty seven.
That's the grads program was is
being funded in this fiscal year
for two hundred thousand I guess
it is and but
not showing any funding for the
next two fiscal years within
their places where they're just
nothing so is it the same thing
dasher of empty space means zero
Madam chair representative I I
can't answer line one thirty
that sunny because I didn't
prepare this sheet but on line
one thirty the black Education
Act to reason their stashes is
because we've got a
recommendation to bring it back
into recurring funding because
it was you pass this bill last
session with non recurring money
and this is an ongoing program
so it's built into the budget as
recurring did I get that right
thing and madam chair
representative here correct the
dashes are just a formatting
thing that represents zero.
the LFC recommendation does
include funding to oversee
administer the black Education
Act through the public education
operating budget so they're just
different places in the high
level where that nonrecurring
funding was essentially put into
recurring place I will say that
is
line one forty seven I do
believe on the executive
recommendation and this is an
error on my part that there was
about two hundred thousand
coming from tennis ten cent if
you could.
Verify just yep so that there is
a two hundred and I I apologize
for that mistake.
engine one so
to me it was a a point of
confusion not quite knowing what
I don't see a key here I do see
some put notes here and there on
the high level sheets but
Maybe more footnotes would be
helpful in those instances
Madam chair and Mr secretary I
am very pleased to see on line
fifty nine.
The early literacy and reading
support.
there's a pretty big difference
between what what's being funded
now
compared to what the executive
is recommending and then the
LFC.
that's a pretty big difference
between those two
recommender skid you tell us
what we're not getting if we
take the LFC recommendation.
Madam chair representative I do
want to turn your attention a
line one twenty three.
That is three point five million
from the public education reform
Fund for early literacy cell and
affects both the executive and
LFC are recommending eleven
point five.
Really and it's just part of
it's coming from nonrecurring
okay.
And madam chair into what I love
footnotes if they tell us so
much thank you for explaining
that
Express just a just a little
statement that I think as a mom
and as a legislator I'm really
concerned to.
In the now almost twelve years
that I've been in the
legislature we really haven't
improved in math and reading
scores to me that's the
indicator that I went to first
as to how we're doing.
I don't know how much money we
have to spend or could even make
a difference if we double the
PED budget would be get kids up
to the ninety th percentile I
don't know but probably not that
this this just really concerns
me this is more than half of our
state budget the PED budget and
I'm not sure we're getting the
results that we expect to see so
I I am very concerned about that
and then finally madam chair and
Mr secretary I carried a bill
several times to make financial
literacy a requirement for
graduation from high school.
the bill stalled and there were
a few other folks who have the
same idea and the bill of
stalled and we were being told
that PED was going to somehow do
this by rule so my question is I
guess it's two fold madam chair
and Mr secretary do we now have
financial literacy as a
requirement for graduation
and if so is that reflected in
the budget because we go from
elective to a prior course
imagine the costs go up the
funding that.
Madam chair representative Brad
thank you for asking
the public education department
is in the process of finalizing
a role that will include
financial literacy as a
requirement as a as an integral
part of the curriculum in our
schools it is not a graduation a
separate course and madam chair
Representative Brown I I'll go
expresses a school district
superintendent if you look at
high schools today they are
overloaded and complicated and
they don't have room to add
another quarter so if we
required that that would be the
frustration that we would get
from school districts so this
idea of building it into the
curriculum from early grades all
the way through graduating high
school is the approach that the
Public Education Department
sticking right now and chair
Mister surgery so um thank you
for that
I I do believe that with my
bills suggested taking half
twelve out of the electives
column for graduation and
putting it on to this is a
requirement I don't think
there's of course we can offer
that will do more good than
financial literacy
it's it's something we as adults
use every day and students leave
high school they're going to
encounter the real world I'm
gonna need to have those skills
and knowledge of how to how to.
Paid their way through life so I
would like to just make a
applied for let's get this done
and the kids will thank us thank
you madam chair thank you.
Okay I don't have anybody else
on my list but if you have a
couple requests if I could Mr
secretary and sunny I've been
looking at what the differences
are in this budget.
looking at the above the line.
Looking at the difference when
it comes to the three tier
minimum salary increase for the
retirement employer retirement
contribution compensation
increase for school personnel
and so forth and then looking at
some of the things below the
line what would be helpful for
me to see.
Is that I agree with these three
major concerns when you have a
thousand classrooms without a
certified teacher I'd like to
know through some type of color
coding what ties in this budget
to resolve that problem.
When you talk about workload
mental health teachers and and
but all person what ties to
that.
And then what we're talking
about Martinez Yazzie.
we we've we've talked about that
talk about it we thought we were
funding things properly I still
think we need to see whether or
not we've got the results before
we start moving moving too far
away from what we've already
been funding but I would like to
to see that
I would think that all these
issues around compensation for
help with all of it.
And anything that we can do to
shore up our core staff makes a
lot of sense.
Like to understand why we are
not in agreement with the at
risk index factor increase it
would seem like that would make
some sense particularly when
we're dealing with the Yazzie
Martinez case.
So I'd like to see that is a fun
fact for us if we go through and
actually improve of color coding
system I'd like to be able to
say when my constituents passed
particularly for my part of the
world what we really bring about
this Martinez Yazzie lawsuit we
can talk about it specifically
so we actually have a very
specific answer and and what
we're doing.
So without I think this is been
a very good hearing I want to
thank you
Mr secretary for being here I
can tell you I think it means a
lot to all those teachers and
all those people that are in the
classroom right now knowing that
your tier when you have the
option not to be.
and I think it's a big deal to
the committee to have you here I
think it's to your advantage and
any other cabinet secretary
that's here because of we can't
hear you or we don't have the
technology to even pull your
stuff up on on the the computer.
How may not going to make a lot
of impact on the committee.
When you're here with us and you
got your people here to answer
any questions that we might have
that makes impact on the
committee but I can tell you
that we're going to feel a lot
more comfortable taking
recommendations from someone
who's willing to do that.
So with that being said I want
to thank you all for being here
today and I want to thank people
that drove all the way from
Alamogordo New Mexico for being
here today with us here are
public everybody also think
after staff.
But we appreciate you all today
thank you for being here thank
you.
Yes I wanted to talk as soon as
we let everybody adjourned I
want to keep the committee for
just a couple minutes did a good
job.
