Point here by Nicole must test
from the department of finance
administration my name is
Jessica has been on the LFC
analyst for DFA we'll get
started with the worksheet for
DFA again business unit three
forty one
you can also find the related
budget documents in volume two
on pages seventy six eighty four
if you start with page two of
your packet will go over the
agency's roll up different sheet
and then I'm on the call and I
will trade offs are going
adding comments.
so do you go to page two of your
packet again the department of
finance administration on you
can see the differences between
the LFC rack and the comments
are starting on page three I
apologize it's a very long chart
six and expensive couple pages
but you can see here that the
executive recommendation for DFA
exceeds the LFC recommendation
for general fund by fifteen
point three million this is
primarily due to increases in
the executive director for
childhood hunger initiative.
The executive recommendation
also exceeds LFC by almost five
million in federal revenues and
this is due to differences in
the recommended funding for a
requested grants administration
initiative.
Looking at the base you can see
that the executive exceeds LFC
by one million dollars in person
and funds additional expansion
F. T. E. requested by the agency
which I'll talk a little more
about any expansion section.
When you look at contractual
services cost the executive
exceed the LFC by almost four
point one million this is
primarily due to differences and
funding for I. T. systems and
civil civil legal services
contracts and the LESC
recommendation hold contractual
services nearly flat with FY
twenty two.
On the executive recommendation
also exceeds LFC by fourteen
point nine million in other
costs I'm again this is
primarily related to the
childhood hunger initiative with
the executive did.
Quality did requests for
childhood hunger from eight
other agencies for a total of
fourteen point two million well
LFC does not support the expense
of the expansion request for
childhood hunger and does not
consolidate request from other
agencies instead LFC funds some
of those initiatives in those
related agencies.
In addition the committee adopts
the legislative recommendation
we suggested an additional two
hundred thousand dollars should
be added to the other costs
category and the memberships and
use program and this is to
account for transfers intended
to go to the law enforcement
protection fund at the
department of public safety this
was that technical error on our
part that we do not include the
two hundred thousand for the
transfer however that is
included on the GPS side and
this should be contingent on
enactment of legislation that
expands allowable uses of the
law enforcement protection fund
to include costs related to the
implementation of the law
enforcement training act and I
can talk a little bit more about
that when we get to that program
as well.
regarding language all
recommendations included
language authorizing transfers
for emergencies for two point
five million and transfers from
the enhanced nine one one fund
for twelve point five million
the D. W. I. grant Fund first
one point six million the
tobacco settlement program fund
for sixteen point three million
and county supported Medicaid
for thirty nine point eight
million.
Analysts come to consensus on
performance measures and targets
and then regarding expansions
well the executive
recommendation supports the
recommended expansion for I'm
sorry the request expansion for
grants administration this is
just under five million dollars
the LFC actually funds this
request in part with
appropriations made during the
second special session in
December of twenty twenty one.
I'll go ahead and head over to
the Culver additional comments
on the roll up and then to go
over our first program.
Thanks Jessica Mr chair members
of the committee I just want to
point a couple of items that
that just commenced for the
department of finance for all of
that for the childhood hunger
initiatives I would actually
like to correct the statement
it's actually for statewide
hunger initiatives it's not just
including childhood hunger and
then also I wanted to state that
the executive also decreased the
existing vacancy rate so that we
have more funded positions and
then for in regards to expansion
for the grants appropriation
request although we did get
funding during the special
session for for the grants
administration program that is
only funding for FY twenty two
we will require bonding for FY
twenty three for that program
and so now I'll go into the
detail and we'll go to P. five
four one which is the policy
development office going out
analysis
Department and that includes the
office of the secretary board of
finance state budget division
and then we also the executive
also includes the grant
administration in that program
the executive exceeds the
legislative recommendation about
nineteen point four million and
part mostly part of that is
included is for the statewide
hunger initiatives as previously
stated we the executive also
recommended to additional FTE
within the base which includes a
legal assistant and one special
projects individual so this
special projects individual will
be deployed to agencies to
assist with CFO functions and
the event that a CFO leaves an
agency for continued operations
the Legislative did not
recommend these positions both
recommendations also include
language authorizing transfers
for emergencies and then we.
In the expansion side the
executive at eleven F. T. E. one
F. T. E. that will utilize
general fund for the hunger
initiative so that person is our
hunger initiatives position and
then federal funding for ten F.
T. E. within the expansion so
those ten F. T. E. include six
existing the other grants
administration program
individuals to additional grant
writers and then two FTE for the
for the infrastructure is our
that is currently housed at the
that that the governor's office
has but we will have those two
FTE with under the department of
finance and administration
and then.
And that concludes my
presentation for P. five four
one I will transfer it over to
Jessica to provide any
additional comments on the
agency and go to the next year
thank you.
Thank Nico Mister chair members
of the committee I just wanted
to make a quick note regarding
the statewide hunger apologies
for for the Mr speaking on that
specifically for childhood
hunger I just wanted to know to
the committee that the LFC is
currently funding at roughly
three point two million
recurring funding for some of
the agencies that were
consolidated in this request on
this includes the department of
agriculture and PED and then
there was an additional five
million in non recurring funding
that was appropriated for the
HSD meal gap program so I just
wanted to know those
appropriations in those
associated agencies as well I
will go ahead and go to the next
peacoat which is P. five forty
two this is on I believe page
seven of your package.
I'm for this program the
executive recommendation for
general fund revenues exceeded
LFC recommendation by two
hundred sixty six point four
thousand this is primarily due
to cook differences in
personality related costs for
the purpose of the executive
included an additional two FTE
which LFC did not include and
the executive funds an
additional four point seven
thousand and other costs to
account for small differences
and costs for training what's
the LFC did not include
analyst to come to consensus on
performance measures again and
the in regard to the expansions
here I wanted to mention that it
on the bottom of the page it
shows that the LFC is
recommending the four hundred
thirty five point two thousand
that was requests for grants
administration of however that
was later appropriated during
the twenty twenty one second
special session for person and
so well it is showing up as
recommended at the bottom of
this page I want to note that
that funding amount is actually
not included in the totals you
see for the program in this was
partially due to our new budget
system and so the amount that
you see here it is not being
recommended within this agencies
program however it I just wanted
to note that it looks like it's
recommended however this was
funded during the second special
session last no is that the
executive recommendation for
that four hundred thirty five
actually roll that up into the
request for the previous P. code
that five million dollars for
granted ministration I'll go
ahead and had about two Nicole
professional comments.
Thanks Jessica Mr chair members
of the committee so the two
additional FTE will be for
additional I. T. support within
the agency in all to alleviate
caseload and assist the agency
with other I. T. needs I will go
now into P. five four three
the executive recommendation for
general fund revenues exceeds
the legislative recommendations
by about three hundred sixty six
point eight thousand is
primarily due to personnel costs
and recommended increases for
civil legal services the
legislative recommendation
exceeds the executive for
federal funding other revenues
and fund balance the within the
base the legislative
recommendation exceeds the
executive recommendation by a
hundred and seventy seven point
two thousand in person both
recommendations support the
addition of two requests FTE for
capital outlay one F. T. E. four
E. nine one one up on the nine
one one programs position and
one F. T. E. for that real but
then position the legislative
recommendations funds being
requested real ombudsman
position utilizing vacancy
seeking.
The executive recommendation
receipt still.
provided recommendation by for
contractual services by four
hundred and seventy one point
one thousand the executive fully
funds the request for civil
legal services contracts well
the legislative recommendation
was smaller and smaller
increased about fourteen
percent.
Both recommendations support
language authorizing transfers
for you nine one one Fund at
twelve point five million and
the DWI crash Fund at one point
six million analysts have come
to consensus on all measures and
targets and I will transfer over
to Jessica for any additional
comments.
Thank you to call I think that
pretty much covers it I just
wanted to know the small
difference in civil legal
services there's an additional
she on civil legal services in
your packet as well on page
sixteen I just wanted to note
that in case the committee had
specific questions on the
differences but per but
basically the executive fully
funded the requested increase I
believe where as the LFC funded
aids slightly smaller increase
the general fund portion was a
fourteen percent increase in the
total increase would be about
seven point seven percent from
the LFC side I'm going to go on
to the next P. code P. five
forty four this is our fiscal
management and oversight
program.
The executive exceeded LFC
recommendation for general fund
by thirty nine point one
thousand and this is due to
differences in recommended
person of that personal funding
excuse me both recommendations
of support people revenues from
other funding sources
the executive exceed the LFC by
that thirty nine point one in
person because the executive
fund the lower vacancy rate for
that program and then for
language both recommendations
supported the authorizing the
transfer of from the enhanced
tobacco settlement program fund
and county supported Medicaid.
the analysts have also come to
consensus on performance
measures and I'll have the
technical for additional
comment.
Mr chair members of the
committee for P. five four five
this is your non operating
budgets so these are all flow
through programs that DFA gets
the executive recommendation
exceeds the legislative
recommendations for general fund
revenues by two hundred and
thirteen point one thousand due
to differences and recommended
funding for those not operating
expenditures both
recommendations support equal
revenues from all other funding
sources the executive
recommendation exceeds the
legislative recommendation by
two hundred and thirteen point
one thousand we provided
additional funding for at least
whole community assistance
County detention of prisoners
and the land grant council and
you can I I'm not privy to your
packet that you have for the
high level but we do have just
because he can point them to
that and that concludes my
presentation thank you just got
thanks to call so for your
packet up on so as you notice
the different sheet for five
forty five forty five excuse me
I have a breakdown for each of
those non operating
appropriations however there's
an additional break down
something you all might be a
little bit more used to seeing
on page fifteen and the shows
also the differences between the
recommended not operating
expenditures for P. five forty
five so I just wanted to know
that and then one additional
note in your difference
worksheets there was just a
small calculation error on the
sheet for page thirteen five
forty four of five forty five if
you look at the total
recommendation total for LFC
under the uses you'll see that
it's it's tying up to twenty
three million point eight
however that should be twenty
three point three and it should
align with the sources we re
checked the map right before
this meeting and so the.
Sources in and choose should
align it was just a calculation
error on the part of the program
so I apologize for that I don't
have any additional comments for
that P. code and so I guess will
handed over but if it's okay
with the chair to secretary
Romero I'm for their
presentation.
Okay.
Secretary Romero here
Representative.
Good afternoon Mr chair and
members of the committee it's
always a pleasure to be to
appear before you I'm Debbie
Romero and the cabinet secretary
for the department of finance
and administration I'd like to
introduce us to members that are
participating as palace than
that hopefully will be able to
answer some questions that they
come up and so with me today is
W. secretary Cynthia Martinez
and we also have colonel Donna
can Tana who most of you know he
is the local government division
director
Kathleen pinion is our new HSD
director she's been with us
since first part of December so
we're happy to have her we also
have thank you Romero who is the
deputy director of HSD I and she
will actually be sharing the
slides and drive people like
talk and then we have Anthony
and ladies who is the budget
director for the department
other key staff that may be
listening in but I want to
acknowledge because of all their
hard work throughout the year in
in providing support and
services to state agencies and
local governments included are
W. secretary Renee ward
also Dr Andrew Miner who is
acting deputy director for state
budget division
Dr Leo they'll gado our chief
economist Donna Trujillo is our
state controller and mark Mel
hop is the deputy director
financial control and we also
have actually eight leach who is
part finance director Marcos to
fear he'll who is the deputy
director for the state board of
finance.
Mr chair on slides two to four
you'll note that these are our
vision mission and guiding
values for the department our
mission is to support public
entities throughout New Mexico
ensuring that they are fiscally
responsible effective and
accountable and we do this by
providing oversight and support
to state agencies and local
governments W. we have.
Yes.
Of.
You're still stuck on slide one
can you have about okay.
Yeah slide actually I was these
are our by focus areas and I
discuss these are I presented
the several times to your
committee so I'm going to spare
you you know and and so just to
be respectful of time so we can
go to slide for now.
So we talked about
both of the LFC analyst and are
DFA analyst explained R. P.
codes and this is just an
organizational chart that shows
what those P. codes consist of
it and before I go to make sure
that I really want to thank the
analyst for all their hard
working working on this budget.
next slide please.
So one thing that I wanted you
Mr chair is just talk a little
bit about things that we've
accomplished throughout the this
year in particular
something that doesn't get
mentioned much is the fact that
we manage the payroll system for
over twenty two thousand state
employees and it's kind of it's
been a little bit of a challenge
this year just because we had
staffing shortages either due to
people finding other positions
are retiring and then we've also
had a couple of instances where
we have to do to limit the staff
because of comment right
illnesses but I can tell you a
hundred percent of employees
continue to receive their
paychecks even though we've had
these challenges.
also notable is that we provide
training on a regular basis to
state employees and other
governmental entities
we provide training on budget
procurement purchasing vendor
and vendor relations and travel
and one thing that doesn't
doesn't get spoken about very
often is our vendor relations
bureau their workload has
actually doubled with seeing you
in emergency rental assistance
program that the department that
all the talk about a few minutes
but
the reason that it's doubled is
because every band anybody that
gets a check from the state of
New Mexico has to have a W. nine
on file and so they that didn't
amount of of the W. nines that
they've been processing has
doubled significantly but not
only that this debate this
bureau has been instrumental in
stopping several attempts of
Bender frock the process
improvements that they have
implemented have also
significantly impacted the
number of directions that they
have been noted by arrest in the
past.
Prior to two thousand eighteen
we could we could expecting
plate anything between two to
four hundred infractions.
And I'm happy reported twenty
twenty last report we got from
IRS there are only twenty five
infractions and that those there
none of them were repeat
findings and so looking forward
to the day that there's yo
infractions but we're and we're
getting there.
Do you know we have a short
opportunity we have a short
opportunity to apply for federal
funds to and to implement the
emergency rental assistance
program what should have taken
eighteen months to set up was
actually done in three months.
The total awards to date this is
how successful the program has
been as we reported eighty eight
million dollars to about thirty
seven almost thirty eight
thousand applicants and
something also that I need to
just kind of read about is the
treasury said monthly benchmarks
for across the nation for states
to to reach of what the you
Representative money.
As of December thirty one we
have actually met the benchmark
Act and we've actually had met
benchmarks through February we
we we expect to be out of you
Representative money you
Representative one money because
they're two pots you
Representative money this summer
but we still have a hundred and
twenty two million of the
Representative to funding and we
actually received about fifty
forty percent fifty one million
of that of the Representative
too many.
You know talk about this you
know how stressful it's been
managing all the federal money
coming into the the state of New
Mexico a lot of it is flowing
through the department of
finance and administration.
so that's the purpose of the
battle grant tracking federal
grant up here that we're we've
established they really we need
a one place to be able to track
all the federal funds community
state New Mexico make sure that
we're meeting all the benchmarks
make sure that we're applying
for as many federal funding
opportunities as we can and so
this unit is actually
established to provide support
to state agencies and local
governments and and so we're
X. we're recommending Q.
additional grant writers and
funding for the staff for this
very important are you and we're
asking that this be funded using
federal funds I know it was
mentioned earlier that we
received some funding during the
special session but that was a
small amount compared to what we
really need we've estimated that
we need about two point three
million between FY twenty two in
FY twenty three so we still have
a significant shortfall to to be
able to continue to operate that
bureau and so I hope that you
will consider that
You know the the workload has
increased not just for it would
be if they.
It's not in just one division
one Pico it's it's increased in
HSD because they have to process
all of the payments it's in and
they have to do all the
reporting it's increase for
financial control as I mentioned
earlier because of all the W.
nine set up to be processed all
the words that have to be cut
and state budget division
because of all the budgets that
have to be established.
the funding for the grants unit
we just it's not just for staff
it's also for the system to
track think that the grants I'm
sorry I should told you to turn
the page it's also to
The federal government is
requiring us to develop some at
the net and equity plan and then
we also have to do conduct a
survey on equity making sure
that the funding that we're
receiving in state New Mexico
from the federal government is
applied
and and this is focused in those
areas that are most at risk you
know that where where they
typically you know what there's
low profit low populations where
we have high populations of low
income individuals so we need
funding to be able to do that
planning and to do those those
surveys and to provide that
information back to the federal
government.
so and in addition I think it's
really important that the state
established Department finance
administration established a
cost equity plan this plan will
ensure that we can capture or we
can allocate of federal funds
for administration of the
programs that were managing for.
The federal programs that were
managing so I recognize that the
goal is to get as much of this
battle funding out to into the
state but we can't forget how
important it is what that that
there's a cost to administering
these programs DFA needs funding
to ensure we comply with all the
federal guidelines and provide
all of the appropriate planning
documents that I mentioned
earlier and that we have a
system to track and provide
reports the governor legislature
and most importantly to the
federal government that that
this is the the executive
recommendation includes five
million of our but.
Federal funds for this purpose
specifically.
Slide six the Mr inside seven so
that's good you know this is the
first P. coat this this is for
the hunger initiative is
included and and and thank you
very much for clarifying it's
not just a child under
initiative is actually a
statewide hunger initiative.
I can tell you Mr chair that I'm
not I'm not I'm sorry on the
line with us also I stick built
introduces candle Chavis she's
the Putin hunger coordinator for
the state she's been working on
this initiative since June
coordinating over two hundred
and thirty member and and and
conducting weekly meetings to
identify develop a strategic
plan to address hunger in New
Mexico.
on slide nine
I think it's like nine no I'm
sorry this is the cat this is
some just for informational
purposes we included a of a
slide of the capital of
appropriations the come to the
Department that we have to
administer so DFA capital outlay
bureau actually all the tracks
and reports on all of the
capital outlay money that's it
that is appropriated by the
legislature this is just state
money.
Next slide please.
So this is where we talk about
the hunger initiative is so as
you can see we have twelve
million twelve million meals
that are are missing for food
insecure people one of seven
people they students security
where the seventh highest in the
US of a food insecurity at the
at fifteen point four percent of
our population bills experiences
food insecurity third highest in
child food insecurity and then
in two thousand seventeen about
twelve percent of seniors
reported feeling food insecure
so I think that one thing that
we need to notice that this that
the investments that the
legislature and
has made in the past has begin
begun to produce positive
outcomes and and we're actually
number two the second highest
improvement in the nation's so
don't want to stop want to keep
this momentum going so the
hunger initiative fourteen point
two million dollars neck if you
go to to can't please.
This is a breakdown of where the
funding will go in and and so
originally when the request came
in each of these agencies
requested the funding but we
felt like it was really
important that we have one to
have the funding flow to one
agency and be distributed so
that we could be in a better
position to report on the
success of the program and also
to figure out where we still
continue to have gaps to so that
that this this is a tool to be
able to do to continue to
identify in the draft that dress
any gap that we see I think
what's really important to note
Mr chair members is that just
New Mexico grown alone we think
we'll be able to serve about
seventy thousand additional
individuals and so you can see
the college food and security we
anticipate that about seventeen
thousand almost eighteen
thousand students will benefit
from this program and for PED
The New Mexico grown for mills
school for school meals we we're
we're looking at seventy five
requests for about ten thousand
children that could benefit from
this program so these
investments are definitely worth
the investments and and much
needed investments.
So this is program support
So we're little bit higher than
the
Then the LFC and this it's about
two hundred sixty six thousand
and and this is for the I. T.
needs that we have within our
department especially as because
the workload has increased with
the you Rapp system that we have
to develop for individuals to be
able to apply and and also for
us to be able to report to the
federal government and then the
federal Act funds tracking
system and and I forgot to
mention that we have implemented
that tracking system the federal
funds tracking system training
was conducted last week and this
week and so the expectation is
that agencies that receive
federal funds will now start
reporting through this system
and will be able to provide more
timely reports and more accurate
reports to the legislature the
governor and to the public on
all of the federal funds that
are coming into the state of New
Mexico.
Spike thirteen please.
So this is local government
division committee development
but it's it's it's our local
government division you can see
we have forty three F. T. E.'s
go to the next slide please.
So again there's a difference in
the executive recommendation
verses LCS recommendation and
and I think these of already
been discussed the legal
services also the county
detention of prisoners we
provide more funding there these
are actually to pay to pay to
reimburse counties for housing
state prisoners in their
facilities
we have the whole community
assistance our little bit of an
increase as did County supported
Medicaid and our local D. W. I.
grant funds.
Slide fifteen please.
So this is just a summary of the
CDBG and there
there's their CVG this is a
summary of local government
division their CDBG allocations
and they're provided of tracking
that they do for all the capitol
procreation you can see the
numbers of projects that they
administer the number of dollars
that the they actually oversee I
expect that given the amount of
money that we have it coming
into the state that their work
load is going to increase
substantially so it's really
important that we get some
funding to help them with that
You know I think the other thing
to point out is that also
includes our recommendation also
includes a debt is sufficient
funding to fund the role
investment position the
legislature appropriated ninety
thousand dollars for that
position and and it's probably
we at we have hired one of she's
began in December I'm hoping
she's working her way round
through the state so hopefully
she'll get to your area of the
state but her whole goal is to
to start
making those connections and
building those those connect
with so that communication so
that we can start supporting the
ruling frontier communities in
our state.
Six my face.
The last is no not last we have
the financial control division
so I could fifty one entities
that they get this the
difference in this program was
minimal and it just had to do
with we are recommending more
funding to to fund unfunded
positions no just bringing up
the vacancy rate down a little
bit so that we can work on
at the end of the positions and
I mentioned earlier about the
workload that that they
experienced that increase and so
that this will help in that
respect.
Okay and slides eighteen to
twenty one Mr Chairman not going
to go through.
You wanna go to eighteen at
least just so that they can see
that so it's just a summary of
the recommendations of side by
side comparison for your
information and that the
following slides are more
detailed explanation of where
the differences are so thank you
Mr chair for allowing me this
opportunity.
Thank you madam secretary.
Well now we will go to questions
from the committee.
Okay the first Tennessee
approves.
Representatives of the hill.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank you to the presenters are
I know DFA budget is pretty
complicated is what to go
through so I just have one
question actually that I'm dying
to know about
Mr chair miss Mr chair and madam
secretary I am referencing looks
like line twenty one of the high
level budget for local the local
government division and the
executive recommendation first
civil legal services which looks
to be quite a bit more in the
LFC recommendation and so I was
wondering if I could
get a reason as to why that is
Mr chairman and secretary.
So.
I'm Mr chair and representative
I'm going to try to answer that
but I think I'm I'm gonna
hunt to you local government
division director colonel can
Donna but we have seen of the
increase in the number of cases
that they need to to handle but
most specifically we saw a good
figure increase because of the
objections that were being that
it individuals were were were
facing luckily we've been able
to find some federal funds for
that purpose is so that may not
be the case now so Mister king
ton is there something else that
you can add to that.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Representative the
secretaries actually right on
target of the.
Load for all of the entities
that support the civil legal
services or provide those
services as soon as hot spot an
increase in uptick in the number
of cases involving murder due to
the fact of the pandemic
evictions some of of some of
them are just several of the
basically the demand for their
services it's in the future
increase in this is a to
accommodate that so that they
can provide adequate services to
those individuals those
constituents throughout New
Mexico they don't have the
ability to pay for those
services on their own so yeah
this would give an opportunity
to ensure more New Mexicans have
proper representation as they go
through the legal challenges.
Thank you very much Mister
Mister chair Mister contend that
and it's it's also my
understanding that there are
certain court fees that are
assessed that go to help
supplement the provision of the
state civil legal services and
that we because of COVID and the
lesser number of cases we see
moving through the courts that's
another reason why this budget
has been impacted and I think
another reason why we need to
find another way to supplement
that Mr chair and so I'm I'm I'm
concerned that there's not
enough money in the LFC
recommendation to make sure
civil legal services can do what
they need to do thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you for that.
Mexico go to Representative
Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair I just had a
question about when the
disbursement of the second round
of emergency rental funding will
begin.
So madam chair Representative
Dixon actually we are already
starting to use some of that so
he wrapped one money had some
restrictions that have to be on
COVID related so you have to
experience some type of COVID
related
In order to be eligible for you
Representative one so we're
finding more more people at that
doesn't apply to and so we
actually started using more of
that the rap too many.
Wonderful and do you feel
confident that you'll be able
sorry Mr chair and madam
secretary do you feel confident
that you'll be able to get all
of those funds out the door.
Mr Chairman Representative Dixon
actually we expect that we are
going to run out of you
Representative one money in the
summer and so then we definitely
will be looking at using the rap
too many I you know we have
until twenty twenty four to
expend this money I would be
surprised if it goes that long.
Thank you madam secretary thank
you Mr chair I have no other
questions.
Representative next we'll go to
Representative Brown.
Thank you very much Mr chairman.
So I think some of the confusion
over the hunger initiative is
due to how it's presented in
volume to the oval here and also
in the.
Little spreadsheets that we have
it's variously referred to as
childhood hunger initiative No
kid hungry campaign and then it
appears somewhere else here so
that I think that's what some of
us have been a little bit
confused about that so maybe
changing the.
One titles would be helpful Mr
chairman and
I guess this might be for any of
the analysts were even the
secretary of she wishes I'm
looking at page eighty two of
our yellow volume number two and
this is in the category of
membership and dues.
So on page eighty two there is
at the bottom of the page some
recommended language and it says
that the department of finance
and administration shall not
distribute in general fund
appropriation made an items be
through K. two in New Mexico
agency your local public body
that's not current in its audit
for financial reporting so the
concept behind that I don't
disagree with but I don't know
what I'd just be through K.
refers to face what I'm looking
at that of the handouts.
So maybe someone could tell us
what that means.
Mr chair Representative Brown I
apologize for the confusion for
items be through K. I believe
what that would be referred to
as in your packet if you go to
that kind of high high level
high level overview of the non
operating appropriations on page
fifteen.
basically what that's referring
to is if we were to.
itemize each of these the
starting with one seven
memberships and do going down to
like eighty and margins water
supply Fund we're looking more
on that we've basically point
number eighty through Kate this
would be referencing the items
related to the merger anything
from the margins to water supply
fund down to that land grants
council appropriation and so
that would be in volume two
because we got a new budget
system basically what happened
was those individual
appropriations that use the
itemized on that page we're not
able to be put in itemized
involved in to however the will
be itemized in the GA house bill
two and so when you get that
version of the bill it'll be
referencing items feature K. and
it'll show each of those
individual non operating
expenditures listed A. B. C. D.
E. S. you'll be able to see but
for now for your your knowledge
that's referring to everything
on this list except for that
membership and do fine I believe
is correct okay and then
Mr chair and
I guess so we'll continue with
our analyst so membership and
dues does that mean every local
government needs to be data
member and pay dues to be using
DFA services.
Question Mr chair and
Representative brown for
memberships and dues that is
mainly for the there's three
memberships that the DFA piece
for and that's for the question
governor's association the state
budget office's national
membership dues so it's it's the
agency's membership dues that's
only within that one line item
for at a hundred and forty
thousand dollars okay very good
thank you for that answer
so Mr chairman I I just have one
comment for secretary Romero I.
Two three years ago I was
getting a lot of phone calls
about the delays in DFA
processing the capital outlay
matters and I'm not hearing
those complaints are now so I
just want to thank you for I
guess making things a little
quicker and maybe even a little
more streamlined and I know our
local governments really
appreciate that thank you very
much Mr chair.
And and look I'm scanning my
page to see if there's any more
hands up.
I was expecting to see a
Representative Anderson but I
don't even see them on screen.
Mr Costello.
Yes Mr chairman thank you thank
you all I also I also one
commend you Mr Romero secretary
Romero also on our local
governments I I know I've spoken
to so my local governments and
and they're really really
thankful for the way you things
have been streamlined like
Representative Brown said so I
just want to commend you hear
and that you have we really
appreciate that and thank you
Donnie as well with the local
governments really appreciate
you guys thank you.
Thank you Mr chair if I might
I'm I'm I can't take credit I'm
gonna give full credit where it
belongs and that's that
definitely to colonel can Tana
and his leadership and local
government division.
Thank you colonel thank
appreciate your guys is hard
work.
The group is.
Madam secretary for a very very
good at all.
Explanation and presentation.
When I don't see any concerns so
I will ask my annual by
Representative Sarinana make a
recommendation.
I think we also need to include
in your and the recommendation
that this will work further
discussion as well because there
has been made several comments
made that we can't just settle
with the.
LFC recommendation so with that.
Madam by here thank you Mr
chairman I do move the LFC
recommendation with another look
at the hunger initiative the
grant writing and the I. T. if
TD's.
And also I can Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman if I may.
Thank you Mr chair yeah I I
think another peek at the civil
legal services bonding as well I
think we.
Very few questions and had a few
answers but like us to look at
that again to please.
The recommendation has been made
and it's been second is there
any opposition.
The recommendations.
See no.
You've got the approvals with
with the LFC recommendation with
further discussion later.
Thank you very much madam
secretary and your staff the
presenters.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you and with that we'll
move on to our next presenters
which would be agency code five
oh five cultural affairs
department.
Miss Peddie and later two
leaders often the discussions.
Okay great thank you Mr chairman
Mr chairman members of the
committee good afternoon my name
is Amanda Dick Peddie fiscal
analyst for the legislative
finance committee as Mr Chairman
said we're joined by Dr Andrew
Miner from the department of
finance and administration as
well as a secretary Garcia E.
Priego from the department and
I'll let her introduce fourteen.
The agency I I I'm just going to
point out a couple things before
we get into the different shades
again have your high level it
should be your very first page
of your different she document
this is a good place to look at
you know side by side what's
going on the recommendations for
all programs so you want to keep
that.
Also the LFC has a few documents
in volume three regarding to the
to regarding the department of
cultural affairs that those can
be found on page sixty nine and
seventy.
Right sharks you have sources
and uses it shows revenues the
agency receives and you have a
museum and historic site
attendance which I know we're
all very interested in as we're
trying to come out of this
pandemic.
Go ahead and get started.
So briefly an overview of the
recommendations of for revenue
the executive recommendation
including overall increase of
three point eight million
dollars or nine percent but
three point four million of that
increase is general fund
revenue.
The LFC recommendation increases
overall revenue to the
Department by two point four
million one point eight million
dollars of that is general fund
revenue or a five point two
percent increase.
In the face both recommendations
support some of the top agency
initiatives our priorities
including a new person with a
lot of contemporary arts museum
and education and engagement
initiative and increased rural
and tribal services.
Major differences in the
recommendations those come.
In a couple places.
some of that is for personal
funding
the executive includes about
four hundred fifty thousand
additional general fund revenue
over the LFC recommendation
board miscellaneous museum and
historic site costs.
And additional funding for a
southern facilities then Madam
and additional funding for an
assistant to the facilities
manager.
For performance analysts to
reach consensus on all
performance measures and targets
and with that being said I will
turn it over to Dr minor to.
At anything on the overview and
go ahead and get started with
our first program.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee pleasure to be
here after minor from DFA
executive analyst for the
department of cultural affairs I
just like to point out one thing
on the high level before moved
that museums and historic sites
yeah we're gonna talk about both
recommendations at its FTE
especially in the museums and
historic sites program but if
you compare the FY twenty two
OpBud column just by twenty
three you'll notice that it's a
difference of three FTE
increased by three of the from
twenty two to twenty three
that's because the department in
FY twenty two lost about ten
point five FTE due to basically
being taken for more than two
years so we're gonna talk about
adding more than three FTE but
the net gain is basically free
FTEs that's what you're seeing
there so go ahead and move on to
the first program museums and
historic sites this is by far
the largest program in the
agency includes all state
museums historic sites the
museum resources division.
Revenue in this program the
executive includes one point six
million dollars more general
fund revenues in the LFC
recommendations and all other
funding sources are identical.
We're based expenditures the
executive recommendation for
support the agency requests for
the of lot of contemporary arts
museum that's the the and new
annex to the museum of art
that's opening at next this year
later this year includes eleven
new FTE forty five thousand
dollars for contracts and three
hundred thousand dollars for
other needed operational costs
the LFC recommendation includes
five hundred thousand for six
FTE at bottom and a hundred
fifty thousand dollars for
operational costs.
Both recommendations provide
additional general fund revenue
for CM's that other historic
sites executive includes about
four hundred thousand more than
the LFC that's to cover various
operational need operational
expenses that all of the
different museums and historic
sites around the state the
executive recommendation
includes also one hundred and
thirty thousand and two FTE for
a southern facilities manager
that would manage the that most
of the DCS facilities in the
southern part of the state and
also an assistant to the
facilities management director
and those are not supported by
the LFC recommendation and with
that I'll turn it back to
Amanda.
Thank you
madam chair members of the
committee the next program if
you turn to page five is program
are key code five thirty seven
preservation this one's very
easy the recommendations are
identical
And left hander has anything to
add to the preservation of both
recommendations essentially add
fifty point six thousand general
fund revenue to be the federal
match requirement but under if
you have anything else to get.
Thanks Amanda I will go ahead
and go on to the next a program
which is library services
including the state library.
Revenue here the executive
recommendation increases overall
revenue by about four hundred
and sixteen thousand or seven
point nine percent over FY
twenty two the executive
recommendation was one hundred
thousand more general fund and
the LESC.
The LFC recommendation budgets a
hundred and fifty nine thousand
and other state funds from the
rural library endowment fund
that's to budget basically the
maximum district Yushin from the
fund just five percent to go to
developed developing libraries
areas with us with areas with
populations less than three
thousand people after that fund
the executive recommendation
match the agency requests for
the base expenditures the
executive recommendation
includes additional funding for
person fifty thousand the
contractual services category
for New Mexico history day and
at sixty five point two thousand
per library requests the LFC a
recommendation prioritizes
direct services and a hundred
thousand dollars for library
requests and then back to you.
Thank you I will quickly note
before moving on for it to be
rural library endowment fund it
is not budgeted as Anders had in
the executive the HSD we had the
talks LFC and
DCA has been talks about other
ways to bring that in besides
budgeting it so if it's not
included in the adopted
recommendations state agency can
look at a bar recommendation or
something like that but LFC does
support getting those funds out
this year because this is the
first year we can distribute.
The next program.
Is programs support he five
forty.
So you're revenue at the
executive includes three hundred
and forty five thousand more
general fund revenue thank he
committee recommendation.
The base both recommendations
support to be the HSD priorities
and that's for an education and
engagement initiative and that
essentially continues efforts
that the department started
during you know the worst of the
shut downs to get.
Get cultural affairs get.
Museums and historic sites out
to people while museums were
closed
and for a rural community
roadshow so those are both
supported in both
recommendations are the
executive includes a total of
three hundred thousand dollars
for these initiatives while the
committee recommendation
includes one hundred fifty
thousand.
The executive recommendation
includes an additional fifty
eight thousand dollars in the
person category to Bill B. can
positions and a hundred and
fifty five thousand dollars in
operational costs not supported
in the LFC recommendation.
Did you want to add anything
programs support.
Thanks Amanda I'll just go ahead
and go on to the final of
program which is arts New Mexico
arts revenue the executive
increases general fund the arts
program by about twelve percent
while LESC provides an increase
of about seven percent all other
revenue sources are identical
the base the executive
recommendation supports the
agency's request for additional
per person funding.
and then some contract costs are
to residents grants to arts in
the military the LFC recommends
in class are excuse me the LFC
recommendation includes one
hundred thousand for the New
Mexico music commission for
activities such as that will
coming outreach and student
recognition the executive
recommendation includes thirty
thousand dollars for the music
Commission and that amounted
match the agency requests so
that's all I have Salter back to
and if she has any final
comments.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I have nothing else to
add I can turn it over to madam
secretary her team.
You madam secretary.
Your me Madam.
Mr chair thank you very much
sorry about that
if the Michelle could start
sharing her screaming at the
presentation going.
I want the thank you for the
opportunity to present to you
today and I also want to thank
our analyst for their overview
and know that both are truly
oppressed pleasure to work with
and and work very hard for us
and other agencies so thank you
with me today on the the meeting
is W. secretary Michele
Gallagher Roberts CFO Greg
Geisler New Mexico state library
director You Like NA office of
historic preservation director
Jeff Pappas and legislative
liaison Michael in Cairo last up
watching on the webcast or
viewing the web in our all of
our do it division directors
along with many of our partners
in the various foundation and
friends groups and I want to be
sure to thank them for joining
us digitally are virtually out
of respect for the committee in
its time my presentation today
will be hopefully fairly short
and focused on the general
operating general fund budget to
the to agree to an exclusive
exclusively about part of it but
next slide Michelle.
I'm as many of you know the
purpose of the department as to
preserve protect them present
New Mexico's rich cultural
resources for the education and
betterment of all of its
citizens but especially our
students are overall we work to
improve the quality of life
education the creative economy
and foster diverse cultural
expressions our goals are to
ensure access and inclusion have
a collective impact on the state
enhance our stewardship of
cultural resources and to
increase for increased
participation our rural and
tribal communities next slide
Michelle.
So how do we do that we work
towards our goals through
three primary service areas
programs stewardship and
scholarships so our programs
include the exhibits
performances lectures and events
for which we are best known it
also includes the abundant
educational opportunities we
offer for New Mexico children
adults and seniors statewide
stewardship really represents an
expansive range of work for
maintaining a variety of
collections historic artistic
Helion collage of coal and
archaeological to conservation
and preservation of those
collections facilities and
resources in our care and also
the care of other resources
around the state particularly
through the historic
preservation division.
I'm probably what we are at
least recognized for is
scholarship and this includes
the maintenance and
accessibility of our archives
the library state real wide
support for libraries around the
state to New Mexico state
library research both buyouts
credit outside scholars but also
buyer own DCA employees as well
as opportunities for fellowship.
and I want to point out the
image of the Mars twenty twenty
perseverance rover mission
that's a great example of of our
work our national and
international work and
scholarship doctor Larry
Crumpler from the New Mexico
museum of natural history and
science is actually part of the
mission team for that NASA
mission and he was also a member
of the Mars exploration team
which had a mission from two
thousand and three and tell
twenty eighteen.
Next slide.
Just a reminder of who we are we
are the eight museums and eight
historic sites that you're
familiar with along with our for
service division's historic
preservation New Mexico arts New
Mexico state library in the
office of archaeological studies
as well as the museum resources
division and our program
supports
within each division is a wealth
of programs and resources and
these include some things that
you may not be as familiar with
like the award winning museum in
New Mexico press pelos CO which
is the country's oldest museum
magazine wonders on wheels are
statewide mobile gallery and the
beloved book mobiles which of
course several communities
throughout the state.
Next slide Michelle.
So I want to quickly share just
a very few highlights with you
from fiscal year twenty one and
going into the current fiscal
year in fiscal year twenty one
we have one point three million
sessions accessing online
resources for museums and
historic sites so these are not
all of the things you see us
doing on social media these
are actually individuals who are
accessing things like
collections and exhibits and
resource materials directly from
DCA websites
there was sixteen point four
million million dollars in
construction costs completed
using federal and state historic
tax credits that was through the
historic preservation division
and this represents businesses
and individuals who actually
actively probe reserves historic
structures statewide.
I'm.
In addition to the museum
resource sessions their war two
point three million searches
using databases funded by the
state the state library these
searches were conducted by
everyone from scholars and
researchers to school children.
two million people participated
in arts programs in their local
communities across the state
that were funded by dollars from
New Mexico are.
And over four thousand sorry
sorry four hundred and sixty
thousand New Mexico children
were served by DCA educational
programs around the state and
impressive is the ninety two
thousand hours of volunteer
service that was logged during
fiscal year twenty one
an impressive number despite the
ongoing pandemic and that by and
large this group falls into a
fairly high risk category so
these folks stayed with us even
serving us and and virtual
formats.
Next slide please.
DCA has also received six
million dollars in direct
federal comment related funding
there was one point two million
dollars from the institute of
museum and library sciences that
went direct to New Mexico state
library and that flow through
directly to local and try local
and tribal libraries statewide I
two point six million dollars
from the national endowment for
the arts that went directly to
New Mexico arts again closer
funding for local arts
organizations statewide
and with great geysers
leadership and perseverance of
the department also secured two
point one million dollars in SB
a funding through the shattered
venue operator requests I'm not
reflected in the six million
dollars is that many DCA
Division applied for and
received a dash additional
federal comment funds from the
national endowment for the arts
and national endowment for the
humanities the institute of
museum and library services
These include of the farm and
ranch museum the national
Hispanic cultural center museum
of Indian arts and culture and
others.
Next slide.
I'm of course there been
challenges
as noted in prior presentations
to during the interim DCA
experienced a combined four
point three million dollar loss
in the mission revenue over
fiscal years twenty and twenty
one we manage those losses
through a careful cost cutting
past management as well as doing
bars across categories within
the two hundreds to cover
personal expenses we also
limited hiring especially for
those positions that were
directly related to the
operation of museum and historic
sites during their closure.
we are also seeing about a
fifteen to twenty percent
increase in cost for many
facilities projects this is
coupled with the ladies caused
by surplus chain issue of our
supply chain issues and labor
issues unfortunately we have
seen the cost of lumber go down
a little bit recently and also
our facilities staff has been
working with the visions and
contractors to mitigate both of
these impacts as best as
possible.
based on four hundred and ninety
seven FTEs we currently have a
twenty percent vacancy rate
according to the same LFC data
the funded vacancy rate is seven
percent of like many employers
we are staying long time
employees these are people with
well over twenty five years of
service retire we're also seeing
other employees that are making
larger life choices that cause
them to leave DCA.
A hiring for financial staff and
some of our frontline positions
regards and cashiers has been
particularly challenging however
we are hiring at a faster pace
than we have in prior years with
twenty five percent of our
hiring representing internal
promotions.
Lastly we're finding the
constituent needs and wants have
shifted of many constituents
have come to enjoy online
programs and services we're
finding when we offer both in
turn in person and virtual
formats we see forty to sixty
percent of the participants
opting for those virtual formats
so balancing the demand for
services in these formats with
maintaining our in person
experiences is an area of focus
across the department next
slide.
As both are analyst shared with
you DACA's agency request
included an eleven point three
percent increase in the general
fund and that was really
targeted to some key areas of
need the executive
recommendation met those needs
by providing a ten percent of
the general fund increased and
we are very grateful that the
LFC has acknowledged those needs
but it's recommendation of five
point eight percent general fund
increase leaves about one point
four million dollars in unmet
needs and I'd like to spend just
a few moments drawing your
attention a little bit closer to
some of those differences that
are analyst rates next slide.
The first looking at the impacts
on museums and historic sites
the five three six program in
museums and historic sites the
LFC recommendation provided a
sixty five thousand dollars for
costs associated with the
operation of the New Mexico
museum of art a lot of
contemporary that does leave a
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars in operating cost and
forty five thousand dollars in
contractual services needs that
are Matt
it is important to note that we
acknowledge and appreciate that
the LFC is recommendation of two
thousand dollars I'm sorry two
hundred thousand dollars in a
one time special general fund
I'm outside of the budget is
extremely helpful to get in the
museum opened.
critically the LFC
recommendation provides no
funding to provide the
department southern facilities
those are the museum of space
history farm and ranch museum
for cell then and the J. Paul
Taylor Misia's site with a
higher level facility staff
manager this really puts the
sites at multiple disadvantages
it increases the time it takes
review and approve work the time
the division staff especially
the division director has to be
used to be involved directly
into of maintenance and
facilities issues and it also
requires additional time for
facilities staff to travel from
Albuquerque and Santa Fe to
oversee work.
Finally the LFC recommendation
for increases in contracts an
operation leaves an unmet need
across all of our museums and
historic sites while the state
has been fortunate to see
increases in general fund for
the past several years the
majority of these increases have
gone to person and benefit costs
which have increased steadily
over a number of years as a
result all of our museum
Division museum and historic
site divisions have seen their
three hundred four hundred
category budgets go down since
fiscal year fourteen
I'm and really the situation is
a pretty perilous point where
cuts to basic costs such as
veterinary services landscaping
services and utilities are
pretty unsustainable next slide.
Within the library services
program area the LFC recommends
Funds for pastor grants to
libraries thirty five thousand
dollars above the agency
requests that is great for those
libraries that will receive
those funds however the
recommendation does not include
the statewide New Mexico history
day program this is truly
valuable program serves more
than two thousand students in
grades six through twelve
statewide.
Next slide.
In the program support we're
extremely grateful that LFC has
provided half of the executive
recommendation for two important
initiatives that involve
divisions across the agency
these
While not the full request
certainly they will help move
forward some of this important
work so thank you for that.
impacts on the arts division
focusing on some key program
areas with the arts the LFC
recommendation of a hundred
thousand dollars for the music
Commission is seventy thousand
dollars higher than either the
agency requests for the LFC
recommendation we're grateful
for the support for the
commission it has received
little to no funding over the
past years and I know that the
commission has some wonderful
ideas about what they would like
to do with that programming
however the additional
allocation to the museum
Commission side the music
Commission does leave both the
artist in residency and the arts
and military programs with zero
dollar recommendations next
slide.
I would respectfully ask this
committee to consider adding
general fund supports the LFC
recommendation to better meet
the needs across the agency
specifically I would strongly
recommend re examination of the
funding for the so the
facilities manager and assistant
in the southern portion of the
state are the four hundred and
twenty three thousand four
contracts and operations at
museums and historic sites.
Forty seven about thousand for
arts in the military fifty
thousand for history day and the
additional two thousand for the
museum of art brought
contemporary contracts and
operating this would add eight
hundred and fifty thousand and
Representative seven point seven
general fund seven point seven
percent general fund increase.
Up next slide.
For that so much could be
accomplished in addition to what
has already been funded we could
truly make certain that our
facilities and the southern part
of the state have a dedicated
person that they need to address
our critical facilities issues
we could make sure that our
museums and historic sites
including a lot of contemporary
how sufficient funding to pay
for things like animal care
landscape maintenance basic
supplies and utilities we can
find art therapy services to
active military members military
members veterans and their
families as well as professional
development for artists
therapist and providers who work
using art therapy art therapy
has been proven to be one of the
most successful treatments for
PTSD I'm we can also find your
long history education for over
two thousand students grades six
through twelve your.
Three regional history day
contest and a statewide
Final competition.
I'm and with that I want to
thank you for listening to more
proof my presentation I want to
thank you for your support I
financial and attending museums
coming to events and I am
pleased to stand for questions.
Thank you madam secretary.
With that will go to the board
and the first person I see as a
Representative right now.
Thank you Mr chairman
madam secretary I'm I'm racking
my brain to try to remember yes
adult literacy
was offered under cultural
affairs in the in the not so
distant past in mind remembering
that.
Mr chair representative brown no
I believe that is funded through
PED.
Mr chairman and madam secretary
so I I know it use our I'm
pretty sure the it used to be in
a different department I thought
it was cultural affairs it
didn't really sit there and
there was a concern that it
didn't really belong and PED
because the focus of adult
literacy programs is very
unlike.
higher education that work you
know the tradition the the model
that we're used to seeing it a
community colleges colleges and
universities so all track that
down and I just want to make
sure that we're not short
changing the needs there and if
that's not your department and
all of like I said I'll track it
down Mr chair that's all I have
thank you.
Mr.
Mr chair if I may I apologize to
the representative it is in the
higher education department for
giving it is not PED as higher
education that was as of fiscal
year nineteen we have not had a
conversation with them about
that program since then I
apologize for speaking.
Right Mr chairman and madam
secretary so I think some of the
early thinking was it it might
fit under library services but
it didn't really fit there
either and I I I think it's kind
of been passed back and forth a
little bit but again I think
it's a critical component and we
need to make sure it continues
so thank you Mr chair then
secretary.
Thank you.
Mexico.
The.
Thank you Mr chairman the arts
the military really effective
programs receipt for our our
military veterans and PTSD I
just I would have purpose of the
talus
so is there a reason why can can
somebody give me a reason why
we're not funding some of these
other programs or not giving
much money to them.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I can take a shot at
that it wasn't the LFC is
intention to not fund something
of the LFC recommendation it
prioritized music Commission
because those rural outreach
services were a top legislative
priority so it wasn't
intentional exclusion if that
helps answer that question.
Okay and I I guess I was
concerned of the southern
facilities manager and assistant
This is an easy and and and and
in our gardens a great museum I
I just I think these are really
important for a whole bunch of
reasons our veterans definitely
with the military arts and I and
some of these museums for kids
you know a lot of just getting
out they don't get they don't
some of them don't leave the
city their their boredom and at
least museums teach them
something in it and given the
ability to
See more than ever wells so I
would just like to see both of
those funded thank you thank you
Mr chairman.
And I don't see any other hand
so all as my question.
Madam secretary I have been
meeting with some of the people
in my district and I have been
trying to find some information
as to how to get started on
establishment of the Navajo code
talker museum.
I believe such a.
museum to add to your list of
responsibility would be great I
mean we could have the cultural
museum the veterans museum and a
whole bunch of stuff in just one
museum and we would call it the
Navajo code talker me as you.
We have some land.
Set aside for it's just on the
east side of window rock Arizona
and the New Mexico portion so I
think the location is would be
very very perfect and I will
probably be speaking with you
all slide to find out more
information on that and I just
wanted to give you a heads up on
it of just very briefly I have
been meeting with Navajo code
talker museum board and out of
what was three hundred plus code
talkers there are only four of
them left and they're all in
their nineties the youngest I
believe it's ninety two and I
would sure like to start
something before they're all
gone and do things in their
remembrance I want them to
participate as much as they
possibly can so with that of.
Hey I don't see any other hands
so.
Who madam chair Syriana.
Thank you Mr chairman but that I
move the LFC recommendation with
hopes to maybe look at more
funding in certain in the area
is requested thank you.
Thank you madam vice chair.
We'll go to our next
presentation
these small are you back.
Mr chairman members I think you
might need to vote on the
motion.
I second that motion Mr
chairman.
Thank you Mr Castellano.
Thank you for the reminder
amended.
Mr small.
You wish me to continue I thank
you so much Representative
Allison and I I think we know
that there's no opposition to
that the motion for department
of cultural affairs
all of all drugs now but thank
you Representative Allison vice
chair representative setting on
a and and all the members thank
you both very very very much.
Okay members
So that ends this move part of
this afternoon's hearing with
with nuns can.
Hard to make jokes over isn't so
I will just go then add directly
to HSD five to one energy
minerals and natural resources
department miss Caitlyn one will
take us away this one.
Thank you Mr chairman good
afternoon members of the
committee my name is Caitlyn one
analyst with LFC joining me at
today to go over the
recommendation for the energy
minerals and natural resources
department is Andrew Miner from
DFA and secretary cultural
Propst will give the agency
presentation after Andrew and I
go over the differences and
again this is agency code five
twenty one.
I'm just want to point out some
references to EMNRD and LFC is
budget documents.
In volume one and natural
resources policy analysis begins
on page seventy nine and the
agency's report card is on page
one fifty one.
In volume two LFC the LESC
recommendation can be found on
page two sixteen.
And in line three we have some
supplemental tables and graphs
on pages seventy four and
seventy seven and I can put
those page numbers on the chat
when it started here for your
reference later.
So in your packets on pages one
and two you'll see at the
general fund high level for
EMNRD and this gives the side by
side comparison of the executive
and LFC recommendations for
general fund appropriations
you'll see a little bit more
detail in this document are
going program by program on the
items that were requested or
recommended for funding.
I'm going to.
My presentation on page three
with the difference she for the
agency as a whole and then
Andrew and I will go back and
forth presenting each program.
So looking at again on page
three of the difference should
be.
We have the LFC recommendation
for EMNRD is six point two
million dollars above the FY
twenty two operating budget well
the executive recommends an
increase of eleven point four
million.
LFC is recommendation increases
general fund revenue by one
point eight million dollars or
seven a half percent the
executive recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by seven point one million
dollars or twenty nine point
three percent.
Recommendations for all other
revenue sources are the same in
total providing a revenue
increase of four point four
million dollars primarily due to
projected increases in federal
revenue.
The executive recommendation
increases the person budget by
fourteen percent over the FY
twenty two operating budget and
sixteen percent over FY twenty
one actuals.
Give recommendation would fund
an additional forty FTP compared
with LFC is recommendation for
fourteen new FTE supported by a
person budget increase of five
percent.
The executive recommendation for
other costs is a seventeen
percent increase from the FY
twenty two operating budget well
the LFC recommendation increases
other costs funding I nine
percent and that's also a twelve
percent increase above FY twenty
one actuals and on performance
LFC and DFA staff reach
consensus on all performance
measure targets.
I'm trying to gauge I enjoy will
start the program descriptions
with the energy conservation and
management.
Thank you and good afternoon
Mister chairman and members the
committee again I'm Andrew Miner
that the FAA analyst for EMNRD
so I'll go ahead and start with
the first program energy
conservation management.
Revenue LFC is recommendation
includes a general fund increase
of twelve percent the act the
executive recommended five
hundred eight thousand more in
general fund revenue or increase
about fifty nine percent it's a
fairly large percent but fairly
small numbers of smaller program
here recommendations for other
revenue sources are the state
for base expenditures the Aussie
recommendation increases person
funding for ECM B. by two
hundred sixteen thousand to
support transfer two FTE from
other programs to be
reclassified as a deputy
director of this division and a
climate your chief the executive
recommendation per person is
three hundred fifty two thousand
more than the FY twenty two
operating budget and it does
also supported the transfer of
those two positions.
Are you see in the only
currently has early set the time
of the budget initiatives this
division only had half an FTE
thank you so is mostly filled
LSE's recommendation increases
the contractual services budget
by sixteen percent compared with
FY twenty one actuals well the
executive recommendation would
be at seventy three percent of
actuals of these this increases
to increase funding to support
climate change and grid
modernization activities the
difference being the executive
provides a a larger increase for
those activities and that was
I'll turn it back to kill him
for the next program.
Thank you and you and Mr
chairman this next program is
the healthy forests program also
known as the state forestry
division.
The LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue by twelve
percent compared with FY twenty
two well the executive increases
general fund revenue by twenty
three percent.
Recommendations for other
revenue sources are equal and
included a six hundred seventy
three thousand dollar increase
in federal funding.
Is budget LFC is personnel
budget recommendation is one
point one million dollars or
sixteen percent above the FY
twenty two operating budget
increase supports the addition
of five FTE to include six part
time firefighters the state
botanist and reforestation
specialist increase also
includes funding to provide
firefighters with the three
percent salary increase with
thirteen beacon F. T. E. and an
estimated one point four million
dollars in FY twenty two the HSD
savings LFC recommends
reclassifying positions rather
than adding FTE for the agency's
six requests you'll R. stirs.
The executive recommendation
recommended increase per person
is two hundred ninety thousand
dollars about LFC is and
includes funding for eleven FTE.
Nine firefighters the state
botanist and a financial
analyst.
The executive recommendation for
federal revenue includes funding
for firefighters salary
increase.
Both recommendations include
funding in the other costs
budget to replace vehicles and
radios and the executive
recommendation is one hundred
and forty three thousand dollars
higher than LFC.
I'll go over to the next program
which the state parks division.
For revenue LFC recommends the
general fund increase of seven
percent the executive
recommendation Greece's general
fund revenue by twenty three
percent of recommendations for
other revenue sources are equal
and include increased federal
revenue forty nine percent to
support various infrastructure
improvements to state parks.
for bass expenditures the LFC
recommendation includes increase
personal funding for seasonal
employees at state parks that's
a two percent increase.
Our excuse me there is a one
point four million Corey
officielle as one point four
million in funded vacancies at
the time of budget initiatives
the second person budget
recommendation provides an eight
percent increase to personal
services that's to fill as many
positions as possible to fill
those vacancies both
recommendations increase funding
for contractual services and
other costs to support park
maintenance and upgrades to
water and wastewater
infrastructure facilities and
plant
for language here there is one
small difference the LFC let
recommendation does include a
language stating that the
general fund appropriation to
state parks include seventy five
thousand dollars to support Rio
Grande trail Commission efforts
to find viable path path routes
and establish the Rio Grande
trail the executive
recommendation does not include
that language okay with.
Thank you Mr chairman living on
to page eight that money
reclamation program.
My reclamation program is
primarily funded by federal
revenue the LFC recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by twenty seven percent and the
executive recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by thirty seven percent in
dollar amounts that a relatively
small difference recommendations
included one hundred forty eight
thousand dollars to replace
federal and other state revenue
with general fund.
And in basic spend the truth the
executive recommendation
includesd fifty four thousand
dollars more than LFC for fuel
employee training and travel I.
T. services and miscellaneous Is
Andrew.
Thanks going next to the oil
conservation division.
Revenue propose recommendations
increase the programs revenues
from the oil reclamation fund by
fourteen percent.
The LFC recommendation for
general fund is an eight percent
increase and the executive
recommendation for general fund
is a forty percent increase of
the where that goes here a
second the LFC recommendation
increases spending by nine
percent from FY twenty two for
six FTE for inspections and
compliance additional contracts
services for hearing examiners
and Corey Paul court reporters
and to develop of the fund
portal and document management
system and other miscellaneous
expenditures as Executive
recommendations supports
basically all of that saying
contractual services and the
same other costs there's a
larger increases notably in the
person services category of
funds twenty five new FTE at a
cost of a eighteen million and
just a bit more in the
contractual services category to
help at the division addressed
it's permitting backlog the
spacing due to all the increased
activity so with that I'll turn
it back over to keep.
Thank you Mr chairman this is
the last program program
leadership and support on page
ten.
The LFC recommendation it
reduces program revenue by two
percent to transfer one FTE to
the energy conservation and
management division and ship the
associated general fund revenue
to that program the executive
recommend a nineteen percent
general fund increase.
LFC is recommendation reduces
the person budget tree like the
transfer of that one FTE the
program has an estimated FY
twenty two vacancy savings of
seven hundred fifty six thousand
dollars and just as I know
Order reference bees thank you
the savings that I mention you
can turn to age fourteen in your
packet there you will find LFC
is that personal services
division for.
And just to wrap up program
support the executive
recommendation at five hundred
twenty three thousand dollars to
the person budget to create an
office of regulatory affairs
with porn you FTE as well as
sixty four thousand dollars to
the other costs budget and that
concludes the differences
between recommendation unless
you have anything else you'd
like to add that we can go to
Secretary part props for her
presentation thank you.
Thank you so much miss one and
Mr minor and madam secretary
thank you so much for joining us
today please go ahead with your
presentation and feel free to
introduce your own credibility
thank you.
Good afternoon thank you Mr
chair and members of the
committee it's a pleasure to be
with you today I do have a
presentation that I'm going to
share with you
so my name is Sarah Cottrell
Propst sent and the secretary of
the Energy minerals and natural
resources department and have
several colleagues on the phone
with us and including Matthew
about selling candy Ortiz from
our administrative services
division as well as director
Adrian Santa from the oil
conservation division and state
forester Lara McCarthy.
So as you heard from our LFC and
DFA analyst for EMNRD's
operating budget there's a
difference of a little over five
million dollars between the two
recommendations and that's all
in general fund there is
agreement on federal funds and
other funds.
Subjective in FY twenty three is
to build capacity in these five
areas program support is a high
priority and something I would
ask for your consideration for a
few adjustments as we move
forward this is really the heart
of the agency and that's what's
what's been kept very clean for
a number of years now and is
demands on the HSD have grown
and anticipating tens of
millions of dollars of federal
stimulus funding flowing through
the agency over the next few
years we need some help.
industry oversight is also a
priority primarily through the
mining and minerals division and
oil conservation division
addressing climate change with
the statewide effort coordinated
by the energy conservation and
management depression I in
conjunction with my office as a
priority.
And then of course properly
staffing and maintaining our
state parks to grow the outdoor
recreation economy and finally
expire response and natural
resource protection managed by
the forestry division the
executive budget request best
supports these objectives that
overall.
For the energy conservation and
management division we
appreciate that both
recommendations support the
transfer of to re purposed FTEs
to created deputy director of
climate directs you however we
we need about another sixty
thousand dollars more in the two
hundred then the LFC rack in
order to pay those positions at
mid point but to to budget them
equitably with similarly
situated positions across the
agency.
In addition the executive
recommendation supports
contractual services and
operating costs and the contract
does would allow us to continue
our climate and grid
modernization work including
statewide public engagement on
our climate work that's planned
for FY twenty three and the
regional electricity markets
task force that our grid
modernization advisory group
recommended that we conduct in
FY twenty three.
Forestry the overall difference
is four hundred thirty two
thousand nine hundred dollars
but some of the nuances really
matter to us and I wanted to
provide some context on that we
prefer the executive
recommendation because it
supports the creation of eleven
new act to use including nine
firefighter positions and
administrative position to help
us manage the complex funding
streams and paperwork for
firefighting expenses with fire
season outlasting year round not
really a season anymore it's a
year sh the LFC recommendations
supports are hiring of
additional wildland fire and
losses to but it would require
us to reclassify so firefighting
positions to do so as I reported
to you before the state is
competing with the federal
government to hire wildland
firefighters and the feds are
getting huge signing bonuses
like twenty thousand dollars per
person and raises to
firefighters and so the exam
both recommendations supported
increase the executive supports
a ten percent raise lowest paid
fire fighters with the state
compared to the LFC is three
percent recommendation the
executive also supports
purchasing of two replacement
vehicles and seven replacement
radios are for percent failing
equipment that we need to rotate
out.
Looking at parks.
In state parks our aim is to
increase staffing levels of the
park's pure and simple we did
not seek any new activities this
year and while both of the
executive LFC recommendations
so.
Recommended increased executive
recommendation is a little
higher for staffing and better
supports our federal funding
opportunities to the land and
wildlife conservation fund and
other sources.
For mining and minerals and as
you've heard the difference is
very small and the two
recommendations are very close
the executive recommendation
does better support our staff
and the need for match
requirements outside of salaries
and benefits and then do staffer
on the road more this year on
projects and doing inspections
and inflation is a factor and
some of our cool fees are
declining and that's what we're
trying to make up for in order
to continue to fully staffed
that vision which has a has a
zero vacancy rate today.
Executive recommendation for the
oil conservation division
supports the agency's full
request for OCD including twenty
five new axes to facilitate
economic development in the
state by permitting oil and gas
activity approving remediation
work performing orphan well
plugging and certain legal
compliance to protect human
health and the environment with
the support will be able to
implement continue to implement
the nation leading messing
natural gas least rules Sir
compliance with our recently
reinstated penalty
administrative penalty program
implement the produced water act
and track the types of water
used in the oil and gas industry
and implement the recently
updated still rule and continue
to modernize the executive also
supported are requests for one
time contract dollars so we can
review approximately sixteen
thousand backlog legacy incident
reviews ensuring that sites get
cleaned up this late so so
taking economic development in
our state.
And that request is not included
in the LFC recommendations.
Finally and and program support
as I have to say the executive
recommendation is is vastly
preferable for us this is the
the financial I. T. legal and
leadership part of the agency
and our programs support has
been stretched to the breaking
point for many years without
additional funds and the LESC
recommendation and cuts programs
support by a further hundred
thousand because we propose to
move item FTE from that we were
not using that was not funded
for program support over to the
energy conservation and
management division but that
programs not funded enough to FY
twenty two hundred thousand
dollar cut would really we must
further and a whole so we're
we're asking that you consider
that.
Going forward and perhaps
perhaps still that so the LFC
record of this is that a bit of
a precarious position program
support and I think maybe that
was unintended.
So by improving the executive
recommendation EMNRD will be
better positioned to increase
our transparency improve
industry compliance and save
time processing permits purchase
orders and tax credit forms
which will generate more revenue
for the state I retain and
recruit experts in the field
thank you so much for your time
and look forward to answer any
questions you may have.
Thank you very much madam
secretary.
Thank you to your incredible
sticking.
you it went very efficiently
through a an extensive
presentation so gonna wait while
we allow members to raise their
hand for questions.
Okay we're gonna go ahead and
start with the index.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Secretary props for the
presentation I was interested if
you could elaborate a little bit
on the
regulatory affairs division and
what what your hopes are with
that.
So that executive thank you Mr
chair representative Dixon for
that question I'm so the office
of regulatory affairs is
something that we actually
proposed in a previous fiscal
year and it was approved by the
governor and by was proved by
the it was part of the executive
recommendation it was approved
by the legislature and the
governor ended up line item
vetoing it because of the Covid
pandemic and trying to avoid any
do you recurring funding and
what the new office we do it
would be a probably a four
person office in and EMNRD
working out of the office of the
secretary two days on regulatory
matters at the public regulation
commission at for potentially
and some other states where
rulemakings might affect New
Mexico's ability to export our
renewable energy for example so
the idea is just would never
have the staffing to be able to
to go and the experts offer
technical expertise at the PRC
and in for example in a
like as integrated resource
planning type of docket and we
we we would like to do that that
that requires a lawyer and
expert director in an
administrative person that was
the the vision for the office.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
I'm secretary one more question
for you relating to the oil
conservation division and you
know it over the past several
years we've talked about the
need to increase funding so that
we have more folks able to do
inspections and permits us so
that the process can be smoother
for folks can you talk a little
bit about the progress that has
been made in that division and
you know what it dishing all
your looking to do it based on
this budget.
Representative Dixon thank you
we've done a lot there's a lot
more we want to do is that short
answer but we've we've we've
made all of our processes online
processes we have stopped
processing keeper in the same
way that we used to which was
labor intensive for both us and
for the industry and frankly for
the public and for porters who
wanted to get our data they had
to cull through thousands of PDS
at online and it was really not
modern or efficient so we've
we've done that we have re
organized the structure such
that we can hire more
effectively and all of the
bureau's anywhere in the state
at any of our field offices so
for example our engineering
bureau chief right now is is an
aspect office I used to be the
all those positions had to be in
Santa Fe will why we have talent
around the state so why not use
it but something that
unfortunately COVID and all the
personal things have have soda
so really modernizing on
technology and processes we have
worked on
that also makes it more
attractive for people to come
and want to work for us because
the positions are more equitable
across the state so really
really have a ring we are
ringing a lot of efficiency is
out of the system but if we have
more to go we also have started
in Albuquerque office because
there's a lot of talent and
Albuquerque to put people there
and inspectors canal telework so
that they don't have to go touch
base at an office for the go out
into the field because it takes
so long to get you know it saved
several hours a day when they
can actually do their job so
paperless initiative
reorganization those kinds of
things now we need to grow our
size final point our size is
much smaller than some of our
other states that are big oil
and gas producer's like Colorado
Oklahoma and the Dakotas and
where the number two onshore oil
and gas producer and we're just
doing more with less so
The PED is of increased
something like two hundred
percent over the last few years
our staff is not.
Thank you thank you madam
secretary and Mister chair I
think that those are really
great improvements and I think
that it just helps our state
entirely we know so much of our
budget
comes from oil and gas and so
making sure that we're doing
things in a timely manner but I
I really like and efficiency
answered thinking outside the
box that you're implementing so
thank you very much Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Dixon listening
representative onion and then
Representative Crowder thank you
Mr chairman and thank you for
your presentation secretary post
I'm I have a question on the
forestry so a few weeks ago we
saw the.
Sorry we saw the Marshall filed
Marshall fire wiped out almost a
thousand homes in boulder
Colorado how prepared we to deal
with the fire like that.
Mr chair representative Sarinana
thank you for that question I
that was indeed horrifying what
happened in boulder we have fire
engines in eight locations
around the state that are ready
to go when it fires reported and
we have capacity for to type two
initial attack crews and two to
four inmate work camp Cruz the
executive budget recommendations
for FY twenty three would allow
us to fulfill all the fire crew
Boston sessions we have that
we've been holding for for
vacancy savings and then adds
fire engine bosses that would
improve the career ladder for
our emergency higher
firefighters the wear and tear
on engines and creating carriers
a significant and we're falling
short and further behind in
terms of vehicle replacement to
and and we that's a another
capital requests that we had
made so it's really about having
more people in the right places
to respond.
Okay that and thank you Mr
chairman thank you Secretary
also you know federal agencies
are raising firefighter pay and
offering signing bonuses with
our money and infrastructure
built on money how competitive
is New Mexico right now in the
hiring market for firefighters.
Mr Chairman representative it's
always been it's always been
competitive but it's extra
competitive now because of the
steps that that by demonstration
has taken to try to recruit and
retain firefighters for the USDA
Forest Service and other federal
agencies and so the requested
ten percent pay increase for our
our lowest paid fire fighters
which you know we're talking
about ten percent of maybe a
forty to fifty thousand dollars
salary it's not this is not a
large dollar amount but it means
a lot to those employees and it
shows that they're valued so our
employees would understand that
the increased as a message that
their work is valued even if we
can't match the federal signing
bonuses dollar for dollar the
engine crew bosses are currently
sold by emergency higher person
and so the creation of these
positions that were asking for
too again house bill that career
ladder so that people who you
know coming into the system now
that they can spend a whole
career with us at state forestry
in state government and live at
home in New Mexico and have the
budget here.
Thank you ma'am thank you and
and secretary one more question
so both the budgets the
executive and LFC have funding
for workforce and watershed
restoration the never be forced
does the the forest division
have the staff to get.
that money to work I mean do we
have enough staff for that.
Mr chair representative we the
need is so great that we will do
everything we can with whatever
resources we have but that is
why the executive recommendation
we proposed six new positions in
each of our state forestry
offices around the state to help
manage those types of programs
these would be forester's they
might be graduates of highlands
university for example coming
and working for us so they would
come by and firefighting and
forestry technician work at our
districts so we can handle the
increased funding for these
kinds of projects and it's it's
the right time we have now or
never money and it's the right
time to to really ramp up thank
Representative for the more of
the staff and projects are
funded by the state whether it's
you through any of these.
Mechanisms and we can that's
bipartisan infrastructure lost
dollars to so we're really
hoping that we can wrap up our
staffing and programs.
Thank you madam secretary I I
agree I hope we can get in the
FTEs for you to be successful
and keep our state safe and
what we're gonna do all we can
so thank you thank you Matt.
Thank you so much representative
Sarinana next we're gonna go to
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam secretary madam secretary
you just mention that you're
seeking a ten percent increase
for the firefighters is that in
addition to the seven percent
that both LFC in the governor.
Are recommending are are those
added together.
Mr chair representative Crowder
yes it would be on top of that
okay that's what I thought.
Madam secretary I I haven't had
an opportunity to say what I'm
about to since I've been here
all week long but I looked at
your transfers out of PSEB and
your reversions and I was
stunned you're the first I've
seen had zero transfers out of
PSEB.
And I don't know how you did
that but I was wondering would
you mind teaching some classes.
Yes that's all I have Mister
chairman thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Crowder
Well I I have several questions
want to see are there any other
member questions miss them a
couple.
Okay seeing now and then madam
secretary okay let me go to
Representative Trujillo real
quick.
Representative Trujillo you're
you're up and if you could hop
off you please.
Sorry at two I just wasn't fast
enough
the first one is the two hundred
thousand of increase enough to
support the deputy director and
climate bureau chief positions.
Madam secretary of.
Mr Chairman Representative
Trujillo it helps it's not quite
enough if you want to include
salary and benefits it for those
two positions coming over you
see and do so we think we would
need rather than two hundred
thousand something more like two
hundred and fifty to two hundred
and sixty thousand dollars to
effectively provide those two
positions being moved that the
both recommendations supported
moving that we just need a
little more than the LFC rectus
so and the fifty thousand Mr
chairs for benefits that you're
saying.
Mr Chairman representative at
first it would go towards the
two hundred category the
salaries and benefits okay and
then the second question I have
is what the climate bureau chief
for that.
Our.
EMNRD do pool advance are a our
emissions reductions goals and
what would happen if we didn't
staff these positions.
Mr chair and Representative
Trujillo thank you for that
question it's an important one
because we're trying to for the
first time institutionalize a
climate euro in this department
we're already doing all the
Mexico coordination working
conjunction with the environment
department on climate policy
across the state to be our
statewide greenhouse gas
emissions reduction goals so we
want to create that permanent
Committee received at create a
career ladder working in that
space and and our department and
we have major plants we we've
been very and we're focused on
state government and trying to
get our act together inside of
state government on climate for
the last few years but now we
know we need to work much more
deeply with and disadvantaged
communities impacted communities
and with the public at large in
New Mexico on climate action and
that takes staffing and
coordination and time and so we
are we still that having a
bureau chief to better
organize that will be the focal
point in the agency on climate
and support tracking both our
state government and our
statewide climate efforts is the
right right way to go if we
don't do it I think we risk not
being effective in meeting our
targets.
So Mister chairman then you're
saying with that support we can
hit our targets.
Mr chair representative yes that
would be the goal okay thank you
Mr chairman thank you US
secretary.
Excellent thank you very much
Representative Trujillo
madam secretary I I I have a few
very specific questions but
first madam secretary in terms
of being able to.
Recruit hire and retain some of
the additional positions that
you're asking for is there do
you all have
because they're in some specific
areas and we've we've gone
through why you've gone through
why they're there what are the
prospects for being able to in
the upcoming fiscal year
actually fill those positions.
Okay your thank you Mr chair for
the question and it it's a good
one so we are we we have a a
rapid higher next week we're
we're gonna have I think it's
like fourteen of our OCD
positions are going to be at
that Robert higher in the
process of hiring three so that
will make a huge dent and that
they can see that Division which
historically has been a little
bit harder to fill but here I
think it's important that's why
the dollars are important as
well as the FTEs because
realistically for OCD you know
LFC recommend six new F. T. is
where we probably with the
funding available could only
sell four of them because they
are often specialize and we do
have to go a little bit about
mid point on some of them so
that's important to keep in mind
some of our divisions have very
low vacancy rates right now that
mining and minerals division has
has no vacancy or maybe there's
a house for the the school
person that we're working on
filling you see and do the same
thing you're very low vacancy to
sort of natural turnover parks
is a challenge but knowing that
we have budget run way to go out
and work on filling those
positions you know that leases
us to go to go out into the
state really higher we've been a
bit hamstrung over the last year
because of of COVID and
visitation having been down
you're not wanting to get ahead
of ourselves because we didn't
know what are what are revenues
are going to be from the parks
so that is resolving visitations
back up and you know I think
we're we're ready to rock in
terms of hiring parks forestry
you know also has a good track
record of of filling their
vacancies and there are some
really good programs pipeline
programs in the state and
mentioned highlands university
for that so I I I know that you
hear this from all that all the
agencies that absolutely we can
do it but you every single
division is putting together a
six month plan for hiring and
yeah I think we just need to
know that we have the budget my
way to to make it happen.
Secretary thank you very much
for that
briefly in that space
you you've talked a little bit
about it as we go through the
rest of the session there are
significant
you over forty million dollars
in federal funds that it coming
to your department it.
Understanding how this is one of
the questions and members raised
how the existing positions and
discussions about budget
expansion influence the
expenditure in the investment of
those incoming federal dollars
would be very appreciated
Moving into the oil conservation
division
it's my understanding and this
is based upon director Santa Fe
checking in with her earlier
today we're back up to ninety
five oil rigs operating in the
state does that sound right
madam secretary.
Mr chair your source is the same
as mine out of what director
Santa provided to me today so
ninety five right awesome thank
you madam secretary and and
truly the director and her team
do such an outstanding job we've
talked about in this committee
we've actually seen New Mexico's
oil production return and now
significantly eclipse pre
pandemic levels
and I think it's fair for us to.
Really Elise rely in the short
term that that production will
continue to stay at a very
elevated levels is that your
understanding madam secretary.
Mr chair yes it is here we
understand that the industry
investing in New Mexico for the
long haul we're one of the
cheaper places to do you do at
the Permian as a reasonably
comparatively less expensive on
shore place to do business
Spence other places even in the
country not to mention all the
world because it's a shallow so
we expect this to continue.
Thank you madam secretary I
that's that's definitely the
place that they were operating
from as well and so within the
oil conservation division madam
secretary the positions that and
the investment in again that
with the the clear I'm sure
you're HSD preference as well as
always the expressed LFC
preference to utilize existing
funds and then to look at at
expansions
it seems like there is there's
both a a continued strong
production tie in we need we
need a fully and smoothly and
efficiently functioning
department to continue it at
elevated production levels with
the regulatory oversight and the
safety The New Mexicans and the
private sector demands was is
that fair madam secretary yes Mr
chair spot on.
Great so I I
That area I think for for this
committee given the inordinate
impact upon our budget and the
tie in where catastrophic events
have.
Cascading fiscal and
environmental and community
consequences on the other side
of that coin if we're able to
work together on a budget that
appropriately
provide safety provides
oversight provides the kind of
technical engagement that
director Santa helps lead we're
gonna minimize earthquakes from
re injection which is going to
in had a young allow production
to continue and be of of benefit
to communities we're gonna do
all these environmental and
economic two four is it seems
like
Madam secretary
going to the office of.
Report which seems like.
The other one of the other key
differences in our budget
proposals
Same question will apply there
how are we going to hire those
positions and.
Civically with those positions
you've talked about regulatory
affairs and the transmission
it's my understanding that
transmission in particular more
of a regional engagement in
regional press national
representation New Mexico will
lead to more transmission at
lower or no costs for New
Mexicans that enables the kinds
of wind farms that provide
monthly payments to property
owners for instance is that your
understanding.
Mr chair yes are you know the
the conversation regionally is
about how to cost effectively
promote greater transmission
that brings down costs for all
the states customers but has to
be looked at recently and we're
not set up to do that right now
and we've been asked to look at
it through this great
modernization top advisory group
which was an outgrowth of the
grid modernization act read
about backs that this body
passed a few years ago and so
and there's nobody to do that
work right now in the agency or
in the in and the executive
branch of state government and
so we need to have some
expertise I often find myself
spread too thin a commit to
going to regional meetings on
topics and then not being able
to make it because it's just not
really the right.
I should I should be sending
somebody else you know with who
has time to dedicate to that so
I'm really hoping that we'll be
able to work with the PRC even
as they they now and as they
make their to their transition
you pointed commission it's very
traditional in other states for
the executive to appear through
the state energy office at in
the docket to provide technical
expertise and some of the
sitting commissioners have asked
us to do that more often and we
just haven't been able to do it
because of our our staffing
limitations so I think it's it's
appropriate there's a model and
you know I think we can be very
efficient with a small office.
Thank you very much madam
secretary
I then want to conclude just to
say both of course with the
things to you in your department
again we're in part producing
more oil than all but Texas
because of the excellent were
you know the incredible private
sector stakeholders and our
energy industry in our
department which punches way
above the folks that are there
because they're incredible
people with incredible
dedication
The so so just thank you and
that extends to forestry and the
other divisions as well
I want to thank
this one as has been noted.
Kind of across the board the
budget we have representative
confidence in across many
different areas special session.
the the federal funds investment
of over forty million dollars
represents a commitment to New
Mexico's natural resources I
think that commitment has been
shared there are differences
that exist in degree and key
fill us you know key areas
perhaps that we need to address
in areas like program support
but this represents really
incredible work by the LFC and I
just want to commend that and
then last thing the we're gonna
go to the recommendation of
courses members now we have the
Mexico Environment Department up
next and I think what we're
gonna do madam secretary is
following the conclusion of the
environment department's budget
hearing appoint a joint sub me
as you've noted there is
increasing collaboration and
connection between the two
departments and so I think we're
we're gonna identify a
subcommittee that works with
both you and secretary Kenny.
Under again working with miss
one and the LESC scheme as we
continue to engage in this
process.
So thank you very much madam
secretary and we look forward to
a lot of work as we move
forward.
Members of the committee thank
you and and analysts.
Thank Mexico now we're gonna go
over to Representative Sweetser.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Secretary especially and Mr
chairman thank you for the nice
concluding comments because it
did give a lot of perspective
and with that I would recommend
the LFC correct yes the move
forward.
Great
we M. S. two for the LS two
recommendations earth thank and
second.
A here a second Representative
Sarinana thank you very much
it's been moved by
Representative Sweetser second
by Representative setting up is
there any opposition to adopting
the LFC recommendation.
The new opposition we've adopted
that recommendation and
following the conclusion of the
upcoming Environment Department
hearing we'll have our joint
subcommittee to work
collaborative thank you madam
secretary.
Okay miss one if you can take us
into the next apartment that's
apartment of the environment
agency code six six seven
and will keep on rolling.
Thank you Mr chairman again my
name is Caitlyn line LFC analyst
and Andrew Miner from DFA is
still with us to help me present
the differences between the two
recommendations for the
environment department this is
agency code at six six seven
I'll point out again the
references to this agency and
LFC is budget documents only one
we have our natural resources
policy analysis starting on page
seventy nine and the agency
report card on page one forty
eight.
Inclined to kind of find LFC is
for recommendations starting on
page three twenty three.
And then buying three we have
the sources and uses a table for
the corrective action fund on
page seventy nine.
Hi it's first begin is our
general fund high level showing
a side by side comparison of the
recommendations just for the
general fund appropriations and
this will get a little bit more
in depth than us so we'll see in
a different sheet that's a good
reference
I will begin The presentation on
that page two and with the
difference we were the HSD
overall and then again Andrew
and I just go back and forth
presenting each program.
So beginning with revenue
overall the LFC recommendation
increases agency revenue by
eight percent including a six
percent general fund increase
the agency's budget is primarily
funded by special revenue from
applications certification
permitting yes.
Followed by federal revenue and
lastly general fund revenue.
LFC recommends increasing
federal revenue based on
provisions of the federal and.
Just then an op Act.
That appropriates twenty one
billion dollars for
environmental remediation and
aspirants including at least
thirteen point nine billion
dollars for state programs
directly managed by the
environment department.
LFC also recommends increasing
revenue from the agency's
special revenue funds that more
than the executive does on some
examples of revenue sources that
LFC recommends increasing our
the waste water facility
construction loan fund which
received a large influx of
federal infrastructure funds for
eligible projects such as water
wastewater facility project
nonpoint source water pollution
control projects and watershed
project and the clean water
administration fund which is
used to administer that program.
Another source LLC recommends
additional revenue from is the
hazardous waste fund which has
the broad purpose.
Meeting necessary expenses and
Administration operation of the
hazardous waste program which is
consistently one of the lowest
performing programs in the
agency and you can find some
data on that in the agency's
report card again in volume one
on page one forty nine and one
of the reasons that the agency
reports for that is low
infections due to high agency
right.
So that's just some context and
samples for what you'll see it
and Adam the difference chief is
one of the major differences
between recommendations the
executive recommendation
increases agency revenue by five
percent less than LESC overall
but with a much larger general
fund increase of forty eight
percent executive recommends
reducing federal revenue by ten
percent and using less of the
agency's special revenue sources
on the base budget.
LFC is recommended increase to
the agencies based is primarily
in the other costs and
contractual services budget an
eight hundred ninety thousand
dollar person budget increases
also recommended to support
reclassify occasion of FTE to
better me agency priorities as
well as recruitment and
retention efforts to address
tied agency right.
The majority of the executives
recommend it increase to base is
budgeted in contractual services
what person funding is increased
by ninety seven thousand dollars
and the other costs budget is
reduced by two point four
million.
On performance LFC and DFA staff
reach consensus on all
performance measure targets and
the agency did at cemex you
expansion requests over
recommendations include funding
or use your requests but LESC is
is a personal recommendation
that's thirteen FTE well the
executive nearly fully funds the
agency requests and that's
thirty four FTE both expansions
are in the environmental
protection division and will go
into more detail on those items
when we get to that program so
and you will start us off with
the program differences on page
four in the resource management
division.
Thank.
You Mr chairman members the
committee Andrew Miner happy to
be here again to brings home
this afternoon before I go to
the first because I just like to
mention the as you will see
throughout the cause us Kalin
said there are some differences
in the recommendations for other
state funds transfers and
federal revenue the executive
recommendation does match the
agency request for those funding
sources and also during the
fiscal year the agency is able
to just a reminder able to
increase its up federal budget
and many of its other state
funds budgets if those those
funds materialized.
More so with that moving to the
first program that's resource
management which is essentially
the program support the program
of the agency for revenue in
this program LFC recommends a
nine percent increase for the
resource management division
including a seven percent
general fund increase the
executive recommendation
increases the programs budget by
three percent with an eighteen
percent general fund increase
LFC recommends more transfer
revenue from special revenue
funds of recommendations for
federal revenue and fund balance
are the state.
Based expenditures here the LFC
is recommended increases
primarily for person to support
recruitment and retention
efforts the executive
recommendation also budgets
major increase in person just
not just a small reduction in
the contractual services budget
and with that I'll give it back
to.
Thank you Mr chairman and so now
we're on the water protection
program page five in your
pockets LFC recommends a five
percent increase for this
program including a six percent
general fund increase the
executive recommendation is an
increase of eleven percent
consisting mostly of the general
fund increase eighteen percent
above FY twenty two.
LFC recommends a larger increase
in transfer revenue but the
recommendations for other
sources equal.
General fund increases
recommended in the person budget
to fund and reclassify three
positions one of the surface
water quality bureau for climate
change activities and water
quality data collection one of
the drinking water bureau for
climate and drought resilience
and emerging contaminants and
one in the ground water quality
bureau for compliance and
enforcement.
LFC recommends additional
increases to person and
contractual services funding
from other revenue sources to
address rising water quality
testing costs and other needs.
The executive recommendation
recommends the same positions
funded in the LFC recommendation
as well as an additional
position in the drinking water
bureau the majority of the
executive general fund increase
is one and a half million
dollars to match federal grants
for watershed and wetland
restoration or protection this
item was not requested in the
agency's budget initiatives so
that was an item that LFC I did
not have the opportunity to
review boards the budget
recommendation thanks Andrea.
Thanks just a quick note on that
one point five million us Gillen
said that's for federal grant
matching for watershed and
wetlands protection that was an
executive age executive
initiative that was that I
discussed in consultation with
the agency and was actually
switched over from the agencies
I see I. P. requests that's why
you're seeing there.
Moving to the next program
resource protection.
For revenue the LFC recommends a
four percent increase for
resource protection program and
the executive recommends a three
percent decrease both
recommendations reduce general
fund revenue by two hundred
thousand to support the resource
management division while adding
funds to support two FTE at the
LFC recommendation creases
transfer revenue by a larger
amount than the executive.
basically the LFC recommendation
increases person signing by five
percent which includes one
hundred forty one thousand from
the general fund for two FTE for
solid waste facility inspections
LFC recommends classifying or
funding existing vacant
positions instead of adding FTE.
The executive recommendation
slightly reduces person funding
the LFC recommends keeping the
contractual services budget flat
and the L. Executive reduces
that category by about fifteen
percent could.
Thank you so finally in the
environmental protection
division both recommendations
keep general fund revenue in the
environmental protection that
divisions based equal to FY
twenty two.
General fund increases are
recommended for to expansion
items with LFC is recommendation
amounting to a nine percent
increase and the executives
increases general fund revenue
by seventy one percent LFC also
recommends a larger increase in
transfer revenue within the act.
Both recommendations re
prioritize funds from the person
budget you contractual services
and other costs but LFC is
recommendation includes a
smaller reduction person.
Now for the expansion items for
the HSD is proposed creation of
a climate change bureau LFC
recommends four hundred thousand
dollars from the general fund to
support personnel costs for the
creation of seven FTE executive
recommends funding the new
bureau with two and a half
million dollars and creating
fifteen FTE.
The agency also proposed
expanding the existing program
to a cannabis and hemp euro for
this purpose LFC recommends two
hundred thirty nine thousand
dollars in general fund revenue
and six new FTE the executive
recommends I fully funding
request of two point three
million dollars to support the
addition of nineteen FTE and
contractual expenses.
Is the presentation of the
differences between the
recommendations I did also just
want to mention on the last page
of your packet materials page
fourteen is where you'll find
LFC is yes calc warm where we
have information on the HSD is
vacancy is I'm vacancy savings
and personal budget increases
that's all I have you can either
go back to ensure if you have
any additional comments or more
to the secretary Kenny to give
the presentation for the agency
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much miss one
let's go to secretary Kenny and
C. will continue with the
dialogue with Mr Secretary
we're very excited to have you
here please take us away and
feel free to introduce your
incredible team as well.
Mr chair and members of the
committee it's nice to be here
with you I do understand where
the last today on a on a busy
week so we'll try to be brief
and to the point today
Mr chair I have with me and
members the committee I have
with me are deputy cabinet
secretary Rebecca Roose are CFO
Marlene Velasquez Alicia love it
our part one of our program
financial managers who is an
expert on budget and Judy cal
our bureau chief for the
construction programs bureau
for questions related to water
infrastructure and and funds of
that kind Mr chair I'm going to
ask steep the roofs to share our
slide presentation with you all.
I don't see it yet.
Okay.
Mr chair and members of the
committee and in our effort to
express one of our core values
of innovation we have a we have
a Q. R. code up there in the top
right hand corner so someone
doesn't have the slide deck or
is following along at home or
any number of our fantastic
employees but are watching they
can just take their smartphone
scan that QR code and get the
presentations act as well so
that it again one of our core
values as is innovation we try
to bring it but everything we
do.
So we can move to the second
flight they're about to thank
you.
Mr chair and members of the
committee you know as as we you
see what the breadth of our
department does and and many of
you know from the point of entry
by which you request services
from us we're very happy with
with our relationship with the
legislature and but yet always
looking to improve it we've
managed about sixty to
legislative inquiries here today
in FY twenty two we chat we
strive very hard to get you that
information as soon as you need
it on any one of these programs
but but our department is
diverse our workforce is diverse
and you can see first and
foremost that were regulatory
agency charged with protecting
air water food and land as well
as your workplaces having
conducted over seventy thousand
rapid responses here since the
pandemic began were very happy
that we kept more businesses
open in New Mexico and employed
safely
were also if you don't know this
a very big financial agent
agency administering millions of
dollars annually in water
infrastructure solid waste
grants and additional federal
grants to communities like the
diesel engine replacement act so
we are both the regulatory
agency and an agency that
provides millions of dollars to
communities throughout the
state.
We can move to the next slide
Rebecca which is our dashboard
Mr chair members of the
committee this I is probably
where the rubber meets the road
for for all of you this
dashboard side is a quick
snapshot of not only our core
values one of which is an
additional Jeff mentioned
earlier but signed collaboration
compliance with the others but
this does would really give you
a quick look at how the
department or who we are and how
we're budgeted and what our
workforce looks like so let's
just start rather quickly in the
top left corner
this is a little bit about who
we are as an agency most
important Mr chair members of
the committee a number of the
agencies have been before you
today and I've been watching
with you all afternoon
you have a combination of
general fund and then some
degree of grants and special
revenue fund so I don't know if
we rank is one of the biggest in
terms of all the funding sources
but we certainly have many the
general fund twenty two special
revenue funds and are one
hundred grant typically if
you're an employee in our
department and and some of our
different bureaus you could be
filling out your time sheet on a
bi weekly basis with about
twenty or more codes by which
your billing your time too so it
it it takes a little bit of
effort and if you're in NMED
employee to account for your
time because we have so many
funding sources next to that
you'll see the FY twenty two
budget just as a point of
comparison as we move to the
right and go into our FY twenty
three budget the FY twenty
three.
I'm sorry the FY I twenty three
budget.
You can see the governor's
recommendation was an increase
of seven point one million
dollars.
In general fund and the LESC
increase was one point one
million dollars so you can see
the different there and read of
six point seven million dollars
if you go below the the the line
if you will and started that
green side in the bottom left
what you'll see there are
reversions and and
Representative Crowder Mr chair
these are reversions
to the to the general fund based
on civil penalties that we've
collected given our our rules of
regulatory agency it's important
to note that you know when we
have civil penalty that when the
environment or public health is
compromised but at the same time
what we hear from industry is
that without regulatory
enforcement as we as we are
charged to do
it and on level playing field
and wanted to on level playing
field industry starts to lose
out because competition becomes
unfair so we take that role very
seriously not only from
protecting public health and the
environment but also valuing the
industry it's choosing to do
business here
So as we continue on from that
reversion I'm just going to
spend a moment talking about
that but you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm really happy
that agency and from the finance
are both talking about you know
what I've seen in the paper
about raises for state employees
I think that'll significantly
help with our retention as well
as recruitment efforts but as it
stands right now we have five
hundred thirty one people
compared to six hundred and
fifty one funded positions so
we're ramping up and have been
ramping up
as as we always are to try to
fill the gap here we have six
hundred ninety seven authorized
positions those include both
funded and unfunded positions
just simply based on our
budgeted vacancy rate Mr chair
members the committee when I
speak for LFC in December we
were at about a twenty point
nine vacancy rate but that's
gone up to about twenty three
point six percent due to your
and retirements so that's not
unheard of as we go as we bridge
the year and the new year but it
does typically take up but but
we're confident that we're going
to bring that back down and
bring it down rapidly and I say
that because we have about
seventy four positions in active
recruitment of forty five are
posted on SLO's website.
Twenty nine were actually either
conducting interviews or have
selected accounted working on
the paperwork doing background
checks on those individuals and
and you know ultimately bringing
on New Mexicans into a great
department and in state
government.
And before we move from this
slide just a couple notes on on
hiring and and recruitment and
retention Mr chair and and
members of the committee yeah I
heard with the the with my
colleague you just presented
you know working the person
services can be under
underestimated here.
We've we've.
And I've been with the
department since twenty nineteen
it on average it was taking us
about seven and a half months
stability can see and you know
there are some on some weeks
that we were doing better but on
average seven and a half months
to fill a position
we're down to three months now a
lot of that is based on the fact
that we have filled incredibly
important positions from our
team you increases resources
bureau chief to are HSD director
but we are still we are in a
skeleton crew and our personal
services and when you're and
what that means is you know you
can't modernize you can't go
from paper to electronic systems
although we have now and that's
we're seeing the benefit
modernization will help us here
When we pull our employees which
we just have have a more routine
process for doing this we part
please and ask them why they're
leaving the department the
number one reason we get is
better pay elsewhere thank it's
simple as that better pay
elsewhere in contrast that to
our employee engagement surveys
which we started in twenty
nineteen when the permit process
of our third year of this
most employees
like their job they like our
department.
But their biggest concern is
employee compensation so they're
leaving for better jobs and
their biggest concern as an
employee is compensation.
and I'm just going to hit this
last point Mr chair and members
of the committee I think some of
the things that we're doing as a
state are really helping though
for example let me share with
you our telework data we have a
fifteen percent of our workforce
is working full time remote.
Meaning that even if there
wasn't a pandemic they would be
working from home just fifteen
percent twenty percent are
working full time in the office
and sixty five percent are
working a hybrid schedule so I
think that increased flexibility
that the state is offering is
actually helping with employee
morale and employee retention.
We can move to the next slide
Rebecca Mr chairman members of
the committee I just usually
show the slide because it it's
important to know where we've
been because where we've been
wasn't as good as where we're
going and I appreciate your help
in helping us get there but we
still have work to do to close
the gap between the author of
the funded FTEs we actual staff
and again we're we're working
earnestly to do that
we can go to the next slide
Rebecca and Mr chairman and
members the committee the next
few slides really just contrast
the executive recommendation and
a bit more detail visually
although I have to say that miss
one and not missed and that Dr
minor have always do such a
phenomenal job in I learned from
their presentation every time
talking about our department but
this is just a render down
version or simplified version of
the great work that they do but
slide I is the executive
recommendation and I six Rebekah
we can fly to that one I think
this is the one will spend a
minute on slide six really gives
you the contrast here Mr chair
and members of the committee and
let me let me point out a couple
things on the slide for you.
If you go from left to right the
five six seven two five six
eight as well as P. five six
nine those are just based base
increases whether there you look
at them from the executive side
LESC side those are basing
creases that's what those
numbers and F. T. E. R. and as
you go to the right of that the
five seventy those are
expansions so that I project
that because the first three
boxes are really the work we are
already charged to do the
expansion is for work that has
either come to us or that we
want to do that we don't have
staff work today
With that Mr chair as a as I go
through this
I'll just say that it I'm gonna
spend a minute talking about the
climate bureau as well as the
cannabis edibles basically our
our hand and handed this euro
the two expansions within NMED
Mr chair and members of the
committee currently right now we
have one FTE devoted to climate
change in the department that is
because we went and worked with
the US climate alliance to get a
grant it's not a state funded
position per se of course is
authorized to bring that money
and it to the legislature but
what I'm saying is this the
state hasn't made the investment
and this year we're making a
significant investment in our
climate bureau the credit bureau
would be designed to implement
those market based mechanisms
that both attract those clean
energy companies and diminish
our carbon emissions and what
does that look like clean fuels
the hydrogen how the act and as
well as some other things like
R. clean cars of birds that are
it's a rulemaking through the
through the department it also
in this this year would be in
pursuit of federal grant that as
we all know there's a lot of
federal money out there not just
formula the competitive and we
want to bring that home to New
Mexico so the credit bureau be
working in those regulatory and
non regulatory areas at and as I
indicated earlier Mr chair
members of the committee there's
fifty of our program services
has really suffered that those
fifteen FTEs that you see there
including like lawyers budget
analyst
R. A. Moyer a budget analyst and
grant writer you know those are
positions that we're really help
facilitate the success of the
climate bureau.
And Mister chair members of the
committee as you go a little
further right you look at the
cannabis edibles program you
know NMED is meant many of you
probably know is the it is the
agency that regulates food
throughout the state of New
Mexico with with a few
exceptions of course but
generally speaking we regulate
food across the state in New
Mexico.
Ensuring that the manufacturing
and retail service of it is is
meeting food safety standards
And if this is no different with
respect to cannabis edibles
we want to make sure that that
industry is is as safe as
possible and is successful as
our restaurant industry into
manufacturers are in the state
of New Mexico the only
difference is this THC involved
but that doesn't that just means
that we have to expand our our
services to New Mexicans to make
that is safe and profitable for
our economy and as we can and
that's where we're proposing
nineteen new staff members
In that program.
you can see the contracting
information there with LFC yeah
hello all of that and I just
want to make this key point and
for for those of you who watched
for Senate finance I took away
my sharpie let senator Munoz now
but the key point that we're
trying to make here in the way
in the difference between the
LFC recommendation and executive
budget in that NMED as I pointed
out have a lot of federal and
state revenues that are
restricted those funds are that
you're marked based on
legislative intent R. Y. and and
federal requirements so I just
want to give you this example
and of course Caitlyn we welcome
your comments online or offline
and we'll talk to you more about
this to make sure all tracking
with each other with respect to
the budget but the example below
is in the LFC recommendation you
know it's for six at the two
hundred thirty nine thousand
dollars will not fund six six
FTEs so that what we did use
from that LFC budgeted the
transfer authority of four
hundred seventy eight thousand
is is helpful but we don't
really this is not a bridge we
can cross there's not a special
revenue fund or a federal fund
that will allow us to to work in
a an expanded program area like
cannabis.
Currently unlike the are the
money that we received through
the special session that got
exchanged if you well as federal
funds through the the
legislature came back this is
general fund this is not my
understanding of how the LFC
this is not my understanding how
this would work in in a regular
budget here so I know I'm Mr
chair members of the committee
if you're the environment
secretary and you're not diving
deep into your budget the way I
I have and and try to get as
knowledgeable as possible then
that you're not able to sort of
know these nuances and it's
important that we do
So Mister chair members with me
I'm gonna advance the slide
here.
And just with a quick note
before we wrap up these are the
special revenue sorry I keep
saying that these are the
special appropriations we
requested in some instances the
special appropriations are to
build programs to protect
groundwater
In their queue hold other states
accountable whose emissions are
blowing into New Mexicos we
don't over regulate our industry
And it Mr chair members the
committee we would just.
Let you know that the executive
rack is important to us here in
order to make the successful
Even if we are just hiring
temporary our terms employees
for a short period of time until
somebody stand up and become
revenue generating or sunset
because we don't need the
additional consulting work
anymore.
and then finally I think that's
it Mr chair members the
committee I I had to slide in
here but I heard what you said
Mr chair before.
As EMNRD and in we started so I
don't think this is a relevant
slide at the moment.
And with that I'm happy to stand
for questions.
Excellent at secretary Kenny
thank you very much for the
detailed.
Very.
Very detailed yet concise
presentation thank you did up to
secretary Bruce for that also
for participating on okay we're
gonna go to committee questions
they get a similar sort of a
space this is the a a committee
used to working very hard Mr
Secretary starting early in
going until the work is done and
so I mean not that that folks to
stay very engaged.
So I will give it one at there
we are
we're gonna reverse order this
time we're gonna start with
representative at Indiana then
go to Representative Dixon
please.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks for
the presentation and director or
secretary Kenny
what structural changes will be
required at ET in the next year
to based on the governor's
announcement announced plans to
address emissions in New Mexico.
That makes sense yes Mr chair
and thank you Representative CEO
and I appreciate that question
you know structurally I think
there's this dance between
things like well we'll take the
private bureau for example the
climate bureau will stand up
some of the priorities that this
body in the governor you know
bring into law like clean fuels
or the hydrogen how back that
will cause the the HSD NMED and
its climate bureau to have to
promulgate rules in order to do
that we need both the attorneys
we need budget analyst we need
the staff to not only right
those rules but then bring them
to legal success through the
process withstand any challenges
and then implement the rules and
implementing those rules will
require staff and and I I you
know a lot of our staff spends
most of their day advising and
helping industry advising and
helping them understand the
rules the budget the the
restrictions
so I think there's some
structural changes the NMED that
will continue I think there's
some structural changes
Representative respect to our
finances
ultimately we want to report on
that we wanted to help New
Mexicans want to tell people how
how well we're doing in
implementing our climate goals
and and that requires really
good communication so I think
it's a matter of all both need
to rise a little bit and and
structurally I think worst we're
building on our department to be
able to do that with this budget
request.
Thank you thank you Secretary
thank you Mr chairman another
question on cleaning but I'm on
Energy and I've been for five
years energy committee and we've
here I heard about the oil and
that guests miss building in the
fossil fuels in the in in and
the habit the habit has that
affected and the wildlife and
the damage to public lands so we
need a lot of people to help
clean this up and.
If we can't pay them enough.
like teachers we lose teachers
to every state around us what
will you be able to do much or
or I I understand I've heard it
over that you know
in the budget we should be able
to pay and what we need to but I
I don't see if we need this many
FTEs how we could pay and we
need to in order to keep enough
to do the job so any what are
your ideas on that to get
enough.
Yes Mr chair and and
Representative I it's a great
question I think you know as a
former student federal employee
myself and I I think people
first one do you feel
compensated fairly.
I don't think you go into
government service for the for
the rate you're going to have
for the benefits and flexibility
because it's a it's a lifestyle
choice and I'm speaking from
experience when I was a staff
person not a cabinet secretary I
can tell you that
But you go into it for the for
the budget and I think the state
is diversified its benefits paid
parental leave
flexible schedules telework
options
but but employees still need to
be paid fairly thank you and and
I think the.
We've lost time and and I want
to just point out Mister chair
and and Representative I really
do appreciate that question we
have to think about this because
as inflation you know is
projected to go up in jobs are
still available and pays going
and in the private sector as
well people are going to need to
make more money and and they're
going to leave state government
so we have to work harder to
keep calm and attract own and
right now we have people moving
in from other parts of the state
to New Mexico and we have some
people who are moving because
they got a job with the
Environment Department
and we just need to work really
hard to bring them up to it a
good wage where they can value
their work time and and you know
non work time we have to give
them some time off right now
we're pretty burned out of the
environment department because
most people are doing two and a
half or more people jobs.
Thank you Mr I'm I'm Secretary I
I you have a huge job and I'm
hoping we can support you as
much as we can with what you
need to get enough FTEs to do
the job we're asking you to do
because it seems like we keep
piling more more more on you but
yet we don't give you what you
need so I hope we can do that so
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
absolutely Representative Sierra
next let's go to Representative
Dixon.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Secretary for The
presentation I did check out the
Q. R. code and that's pretty
cool and I liked the little to
restore us I in the middle of
it.
so Mister chairman Mr secretary
my question actually relates to
legislation that passed last
year and was vetoed by the
governor and that is the
The increase in fees
I think it was for you know
let's see water systems and one
of the things that I was reading
is that.
you know the EIB has to approve.
some of the fee increases are
you can petition directly and
others are set in statute and so
one of the things that I'm
curious about long term is if we
are going to be able to raise
some of these fees that haven't
been raised in decades that
really ought to be addressed
because that's a.
Form of revenue and costsharing
for the agency.
Thank you.
Yes Mr chair and representative
I really do appreciate that
question
in in twenty nineteen we we
there are R. P. users are all
over the board Somerset
legislation some are set in Raul
making with respect you for
examining just about water and
and I'll get back to that date
with respect you trying to raise
the beach for example by a as.
A moderate amount
that did not pass in the Senate
and therefore that died when we
because the legislative increase
that we had to address so we
were unsuccessful in raising
food fees so we went back to the
drawing board and about how do
we combine various species that
were collecting and we we we
came up in with a fund that
combines multiple fees and do
what's right allows our staff to
be a little bit more involved in
how they're doing their work but
I I wholeheartedly agree with
you that we have you know for
the fees that we can increase
you know now that our economy is
doing a lot better is in
particular I think we you'll see
the environment department
looking at their fees in the
near future err permitting peas
of ground water discharge permit
fees and those are things that
we can do with in the department
within our in our administrative
duties with respect to the water
PED's you know that that when
those two bills passed that
would is raise water fees and
and we spent a lot of time I
don't want anyone to think that
we did not spend time with
community we as well as others
trying to make sure that that
was something that we can all
get behind it was the time when
COVID was really affecting our
economy we weren't sure were
going and I think we made our
you know the government chose to
make a responsible but hard
decision to make sure that
that the fees were not going to
be at the expense of our
recovery and and we're in a
different spot now than we are
were before but I've talked to
LESC about this David Abbey
Caitlyn Charles and that was the
plan in about twenty twenty is
that we start raising fees the
legislature can respond that way
I would have liked in in in
committee on the floor but at
the same time I think we can
revisit that going forward both
legislatively and through
administrative.
Raul makings.
I thank you Mr secretary
secretary Mr chair I have no
other questions thank you.
Thank you Representative Dixon
next Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman and hello
secretary Kelly how are you
doing.
Good to see you Sir.
Secretary give me I'm curious in
the infrastructure bill that
president Biden signed recently
I I know that most of our
agencies really kind of scope in
on that and see where all is in
there
are there a.
Very many dollars targeted
toward your agency here in New
Mexico or or you do you know
yet.
Yes Mr Chairman representative
Crowder could see I couldn't on
mute quick enough I apologize so
hello
Mr chair representative Crowder
yes we do know some of that so
there's formula grant that are
coming into the department
through the clean water drinking
water well clean water to water
will come into the state some of
those will come with the
Department Clearwater just are
out
we'll have an unprecedented
amount of state revolving fund
coming you know to us from E. PA
and in fact we just spoke to a
number of mayors across the
state in New Mexico this morning
to try to promote the use of
those special revenue fund think
big about your cat about your
water infrastructure needs
because where we're ready we're
ready to get that money out the
door
There's also going to be a
number of formula requests
coming in that we want to help
we want to help apply for we
want to apply for help
communities apply for if we
don't do that then it's going to
go elsewhere of course and we
want to make sure that we bring
this formula grants I'm sorry
those competitive grants I
misspoke into the state of New
Mexico so formula competitive
New Mexico's gonna get a lot of
that through clean water
drinking water there's some
super fun money coming into the
state dedicated to Roswell and
Sapporo and and the list goes on
and and you know we want to
pursue the eight billion dollars
for the hydrogen hub and that's
going to be competitive as well
contact but that's something
that we're actively working on
to both our legislation and
relationships with the
department of energy national
lapses such a.
Who's doing that thank you Mr
secretary I appreciate that this
is sentenced to.
Find out exactly can you put
together a.
Just a little sheet showing us
the dollar amounts to each of
those opportunities are we'll
know the impact to our state
because those dollars will flow
through our economy and and that
there would be a good tool for
us to have to kind of measure
impact and then the so we have
an opportunity I'd appreciate if
you'd send those to Mr chairman
that's all my questions thank
you Sir thank you Representative
Crowder and really excellent
questions and.
Thank you for the the questions
and Mr secretary we look for
that information next we're
gonna go to Representative at a.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Secretary economic good to see
here
I guess it when I'm trying to do
is to as a representative and
the north is to put together a
group of people a group of grant
writers who can go actively
after these after these funds
say I've so appreciated your
partner your your department and
Rebecca Roose stand her staff
and I helping with the Superfund
cleanup the and Espanola and
they did amazing work there but
but what to go after these
competitive grants that the most
difficult task really is just
simple people
who have skills to register his
stated federal grant that's all
there is to it and and not and
we don't have a lot of that
capacity in rural New Mexico
could you tell me what you need
is a department to to help make
that happen and how we can
support you and your staff the
and and rural communities at the
same time so you know we can
talk about economic development
the without water you can't have
a business without broadband
economic business so so that's
what I'm working on so I just
want to know how I support you
and your staff so that they can
so they can help help us put
together these Regionales Water
plans in rural New Mexico.
Mr chair representative thank
you and I will agree with you
that our deputy cabinet
secretary is fantastic Rebecca
Roose and we appreciate working
with you on a number of fronts
and and it again thank you for
your support of our department
So let me just sort of say it
this way.
It if we move closer to towards
or adopt the executive
recommendation will have more
ability to pursue federal grants
and I know that's not directly
answering your question but will
happen you know will will that
will be one way we can get there
and I another way in which we're
getting there and I have to
think about how to turn your
question into action we've been
working with engineering firms
because we we we sometimes don't
have the capacity to do
everything out of our
departments we hire contractors
in a number of the contractors
were hiring how are now
interested well than the number
at least I know of one is
interested in moving into New
Mexico and creating bringing
water infrastructure knowledge
technical
engineering services to the
state of New Mexico like setting
up an office here and they're
working on that and don't want
to get ahead of them but they're
they're they're looking to set
up in the spring higher UNM grad
hires New Mexico tax grad hire
an image you grads and bring
them to work right here in New
Mexico on things like water
infrastructure we're also
talking to another and some
other sort of groups to bring
that expertise to bear and they
try to bridge the gap between
rural communities and the pots
of money that we have and we
talked a little bit about
building an act that makes it
here we've also pledged to do
things like go no go discussions
with communities so that they
don't invest a whole lot of time
chasing into something that they
can't ultimately gap because
they don't have an audit or they
don't have the fiscal agent or
they don't have something that
they need in order to make the
application successful so I I
would like to kind of spend a
little bit more time thinking
about what what we could do but
in the budget contacts I think
this is our opportunity to sort
of find.
And the position that could
think that way I spend a lot of
my time is Secretary probes
Council Probst explained you all
doing things that I probably
should have staff to do
and I say that not because it's
follow me but because there are
other things I should be
focusing in on and that you know
I'm I'm I'm doing as much
economic development work and
regulatory enforcement work and
you know financing work in.
Social media on occasion just
because just because there's a
need to get it done and
The staffing would really help
the staffing and budget would
really help to do indirectly
pushing forward on what you
asked for but let us get back to
you with more of a proposal
because I don't want to I don't
want to not take you up on that.
Well Mister chair and secretary
Cheney that's that's an
interesting answer I had talked
to the governor about creating
something like a public school
capital outlay
Office of for what you know so
that you would have a group of
engineers and experts and
realtors thank you know
everybody it takes two to make
systems work with land
acquisition building what what
are and she said no she didn't
want to do that you do want to
create another state agency but
she wanted to put it in
environment so I I think this is
what you're talking about and
And I I appreciate that and I'm
I'm I'm ready to do what little
I can I and I know what
expertise you have on your staff
so I say what very little I can
do to make that happen so thank
you and thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative.
Okay I don't see any other
questions I do have a few
questions so I'll excuse me I
apologize Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman of Mr
secretary thanks for the
presentation today all.
I would have a question I just
over last
Senator got a.
We really need to emphasize on
small communities that have all
we water problems water
problems.
As per se because you know these
people of their board is so
small you don't have the funds
to all really big into the nuts
and bolts of what's going on in
the you know I have a in my
community you know on the both
the rule list of the state.
And I have to for communities
are struggling wanted
particularly one is struggling
is up Water real age and now
you're aware of that Mr
secretary and in all we really
need to get something the line
to help these people because we
had been in here Mr Chairman and
Mr secretary the longer they
stay out there doing the wrong
thing the worse is going to get
to it we're gonna be able to fix
it and these people are going to
get penalized for this and now.
And I don't know how to fix it
rural what we can do but Mr
Kenny
Comma come comment on that.
Mr chair and representative
Garcia good the good doctor
thank you so much I wanted to
see in person even if their
computer
Yes I I agree I fully agree with
you that we need.
Excuse me
we need to figure out a way in
in order to help these
communities as I indicated to
you Representative her and the
in my last answer you know we're
talking to engineering firms and
we're talking to you
organizations that can go out to
these communities and not just.
But and help them throughout the
entire process so they had
compliance issues they will be a
resource for them if they have
fiscal agent problems they will
be a resource for them so what
we're trying to build out that
infrastructure and I use that
word generically we're trying to
build up that
that that for the whole process
we need to make sure they have
support right it can't be that
we are going to give them a
subsidy or grant a subsidy or a
loan package and we then wind up
having to pull it back because
they had they they themselves
have made a lot of little
decision that ended up in a
place where they can services
thing that that funding so what
we're trying to bring those
resources to bear
It and you know I think
engineering help grant right
will grant writing engineering
help accounting help would be
good but we have to bring in as
a package we can't just bring it
in in in pieces right we have to
do it for the whole life cycle
here that's what we're learning
seeing
so we're we're trying to build
that infrastructure to support
them Mr chair representative at
that that.
That's where we are today.
Thank you very much India Mr
chairman.
Secretary what I consider your
is the longer we prolong it.
The worse is going to get
individuals small communities
because they're not in
compliance and you know as we go
along they're going to be for a
lot of plans we need to figure
out a formula or a way to not
overlook.
The non compliance with the help
of mod instead of penalizing and
so bad that they can't function
anymore we need to help them out
so you know what we know you
messed up but we're gonna start
from right here and we're gonna
work with you the last time Mr
secretary and Mr chairman.
We'll call in and get a full
somebody done while you do this
this this but a different day
we're back to square one because
they don't have a clue run idea
of how to proceed about it
because I've had conversation
with somebody people know doll
we don't know what you need to
get your board and ordered and
you need to get the fly and and
and it's hard it's really tough
for some of these are
communities not not only my
community but rural New Mexico
was struggling with these
problems and we really need to
address the issue is already
there and not compounded and
make it harder on them six
months on a roll this up the
only want to put together Mr
chairman and the secretary it's
a good deal but it's gonna take
a little time.
And in that period of time these
people a little fall more out of
compliance and we're gonna have
a bigger problem and we need to
think about how we can help
them.
Now with the problem they do
have a need on I know we can get
a state is a wall with fixed
because it's not going to get
fixed you know the people are
sort of a brand that is funny
and fun anymore Secretary Mr
Chairman.
Thank you that's all question I
have thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Garcia at the
very important points and in
really statewide perspective
that you're noting and bring Mr
secretary and I want to ask a
few questions briefly obviously
being very cognizant of the time
The the so the key differences
especially around the climate
bureau.
Our exist around the client
bureau
Secretary can you talk us
through specifically around
things like the classics
injection wells how those tie
into carbon capture.
Guide us a little bit on what
both the environmental and
economic implications you
foresee within the proposed
climate bureau.
Please yet Mr chair and members
of the committee
let me just start off by saying
that the that the you know the.
EMNRD and the NMED that the to
the two secretaries we were
close together with each other
and we're looking at how you
sort of move the needle and in
both camps and that classics
privacy issue as you're pointing
out which for those who are not
as familiar the crickets carbon
sequestration Wells
That that program would really
be run out of energy and energy
minerals
but it's an essential piece to
our climate bureau right because
if we're going to continue to
promote carbon capture
sequestration especially under
and that zero construct then
both the NMED has to look at it
from an emissions sampling and
EMNRD would have to look at it
from a carbon capture standpoint
so that this kind of a system
that rated you're emitting and
if so to speak and.
Under NMED's jurisdiction but
then you're capturing and
sequestering in under there's
So that that's how we envision
that will work right now but
we're probably a couple years
away from the classics well.
I miss the.
At the moment that would be
handled by EPA out of Dallas
Texas and I think for a lot of
reasons we want to bring that
program to New Mexico
and administer our own
our own permitting programs here
in the state.
Thank you Mr secretary that's.
Helpful and and I appreciate it
also kind of working as through
that connection with with EMNRD
Mr secretary similar question
that that.
Was Representative that I raised
with Secretary Probst
You the the as we move in this
process the ability to to
recruit hire and retain as this
is been a court order course in
subject of discussion for a
significant while now is key and
if dollars are appropriated and
end up being reverted because
for whatever compendium of
reasons those positions are
fillable that and you know it's
kind of a double head in a sense
to the state and so do you have
any framing thoughts there
around the expansion and why
you think that that you may be
able to hire some of these new
positions.
Yeah Mr chair thank you for the
question
as we as a state leading to
cleaner types of energy and look
for opportunities to decarbonise
and I'll tell you it's not our
it's not far it it's an
analogous sort of answer on the
economic side which is our other
expansion as we look at you know
as as people are looking at the
state of New Mexico they're
seen the way in which the state
is moving is attractive to them
so we have people I'm not going
to name names but we have people
moving into New Mexico taking
jobs or that in the because they
fell in love with the state they
like the direction in which
we're heading the C. upward
mobility in these two of merging
markets these cheap the these
are where the careers are
biosciences around cannabis is
is you know an amazing career
opportunity working in the
climate clean energy sector your
you have worldwide marketability
so we're our jobs are giving
them upward mobility and I think
those are going to be easy to
fill I ice also suspect I have a
lot of internal candidates for
those jobs because people want
to work in those areas
in addition to that Mr chair we
are also working with spelling
DFA on you know experimental
ways if you will you to
streamline the hiring process to
streamline the advertising
process and we're really excited
by that we have great partners
with DFA and CPO to do that and
we're one of the agencies
they're working with to see if
we can in the next six months
really drop are vacancy rates
based on reducing just pure
accuracy that is not that's not
a judgment on anybody it's
simply a fact that we have to
modernize to do that
Really optimistic we're going to
fill those positions requirement
and cannabis curable we're also
going to need to continue to
promote things like our solid
waste basing crease where we're
gonna try to move into a
circular economy there's no
reason we should be expanding
landfills in the state of New
Mexico where we can conceive
that waste internet the Energy
and and that's a really exciting
opportunity again very cutting
edge work but that's kind of
what we're doing in the
environment department is
cutting edge work.
Thank you very much Mr secretary
and I I I really appreciate
actually the the upward mobility
frame within some of the
expansion request
so that okay it I guess I would
just conclude briefly on a
personal note with you Secretary
in you W. secretary Roose two
years ago the legislature passed
the produced water act
there is no doubt that your
shared expertise insight
commitment along with really
something that that the private
sector producers in the Permian.
We're seeing opportunities on
the ground wanted to work
collaboratively with a proactive
state and I just got some
numbers there that just really.
Makes me quite excited
in the past year.
Moving while we side again is
this committee is heard
eclipsing pre pandemic levels of
production moving back into
bringing wells online so a lot
of activity.
In the previous system prior to
secretary your work the work of
this body in a very bipartisan
way with the majority of water
utilized in those operations was
fresh water source in a very
arid part of our.
Continent in state.
Now in twenty twenty one first
year that the numbers have been
reported we're down to ten
percent fresh water being
utilized in those operations
forty eight percent plus is
treated produced water literally
billions of gallons of water
that are being saved and the
technical expertise of U. of W.
secretary Bruce many other folks
the strong contributions and
really the incredible leadership
from the private sector
producers as well as
conservation stakeholders.
Give us I think some real.
That helps lay out the road that
you spoke about in more of a
sustainability in increasingly
climate and resource.
where world that we can move
forward together so with that
let's go ahead.
For right now let's start with
the subcommittee joint
subcommittee it'll be
Representative Chatfield
representative Sarinana
Representative Anderson myself
that will work closely on this I
know they'll be input from other
members other stakeholders as we
work through this process I also
want to say a big thanks again
to our LFC is very important
that we recognize that the
budget proposal from LFC
recognizes includes.
Really a significant faced
progress in investment and all
with an eye towards fiscal
responsibility and the hiring
market constraints.
With that let's go to
Representative Sweetser for our
motion please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Secretary Kenny and your staff
is always good to see you I move
the LFC recommendation for
adoption pending working from
the subcommittee.
Since been moved is there a
second.
I see a second from
Representative Dixon is there
any objection and representative
Allison
is there any objection to
adopting the LFC recommendation
for New Mexico Environment
Department.
Say no objection that a doubt is
adopted committee staff of the
LFC and all the participants
thank you so much this is been a
very intense we to the
committee's credit there's never
a complaint just a commitment to
work into engagement and for
each and every member just want
to say a very big thank you I
want to go over to director Avid
who staff of course is working
before we get here long after we
leave Mr Abbey.
Director Avid.
The that might logistics the
binders for the LESC meeting
went to HFC of the right places
we hope like in the last ten or
fifteen minutes if you can't
find it we were I don't know
they were delivering into the
offices are HSC if you don't see
it you want to please call us
thank you Mr chairman.
There are there are versions
that are on the.
The less the electronic lists
are but hard copies were
delivered thank you Mr yes
excellent thank you very much Mr
Abbey in members take note so
that we make sure you have all
of the incredible back up work
and contacts from the LFC with
that we're going to conclude
today and this week again just
thank you please everybody be
safe and look for dissing
everybody very soon have a great
weekend.
