Mr Representative Anderson we're
gonna have to ask you to finish
that one because our prayers
were answered.
You got us through and thank you
so much you got us through we
are now on we see the webcast is
going.
Thank you Representative small
and I will hold that thought
thank you okay we'll be ready
for it though.
Okay good morning members and
participants really pleased to
have everybody here for this
morning.
Workgroup with our specials and
supplementals.
As members now will have
presentations brief
presentations from our staff
both the the LFC staff as well
as the FAA.
Mr Abby's gonna walk us through
your briefly just a quick note
following madam chairs kind of
leadership and direction we're
gonna go through page by page
and members should as you have
questions on a particular page
regarding a special or a
supplemental please.
Feel free to raise those will
address those so again we're
gonna work page page.
Going off of the brief
presentations from our M..
Strappy can you give us a little
bit more orientation perspective
and then we'll get started
please thank you Mr chairman so
you're gonna this morning or if
you are LFC and Executive
recommendations for special
supplemental appropriations
special appropriations or for FY
twenty two and twenty three
supplemental for.
FY twenty two only and then I.
T. appropriations are included
in the special category are you
have a spreadsheet on that that
you go over I think a page of
the time.
There's quite a bit of
difference between the executive
and the LESC recommendation the
executive total to seven twenty
seven million the LFC is two
hundred twenty seven million
you'll see a one cheater from
LFC staff however that says
those differences about ten
items account for three quarters
of the total dollar different
so.
For big items or in the
executive but many other items
there's some more and then after
that you'll have
Eric's you may present LFC
recommendations for use of the
operator of a new the northern
nonrecurring general fund and
they'll be a separate
spreadsheet on that.
The LFC recommendation leave
reserves at thirty point two
percent and I want to mention
one other thing in the LFC
budget guidelines were which
were adopted in August LESC
direct the staff to bring forth
recommendations on achieving a
thirty percent general fund
reserve target including use of
all the operative in the so
indeed that's what the LESC did
that I guess my point is there's
certainly room to adjust
increase any item at items but
it may if you're gonna generally
go with many of the LFC
recommendations of it may
require some rearrangement
paring back some to accommodate
over so thank you Mr chairman of
well I think we're ready for
Amanda to present first for LFC
and then go to the DFA.
That sounds great thank you Mr
Abbey Amanda could you take us
away please and again we're
gonna go page by page Amanda
please start us up and.
The.
Let me know or or just make sure
that you have the spreadsheets
in front of you as we get
started here with Amanda.
Mr chairman if it's alright with
you I can screen share the
spreadsheet as well just so
members can see what page we're
on might make it a little easier
that's perfect thank you very
much okay great.
Share my screen.
Okay.
Yes can you make a little
larger.
I don't know if I can.
All members should have this
let's see.
You.
That a little better.
Wonderful okay perfect.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee again my name is
Amanda Dick Peddie.
analyst for the legislative
finance committee we also have
with us please hello Bob program
evaluator he's helping us out
with specials from the executive
we are joined this morning by
secretary Debbie Romero as well
as acting deputy secretary
Andrew Miner.
So as we said we're gonna go
page by page we're starting out
with sections five and six
describe she does include
section seven but we will not be
reviewing today Andrew Miner
basically just an alternate
going page by page and I will
start with page one.
Thank you.
So are first rate your first two
or three pages really are mostly
court a request and
recommendations so I'm just
going out a couple we're just
gonna go through the biggest
differences
I'd like to start with item
number one that is for the
administrative office of the
courts for least cost you can
see the executive recommended
about one point three million
more than the LFC recommendation
of the reason that is not
included in the LFC
recommendation is because that
is included in the
administrative office of the
courts operating budget the LFC
recommendation that's a
recurring cost generally
speaking it's committee policy
to avoid funding recurring costs
with this one time funding.
Also one I would like to point
out item number fifteen and that
is eight year again to the
administrative office of the
courts a unified magistrate
court security and technology
appropriation for one point two
million dollars so from the
point you're going to see a lot
of these little tiny a request
for fifteen thousand dollars
twenty five thousand dollars
this appropriation roll those up
so that you're not seeing so
many little request and AOC will
administer it to the point.
You have anything else to add on
page one.
Thanks Amanda good morning Mr
chairman and members of the of
the committee first autistic
clarify thank you Amanda for the
promotion but I'm actually just
the acting deputy budget
director have Terry but yes
that's fine thank you also I
would just want to point out
that I knows that there were
some language changes in the
executive recommendation on some
of these items as we change the
language a little bit between
the request and the
recommendation and I didn't see
those reflected on the sheet so
I'll point out a few of the more
important ones as as we go
through the spreadsheet but I
also would like to direct the
committee members to the table
on pages fifty four to sixty two
of the executive recommendation
document that does have all of
the the updated language there
so.
With that I have nothing to add
on that page one thanks Amanda.
Okay.
go ahead sorry ma'am.
Right.
I was gonna go to questions from
members but if you have
additional comments please add
them now and then we'll go to
any questions that was my
question.
Excellent okay at members
on page one.
Are there any questions or items
that members want to raise.
I see you Representative
breaking number Crowder fleets.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm just
curious on item number four is
that a for a pilot program or is
it for a specific jurisdiction
of just.
It's a small number but I'm
curious what the purpose behind
it is.
Mr chairman I can take a shot at
that if that's okay so this a
real time review action on
electronic monitoring for pre
trial defendants are wise eight
trial program in the second
judicial District that odd AOC
and the second quarter rolled
out of this last fiscal year
this money along with additional
funding that was provided to the
agency and the special session
would expand that program to
other districts so the goal is
to get that technology those
programs to all districts.
Thank you Amanda thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Crowder and I
guess briefly on that Amanda in
Mister miner the to the two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
is that the estimated by LFC
staff to be sufficient for.
Additional districts that are
interested in utilizing us.
Wester chairman members of the
committee yes that there is
recurring money for pre trial
services in the AOC operating
budget in addition to that five
hundred thousand from the
special session this exceeds the
request from AOC and yes LFC
analysis believes that the
appropriation combined a
sufficient.
Excellent thank you very much
that's great.
Okay
I don't see any other hands up
from members any other questions
on page one before we go to page
two.
Mr Chairman real quick back to
line for yes I I I I heard five
hundred thousand and then I look
at the line and it makes me
think it was.
Two fifty yes thank you all I
can answer that Representative
Anderson at in the special
session we the body appropriated
five hundred thousand to AOC for
pre trial monitoring services so
Amanda is referencing that five
hundred thousand that the body
is already.
Thank you very much.
Okay.
Amanda and Andrew please.
And sorry food familiarity first
name but take us through page
two whichever way you want to.
And.
Mr chairman I have nothing to
note on page two so you can go
ahead.
Okay great Mr chairman members
of the committee I'll just point
out one thing again these are
all court probation but item
number nineteen this is another
uniformed appropriation from the
LFC that is not included in the
executive for cars and equipment
and again this is just rolling
up some of these so you see the
executive recommended lots and
lots of these little ones the
LFC recommendation just take
those and kind of put them in
one line item.
Excellent thank you very much.
I see let's go first to
representative Garcia with
questions on this page.
No question Mr chairman had won
for the fifth straight but that
it will not.
Okay.
If you that real quick let's go
to that or or we can do can you
do that offline we do out of my
Mr okay great.
Okay members than
Any.
Any other questions for any
questions on page two.
Seeing none that's going to page
three.
All right Mr chairman members of
the committee on page three
we're still we're still in the
courts and the district
attorney's there aren't very
many big differences in this one
so I don't have any items to
highlight Andrew do you have any
like to point out.
Thank you man I'm good.
Thanks okay we're on page three
so on the courts are there any
questions for page three.
Okay.
Seeing none let's go continue
going through going to page four
point.
Before.
Thanks Amanda and Mr chairman
and committee members I just
like to point out a couple on
this page item number sixty for
the taxation revenue department
for a statewide tax preparation
assistance program for low
income or elderly years that's
something kind of boring to the
executive and we do recommend
that at one hundred and fifty
thousand and the LFC did not
recommend that item number sixty
one below that also are sorry go
ahead I think we get yet.
I apologize Mr chairman members
I I saw four and I got have got
a little help myself so
I am okay I have nothing to
comment on page four of side are
okay I'll make a couple quick
ones for cage for.
Item number of fifty seven for
tobacco litigation that's about
a one million difference our
analysts look at this and
believe this to be an ongoing
initiatives so possibly
recurring expense that the only
reason you see these kind of big
differences for the Attorney
General.
Thank you.
Priorities are thank you Mr
chair.
Yes Representative Sweetser
please thank you Mr chair I'm I
just had a question on number
fifty three for the Attorney
General is there also litigation
money for the office of the
state engineer just so I can get
that balanced in my brain
members of the committee yes
there is and we'll see that
later on a spreadsheet all right
perfect thank you thank you Mr
chair Mr Chairman Representative
think you're the yes
Representative Anderson thank
you Sir on item fifty eight.
Up my question is sort of simply
I think I understand what the.
Money is purpose is is there any
hi to the money when we Fund the
HSD for these and how the money
is divided if he's successful in
most recently I see opioid Madam
and I just wonder to myself who
decides where any of that money
go question thank you
Representative understand Mander
perhaps David at when there are
settlements reached with the
state can you briefly answer
Representative Anderson's
question.
Well start out Mr Chairman
generally the settlement
agreement specifies the
disposition of proceeds and so
the AG has significant influence
on where that goes.
if it isn't specified the
general fund gets to the general
fund gets what's not otherwise
your mark by law and so when the
AG AG typically direct
settlement proceeds to the
consumer settlement fund and
then we have a spreadsheet in
our volumes on that.
We do.
Seventy something whatever.
Thank you for that answer I
think of that sufficient and
I'll go for I feel that that was
the answer I was looking for
but it's on page fifty five and
it's worth looking at because
it's been that the legislature
has used up for wide range of
purposes although the balances
come down a fair amount so
there's probably less
discretionary money that we've
seen in the past and your I'm
glad you brought opioid because
there's a major Madam.
A major major discussions on
settling one of the many opioid
cases involving both local
governments and the consumer
settlement fund being a
beneficiary and that's in
process.
Thank thank you David and Amanda
and great question marks around.
Okay let's go now to page I.
The one I continue where the.
Thank.
Thank you madam thank you Matt
Mr chairman and committee
members so I already touched on
item number sixty so I'll go
ahead to right below that item
number sixty one this is five
million dollars appropriation
the executive recommendation to
implement any tax and motor
coach changes that are mandated
in legislation this year and
that this session for TRD
Executive recommended five
million eight slate the LFC
recommended three million.
A couple lines below that I'm
over sixty five or six excuse me
sixty three for the department
of finance and administration
I'm sure you've all aware of
this this is the hundred million
dollar public safety initiative
that's been publicized for the
executive and showing again here
showing the commitment that this
would be a ten year provide
hundred million dollars for ten
years to give out to local law
enforcement agencies
and that is all I have on this
page and.
Yeah Mr chairman if I could just
wait a couple more out on this
page so as Andrew mentioned the
department of finance and
administration hi this
recommendation for a hundred
million dollars if you go down
to the bottom of the page item
number sixty nine for The New
Mexico's sentencing commission
this is for crime reduction
requests and you see that the
LFC recommendation is actually
about one point two million
dollars higher than the
executive recommendation the
reason for that is the LFC also
has a public safety package and
that includes a little over a
hundred million dollars I think
a hundred and thirty million
dollars of for public safety so
even though the LFC does not
have a recommendation in item
number sixty three there is a
crime packaging you'll see some
of those throughout as well.
Thank you very much.
Amanda and and and and Mr minor
Andrew any questions from
members here on page I.
Okay.
Chairman representative and what
staff sorry okay perfect we're
gonna go on my screen I have
Representative Garcia
Representative Crowder and I'm
gonna go to you Representative
Anderson to start us off with
Representative yeah please.
Representative Garcia.
Mr judge forgot to all lower my
hand I'm sorry although not
that's our number is
Representative Crowder.
The technical question Mr
chairman if if the body
recommends the LFC
recommendation is there a
process where they go what we're
by they go back and amend the
five million dollars in the
language to three million I just
want to I highlighted that
because I noticed the difference
when I started this last night.
I'm I'm sure LFC has and and the
F. as well has a process but I
was just curious and then I just
wanna make a comment alligned
sixty four I don't know who put
that in there but I really
appreciate it I think that's a
good idea thank you.
Excellent thank you
Representative Crowder and next
we have Representative Anderson
thank you Mr chairman a real
quick question on line sixty
three.
I think to myself okay that's a
ten year fund.
Where does that get created
where are the details supporting
this one hundred million dollar
appropriation.
Question.
Thank you Representative I
understand Dr money or do you
want to take that I know also.
We have secretary Romero but
briefly to drive money first
sure Mr Chairman representative
Anderson I can take as a stab at
it secretary Romero would like
to add so this is appropriation
to as you can see DFA cell at a
fund would be created at DFA and
that would be if this is a you
know language held will be valid
for two years now so and as is
been discussed the intention is
to have these funds go out to
local law enforcement agencies
across the state to increase
their their efforts and help
them with officer retention and
the equipment and everything
like that so as possible that
you'll further stipulations and
things like that could be added
to this program if it was passed
but that is you know because as
you know this language currently
is fairly broad and let's put
into just show that that
commitment so I think it's you
know anticipated more for
further details would be worked
out if this were to be
implemented.
Thank you doctor my any.
Add to your question
Representative Anderson thank
you just a quick follow up in
COVID that is of these open
ended of large funds that have
no parameters or the guidelines
of before the Legislature to
consider up although the cause
is is a most worthy one gives me
concern that that they're you
know how it could be money for
class eight counties and not
class B. counties receive
counties or it's all going to go
to class C. counties I I just
kind of ponder how equity is
going to be distributed by DFA
when they sit down and write the
rules are supporting this
hundred billion dollars.
Thank thank thank you very much
Representative Anderson
As secretary Romero if you want
to add anything briefly and I
know we want to go to you at the
end as a wrap up as well but
secretary Romero please okay
Mr Chairman representative
Anderson thank you for the
question it's a great question
definitely will you know one of
the things that I'm I'm hoping
that we could do is work with
the committee on language and
that's exactly what you know
this is really just a
description it's not it doesn't
contain everything that we need
to but we definitely do DFA is
has been in the program process
of programs
business for a long time and so
we can set up programs for where
we can make sure that things are
distributed equitably one of the
things I'd like to talk debt and
mention though is on the state
police stipends this is a
recurring expense and and really
should be included in the base
budget and and the executive
recommendation does include the
stipends in the base it's part
of the the state police pay plan
and so this is one of those
items that you know we can't pay
for longevity what time did not
continue into the future and so
just something to be concerned
about right now thank you
secretary Romero.
Okay I see let's go now to
Representative Sweetser and then
we have Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chair and that was
one of my questions so thank you
secretary Romero I was wondering
if that how a one time mistake
then was going to work and and
this was probably also explained
and Mister chairman but I I
wondered on the blue lines where
there are no.
No money amounts I'm sure she
explained it was distracted so.
Tell me what that's about again
please.
Thank you and then of course Mr
chairman Representative Sweetser
I did not explain that and I
should have I'm sorry these two
requests were of these two items
sixty six and sixty seven that
you see in blue were originally
request and that you see no
recommendation from either
that's because these were
addressed in the special session
so you'll see this blue probably
in other areas of the
spreadsheet and for some of them
the executive has something LFC
has nothing but that just
indicates that this was
something that we address during
special session how wonderful
thank you for that thank thank
you for reassuring me that I
didn't just based out of miss
something.
Pointed that out.
Thank you.
Excellent excellent question
thank you nextra go to
representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman unlike
sixty three of that hundred
million dollars there is doubt
two other uses for before all
this Romero.
I'm sure as I reach out to of
that private bedroom for all.
Their intended for
Representative responses.
Mr chair representative Garcia
absolutely this is statewide so
it's it's it's available to
statewide for all law
enforcement agencies.
Thank family for more on that Mr
Chairman the statewide is the
one thing but when you're on a
sovereign nation my concern that
they get to follow they're awful
nations.
H. excellent question
Representative Garcia thank you
very much for that and thank you
secretary Romero for the
clarification.
Okay and
What's that on briefly at you
mentioned it Amanda but there
are the LFC.
Recommendations and the the
package perhaps you can note is
if we go through any other
special appropriations that are
part of the LFC public safety
package and offline with to make
sure the members have the
current legislative approach as
we move forward in this very
important area does that sound
okay.
Course Mr chairman and actually
that five million dollars
stipend is also part of the
package we have a really great
spreadsheet that breaks down
that package and I'll make sure
all members get that.
Thank you very much that sounds
great.
Okay let's continue on now to
page six.
Okay Mister chairman sorry now I
was just saying whoever wants to
start first.
I don't remember It whose turn
it is if it's minor injuries but
I don't have anything on this
page so Andrea go ahead if you
have something thank you madam
Mr chairman I don't have
anything on this page either.
Great okay I members any
questions on page six.
Mr chairman I just had a real
quick one online seventy seven I
don't I don't understand why of
that one is being funded for
forty seven hundred dollars.
On this schedule why isn't that
in H. B. to question.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I might kick back to
Andrew The LFC does not
recommend that one for that
exact reason.
Dr anything that.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Anderson I I
think I actually agree with
Amanda here at the executive
would be okay if that funding
did switch to the to there's
section four operating budget
for the reason that you
specified.
Thank you Mr chairman thank
Representative move on to page
seven it's it's.
Okay let's go through on page
seven
kick us off I I yeah.
Amanda please start this up.
Mr Chairman I'm on page seven
there are a couple I'm gonna
highlight so item number eighty
you see that blue again that's a
very big difference of for the
tourism department for marketing
and advertising executive
includes twenty million while
the LFC does not include
anything here that's because the
legislature did appropriate
fifteen million dollars to the
tourism department during the
special session as well as seven
million dollars in the last
regular session for tourism
revitalization so that's
something that LFC news is being
addressed in other areas.
All my.
Also let's see here.
I would like to point out number
eighty seven this is for
The this is to the Economic
Development Department for local
economic development act fund or
Leda this is another one of
those big ticket items that
director Avid mentioned that you
know there's about ten items
that make up a big part of the
difference between the
recommendations this is one of
them you'll see it when Mr
Chairman representative after
this section time at that the
LFC recommendation does include
Leda funding but not in this
section of the bill.
Lastly number eighty nine same
thing you see that blue again
Economic Development Department
for outdoor recreation trails
and infrastructure in the
special session the legislature
appropriated a total of ten
million dollars to the outdoor
recreation program so again
that's something that's been
addressed somewhere else
you have anything at that one.
Yes thanks Amanda Mr chairman
and committee members I'm just
going back to a little bit too
number eighty certainly in terms
of department the state
depreciate the money that has
been appropriated but I do feel
that that twenty million dollars
in that line is that is
appropriated addition to that to
really help the tourism
department kickstart the tourism
economy getting back after of
the pandemic couple lines below
that number eighty two of the
departed Development
implementation of interactive
kiosk system this was not the
executive recommendation because
I was really that this is not
needed at this time and I think
there's questions about that I
think is secretary Romero might
have more on that pretty one
note that and then number eighty
are scary us eighty seven going
back to the Lida probation so as
Amanda pointed out there is this
a a large difference here fifty
million and the executive and
nothing recommended here by the
LFC one note this is one of
those items where there's a bit
of a language difference in the
executive recommendation there
were two request for leisure
submitted by the department and
the executive recommendation
basically combines them into
this one and so there is a
little bit of extra language
recommended by the executive
that basically just says to the
local economic development act
fund for Economic Development
Jex and for infrastructure
projects of community on
businesses and industrial parks
except for us so that is that
and then there is talk to the
Department yesterday about the
LFC recommendation for leader
that will talk about it yet and
I think there is some concern
about the
D. uses outlined in that
appropriation and whether they
might be allowable under the the
leader statutes so just wanted
to point that out and that's all
I have on this one.
Excellent at thank you very much
Andrew and Amanda let's go to
committee questions we're gonna
start out with Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chair I was curious
about line eighty three
the request so LFC doesn't
recommend that the governor
recommends it so that basically
means not getting funded is that
correct.
That.
Mr chairman members of the
committee neither recommendation
has been adopted yet so
as director Abbey said.
Your the legislature you can
take a look at anything you'd
like the LFC recommendation does
include business incubator
grants in the economic
Development Department of base
budget by correct this
bioscience one is not included
in the current LFC
recommendation.
Okay thank you Amanda thank you
Mr chair so so they could apply
for the incubator in the
economic development.
as.
And and not grant instead of
specifically for the bioscience
I just would would really like
to see the bioscience kind of
separated out but just just a
comment thank you so much.
Thank you very much
Representative Armstrong
are there any other I have a I
have a few questions on this any
other questions from members Mr
chairman of and I'm having
trouble get my hand raising up
but up online eighty seven a
quick question and that is just
a currently to funding revert
under the current fiscal year of
the last part of that sentence
talks about
unexpended balances so my
question is is that new
treatment of late of funds or
set the state.
Mr chairman members of the
committee leaders currently non
returning so that is not new
language that status quo.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Great question thank you for the
answer Representative Garcia.
Representative problem I work
with my hat down no use it down
low sure.
State yep yep we're good to go
now.
Okay so I'm.
regard showed that regarding as
line eighty three
Andrew is there anything you
want to add about why this
specific car about.
Is is included.
Mr chairman committee members I
don't have anything
specifically I think that it was
us a request by the economic
development agency departments
you put that in and the
executive follow through on the
recommendation okay that's
that's very helpful thank you
for that and in and and the man
that for both nine eighty seven.
Line eighty three and I'm sure
more as we go through this the
section ten that Mr setting a is
going to help walk us through
which includes over a hundred
million dollars in the LFC
recommendation these are areas
that members should keep in mind
as we go through that process is
that fair to say.
Mr Chairman.
Right.
Okay that's super very helpful
so we see how things connect and
members again please feel free
to highlight areas of importance
as representative of Armstrong
is done on this one and I would
second that.
I'm it let's move on now to page
eight.
Mr minor could you maybe start
ASAP please Sir Mr Chairman
happy to I'm page eight I would
direct your attention item
number ninety five for the
department of game and fish this
is the implement conservation
actions forced species of
greatest conversely excuse me
conservation need the executive
recommended nine million dollars
LFC recommended five hundred
thousand and also just to
clarify the exec recommendation
did include language that this
nine million dollars is
contingent on passage of the
federal recovering America's
wildlife act so and that nine
million dollars could be used to
leverage I think it's almost
like twenty seven million
dollars of a federal fund
something like that so important
issue for the executive.
And go on just point out to item
number ninety nine for the
energy minerals and natural
resources department for the
acquisition of conservation
easements and restoration
projects for forest and
watershed health under the land
of agenda conservation program
executive recommended fourteen
million for that and the LESC
did not recommend that item
without her back to Amanda.
Waste Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for both
items number ninety five and
ninety nine thank Dr minor
highlighted for us these are
things you're going to see when
Mr Cheney presents for item
number ninety five there is five
million included in the section
time framework and for
Item number ninety nine there's
also five million included for a
healthy forest programs so yes
No for members.
Excellent thank you very much.
Andrew and then the let's go now
to questions of some products.
Thank you Mr chairman I just one
question on ninety six the the
two million dollars to implement
a community energy assistance
program what what exactly is
that.
Yeah.
Mr chairman I can take a stab at
it they they can help me if need
be so this would reduce energy
expenses for low income
households
low income households tend to
have a higher energy burden and
distant there is already the
program with the mortgage
finance authority but that
funding fairly limited to this
with Google and that.
Thank you madam curious that
there's no number in the
executive recommendation so that
the agency requests this or how
to get requests had it wind up
in here.
Mr chairman members of the
committee this was a legislative
priority and so this was an LFC
at is there a Mr Chairman then
is there a bill that will
accompany this.
This time though.
Okay okay thank you.
Thank you Representative Crowder
listening Representative
Sweetser than representative
that.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
all of my questions one one a
one the fifty year water plan
what.
That's an exact not an LFC
what's happening on the LESC
side where is the water plan and
development.
Mr Chairman comment on that
please I.
The department is struggling to
do financial forecast for the
next twelve months and it's
closed LFC staff to be kind of
skeptical about a fifty year
water plant given it just to be
more specific was only three
months ago on the fifty year
water plan they said that the
trust funds would work turned
into the negative our next
fiscal year and that's clearly
not the case so I think that's
basically the suggestion that
they focus on the short term
more and get a handle on that
for the next fifty years.
Okay thank you I think that's
fair thank you very much Mr.
In that thank you representative
your next representative
Sarinana.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
I had the same question on one
oh one I think
Right now we don't have a state
engineer right that correct.
Okay so two things we have a
huge we have a drought so
looking at our water for the
next fifty years is really
important what's going to happen
of this next fifty years and we
have climate change so we have a
great impact on the water we
have and I really believe we
need a plan and I think
hopefully with the news that
state engineer we can do
something about it so funding
even a little bit to get this
started is really important
Comment on that.
Yes please I just want to say
part of the purpose of these
hearings of course is for staff
to record these comments to work
with Mr about this in the chair
so so when you make those
comments were listening and you
know we argue last where the
recommendation came from but
ultimately it's for you and we
will hear that we are some of
that thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr Abbey
Representative yes please
continue representative Senate
that was it those are the two
things I just worry about
climate change and in our water
so thank you thank you Mr Abbey.
Let's go to Representative
Chatfield and we're going to go
back to Representative Crowder
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chairman just a
comment on the on the fifth year
water plan we do have regional
water plants with that state the
plan is a brings all these plans
together and well and the this
fifty year water plant is just
something that's kind of
reaching out there in the
science auto I think until we
get somebody into the state
engineers office it's going to
be at the house background and
in the cities where we're going
moving forward it may not be as
important as our regional water
transit center.
Thank you Representative
Chatfield.
for those comments let's go back
to Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman online
ninety seven for the purchase of
a hundred forty one acres of
private land.
Number one where is Kyra creek
state park in number two why is
that needed
thank you I can take a step
Representative Crowder this is
located north of Mada it's
At a is very well developed use
lies state park I actually had
the chance to stay there during
the rural economic opportunity
task force and it draws then as
I understand that folks from
surrounding states especially
Colorado as well as New Mexicans
going up to more accounting for
recreation and that's my
understanding of the of the of
the area it's a tourist draw on
something that it seems to bring
in local folks so Mr chairman I
can understand if there's a
desire to expand the the ability
to develop that part Mr chairman
you know does this come with any
water rights or is it provided a
control of the more a river or
anything I'm just not familiar
with where it is your cell the
water connects to this hundred
forty one acres.
Great question Representative
Representative Crowder my
understanding is that there's no
water rights connected to this
but please for staff let's make
sure and note that and be able
to follow up with the committee
but I believe there are no water
rights attached to it.
Thank you Mr absolutely thank
you Representative.
Okay.
Yes real quick
if I could line ninety two I
don't understand of that looks
like we're we're looking forward
to me that that expenditures
not.
A liability the state could I
have a comment on ninety two.
Mr chair secretary Romero if
it's okay all respond to this
there's federal a federal
requirement that that that we
have to have testing and so this
is just in response to that
would requirements so we're not
quite sure legislative racing
Commission provided this
information they're not quite
sure what the impact is going to
be but they definitely know that
it's going to be something that
the state has to address.
And thank you for that secretary
and in.
It makes me wonder whether or
not we're being premature
colluding that in FY twenty
three.
if that will be FY twenty three
will let LFC.
Mr chairman members of the
committee special appropriations
us section five appropriations
are available in the current
fiscal year as well as the next
so would be available in FY
twenty two upon passage upon
signature of the governor and
then still available for FY
twenty three well I certainly
hope we get together because I
think we're we're spending money
ahead of ourselves not the line
number of.
Representative Anderson can I
follow up on that Mr
discussion of this on page one
eighty eight of million to under
the recurring budget for the
racing commission and and I
think what I would suggest I
think you're making a good
observation perhaps addict at
dot.
The board of finance or DFA
contingent on their
certification that the federal
changes come into play in the
money needed my help thank you
for that response and that
certainly sufficient then on
ninety eight what I noticed in
this is just a comment to the
committee I noticed so we keep
slipping up vehicle purchases
through and it did make me want
to know what the grand total is
for all the vehicle purchases
that we're going to recommend
of.
In the motion and that will be
done today but as a follow up I
just it there too many to keep
track of it at five hundred here
and eight hundred there and
you've begin to think you know
what I wonder how many new
vehicles to really get ready to
buy and the last is on the.
Never mind thank you Mr thank
you next Representative is madam
chair Lundstrom madam chair.
Thank you Mr chairman I was just
going to suggest that we try to
speed things up a little bit so
I ask you to do that thank you
thank you Matt
okay speed round will start I
will just echo met that that.
Short term drought response as
well as met in long term water
planning.
That needs to be part of what we
address and so there is clearly
significant work to continue
their but it is absolutely a
priority that we have to address
in this budget given the extreme
drought the entire state is
facing
And I'll take I'll have some
other comments off moving
quickly for madam chair let's go
now to page nine.
Right Mr chairman members I'll
go ahead and start this one off
quickly so first I'd like to
point out item number one oh
five Representative Sweetser was
looking out for that matching
appropriation for water
litigation to the engineer that
we stop for the Attorney General
that in item number one oh five
there also on this page there's
a couple big differences between
the LFC the executive
recommendation
and it will just look at item
number one twelve said this is
to the Human Services department
to support Medicaid expenditures
this is another one that the LFC
our analysis news is a recurring
cost it's not included here
because it is a recurring
appropriation with nonrecurring
funding Andrew I can let you
make for their comments on this
page.
Thank you madam I don't believe
I have anything else to help.
Okay members any questions on
page nine.
Okay.
Mr chair yes sorry
Representative Crowder please
yes Mr on on line one twelve I
don't understand what the.
Executive other funds the four
hundred fifty eight million.
In the one twenty eight and and
I can address that it's a
Representative Crowder the
executive one hundred the other
funds are federal funds that
would be expected to match given
the Medicaid match leverage
Those are those would be federal
funds that would flow with these
a hundred and twenty eight
million in state funds.
In the LFC recurring
recommendation there as Amanda
said it's recurring and
At we we will match it so that's
the answer there and I'm gonna
when we go to page ten we're
going to go to madam chair to
keep.
Thank you Mr chairman was go to
the next page.
Thank you madam chair I can I
can take this page writing page
so a Page ten item number one
thirteen as for the Human
Services department for
settlement pay out of a federal
snap program one hundred sixty
three million over payments
claim executive recommended
about eight point nine million
LFC about five and a half
million and the the department
does feel that the entire
executive recommendation is
needed there to resolve that
issue we go down to item number
one sixteen for the department
of health.
To provide you Mexico's health
care infrastructure in
underserved areas for rural and
primary healthcare clinics
executive recommendation
recommends five million on that
line and there's no LFC
recommendation on there and
that's all I have for this page.
All right let me ask you then
are you gonna say anything about
this page you madam chair always
make a couple very quick comment
on item number one thirteen the
doctor minor addressed is the
executive being higher the LFC
recommendation excludes a little
over two million dollars in
recurring staff retention so
that request included staff
costs which again LFC use as a
recurring cost with nonrecurring
funding
Same story for item number one
sixteen department of health
LFC believes that there is
County support to help fund this
initiative and that a lot of
these costs would be recurring.
All right on this page
Representative Senator nana.
Thank you madam chair I I
remember one twenty four the
natural resources trustee I
remember being I think again we
talked but when they came and
spoke to us about this and that
it was costing quite a bit in
the hat I believe they have like
five more cases coming our
current cases and we're coming
in twenty twenty three
Do we have enough money I I
think we need money for the
clean up and and for the claims
so do we have what we have any
money for it.
To support that agency.
Go ahead Amanda this very
quickly madam chair members of
the committee I can follow up
with some more information on
that for you by our analyst does
believe that the current funding
is sufficient for those claims.
Excuse me just a second
Representative Siriano what's
the cash balance in that
department.
Specialists or.
I don't have that would be madam
chair I'm sorry yes it's the
it's the right it's the binder
this guy but the ring in at if
you look at cash balances for
that department I think I took
him back home to read it okay
all right sorry let's go back to
David you wanted to make a
comment yes the cast built in
that fund is nine million of
course there are encumbrances
against that.
Representative Sarinana do you
want to help us for questions I
did I just thought this was
really urgent because when we
were there the uranium mines
built the different things that
they're up against I just think
we need to fund it and we are
looking it's it's it's something
that seemed really paired up
over there so I was in I was at
that meeting when you all were
here and I remember that that
presentation was given my
understanding was that supposed
to be a bill coming forth from
Representative Wonda Johnson and
some others from the area I
haven't seen any of that yet
don't know if they have actually
put a dollar figure to it but
what we're we still have time
with this this is just a sub sub
compared well I mean we're going
to we're gonna get into full
committee review and you can
catch a plane at but I'm waiting
to see what they've come up with
remember they had that
assignment to work on that.
And madam chair I remember I
know Steinborn is looking at an
office
Of the your record uranium
cleanup or something I think
about it but okay he was but we
haven't seen any we haven't seen
anything on it yet least I have.
Okay so okay thank you madam
chair thank you is there anybody
else on this on this page yes
madam chair real quick online
one one one one hundred nineteen
of if somebody can contact me
and just tell me what we buy
when we fund four hundred and
fifty thousand dollars this year
to address ozone pollution in
other states question not for
today thank you.
Thank you very much that's a
very good question I'd like to
know that also.
Anybody else.
Okay let's move on.
Madam chair I can kick us off on
page eleven.
I'll just point out a couple on
this page of course I'd like to
highlight item number one twenty
seven to the department of
military affairs this is a total
of one million dollars to
address building repair needs
this is part of that LFC public
safety package that I mentioned
earlier Representative small
asked that I continue to point
those out so there's that one up
also.
Item number one thirty one this
is to purchase in car cameras
body cameras for the department
of public safety the LFC
recommendation is about one
point four million dollars lower
for that one but it's worth
noting that the LFC
recommendation does include
recurring funding for this in
the operating budget for
department of public safety
because again you know part of
these camera purchases the staff
are going to be recurring costs.
Andrew did you have anything to
add on that page yes thanks
Amanda madam chair real quick
item number one twenty eight for
the corrections department at
three million dollars
recommended there your language
this I believe to purchase
tablets for use by inmates this
is another one where the
executive recommendation and
consultation with agency at
change the language of budget
and that brought in the purpose
to for expansion of pre release
services for inmate population
including mental health
treatment.
Mentorship programs access to
tablets or virtual reality
programs and you brought in
partnerships with local
community colleges so in other
words tablets may be eligible
expenditure up under that but it
is broader than that so that's
all I have on this page.
Any questions.
Okay let's go.
madam chair all go ahead and
start with that page twelve
first is the another of vehicle
appropriation their item number
one thirty four for the
department of public safety the
person I quit law enforcement
vehicles eleven point one
million and the executive
recommendation and nine million
and the LESC recommendation and
and the item number one thirty
nine for the public education
department this is for basically
FY twenty impact aid executive
recommendation is nineteen point
six million which shot matches
the agent what agencies request
was and LFC recommended thirty
million and that's all I have to
the stage.
All right anybody can Amanda
anything on this.
Madam chair members of the
committee very quickly item
number one thirty four LFC did
extensive analysis on this and
again there's funding in the
recurring budget for GPS for
some of this there is a
replacement schedule for that so
that's why it's a little lower
okay.
Next one.
All right.
Madam chair members of the
committee page number thirteen
These are almost all
appropriations from the public
education reform find
several of these it match agency
requests Senator Wirth LFC ads
will just highlight a couple
item number one forty six of the
Public Education Department for
tribal and rural community based
extended learning programs from
the reform Fund that wasn't LFC
add also item number one fifty
to the teacher residency Fund
And yet at all public education
reform Fund the LFC recommends
five million for that Andrew did
you have any of these you want
to highlight.
Thanks Amanda I'm good on this
page.
I don't see any
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair very
quickly but I'm sure in our of
volume one I believe it is where
they have the same similar
spreadsheet there was an item in
their four of.
We find it science technology
engineering arts and math
initiative the stem stuff is
five hundred thousand was in in
our binder to it was recommended
and I can't find it in the
spreadsheets was that a clerical
error is that did that something
that they put somewhere else we
just can't see it or.
I I would like to see a support
stem.
It would have been in the right
around the one fifty to one
fifty three area in our binder
it was item number.
One ninety.
Mr chairman members of the
committee all have to check with
study the education analyst and
all I'll follow up on that for
you.
It's in volume by one one one
ninety thank you madam chair.
Are any Representative Sweetser.
Okay Representative mean OK
Representative Sarinana thank
you madam chair I'm looking at
learning one fifty the teacher
residency
this is a really important
program it is our pipeline to
get more teachers into the the
system right now I actually had
caring a bill to right now we
have alternative licensure we're
trying to get our fourth year
graduates undergraduates into
the program so Levin eleven
million
Is what we need at least to
start with this year we're
asking twenty million but let
million so is there anywhere
else in LFC that that money can
come from for teacher residency
programs to get more teachers in
our classrooms remember we have
a thousand teacher openings
right now.
When you're talking about
residency is out
being at where they're assigned
into an actual facility to
conduct teaching are you talking
about a building that they're
going to live in no it's a
program where they they they
were for the master teacher to
learn how to be a teacher okay
okay what we're have to it when
we get into the education budget
because I don't recall that at
this point okay in LFC all right
the second one madam chair is
one fifty one knowing what's
happening APS right now
cybersecurity is really
important I think it is in every
agency
will that be enough to fund if
we use the X. if we don't we
don't have anything LFC
what we do because right now
APS's been down for two days
from that seventy.
Four thousand kids not at school
we have to have reinstated on
the outer amount to have we had
any
emergency request shed on this
from anybody or they using their
own budgets.
Mr slowly can you comment on
that you had a conversation with
the cyber security expert.
You're obligating recommend you
all made an appropriation for
this fiscal year up one point
five million the PED for cyber
security to work with school
districts and apparently that
was not executed in a way that
it was intended and we're
following up on that right now.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much anybody else
on this page okay let's let's
move.
Madam chair members of the
committee I can go ahead on to
the next page I'll start with
item number one fifty nine okay
distribution to the higher
education institutions of New
Mexico for building renewal and
replacement just to kick start
work on basically fifty year
backlog of of those types of
projects that's there that's
seventeen point four million
recommended by the executive and
also might be some additional if
the committee wishes to move for
with some of this there might be
some additional language there
to put in that we be happy to
work with the committee on the
set and the LESC on then right
below that total two lines below
that one sixty one you can see
another I'm sorry what actually
one sixty right below that you
can see another cybersecurity
appropriation though we're just
talking about this for higher ed
one point seven million in the
executive and and dealt not
recommended by the LFC and then
right under that five million
dollars to the higher education
government fund recommended by
the executive.
That is all I have on the state.
Amanda.
I'll just make a couple comments
so on item number one fifty nine
Andrew highlighted for.
building renewal and replacement
LFC does note that the higher
education department has about
one billion dollars in
unrestricted fund balances
across institutions so that's
just a note for item number one
sixty percent of our security
LESC also notes that
institutions received about two
hundred and thirteen million
dollars of federal stimulus
money that could be used for
purposes like this so just a
couple of.
Very good thank you very much.
So do you want to talk about
section five total.
Madam chair members so that's
the end of that section five we
will start with section six
which is a lot shorter so we're
nearing the end here.
Well All funds for section five
in the executive is over a
billion dollars that includes
five hundred seventy point six
million from the general fund
the LFC totals for section five
are about three hundred and
forty two million in all find
and that includes a hundred and
sixty two point two million from
the general fund.
Okay and I'd like to ask Daymon
let's have sunny follow up with
the path secretary what is going
on with the cyber security
business in all the schools I'd
like to have a much better
handle you know I eight I had I
don't know and we need to get a
handle on the.
Okay sure let's go to the next
section.
Thank you madam chair although I
can kick us off just because
we're still on the same page so
these first two this is where
section six darts these are very
small if any differences so I'll
skip to page you.
Fifteen year
Google highlight
a very big one obviously item
number one seventy seven this is
to the department of finance and
administration this was an LFC
ads you don't see an executive
recommendation there this is for
a three percent compensation
increase in the last quarter of
FY twenty two budget thirty one
million dollars and that is part
of the LFC is seven percent
compensation package I wanted to
highlight that one for you
The only other one I'll point
out is item one eighty four to
the secretary of state for the
primary election is a
supplemental request the
executive includes about two
million dollars more than the
LFC recommendation by LFC has
LFC is anticipating some
legislation that would make this
unnecessary so Andrew would you
like to expand on page fifteen
yes thank you madam chair
members real quick item number
one seventy six to DFA four are
grants management division as
you know there was some money
appropriated for that in the
last special session however as
was discussed at the agency
hearing for the FAA yesterday
that part doesn't believe that's
sufficient for all the needs
that are going to be a clean
person systems and all of that
so this is a another one point
eight million supplemental
recommended by the executive to
help get things started right
now FY twenty two so that we can
fulfill all the reporting and
that federal tracking all that
is needed with all the money
that's coming in and then right
below that is Amanda said
there's no
executive recommendation here we
but as you know the executive
does have a fairly robust
compensation plan it just
doesn't take effect until FY
twenty three so that's why you
don't see an executive
recommendation here that's all.
Representative Garcia thank you
madam chair on line one eighty
four one eighty five for the
sixtieth St.
That comment on the same deal
because they're asking for a two
million for cost of of
conducting only twenty two
primary elections and right
below the costs of notifying
boulders down under the state
law James good.
Then you want to talk about
that.
Chair members of the committee
on the LFC does include that
notifying recommendation as you
see I'll have to follow up for
the primary election I'm not
sure if there's overlap there.
Thank you thank you madam chair
yes Representative Castellano.
Thank you madam chair allied I
am one seventy six also the
grants management division I I I
don't know if if it's not enough
money but I think it's very
important and very of that we
are trying to fund this as much
as possible being that there's
gonna be a lot of.
Rural communities many
mentalities and and trying to
get these this federal money so
I just think it's point and if
it's not enough that we look at
maybe trying to fund it more
Madam chair.
Well we're gonna find it more in
this line item but I'm gonna
have Sweetser and Herrera have
already been working on this
with the department and with
Charles so we're gonna have to
come to a good number that goes
into that for one seventy six
and it's because it was a
there's quite a bit of
recommendation coming out of the
rural task force so those two
are members of the committee
working with the Donnie can Tana
have been actually working on
this I know I sat in their first
meeting so we're that one of
course we're gonna have a note
for.
Thank you madam chair that's
great to hear thank you.
Anybody else.
Okay let's move on.
Madam chair I can go ahead and
do page sixteen just taking a
look here and I would just
highlights number I'll one
ninety nine to the Human
Services department this is a
Medicaid supplemental as you can
see there are mounts recommended
by both the executive and LFC
however we're just came
yesterday that the federal
public health emergency has been
extended and so it's believe
that this this supplemental is
no longer needed.
That's.
Do we know about that Amanda did
did we get word on that also.
Madam chair yes noted that.
RubyAnn here.
RubyAnn are you shaking your
head yes madam chair yes we we
did receive word of that
yesterday as well and so we can
current that tend to
supplemental is no longer needed
thank you.
Okay Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair I was just
curious what the online one
ninety eight the medic the
health care premium surtax what
is that exactly madam chair.
We approve that last year and we
have to pay taxes on Medicaid so
what will let David talk a
little bit more about that.
It's going to offline I I do all
right I need to educate myself
on that thank you okay.
Thank you very much thank you
next.
For.
Chair moving on to page number
seventeen
just a couple of highlight item
number two a one to the
Department of Health for
implementing electronic
medication administration record
system the LFC recommendation
does not include just over
million dollars that is included
in the executive recommendation
again this would be a recurring
cost so that's why you don't see
that went there
That is I will point out also.
That's all highlight.
There any like we now yes thank
you madam chair committee
members the only one I'm direct
your attention to is that number
two oh seven after the higher
education department this is the
opportunity scholarship program
so this is basically a
supplemental to provide for fall
twenty one in spring twenty
twenty two fifty nine million
dollars recommended by the
executive a priority for the
executive would help out over
fifteen thousand students in
that in that program so thank
you.
I apologize for not just one
more go ahead all right item
number two oh nine for the
General Services Department that
you see that for shortfalls in
the health benefits claims and
risk management division the LFC
is about seven point three
million dollars hello the
executive on that the reason
there is that gap there is as as
you mentioned the last time we
went over these LFC is looking
at.
You know putting in a match
requirement for local
governments to help fill that
gap so I just wanted to point
out because I know that with the
committee priority.
All right you know I'm gonna
focus just to be fair to the
members that are here I'm gonna
focus on the actual sub
committee members so if I cut
you off it's not because but I
have some committee members and
really need to get in on this
list are with Representative
Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair and my
question goes to to line two oh
seven so these are supplementals
fall has already concluded
spring financial aides have
already been awarded are we
fifty nine million short for the
opportunity scholarship.
Madam chair I'll defer to state
secretary Romero if you have
something you could clarify
that.
So madam chair good morning
Representative C. strix we start
that's actually exactly right in
order to be able to provided the
opportunity scholarship for
students we we are fifty nine
million dollars short for twenty
one for.
For the fall semester and the
spring semester.
And and so.
So at that age that higher
education department
Does have a system in place so
that they can get the money to
the students so they'll get it
retroactively.
Madam chair can make a very
quick note on that
so as we as we mentioned before
right after this Mr Cheney's
gonna go over section kind of
which distribute some of those
are but funds as well as other
general fund revenue there is
about forty three million
dollars in the LFC
recommendation in that section
is so it's not that there's
nothing in the LESC
recommendation for this purpose
you will see that in a minute
there's also twelve million
dollars recurring funding
included for opportunity
scholarships in the LFC
recommendation for higher rate.
So thank you madam chair I guess
my comment is simply it's
interesting to award
scholarships retroactively for
semesters at it concluded or
that financially it's already
been awarded chiefs so I just
sort of have a red flag on this
whole area thank you madam chair
yeah we're going to we're gonna
kick that back in the interim to
the higher end sub committee is
that's news to me also I didn't
know that we could do that so
representative of small as the
chair on that will have a chance
to dig into that a little deeper
let's go to Representative
small.
Thank you madam chair briefly
for line two oh one.
I'm.
This state Amanda yours senses
that this is a recurring cost is
this included in that the
recurring budget.
Mr madam chair members of the
committee I'm gonna have to
follow up on that one with our
deal each analyst okay as
chairman yeah I think I can
answer that.
The.
We we can do it I'm happy to do
it online was in an area that
was highlighted and finally
madam chair
for line two zero four
receivership costs.
It's my understanding that
these this amount is being
requested to avoid.
Essentially a a department of
health facility going
being taken over going into
bankruptcy I'm not exactly sure
but I would like that to to be
highlighted as well and I don't
know if there's any brief follow
up from the analysts are we can
also do that offline but that
one seems critical just did some
research on that one if we could
New Mexico at eight one
disability that actually is yeah
go ahead Representative small no
that's it that's it great thank
you madam chair Representative
Crowder thank you madam chair
applied to hundred they're
asking for three hundred and
seventy four the department of
health and I look at your they
transferred seven million
dollars out of PSEB and they
reverted about forty six million
dollars and I don't understand
why they're asking for that when
they transfer seven million
dollars out of PSEB.
Somebody would figure that out
let me know offline that be fine
but that doesn't make any sense
to me madam chair thank you all
right Debbie did you want to
comment on that.
You know I think it's really
important to note that you might
have seen larger versions for
some agencies and so and and
some some transfers just because
we have the cares Act money that
the legislature appropriated and
asked us to do some swapping we
were able to do it for the
public health and safety
agencies and so that's why you
might have seen a lot of
movement in the two hundred that
we're able to use many different
places and so it's going to be
really and you'll see that Percy
why FTE hiring and not hiring.
Department of health public
Department public safety and
corrections mostly.
Thank you madam chair thank you
ms Romero I it's still difficult
I know they have borrowed forty
and they can move money around I
don't know why we're doing this
is specials and supplementals
thank you madam chair.
All right do you have anybody
else Syriana Representative
Sarinana you still have a
question.
Thank you madam chair I actually
have the same question is is can
be thank you are any okay let's
move on.
Right.
Is our very last page as I
mentioned your spreadsheet also
contain section seven for I. T.
but we won't be reviewing that
today so this is just the last
of your supplementals for
section six I don't have any I'd
like to point out on this page
the differences are pretty small
I will quickly give you your
section six total and that is a
hundred and fifty six point two
million from the executive in
general fund revenue the total
recommendations from the
executive is five hundred and
twenty nine point three million
and then your LFC section at six
total is sixty four point nine
million general fund revenue and
two hundred and eighty six point
about nine million total fines
for section six Andrew is there
anything you'd like to go over
here thanks Amanda I just
reminded committee that you
already take a little bit of a
nice to those totals in both
recommendations thanks to the
Medicaid supplemental no longer
being needed but other than that
I have no further comments.
Okay let's move on next six
next.
All right madam chair members I
will go ahead and stop sharing
my screen and I'm gonna kick it
you Mr Cheney to go over
section.
And a lot.
Thank you madam.
All right madam chair all get
started here real quick let me
get the mice let me share my
screen.
What are we looking at here.
I just wanted to let the
subcommittee know that this is
our first
public review of federal funds
and want to HSC is going to be
focused on.
So I asked the staff to go
through all of this and
I mean this is just our first
high level overview.
And obviously will have a couple
of a couple more opportunities
to talk about this before it
goes to the full committee I
want focus by the subcommittee
on there so let's let's go Eric
on this all right madam chair
and I I just want to just as as
a little little bit of
background all go through pretty
quick but just to remind
everybody the committee this was
all kind of vetted throughout
the summer throughout all the
LFC hearings I think there is
you know a lot of people came to
the committee with a lot of
different ideas on how to spend
this funding and so a lot of you
know this is coming from our
button and also other
nonrecurring general fund
revenue.
Priority was given to projects
or programs that assist the
state recovering from the
pandemic the areas of economic
development source social
services education health care
workforce and infrastructure.
Another thing I wanted to
mention and you can all see the
the spreadsheet that I have here
correct.
Okay so just to kind of orient
you on how to beat the spread
sheets a little bit different
than the the special
supplementals.
The items that you see that are
highlighted in blue those were
at least partially covered
during the
during the special session that
we had in December that second
special session you'll see some
of them why item for right here
that was fully covered but then
item one right here that was not
fully covered if there is an
additional need on top of that.
You'll see this yellow column
here that the executive
recommendation call you'll
notice that it's all zeroed out
there was no recommendation from
the executive.
We have LFC general fund
recommendation and LFC converted
are but relief to general fund
And what that is is during the
special session we transfer one
billion one point oh six billion
to.
The General Fund and that's this
line here this is the total
amount from LFC.
Then we have the house bill two
special session so that's where
you know a lot of these items
had already kind of been covered
and then we have our amount that
we need to reach the original
LFC recommendation call here.
All right moving on the first
item I want to talk about was
justice department of
transportation to plan design
construction infrastructure
projects statewide those come
off that project list from D. O.
T..
the original rectus three
hundred and now we've got about
two hundred seven point five
million to complete that
recommendation.
I wanted to also talk about
line sixteen here.
for the Mexico financed
Authority public private
partnership hydrogen energy hub
hi this is try to tap into some
of the eight billion that was
that was allotted in the federal
infrastructure bill of you know
for for hydrogen energy hubs.
also I want to talk about line
seventeen we've also got and
it's not it doesn't show up here
in the total but there's seventy
million coming from and NMFA
reversion so this total here
would actually be another
seventy million so two hundred
thirty million that's money from
the
The NMFA
small business recovery.
Act that thank you all passed
Last session.
Any questions on this page.
Madam chair.
Representative small.
Madam chair
Just quickly clarifying on line
seventeen.
Mr Cheney I did you say that
this is two hundred and thirty
million dollars total that's
correct if you if you look here
where I highlighted it includes
another seventy million from the
From the leader reversion coming
from the New Mexico finance
authority for that small
business a program that we had
okay it Madam just briefly and
then it's a.
A hundred and and is it just
ninety million from our quest so
ninety plus seventy is a hundred
and sixty total.
So we have the seventy one
general fund recommendation
another eighty nine from that
from the from our but.
You get okay okay all right and
then another seventy on top of
that got it okay that's
incredibly helpful and just the
point madam chair that you and
others have made that this
offers important flexibility to
address specific economic
development needs.
In addition to the broad overall
goal of the language that's
currently there and with the
extra funding I'm very
encouraged that we can help fill
other.
priorities that's it thank you
madam chair.
Eric go ahead all right moving
on to the next page page two.
I wanted to point out line item
number twenty five where we have
seventy million.
to construct a new executive
office building in Santa Fe this
would go across the street from
the capitol
That's all I have to say on the
line line twenty eight.
For business space development
and research dealt development
this goes to the Economic
Development Department and
that's forty million dollars
there.
And then the line thirty eight
down here at the bottom that
goes this is thirty seven
million dollars in the Cisco
going towards the state's share
of the Abbott Water settlement
that's in order to
deliver water to the pueblos it.
In the Rio Grande Valley.
Hold off here Debbie Romero you
have your hand up did you want
to make a comment.
Thank you madam chair I have a
couple of comments on on this
particular page items twenty
three and twenty four like to
see some contingency language in
in those appropriations and the
reason for that is these
agencies have been working with
payment to try to get
reimbursement and so we think
there's an opportunity that that
that the may remember some for
some of the stuff testing costs
they just apps omit the
paperwork and so bike to make
sure that they do that person in
so and then if all else fails
then we resort to this funding
the other thing and I don't see
I think it's item twenty eight
no I'm I'm looking for game and
fish it was mentioned in the
previous discussion on the
previous spreadsheet about using
some more money to fund for the
given fish
it's hard for you to have a
thirty three okay so so that the
the problem with you can't use
federal funds to match federal
funds in so there's an
opportunity to to you to get
that open match but in this case
you will be able to do that if
you're using federal funds.
All right that's a good catch on
that first one W. thank you.
All right madam chair if any
other questions I move on.
Yes all right we're going on to
page three.
The first one I wanted to point
out on this page was line forty.
And that's to develop providers
it's twenty million dollars it
goes to HSD risk for HSD to work
with the children youth and
families department
basically what we want to see
this money one time funding be
used to develop behavioral
health providers children's
behavioral health providers and
child welfare providers
and so that's what we think
that's a good kind of
you know provider development
trying to expand the the
capacity to meet the needs that
are out there and of and in the
behavioral health and early
childhood could Rowe.
Line number forty three
workforce solutions department
this is ten million going for FY
evidence based
Programs that are already in
place this will supplement some
of the federal programs that are
out there.
The line item number forty eight
going to the higher education
department we have fifty million
dollars and this is for research
and development.
Line item number forty nine.
Again going to the higher
education department and this is
for that opportunity scholarship
and we talked about this a
little bit on on section five a
believe it or I'm sorry section
six it was really have where
they recommended I think it's
fifty six million for the
shortfall and this is another
you know forty three million a
little for that same purpose
there.
And that that programs for
degree seeking students who
left.
Universities are are coming back
now any questions on that page.
Any questions anybody on this
page Madam chair representative
Anderson a quick question on
item forty.
On
on item forty the health the the
health committee interim
committee had issue or proposal
on behavioral health I think it
was senator Ortiz two pianos of
specific of we're idea request I
believe there's going to be
legislation is that what this
twenty million is about or is
this separate question.
Madam chair representative I
believe I believe this is this
is that same question.
Thank you I thought maybe it in
in in also involved maybe a fund
idea this is a one time
recurring or nonrecurring
appropriation.
Well this is this is a one time
but it's Madam chair
representative it's also are but
funding in that that funding of
expires and twenty twenty five
so it's you know they could
spend expand that throughout
that time period thank you madam
chair.
All righty anybody else.
Okay let's go ahead.
All right.
The last page here.
Line item number fifty two and
fifty three pretty similar line
item fifty two this for fifty
million dollars to the higher
education department this is to
develop.
the workforce in and social work
this is for those in doubt
faculty positions to to fund
more teachers and social work so
that we can get more workers out
there and then this is the and
that basically the same thing
here online fifty three only for
nurses and we did thirty five
year but that's because if you
look at the.
Why fifty one you go up one page
here at the bottom we did
fifteen million for nurses
during the special session so
that that kind of leads that
item there fifty four social
workers nurses.
Line item number fifty eight to
the forest land protection
revolving fund this was.
This the executive had a special
appropriation for this and we
have twenty million here.
And we're we discussed at a
minute a moment ago and then.
The last item we have here's to
the lottery tuition Fund we have
a hundred and fifty million
going to that fund and I just
wanted to mention on this one so
we're looking for the
Department for the.
For the lottery tuition Fund to
spend this funding first so that
we build up the state fund
balances the kind of what it
basically is it's a head start
for that Fund we can build up
those balances over time and
then we can make it a little
more sustainable in the longer.
And then so here we have the
section nine total of three
hundred twenty one.
Five million.
Section ten which is a
nonrecurring appropriations nine
hundred and one billion and then
section Levin which are fund
transfers of two hundred sixty
eight point five million and
that's our totals there with
that madam Cheryl pass it back
to you or to members who have
questions.
All right let's go to
Representative small first go
ahead Sir thank you very much
madam chair online fifty four
for the with the water projects
fund and love follow up to see
if that amount is to if that's
the right amount specifically
for the water projects fund or
with other water needs that
there are additional recipients
to spend that money most
efficiently in our current
Crisis in drought.
So justified thank you madam
chair.
Representative Crowder thank you
madam chair same item fifty four
I'd like to maybe run out the
annex to meet with the David and
some of them and understand what
that fifty four is for and and
if it could be expanded so thank
you madam chair.
Okay anybody else on this.
Any other comments are secretary
Romero okay let's go
representative Garcia thank you
madam chair online all fifty
seven we got ten million dollars
for rural libraries.
You could add a little more that
some of these private here are
saying that they don't have
enough money for that the bottom
of the chair.
I think that there are other
sources besides this that goes
into the tribal program
and you know we put money in
their last year I'd like to see
where they're at I'd like to
understand exactly what the
status is on some of those
things.
and we also put money in there
in the special session as you
see the note there.
Okay let's let's move on anybody
else on this page.
I just want to remind the
subcommittee that this is a
massive amount of funding here
one point nine billion dollars
of that we're going to be
looking at this is our first
introduction and public hearing
on this
course the plan will be will
have to have
other presentations as as we're
going along but I think this is
a very good opportunity to at
least start getting our arms
around this as it goes into the
full bill.
Secretary Romero did you have a
comment.
Thank you madam chair I do and
I'm so one of the things that
I'd like is the opportunity to
be but to have staff there are
grants staff review this because
I'm concerned that there may be
some items on this list that may
not be eligible under the
federal guidelines even though
the money was was is deposited
into the general fund it's still
federal funds that we're still
going to have to report on it
and they got to be eligible uses
so I have Act staff does have
the I have a list I don't think
it's this list on that and
they're starting to be here but
we really need to dig into that
to make sure we're using the
funding appropriately okay
dammit Charles you all and Eric
you heard that.
So I need to Eric to to meet
with the DFA people and make
sure that
these things are going to be
eligible for federal funds.
Here bear icon that okay great
okay.
Anybody else on any questions
regarding this presentation.
Okay it doesn't the.
Go ahead you want to show the
split between that ACF arpa and
reject regular general fund.
Sure we will work with DFA to
show them how that split out so
that we're aware of that the
issues with not being able to
use our but a match.
That we propose to the general
fund that will get you input on
that okay very good okay we
I think we can take that screen
down now if if you would.
Okay let's get a different view
here.
All right well looks like we
have the good group here this
morning and I don't think we've
got anything else on the agenda
do we bill.
You're on mute.
No chair we don't have anything
else okay great what I want to
thank everybody I was listening
and I want to particularly thank
representative small are
stepping in and it's been very
helpful the committee you all
have your committee agenda.
Monday of course we'll have our
LESC meeting and I believe that
there is a Legislative Council
meeting and Tuesday obviously is
opening day and then we come
down to to well work on the feet
bill.
and then after that I think we
don't fire up until the next day
so am I correct in that bill.
Yes Representative Jr all right
we all have a great weekend I
want to thank you all for a very
productive PreSession HA FC I
want to thank all the staff so
you all have a good you all have
a good weekend and all see is
also you next week I thank you
madam chair thank.
