First you have a number of
things here in your packet I'd
like if we can pull the
technical adjustments.
So you have a packet of papers
there.
This is the key we're gonna go
first as you recall I appointed
ranking member Armstrong myself
part of a technical adjustments
workgroup this is a work group
that we have to finish any small
issues that arise after we
conclude our kinship cleanup
process last Mr Valdez to go
through these briefly and then
we'll go to a motion from six.
Thank you Mr chairman are the
technical just as workgroup
basically is a lot of language
items that needed to be done in
the bill.
And you could you can see those
at four to take the A. office
state engineer courts Indian
Affairs Department public
education basically performance
measures in other language it
was necessary.
Are there a couple of items that
are.
One was left in it virtually out
of our packet that we did on
this last Friday.
serve those items are added in
there for just technical
adjustments but they have been
acted on prior to that.
Thank you very much Mr Valdez
will go down to a motion from
vice chair Dixon for the
technical adjustments workgroup.
Thank you Mr chair of move that
the committee adopt the
technical adjustments workgroup
report second Hey it's been
moved by by her Dixon second by
ranking member Armstrong is
there any opposition to that
motion.
Seeing none we've adopted the
motion thank you members.
Okay now members of course we
we have a.
Our our HB to the full bill here
in front of us
There's an index but we also
have key budget issues so this
is a guide and we're gonna ask
Mr Valdez to begin walking us
through this guide question Mr
Abbey Mr so we here I I'm told
that we have copies available
for folks from the public who
are here today and if you want
to copy and you don't get a copy
of the and if we can work with
staff to make sure that that
folks who want copies have those
available.
Members we're gonna go through
these sort of
high level summaries and then
we're going to go
I I think we'd like to go
through the entirety and then I
want to go to members for
questions and of course we'll
have Mr Valdez Mister Sibley Mr
Abbey able to
to answer those with that Mr
Valdez can you start us off on
our fiscal summary for HCFC
substitute for House Bill to.
Mr chairman.
The house bill to re for you is
a substitute bill that you'll
have to act on as we go through
this however the appropriation
for general fund R. for FY
twenty four nine point three
three billion dollars.
Amazing.
Up about twelve percent for
fiscal year twenty three.
The preliminary spending levels
approximately at the same level
of both the executive and the
legislative appropriate
recommendations.
The education portion Mr
chairman.
The public schools are
appropriation up eight point six
percent from FY twenty three
about the same as the LFC
legislative finance committee
and the legislative education
study committee recommendations
and provides approximately three
hundred hundred million dollars
for extended learning.
Fifty million for education
assessments thirty two million
for just wrists you
Representative at risk students
and forty million nonrecurring
for career technical education.
Under the substitute public
schools higher education
employees would receive an
average salary increase of five
percent and the minimum salary
for educational assistance would
be twenty five thousand dollars.
The HB two also provides a one
percent education pension
contribution increase.
And provides parity with state
employees for educator health
insurance coverage.
For higher education the
recurring general fund
appropriation is up eighty
million dollars or seven point
eight percent and with
nonrecurring funding provides a
hundred twenty million.
dollars for the opportunity
scholarship.
Mr Chairman early childhood.
The general fund appropriations
to the early childhood education
Care Department up a hundred and
thirty five million dollars or
sixty nine percent and sharply
increased funding for both pre
kindergarten and childcare.
The general fund appropriation
through the CYFD for children
youth and families department
are up six percent it includes
funding to fill hundreds of
existing and new social work
positions and funding for
evidence based programs rated as
well supported or promising are
nationally recognized evidence
based clearing houses to help
modernize the state's child
welfare system.
Terms of health Mr chairman.
The general fund appropriation
Medicaid is apple hunt two
hundred eighteen million dollars
or eighteen percent.
It provides a Medicaid provider
rate increases greater than ten
percent to promote recruitment
and retention of health care
providers.
Budget the general fund
appropriation department health
continues funding all
developmentally disabled slots
and provide significant provider
rate increases and start up
programs for alcohol treatment
and prevention.
The increase in behavior health
services.
Across the Health Human Services
children youth and families and
early childhood education care
departments and other agencies
towards a hundred and sixty four
million dollars in recurring and
non recurring appropriation for
the general fund and other
funds.
HB two also uses twenty million
dollars of OP you Madam revenue
to expand housing services
telehealth and substance use
research our reserves and three.
Mr chairman of the economic
development tourism area.
The the Economic Development
division's recurring budget
includes a general increase of
funding increase of a hundred
one point nine seven million or
eleven forty three percent also
this bill also makes numerous
one time investments and
economic development
appropriated a total of a
hundred and six point one
million Ms racial appropriations
including fifty million for
public private partnerships
focused on energy related
projects two point two million
for business incubators and
intersect capital support.
Two million for creative in your
cities fifteen million for the
local economic development act
three million for job training
incentive program one million.
For outdoor equity grants ten
million for trails
infrastructure grants and fifty
million for the venture capital
fund.
The recommendations for the
tourism department recurring
budget puts the general fund
increase of two point two
million or eleven point one
percent.
HFC also approved a total of
fourteen point five million in
one time appropriation for
tourism.
If which is a two and a half
million increase or the LFC
recommendations for the agency's
top priorities including eleven
million dollars for national
marketing campaign and three
point five million dollars for
local tourism development.
Mr Chairman the the natural
resources area.
The increases for natural
resource agencies in the
substitute for House Bill to in
the budgets of the department of
environment energy minerals and
natural resources and office of
state engineer and other
agencies Representative a
significant significant increase
in funding for the fiscal year
two thousand twenty four
totaling two hundred and ninety
one point two million and
recurring and nonrecurring
appropriations from the general
fund.
Aged agency budget increases of
HB to include a fourteen point
seven percent increase in
general fund appropriations for
energy minerals and natural
resources department eleven
point two percent increase in
appropriations for the
department of requirement with
more than recommended by either
LESC or the exact executive a
seven point two percent increase
in general fund appropriations
for state engineer eight thirty
one million dollars an expansion
in the water resource allocation
litigation education program.
Germinated dition to pay
increases for public schools and
higher education employees.
This bill provides a five
percent average pay increase for
all employees and targeted
increases for many jobs such as
nurses crime lab techs case
workers judges and district
attorneys.
Mr Chairman there's a
significant.
part of this bill is special
appropriations and there's a has
a approximately nine hundred
million.
General fund special
appropriations including those
already mentioned.
Forty million for law
enforcement.
Forty million for recreation
centers fifty million to match
federal on alternative energy
investment twenty million for
higher education building
removal refuel at two hundred
thirty million for state and
local roads.
Mr Chairman the spending plan
for H. B. two eight general fund
reserves at thirty percent.
And makes K. assumption similar
to those in the LFC
recommendations.
There is still room.
For over one billion dollars in
tax changes albeit perhaps less
for rebates given the increasing
capital spending from seven to
six hundred fifty million to one
point zero seven five billion
dollars.
A speak to assumes approximately
eight hundred and fifty million
in transfer to the severance tax
permanent fund to turn and now
money into future money to
address the oil and gas
volatility and long term
decarbonization goals HB two
also brings transfers to the
water trust fund at the land of
enchantment conservation funds
to one hundred million dollars
each.
Mr Chairman that at this time if
you so desire could stop right
here and we go over the next one
that's perfect thank you very
much Mr Valdez the and thank you
for an excellent summary and and
for the court guidance and staff
with that you always find to
this committee we do have a
couple of quick questions from
the committee we're going to go
first to Representative Cruz and
we're gonna go to Representative
Trujillo of Santa Cruz please
thank you Mr chairman.
Just wanted to highlight a
couple of things around our
educational assistance or you
just refer to them typically.
I understand that will be your
explained and this we will
actually reviewed previously
that they will.
Any new EA will start at twenty
five thousand is that correct.
Yes that's correct Mr chairman
and if if you're currently
employed as an EA you'll
experience a five percent
increase along with other
educators and state.
Mr Chairman representative if
they're above the new minimum
that that's where the district
would have the flexibility to
provide at least five percent Mr
Chairman I'm I'm just a little
disappointed I I think that we
really need to do better in the
future only when you consider
that if you're starting pay is
twenty five thousand dollars a
year.
And if you assume that the
average employee which would be
working full time at twenty
eighty hours would be about
twelve dollars an hour now I
understand that you know along
with other educators say they
don't actually work that twenty
eighty or maybe they do I'm not
sure about that but none the
less it would be twelve dollars
an hour and those incredibly low
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative dela Cruz and
that this represents a
significant increase at this
committee guided by our L. yes
the is committing to of
recurring annual fourteen point
five million dollar increase the
point well taken Representative
Trujillo please yes thank you Mr
chairman thanks for the
clarification for public
education.
Why some the committee going
For public education on your key
budget issues your specifically
stating that
it would be.
Thanks again the people in the
public school probation is it up
eight point six and then you
want to say two hundred million
for extended learning fifty
million for education assistance
etcetera
the extended learning doesn't
change the existing extended
learning in the house bill one
thirty it doesn't.
Mr Chairman representative the
of those appropriations are
contingent on enactment of
legislation to extend the
instructional hours to eleven
forty and to replace K. five
plus extended learning program
with the K. twelve plus factor
it does not have any language in
the bill detailing how the
eleven forty is calculated that
needs to be worked out in
separate legislation okay thank
you Mr chairman the second
question is simply the targeted
pay increases for state
employees where would I find
that and what is what is it
specifically.
Mr Chairman representative and
many of the based budgets that
you adopted there were targeted
increases in the salary budget
line items
so things like specific
positions and public safety
department there was additional
money and those line items
that's on that would be funding
available in addition to the
five percent a year
appropriating for all agencies
and public schools and higher
rate so Mr chairman the just for
clarification the base of an
increase for all those folks to
be five percent and then in
addition if if need be correct
this twelve thank you Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Trujillo next
we're gonna go to representative
Allison.
Thank you Mr chair thanks for
the presentation of.
Couple questions under the
heading of health.
There's a large increase for
behavioral health sciences I'm
just wondering if any of these
funds would be covering my house
bill one oh four what we're
asking for
Supervision compensation for of
supervisors in behavioral
health.
Yes Sir Mr Chairman
representative you all in your
specials workgroup added
language to the twenty million
dollars appropriation
authorizing the use of that fund
for clinical supervision and in
addition to endowments for
financial aid for social work
students to pay for their
tuition as well as the pay
practicum.
Thank.
And then my second question is
under the heading of natural
resources there's quite an in a
number of money is allocated to
the office of the state engineer
I'm wondering if some of these
funds.
Could be used for the Indian
rock Water Act settlement.
Because of some of the projects
or.
Wait approval in.
We would not want the to be
waiting on the state to match
the funds could some of these
funds be allocated for that and
I guess so down under the title
risk other.
it says thanks be to also
transfer of the water trust fund
I'm wondering if that watercress
one is related to the Indian
water rights settlements back.
Mr Chairman representative
Allison the water trust fund
generates a recurring revenue
stream that goes to NMFA for the
water project fund which funds
projects all over the state and
I believe that certainly
includes tribal projects in that
area and.
Back to the of state engineers
operating budget that generally
typically wouldn't include
tribal settlements so and then
worst finally left and capital
outlay with there's a hundred
million set aside for tribal
projects in the capital outlay
bill that could potentially
include Indian water rights
settlements that's still in
progress.
Okay thanks for that Mr chair
right now we have a sense of
urgency among the tribes the
tribes being come up the gonna
Hey miss Andrea they have water
rights settlement agreements
pending before Congress and then
the zoom in okay Wingate or wait
in the rain and the wings of.
We just need the state to step
up again everything is here so
these projects can come to
fruition thank you for that Mr
chair.
Thank you thank you very much
Representative Allison thank you
for the note on the the strong
set aside our capital framework
okay next we're gonna go to
representative Garcia than
Representative Bach thank you Mr
chairman thank you Mr
presentation bills revenues for
these a lot of special
appropriation this point three
million dollars or for state and
local rules how will that be
divided between state and local.
Mr chair.
Mr Simon to help on that.
Yes good morning Mr chairman and
Representative so the
appropriation in the in house
bill two doesn't include a
specific earmarked for state or
local roads there are specific
projects mention for that
highlight legislative priorities
but the department has
flexibility to use those to
address the most pressing needs
in our in our road statewide
thank you thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much
representative Garcia next we're
going to reserve Baca than
representative at a young.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for your presentation I do
appreciate the description about
what we actually have built of
the highlights of my questions
are gonna be referred to
questions regarding public
education okay Mr Chairman the
of the question regarding in
this budget here we talked about
increased money for school
security and school safety I
could not find it if you could
just point me and talk about the
dollar amount for school safety
school security.
Mr Chairman representative Baca
the public school capital outlay
task force recommended a hundred
million dollars that would be to
be distributed by formula
funding to school districts that
will be in the capital outlay
bill not in this bill and as
discussed in the education
subcommittee of our staff the
proposed based on your
sub committee to boost to reduce
the amount for C. T. E. six
forty million is in this bill is
going to CTE to reduce the
safety of out of the hundred
million from thirty five to
twenty five percent and we
allocate that scared us so we we
think that would make at least
thirty five million available
for security in the capital
outlay thank you Mr chairman I I
guess the question as far as who
oversees those funds and how the
two can be to sources at the
rate the secretary or is it
appears to pay how those funds
to the home of the that money
would go up by formula in order
to get the money disbursed
quickly and I think there's an
expectation that districts would
have to submit a plan and it
would be.
Reported to the public school
capital outlay council which
administers of those funds but
I'm sure the intent is to have
minimal
Minimal direction to the
districts in other words to
allow the districts to
prioritize their needs rather
than establish some of the state
level.
Thank you Mr my my last question
is regarding the school ensure
insurance word says about
bringing parity with state
employees so Mr chairman and of.
I'm here are we Todd there so I
know there's two pieces of
legislation rather one for the
eighty twenty and one for that
the state would have to assume
so Mr chairman it is the parity
my looking more kind of an
eighty twenty or for what is is
currently for the state
employees for of school
employees for public school
employees.
Mr Simon can help with that this
bill has thirty three million
for that purpose and then you
can Mr Chairman explained the
mix that that come up with from
the structure yes so Mr chairman
and representative so currently
the legal minimum for the public
school insurance authority is
much lower than it is for state
agencies so for example if the
school district follows the
legal minimum anyone over twenty
five thousand dollars in salary
has would pay out forty percent
to get to that level at this at
the state level you have to be
fifty thousand dollars so this
would increase those pressure
this would increase the
threshold contingent on the
legislature passing legislation
to align those systems.
Thank you Mr rose my questions
great thank you very much for
percent of Baca next we're gonna
go to represent setting Jana
than Representative Lujan
Representative setting up the Mr
Chairman first I want to thank
you for all your hard work it's
it's been great working
alongside you and with you and
learning this whole process so
thank you all the staff thank
you guys for everything okay
great thank you for hearing us
on enlighten the environment the
funding you're giving to EMNRD
Edie and the state engineer is
going to help all over the state
so we really appreciate that and
Actually I think that's it thank
you this thank you thank you.
Thank you very much for some
setting on a next we're gonna go
to Representative Lujan and
Representative Garrett and
Representative turned
Representative Lujan thank you
Mr is one echo the sentiments
from a representative of setting
and I
there's still more to do but I
want to thank you for educating
me and all this to this process
and I look forward to the
interim as we work towards doing
more for our state we have we do
have so much more to do this is
a great start
and this is just the we're we're
in the house we still have a
another side to go over the
Senate so thank you so much for
the process thank you for this
opportunity to really be dive
into this as much as we all
have.
Thank you very much
Representative Lujan as we go to
our center thank you Mr chairman
and I did it what everybody's
been saying I know I have
educational question for my own
education we have as as
Representative Baca just pointed
out there's numerous bills where
the language or the use of the
funds is contingent on specific
bills what is the we're going to
try to pass this budget before
those bills actually pass what
is the process of incorporating
the contingent legislation
what's the timeline as it goes
to the house Senate finance
Senate floor.
Mr chairman those bills will be
heard.
As soon as we as soon as we're
able to do that
the contingencies sits in there
and once those bills leave the
house they go to the Senate the
actor I'm Lester Center pros and
they'll act on them at that
point but the the.
Contingency is in this bill so
if if those bills do not pass at
all then those particular
appropriations will fail they
will not.
They will not take place
did that did answer question
after.
All yes and Mr chair it's then
how do we incorporate the passed
legislation passed legislation.
Representative.
Mr Chairman I think the process
partly is as the bills education
related come to this committee
after the Education Committee to
the extent there in the budget
with the contingency the
expectation would be to advance
the bill without the
appropriation in the bill
because it's in the budget there
are items that may come before
the committee that are in the
budget and that it basically
your committee will spend the
next fourteen days watching the
action in the Senate the Senator
be paying attention to your
action on those bills and that's
where the Senate finance
committee committee may make
adjustments both to what they
want as well as an idea what
you're moving that's how I see
that process Mr chairman thank
you very much you've covered by
asked and unasked questions
thank you thank you very much
Representative Garrett we're
gonna go to Representative
Herndon
and then representative Allison
for a second time and
Representative Chatfield
Representative please.
Thank you Mr chair and thank
you.
So I would like to follow up on
the.
That was raised by
Representative Garrett in terms
of the contingency fund and if I
look at the document that was
given to us on page ten so the
contingency fund as than a
negative so could do to help us
understand what that means.
Mr Chairman red dress the I I
just noticed that.
And this is going to need to be
adjusted incentive finance it'll
be necessary to make a transfer
from the operating reserve to
the appropriation contingency
fund it shows estimates of
disaster allotments of sixteen
million that needs to be
revisited to see what the actual
spending is coming in at.
with an eye to that you mean yes
Sir to replenish it again with
funds from the operating reserve
LFC typically doesn't make a
recommendation for reserve
transfers you've done that for
the first time and it the
reserve transfers to bring all
the accounts of the general fund
up into the black sufficiently
this sort of work in progress as
the bill moves through LFC HSC
Senate finance so I I this is
the first stab at it it'll be
improved and refined and Senate
finance.
Okay so Mister chair members of
the panel additional
clarification again help me
understand this we are going to
hear a number of bills that do
have Appropration on them we
have to look at the contingency
and so we are going to separate
them from within the strip the
appropriation at this.
Mr Mr chairman may I clarify.
When we speak to an
appropriation with the
contingency we're describing
that appropriation that depends
on other legislation to be
implemented in the budget like
there will be a contingency for
the at risk funding formula
change which is which of thirty
one million dollars in house
bill two thirty one million is
contingent on passing a change
in the at risk formula.
This appropriation contingency
fund serves a very different
purpose the main purpose is to
provide disaster declarations
declared by the governor like a
fire or flood and that's the one
place where the money can be
spent without legislation.
Without an appropriation because
the legislature's in statute
provide the governor's authority
to draw balances in the
preparation contingency fund to
cover the disasters of two
different kind of contingencies
Representative program earned
and and Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
As.
This sept two more quick
questions and.
All up on I'm looking at page
one of seven of the.
Of the explanations for the
looking at the department of
health the.
Please.
And is talking about facilities
management and I just and I'm
advocating Mr chair members of
the panel in terms of the
definition here it talks about
and I'm looking at line for on
page one oh seven going through
line eight on page one of seven
and it talks about oversight.
for the department of health
facilities that provide health
and behavioral health services
so we have school based health
centers in our schools and we
are also looking at this concept
of mental health and wellness
rooms in our schools so I'm just
looking at the at the wording
in making sure understand
understanding how this
hundred and.
This multi million dollar.
Mr Chairman
this particular program within
the Department of Health you are
funding all of like the state
behavioral health institute in
Las Vegas the Korea in
Albuquerque the drug rehab
center and and we have center
down in Roswell that's what
these appropriations are for the
school based health centers get
some funding through the public
health.
Program which is on page one oh
four and one oh five that that
money is built into those totals
as well as school based health
centers then use money to bill
Medicaid for services so you'll
see some of the expenditures for
school based health centers will
be covered through the Medicaid
budget so lots of different
places in the budget to help
cover services like that.
Thank you
Kelly if you would like to add
anything thank you Mr Mr chair
and just add to that in
particular to the school
wellness rooms which you
requested information on that's
actually in section eleven
there's two hundred thousand
dollars the of the settlement
for that in particular separate
from the school based health
center money and that's page two
thirty eight line sixteen and
seventeen.
Is this for clarification Mr
chair members of the committee
so when this is finally approve
the amount that was in.
As part of junior funding is
then added into this about that
we'll see it a final produce
budget document Mr Chairman
representative Herndon when the
agencies submit their operating
budget to DFA and the LESC
Andres first to it will be the
gender money that was an act
will be part of the agency's
operating budget above and
beyond these amounts that you
see in this table because they
we anticipate that there is L.
support is not correct so the
come in is a special
appropriation operating budget
in July first the agency has the
authority to start well for
junior they have authority to
start spending and as soon as
the bill signed believe that
survey constructed that but in
practice probably July first all
right thank you and just one
last question and I'm just bored
and understanding as we look at
the rest of the documents that
you provided and it says FY
twenty four general fund
appropriation customer so every.
Item that.
That's on here Mister chair
members of the panel should be
this is so.
The I guess what I'm asking for
the clarification for example if
I look at the workers
compensation administration so
there is no general fund dollars
there but what happens is this
is a it these are these operated
this organizations operated
primarily on the bump that is
expected to produce a would be
here but we still have a general
fund obligation because what if
they don't meet their
responsibility but they still
have to they still have work to
do so what I don't know is how
is that accommodated in this in
this budget so that those
organizations that do fall under
that are compensated for I'm
sorry Mr chair members of the.
Committees of that think of the
state fair there's an enterprise
that his tryst historically been
a hundred percent non general
fund yes your interest has been
to get now in this bill three
hundred and seventy five
thousand for the pavilion that
the predominantly other state
funds can't raise enough money
to cover those obligations so
it's supplemented with the
general fund obligation if
workers comp and ministration
was short on their revenues the
you would be considering a
proposal to add general fund to
their fee revenue other state
programs.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
that explanation thank you very
much Representative.
we're gonna go to Representative
Allison reef that for the second
time then we'll go to
Representative chat.
Thank you Mr chair just one
quick question.
Does H. B. to appropriate the
energy transitions funds that's
being held at the economic
development the workforce
solution and the Indian Affairs
Department.
Mr chairman and and
Representative it does include a
funding that was requested for
the economic development
department you did not receive a
request for the workforce
solutions funding from the ETA
and we've not been able to
locate the funding that the
state should have received for
Indian affairs at the treasury
as of today.
Thank you for that thank you Mr
chair thank you very much
Representative Allison
Representative Chatfield please.
Thank you Mr Mr chair this bill
will leave here with a thirty
percent reserves.
I think that's a good number.
How much money is left for the
Senate.
To fund their projects and so
forth without stripping money
out of projects that we have
funded.
Chairman of lever point six
million dollars.
Alright Jeff that is the
recurring amount.
Eight they have capacity in a
nonrecurring thank you for your
very very issues eleven point
six million without stripping
from our thank you Mr thank you
very much Representative
Chatfield next we're going to go
to ranking member Armstrong
please thank you Mr chairman and
and I to want to just say thank
you to all the staff this is a
huge left always is the the
really hard it sounds ridiculous
that the really hard thing is
when we have a lot of money it's
even harder because people come
out of the woodwork asking for
money and asking for raises and
asking for increases and so I I
have my whole key budget issues
marked up in red and I have a
marked up in the good the bad
the ugly.
which is always in the budget
it's it's not anything new and
not anything different.
But there are still there's so
many good things in the budget
with that thirty percent
reserves
You know there there's a few
things that I I really I I
expressed my concern about which
was one of them was the extended
learning and the other one was
the the early childhood
department.
and so.
My biggest thing that the that I
want to talk a little bit about
it and ask a question about is
the Medicaid provider rate
increases and can you tell me
again
Mr chairman and and panel.
What that will what that
includes in a round about way
and how that will help Mexico
who Mr Chairman representative
when you combine the I think
eighty three million of state
resources that are being put up
with the federal resources
you've got provider rate
increases that we expect would
go out the door and to the tune
of three hundred thirty million
dollars for some high priority
types of services like physician
and other practitioners we
expect that to increase the
revenue by forty three percent
for infinite and put them at a
hundred twenty percent of the
federal Medicare rates
substantial movement and that
direction to make sure that
we're paying for high quality
care infant maternal child
health type services would be at
thirty five percent Medicaid is
paying for seventy five eighty
percent of the person the state
that would take them to hundred
twenty percent as well
behavioral health services would
be up about twenty percent and
at a hundred twenty percent of
Medicare and in a variety of
other practitioners to be at a
hundred percent of Medicare but
still substantial increases from
where they're at today including
rural hospitals and critical
access hospitals thank you Mr
chairman of that thank you
Charles for that that quick
analogy I just think it's
imperative to be able to recruit
and retain doctors in the state
at any kind of health care
workers that we get that raised
with the the way that the
percentage of New Mexicans that
the access those services are
and so just once again I want to
thank you for all your hard work
and specifically on that I know
that was a real push from my
area to get that increased so
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Charles thank you very much
remember Armstrong next we're
gonna go to Representative
Montoya please.
Yeah.
The multi a please thank you Mr
chairman had trouble the
microphone there
Bill and and David Charles just
a.
On the
I have a couple questions on the
Medicaid reimbursement as well I
I know that there were different
rates for different providers
how and I know we just question
early on and I thought there was
gonna be some.
something that we which receive
back and I've not heard anything
how did we determine which
providers would get what rate
increases since they're
different.
So Mr Chairman Representative
Montoya so physicians and other
practitioners like radiology lab
surgery a would be at a hundred
twenty percent of Medicare
maternal an infant child health
would be at that includes apps
that new Bern related care would
be at a hundred twenty percent
behavioral health services would
be at a hundred twenty percent.
How many community based
services would be boosted by
eight percent they be at a
hundred percent of Medicare
other types of community based
services like emergency and non
emergency I transportation would
be FY eighteen to forty two
percent they be at a hundred
percent of Medicare and dental
would be a hundred percent
Medicare inpatient outpatient
hospitals nursing facilities
hospital hospice residential
treatment centers all would have
targeted increases in the range
of of five to twenty five
percent so thank you Mr chair I
we did go over the the the the
the increases by.
specialty or by modality but I I
still don't know how we how we
got to those numbers but where
would I go to find out how the
recommendation came to.
LFC to determine.
What would end up in the bill so
Mister chairman Representative
the department has been engaged
in right studies for the past
two years to identify and
benchmark where our providers
are relative to the region as
well as relative to Medicare
they provided LFC range of
estimates last fall and LFC
prioritize some of those types
of providers for higher rate
increases based on access to
care issues that we are
identifying or the case of like
infants and maternal health you
know Medicaid paying for the
vast majority of first and then
trying to bring everybody else
up to the best we can to a
hundred percent of Medicare
thank you thanks for that that
is helpful that is information I
was looking to to get I I just
need to have an answer when I
talk to providers Mr chairman
the there's eleven point six
left in there for for Senate
as is that enough is that what
they've requested do we know
that that would cover the the
possibility of them going over
that and stripping out other
items that are in here.
They are also they think this is
also been Representative monthly
I think one of the things we're
proud of as we came in and we
actually went underneath with
the LFC framework was we spent a
little less and recurring as was
mentioned will be sending this
piece of legislation over to our
colleagues in the Senate and I
think we want to stay closely
connected to them we don't want
to speculate or on their behalf
but we are proud that we're
sending we're actually coming in
below the recurring spending
levels that the LFC unanimously
adopted at the end of last year.
I just don't in the past we've
sent bills over and they've been
dramatically changed and I was
just wondering if there were any
if we put a safeguards and I
mean obviously if we spend less
that that helps but I'm just
wondering Mr chair if that
eleven point six million is.
Was requested or if there's been
discussion and and on the front
end.
Thank you Representative anti
I'm again we're not going to
speculate on their sort of.
Or there were.
Thank you Mr chairman that so I
appreciate that I just
There's always that disagreement
back and forth as to whether or
not they believe our work was
that so Mr chairman I just one
last thing
Hi this first time through this
process and and Mr chairman I'd
I'm I'm probably gonna.
Introduce at least a study
memorial for a study
information just comes flying at
you we got that this today we're
voting on it now
at committees of hearings that
we've had very similar
information we get that day we
have a discussion and we're
given a couple of options and
and and people who are not
fortunate enough to serve on
this committee have literally no
say so or understanding and they
will get this on Thursday.
They will have really no time to
look at it and.
The gonna have to vote up or
down and I I just after going to
this process I just think that.
Once again government is not
business but you wouldn't run a
business this way and so I I I I
do not gonna pre presuppose what
the answer of that study should
be a really would like to see an
open in a study and maybe take a
look at what other states do we
have oversight committees that
That have oversight over it
administrative departments and
but don't ever talk about budget
or anything like that and and it
would be nice to see if there
was some way that other
legislators can have some input
in the area on the committees
that they are experts on or they
have more subject matter
expertise than we do because I
I'm really uncomfortable there's
so many things in here I know
nothing about and we're gonna be
looking to pass a budget and so
I just wanna let you know I want
to give the courtesy to the
committee and let you know that
I'm gonna ask for that study to
be done to see if maybe there's
better practices thank you Mr
chairman next we'll go to
Representative Brown.
Chairman I I just have one short
question so Mr chairman and
panel when we on this committee
work on preparing our budget for
fiscal year twenty four we're
looking at general fund revenue
just for our edification and for
the education of the public I
just like to know what the
overall spending not not just HB
two but what is the overall
spending state government
considering all sources of
revenue anything done on behalf
of New Mexicans and in terms of
government spending Mr chair.
So Mr Mr chairman Representative
Brown what page numbers are a
little bit off from years but
about page one eighty two is
twenty six million five hundred
and.
Twenty six billion five hundred
and seventy two million this is
the last word on section four
the grand total of all funds
page one eighty four women
inclined fourteen the document
before Mr chairman and director
every thank you so much for that
I I think it's important for us
to keep in mind you know we're
looking here at nine point three
billion roughly but the overall
spend is about twenty six
billion.
It's a lot so thank you Mr chair
cruciate the answer.
The representative round and Mr
we'll go now to percent pedigree
please.
Thank you chairman I have just
one question and then the
statement but before I do that
sure.
Thank you for the effort the
everybody is put forward in this
I too am a little bit.
Overwhelm.
yeah we broke up in the
sub committees and and had
discussions we heard the
subcommittee reports.
But not a whole lot of
capability to make the
adjustments and so I look
forward to what happens
throughout the interim and and
to see how that process builds
everything together that'll be
that'll be the fun side of this
with respect to that.
Mr chairman my questions.
Would be with respect to the
bill that we heard on the house
floor last night Senate bill six
I don't the in this document
we're that hundred million is
appropriated and taken.
And and put into the budget yes
I understand that we're supposed
to receive a payment back from
the federal government with
respect to that but I don't see
it anywhere.
And the spreadsheets.
Mr Chairman it's not.
Use that's this is kind of
tracking the LFC plan and
to the extent that bill moves
forward is going to be necessary
perhaps in order to maintain
thirty percent reserves there
are a couple of key variables on
the sheet.
H. which is the way it would be
possible to maintain thirty
percent reserves and accommodate
that Phil so the key variables
are page nine shows one million
for tech one billion for tax
reform and then.
let's look at page eleven the.
It shows one billion in the
recurring revenue section for
tax reform and then the very
last row on the same page which
shows other not specify.
And you know some of the of that
is potential rebates it could be
the hundred million for that
bill so this is where you will
issue have continued discussions
about all legislation these
figures will adjusted or to keep
your target of thirty percent
research.
Thank you chairman and thank you
director for that.
Chairman and and
Percenters I just and.
ET as as I looked for the soon
as I go through this process I
look at.
What we've done in the in the
state.
Senator several of our
presenters over the last several
weeks for weeks now have talked
about how they wanted to
maintain their budgets as a
percentage there there spent.
As a percent of of of our
revenue.
And.
I look at that and I see the R.
our reserves are going down and
we're not doing the same thing
from a legislative standpoint
we're not trying to continue to
build our reserves to appoint
chairman of I don't teach my
kids this way.
I I
It's not fiscally conservative
for me.
When when our reserves are
consistent with with where we're
going and yes we have a windfall
of money that that is primarily
based on the
Based on the presentation that
we receive on day three.
Billion.
Money that we have an access for
this year eighty percent of that
comes from gas.
And.
As we continue to look forward
we have a graph the talks about
where we're going with respect
oil and and gas and then it
starts to participate.
And and director we've had
conversations about how are
funds start to start.
To offset that but now we're
dealing with our state beans.
To offset a revenue stream that
we're trying to destroy.
And and I don't get the
dichotomy here we're all happy
to spend the money we're all
happy to grow over.
Six years we're happy to grow.
By over fifty percent.
The same time we're doing
everything we can for the
primary revenue stream to
destroy that and and that
concerns me when I look at
things from the overall state
standpoint we have such great
natural resources in the state
we have such capability we have
seven.
Of the rare minerals that it
takes two to go to the green
energy I am more blocking.
The access to those.
Across the state.
I don't understand if we want to
move in that one up why are we
the leaders in the in this where
we we should be the wealthiest
state in the U..
With reserves that we have.
We rank in the bottom percent
on.
Thank you chairman.
I look forward to the debate on
the floor the.
I thank you very much
Representative Representative
Garrett for the second time
thank you Mr chair it's very
exciting to see all our little
sub committee groups in here I
have a question Mr chairman and
our experts so House Bill three
the transportation budget do we
have to pass that.
That that's contingent on its
contents here my correct in
understanding that in reserve
your that's what we've adopted
in this we've we've adopted that
hearing this committee so you're
right.
Right but it does have to pass
on the floor still yes.
Mr Chairman the the
transportation bill that has all
that information and that will
be substituted in this will it's
all that information is in this
bill are ready okay so that bill
does not need to pass because
there would be subject to okay
thank you very much that's it.
Thank thank you very much
Representative Garrett.
okay thank you for the I want to
go to Representative month late
for second time thank you Mr
chairman
on the continued C..
Issues
Is there language in there that
says it's continue so if there's
if there's money in there for.
Feminine hygiene products and
that's and that is it that that
money is in the bill but then
but the bill and house bill two
but the bill has to pass on the
floor for that to go what
happens if that were some other
bills is there language that
says.
That the money reverts if it's
there I'm not exactly sure how
that's written.
I'm gonna have to learn how you
guys.
Representative Monterey of so
you know any an example would
be.
page one seventy seven the at
risk example to David again.
There's an appropriation of
thirty one point nine million.
That's contention that Ackman of
Bill the session to increase the
at risk multiplier.
Okay thank you that's that bill
does not pass that money goes
away it is not put in the the
SCG okay thank you Mr chairman
that's a that's just a rookie
question thank you very much for
someone to.
I thank you well we're gonna go
to vice chair Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
to that wonderful staff for
compiling all of this and
leading us through this process
with regard to page two of the
high level summary
I wanted to ask for a little
more information about the eight
hundred and fifty million dollar
transfer to the severance tax
permanent fund and.
Sort of what the thought process
is there and and why we're doing
it.
Mr Chairman Representative
Dixon.
It has been said many times and
I'm gonna give senator Wirth a
little bit of credit for
influencing LFC this way and it
very much related to the chart
the Representative Pettigrew has
slacked again is inviting one
the the picture that there is an
oil and gas peak five to ten
years away but then there's a
decline decades into the future
as the world kind of seemingly
inevitably moved to
decarbonisation and forty
percent of general fund revenues
are coming from oil and gas so
we've got a few good years of
perhaps growing revenues and
growing production but then
decades in the future of
declining revenues and declining
production so the whole thing is
of not a partial thing of this
budget is how to convert now
money to future money so the
budget growth is twelve percent
it could have been twenty
percent but instead the
proposals are to take recurring
revenues and either use some for
nonrecurring spending like
capital or to put in these
endowments permanent funds that
will spin off revenues in the
future as.
Almost inevitably whether it's.
One two three or four decades or
guess realistically.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr Abbey
and so in a way with my with the
analogy of in personal finance
it's like I'm putting money a
bonus check that I got from my
employer I'm putting it into a
money market.
So I'm going to be growing I'm
gonna be getting interest stuff
that that I would then have
later to use.
And I would say that's exactly
right Mr Chairman except for one
thing it's better than the money
market you're investing it long
term to produce super returns
above the money market return
all the better.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr Abbey I.
Really appreciate that you know
not only are we doing thirty
percent reserves which I think
is phenomenal and I think is
sort of above and beyond what.
Most Americans.
Would you but I also appreciate
the strategic thinking of taking
one time money now saving it and
and putting it to work for us in
the future so that we are
somewhat insulated from some of
the volatility so thank you Mr
chair thank you thank you very
much thank you very much vice
chair Dixon okay I'm gonna have
a a couple of quick questions we
do have to be on the floor we're
going to have a the short amount
of public comment available and
also will have that available
online first I want to go
In terms of Mr Abbey can you and
for all panelists New Mexico is
one of a very small handful of
states that where the
legislature built a budget
independently of the executive
how many other states do that we
think about I they're mainly Mr
Chairman mainly western states
Arizona Texas Colorado great
thank thank you so members
The a recently all finance
committee members are able to
attend to participate and
receive the per diem to the part
of the legislative finance
committee this sort of
legislative process and members
in public this is a an
incredibly unique and positive
things that we enjoy in the
state of New Mexico where the
legislature in a bipartisan
bicameral way work throughout
the summer meets every single
month works closely with staff
with folks all across the state
in order to to build the budget
and members that's something
where every one of us will be
able to participate in the
supported and that as we go into
this interim and so Mr Abbey we
came into this with a target of
a thirty percent reserve in our
LESC framework we came in with
the target of of this recurring
spending level we've met the
reserve target and we've
actually come in slightly
underneath the recurring
spending level is that that's
accurate Mr Chairman yes great
and Mr Abbey to go briefly into
the the as vice chair Dixon
talked about now money for
future money we're looking at as
you said five to ten years
perhaps in the estimates vary
our our oil production for
thirty years from the eighties
until twenty ten was released
sixty to seventy million barrels
of oil a year at five five to
seven a month and it very good
did it ever very from five to
seven Mr chairman that's that's
exactly right so members this is
and this is something that we'll
talk about more as we go through
this process for thirty years we
had no less than five no more
than seven million barrels every
single month.
You can look it's remarkably
stable.
Over three hundred months in a
row.
We're now
at in escalating level above
fifty million barrels and so
this essentially the question
that we're discussing how high
how long what's the rate of
decline is is really the core
part of everything that we're
doing here and so Mister at and
to the panelists with the the
surplus revenue this year that
we have to be honest may be in
fact.
Higher next year is that in the
it.
Over the next few years we will
see higher revenues more likely
than not that we're seeing this
year Mr chairman I think I agree
with that also like to draw your
attention to page nine.
The the.
Even if there was a billion of
tax reform reducing revenues it
shows revenues of eleven
billion.
With the recurring spending is
nine point five.
So you could have zero revenue
growth for FY twenty five and
have new money of a billion and
a half.
Because the mix of investing in
The permanent type funds of
billion or less and spending
some of the recurring or
nonrecurring purposes and having
reserves that thirty percent of
all combine to.
I think reasonably do what the
volatility of oil and gas that
we know is out there Mr chairman
thank you very much Mr I mean I
think this is a point the
building on an LESC framework we
should all frankly take
a great deal of pride and we are
investing for the future our
severance tax permanent fund
even if scenarios one time
investments lower for five
hundred million.
This one time only pays for
itself in roughly a decade sort
of that similar time frame that
we're talking about here where
we have this elevated revenue
based upon elevated production
scenario at the same time we're
investing in agencies and
prioritizing health care
education infrastructure
economic development and care
for our resources
and at the same time is that
we're keeping a strong thirty
percent reserve and so and Mr
Abbey the percentage amount will
stay the same the dollar amount
will our reserves be higher and
dollars this year than they were
last year.
Mr Chairman yes and you can see
that on page nine it can
comparing twenty three of twenty
four they chose reserves
increasing from which the
percentages thirty percent both
years but because of the growth
of the budget the reserve about
increases thank thank you very
much Mr Abbey members this is
again a key important point.
As we're building on more into
recurring we're building the
reserve dollar amount to keep
that target that we set in a
unanimous and in a bipartisan
manner so great deal to be proud
of here to the LA to Mr Valdez
and agency staff you all step
shepherd many budgets through
none bigger than this and you've
provided an extra level of
service support and expertise of
course the LFC staff and our
analysts we see that there are
area and sort of issue area
expertise and an overall
extraordinary level of of
expertise and come.
With that I think we're going to
go is there anybody here who
would like to offer a brief
public comment.
Please come on up to the Mike
will have one public comment
here.
we have a we do have a hand held
Mike members I want to thank you
all this is the point again of
pride for us as a committee we
know that the budget is
extraordinarily important and so
we have work to integrate public
comment into our agency hearings
as part of what we've done this
year helped inform our work and
so will finish please go ahead
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name's John to
they have to New Mexico I'm here
to use the small time of public
comment state thank you for the
inclusion of the twenty five
thousand minimum for educational
assistant workers in those
license in that role group in
particular I'd like to think
Representative Baca for being
one of the primary Sanchez and
all of you who have supported
this legislation as it's worked
to this point in time about half
of those educational workers we
offer thank you for hearing them
for seeing them and for
knowledge and the important work
that they do in our schools
thank you.
I thank you very much okay thank
you for that we're gonna go
briefly online please raise your
hand I think we do have one
comment
we're going to time this for a
minute by all go ahead and pull
up my little timer.
Mr chair we have a Charles good
marker okay Mr good map or you
have a minute please start
whenever you're ready.
Thank you Mr members the
committee of Charleston marker
speaking on behalf New Mexico
voices for children.
As as the doctors like to
express creation for the
increases in education spending
it's very important for the
future of New Mexico's I also am
hoping still to see I am not
because no not there I can see
the document with hoping to see
of funding for H. B. forty to
the public health and climate
resiliency bill it's so
important to take care of this
now a plan to protect the health
of our people before the next
weather events happen thank you
thank you very much.
Okay
okay I think that's going to
conclude that conclude our
public comment
with that members I just want to
say thank you to each and
everyone of you here again for
members of the public we have
these highlights available along
with the additional context in
the different sheets and others
that are available we want to
make sure that everybody who
wants a copy of this has it also
Mr slowly Mr Abbey can we make
sure that the this will be up on
the LFC yes this will be
available electronically.
Okay with that we're going to go
to vice chair Dixon promotion.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
that
We approve the HFC substitute
for house bill two and three
Senator Mr Chairman.
Is that the house bill
hospitals two and three do not
pass.
And that the the HSA for House
pro two and three to practice.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
that house bill's two and three
do not pass and House Bill HFC
Committee substitute for House
Bill two and three to pass.
Okay there's a motion and a
second vote as thank you for
keeping us going on the right
track there's a motion and a
second we'll go to call the roll
for this.
For.
Representative.
Yes Representative.
Yes.
Senator Browne.
and I would.
Representative capital yes.
Representative electors yes.
Representative Garcia yeah.
Representative Care Act yes.
Representative Perkins yes.
Representative had a meal yes
Representative Lujan yes.
Yes.
I.
Yeah yes.
Share yes.
You have working in the program
and we and.
Okay thank you very much first
we're going to Representative
Brown to explain.
Thank you Mr chair be very brief
there is so much in this budget
Mr chairman that I really like
and I am.
So thankful to all those who
work so hard men and women in
industries across the state but
also especially in my part of
the state oil and gas for giving
us this additional revenue it is
a blessing and every New Mexican
is going to benefit from it but
Mr chairman the reason I voted
no is the overall spending of an
increase of twelve percent is
just more than I would like to
see I'm comfortable with the
five percent maybe even a six
percent increase but we've had
successive years.
Of large increases and I'm
looking into the future and
thinking our best move right now
is to put more money into the
permanent funds that will help
us fund to the future and take
care of our next generation and
in particular Mr Chairman there
is a bill now that's been
introduced and I I don't think
we'll have time it's not in the
budget but to set up a
transportation infrastructure
trust fund we have more than two
billion dollars of needed road
maintenance in New Mexico and
we're not we're not getting to
the point where we take care of
it well enough so well I guess
we'll see what happens this time
but I think we'll be seeing it
next session so for those
reasons I just really
like to see less of an increase
and that's why I go to go thank
you thank you Representative.
Mr chairman thank you for the
opportunity.
I'm gonna echo the almost
everything that Representative
Brown just a
we stand on the same page I
stand on the same page is as
bizarre with respect to how much
or spend as and I do look at
money now working for money in
the future but I also realize
that we need to.
Building business to work for us
in the future as well
we don't teach our kids about
their savings those people are
gonna retirement don't live off
their savings for more than ten
to thirty years and we shouldn't
be we should be looking at
things that way
that's just my opinion thank you
very much I do appreciate the
effort from LFC all the work
that was done in the interim
committee from your team
amazing watching the process I
appreciate that very much thank
you thank you very much
Representative okay add members
thank you very much we have pass
along our budget for everybody
here and everybody watching
thank you for the increased
participation with us as we
build our budget through the
