Twenty four budget requests if
you're following along in your
volume let me just grab you that
page because that's going to be
everywhere from page sixty five.
On through to page six to be
seventy excuse me.
the LFC were the recommendation
is about US thirteen point.
Four thousand below the
executive recommendation the LFC
recommendation supports the
general fund increase of a
hundred and ninety three
thousand or about five point two
percent for an overall budget
increase of four point three
percent so we have some pretty
minor differences over all in
the grand scheme of things for
this particular Department we're
sorry for the and so what I'll
go ahead and handed over to
Cecilia who is the other DFA
counterpart for some further
details on that yes thank you
gender good afternoon Mister
chair and members of the
committee there are really some
small differences here so in the
interest of time I'm just going
to go over those P. codes that
have those differences and
that's going to be starting with
P. five seven for the motor
vehicle division.
for the revenue both the LFC LFC
and Executive recommendations
include charities requested
reduction of two hundred and
sixteen thousand in federal
revenue.
the LFC recommends a five point
four percent increase above
motor vehicles fiscal year
twenty three operating budget as
requested by TRD whereas the
executive recommendation
includes an additional ninety
four point five in other revenue
sources to fund the wasted
weight distance transfer to DPS.
in the base the LFC recommended
recommendation for other
financing uses is that ninety
four point five thousand below
our recommendation.
Both recommendations include
funds to reduce motor vehicles
vacancy rates and fund positions
with new salary schedules.
And the and also both come to
consensus with all performance
measures for and we do.
our other difference will be in
P. five seven nine compliance
enforcement.
the LFC recommendation fully
funds here these requests for a
hundred and seventy one point
eight thousand dollar increase
and nine point two percent above
fiscal year twenty three in the
audit and compliance program
operating budget.
Whereas the executive
recommendation is an increase of
ninety point seven or five
percent over fiscal year twenty
three.
The LFC recommendation fully
supports the agencies requested
increase of a hundred fifty five
point two or ten percent above
the fiscal year twenty three.
The executive recommendation
supported an increase of seventy
four point one or five percent
over fiscal year twenty three in
the personal services employee
benefits category both the LFC
and executive budget
recommendations are the same and
contractual services and both
recommendations included nine
point four thousand in the
contractual services category to
fund salary studies for special
agents of the state personnel
office which affects for FTEs.
The analysts have come to
consensus on all performance
measures for compliance
enforcement program and with
that I'll pass it over to
secretary Schardin Clarke.
Thank you madam secretary please
feel free to introduce members
of your team are here today
great thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee it's
pleasure to see you today I'm
Stephanie Schardin Clarke and
the cabinet secretary of the
taxation and revenue department
and I do have some really
wonderful key staff members here
that I'd like to take a second
to introduce are HSD director
Danny Syrian is to my right she
will answer most of your tough
questions about details I'm sure
but I couldn't do without her
and appreciate her being here
also here is our budget director
and that Reynolds our budget
bureau chief our audit and
compliance division director I
Shammara
also are deputy chief
information officer darshan
account of ours here if you have
questions in detail about I. T.
division and then we have to key
individuals here from the motor
vehicle division that's acting
director taken solace and Ali
Rodriguez comfy a potus who is
the finance director for MDD.
And with that I have to slides
that look like this and I know
that the the differences between
the executive and the LESC rack
are fairly limited on our
budgets will go through these
very quickly I know you have a
long agenda today so just for
your reference on slide two is
organizational chart you can see
there if if you need to know who
is in charge of any of our
programs you've got everything
down to the director and deputy
director level of each of our
programs
slide three we just restate for
the committee's information our
mission and vision statement
we're really all about serving
the public we exist to serve
whether B. tax payers are
drivers are vehicle owners we're
here to provide great public
service on site for is a recap
of some of our recent
initiatives we'll go through
them all and in detail but
a lot of our work in our
strategic planning is organized
around three main areas
workforce development recruiting
and retaining the most capable
wonderful staff we can a second
as customer needs just making
sure customers have as many
choices and channels to interact
with us as possible and the
third is really about governance
and information security in
internal things like that so on
site for just some of our key
initiatives lately around
workforce development we've
really been emphasizing training
documenting as many procedures
as we can so that it's easier to
on board and we can expect
things to happen more
consistently across different
staff members are we've been
focusing on job fairs and
internships to get as many folks
as possible to apply with the
agency and start their career
taxed Rav
and just to highlight the the
budget request and the executive
budget recommendation although
it's not that different than the
LFC a recommendation this really
is really about improving are
funded vacancy status funding
more vacancies than in years
past and you can see on slide
four how many more FTE this
budget recommendations will
allow us to fill.
On slide five some of our recent
initiatives related to the
customer experience and customer
service there's been a lot going
on obviously but some of the
highlights include completion of
a two million dollar property
tax automation system that was
completed back in December we've
resumed delinquent property
auctions and all counties we
launch the cannabis excise tax
so that taxpayers could register
and begin paying as of April
first go live date for that
program we've upgraded unclaimed
property system and it's more
automated and helpful to
customers than ever we have this
is something I don't want to
skim over we have an incredible
amount of progress year over
year for the last four years
that our financial statement
audit for FY twenty two
financial statement on it was
done it down to having just to
audit findings of the lowest
level severity possible for an
organization that processed
fourteen billion dollars last
fiscal year with over eight
hundred employees to have just
to audit findings of low
severity level is something
we're very proud about.
I will go through all the rest
of these in detail but just know
that we were doing everything we
can to to be mindful of and
improve the customer experience.
And then last just I know that
you're for merit very familiar
is legislators with recent tax
policy changes
but in the in the last year we
did collect and distribute
sixteen point seven billion
dollars I think I said fourteen
minutes ago that's now outdated
we've we've timely and on budget
issued about a billion dollars
of tax rebates since may.
and many other changes that
we've made together since
nineteen so again I I think I
can skip over page seven you to
you've heard the differences in
the two budget recommendations
they're very similar and then
our keep budget highlights
really is this is just about
funding vacancies so that we can
continue to fill positions and
continue to bring that vacancy
rate down.
slide nine just has highlight a
high level overview of our
budget but you already have
heard about and so I will stand
for questions.
Thank you thank you so much
madam secretary great to see you
and you members of your team
let's go to committee for
questions we're gonna start with
representative Garcia.
thank you Mr chairman of madam
secretary of on page four when
you reductions.
What on on
Program for six percent the
administration two three and
four months.
What is going on right vacancy
rate for the whole department
currently Mr chair and
representative Garcia were it a
little over twenty one percent
vacant I think twenty one point
three.
For us as a rule of thumb about
ten positions is one percent
vacancy so that's been creeping
back down at the beginning of
the administration we're close
to thirty percent vacant we have
got it down to about twenty one
percent pre pandemic one of the
little known for trending back
down.
You Mr Secretary you know the
the federal funding reductions
but I want to find out what
it'll
The consumer you have on the on
the department of what was Mr
chair of how you want it.
Fifty the auditor Department.
Mr chair and representative
Garcia I want to clarify the
question because we perform
audits and make tax assessments
but we're also audited by you
know an independent auditor as
well as by the IRS and the
Social Security Administration
and others so which which takes
about it's to me before I'm
sorry about your Department
voters in your department.
The venues that have private
auditors auditor Department us
all a lot of the Mr chair and
representative Garcia we are
incredibly proud of the progress
we've made it year after year
over the last four years on our
audits coming in this
administration received an audit
report that I think had
seventeen audit findings and
some of them were material
weaknesses and our inability are
agencies prior inability to
complete its audit timely was
holding back the statewide
financial reporting and I'm
proud to say that every year
we've chipped down at that audit
finding and this most recent
here our audit had to provide
they were not significant
basically the only audit
findings we had across this huge
complex organization work some
employees brought premium gas
emission about regular unleaded.
And there were a couple days
where the armored Currier that
takes our deposits to the bank
got there late.
Of that's it madam secretary of
thankful ranchers you know with
the it looks all good thank you
for what you're doing for the
state and not keep on the job
thank you thank you
representative Garcia listening
Representative Cruz.
Thank you Mr chairman secretary
when the public goes to renew a
license plate and they do it
online.
They are charged to be wiser for
the for the public to access the
use of of a card.
Okay I'll look to the experts
behind me if need be but Mr
chairman and Representative
della Cruz I believe what you're
talking about is a convenience
fee there are certain services
that we offer online whether
it's registration renewal of
plate renewal or whatever so for
the convenience of paying online
state agencies often pass on
that convenience be it's
basically the charge that the
credit card company would
otherwise assessed and it gets
passed on to the customer in
exchange for that I know that on
vehicles on I. registrations we
also offer a five percent
discount though that more or
less offsets the fee.
Thank you because if there is
nothing that helps offset but
that is hardly convenient for
the public so.
Can you assure the committee
that that offset that there is
no cost to the public when they
do that or there's a little
close to the public.
Well Mr chair and representative
dela Cruz I I cannot guarantee
that there's a one to one offset
but I actually renew my vehicle
registration and know this every
year that there's this five
percent discount that's about
equal to the convenience fee
customers are required to do
that online so if they would
choose instead they can make an
appointment through our our call
center or website system
appointments are readily
available we have thirty two the
state run field offices
statewide and typically all but
one of them were there happen to
be vacancies currently have same
or next day appointment
availability so that's the way
that the customer can choose to
opt out of that if if they like.
Mr Chairman used to receive in
the mail or renewal.
Senator partners chairman you
get something Carter tells you
that it's time it's almost time
but you know large and Hey you I
used to write out a check and I
mailed a check and I was done
and I get get my internet that's
no longer available why is no
longer available Mr chairman.
One of I'm going to ask if if I
may Mister chair and
representative for acting in B.
D. director seconds all us to
speak to that.
I know that we do still send the
postcards but chair
representative this the
objections that is close so I
know you're from sorry I'm a bit
short my apologies so thank you
for the question we still do
have that option available Sir
so if you get the postcard you
can mail that postcard back with
the check as well and we're
still processing affect our our
our revenue possible division
actually process that check and
you will get the registration in
the mail Mr chairman so you
would have to enclose it in a
personal level yes
Representative can be the.
With the chair Representative
Sir that's correct then the
information is available to the
public.
Mr chair Representative that's
correct which the address and
injection should be on that same
postcard thank you Mr chairman I
I had no idea was and maybe I
didn't read it throwing up but I
I think as a matter of
convenience for the public I
ought to be made very clear on
that postcard.
Mr because without that I just
hate to see the idea that you
know if you buy something on
Amazon or you go through any
business they don't charge you
any fees and it always just
seems like a little
contradictory when it's called
the convenience fee.
And I don't know that most
people realize that they're
getting a five percent discount.
If if it's almost negligible in
terms of the amount of German I
think that's something that
should be made very very clear
the public because I know I
would a lot felt a lot better
has that been more clear to me
now granted if you look at some
of the divergence written on the
part of German it tends to be
very small and you know I'm an
older guy and there's a lot of
older people out there and I
will just chair purple store
years ago Mr Morneau's director
parks and recreation I went to a
community center that house a
senior programs and I was
speaking at a normal tone and a
very very.
Strong wonderful lady who was a
regular there at the senior
center said let me tell you
something young man when you
come to talk to as you speak up
we can't hear you were older so
keep that in mind if you would
when you prepare these documents
because.
These only get stronger as you
get older.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much for percent of the
cruise listening Representative
Trujillo then returned.
Yes thank you Mr chairman thank
you madam secretary.
I'm like Representative that a
cruise I I never find that it's
that convenient and I don't ever
recall getting a reimbursement
for or use a reimbursement of
whatever it's called I.
I would.
Encourage you to make it more
user friendly and I would give
away the the reimbursement that
you give us it because elderly
folks as he said they don't know
that and and we're supposed to
be aware and and the and we
don't have that stuff at least I
don't am I speaking for
everybody say yes.
Thank you madam chair Mr.
Thank you very much
Representative Trujillo next
we're going the Representative
route.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Secretary.
Couple of questions I know this
is a budget hearing but I have a
couple other just it related to
your department so we have NPD
offices run by the state but
there are some private groups
that also.
Dispenser would discuss licenses
process those things could you
just give us a quick summary of
what other services they are
allowed to do that I guess you
call.
Would you call them Mr chair Mr
chair and representative brown
you're correct we have a a
private public model we have
thirty two state run MVD field
offices and then countless if
you're maybe someone can count
it but I can't private run MVD
offices that might be private
sector private industry or the
money also lumped in there are
some in the the offices that are
run by municipalities and
counties and so we partner with
them we ensure that the agents
who work there are trained to
process the types of
transactions they are allowed to
to process typically and
historically those private field
offices have only been able to
process vehicle transactions but
there's an interest from them
and we are interested as well
and allowing them to expand
their offerings to include at
least certain driver
transactions so there's a lot
more training that goes into our
offering drivers transactions
there the for example picture
the types of documents you need
to review to make sure for
example that they're qualified
under the real ID act to get so
it gets there's a lot more
detail than for example vehicle
registration or title but we are
interested in partnering with
them to expand those offerings
and some already have.
Mr chairman Yasser thank you
that's kind of where it was
headed or these other offices
allowed to do real ID and all
that so I do know that the
entity office in my area is by
appointment only now and I think
some of these other offices are
satellite offices might not
require an appointment is that
your understanding madam
secretary Mr chairman okay thank
you and then finally thank you
for continuing to have a tax to
advocate on your staff
Invariably every so every spring
I get a call from an elderly
couple in my district they
didn't get their tax refund and
they wanted to do something
about it and I can always call
the taxpayer advocate and I
think it used to be Tiffany
Smith I believe she was
absolutely fantastic Mr chair it
looks like it's is Amador now
and reading that correctly and
would you be sure that the
members of the committee get the
phone number for that person so
we have a your honor speed dial
absolutely right Mr chair and
representative from thank you
for highlighting that Tiffany
Smith was so good at that role
that we promoted her to be a
deputy division director an
audit and compliance issue still
with us but with more
responsibility and that's
correct all my adores the
taxpayer advocate and I will
find our contact information to
the committee staff afterwards
thank you Mr chair thank you
madam secretary thank you very
much Representative Brown next
we're going to go to vice chair
Dixon than Representative but.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
madam secretary I just have a
couple of questions
I want to follow up on a couple
of items that I'm pretty sure I
asked about last time I saw you
regarding the state tax gap.
so
I think currently what is our
current state tax gap madam
secretary Mr Chairman
representative Dixon I don't
think that I can give you a
brief answer on that because
it's subject the the tax gap is.
Something you can estimate but
with a lot of new wants and
cabbie out around the nature of
the estimate so for example I
know that the LFC you know
issued a report on that this
summer but I noted that the and
now you know that the
methodology had to do with I
think a a report from Minnesota
twenty some years ago and you
know and just sort of generally
applying a rate that the IRS
thanks is there for federal
returns to the state which you
know so it's so at in a long
long way I'm I'm saying I'm not
sure that I can estimate that
for you.
Thank you Mr chair and madam
secretary and actually for the
interest of other folks who may
not know what that tax gap is
could you just briefly explain
that Mister chair and
Representative Dixon the tax gap
would be sort of the difference
between taxes owed across
everyone who owes it to what's
been collected the gapping
uncollected amount in the middle
so there's different ways we can
we can approach it you know
there's there's a way to use IRS
data and with the IRS thinks the
tap gas tax gap is and federal
returns to pro rate that sort of
to New Mexico that's one
estimate we can also look at the
amount we have assessed you know
that if the tax department makes
an assessment we think that
someone has taxed owed so for
example we have an accounts
receivable balance over a
billion dollars on that's been
assessed with the audit and
compliance division but.
That is much of that subject to
mining its way through the
courts and subject to tax payers
protesting in providing more
information that might you know
if do away with the assessment
there's all kinds of Cappy adds
to that.
Sure thank you Mr chair and
madam secretary and so one of
the questions that I have
is if you what has of the
department done to help shrink
that tax gap what proactive
steps have you taken because it
your Mr chair and members of the
committee it's you know this is
additional revenue that is owed
to the state that we are missing
out on and so could you tell us
what if any steps the department
is taken absolutely Mr chair and
representative Dixon and and
after you take a first stab at
it I might go to our division
director I Shammara who can
speak about this to in in
greater detail than I but
there's a couple things one and
this predates me being at the
department we completed a an
audit selection tool that
basically uses artificial
intelligence to machine learn
and selection G. R. T. returns
for audit selection so what that
that's wonderful and it takes
all the human elements out of a
picking on any tax parity
industry makes it all just
mechanical which is great but
that means that are mature
technology is much more mature
in making and doing audits and
making assessments that are
maturity is in collecting and so
we last session secured a C. to
project appropriation to do a
similar thing on the collection
side so we're right now in the
process of completing that C. to
project and that will actually
help automate and improve our
collections function
There's something else I was
just going to know but you know
where it hi I also wanted to
know that we're constantly
evolving the methodology we use
to prevent fraud and flag
returns as fraudulent and think
in a tentative verification and
things like that but as you can
imagine we don't talk about the
methodology publicly we we're
just doing it but I also want to
hear from miss more if she wants
to add to that.
Thank you madam secretary and
chairman small and
Representative Dixon we have a
pretty advanced data warehouse
that has over thirty data
warehouse thirty data sources in
that warehouse that uses of
combination of a secretaries
that algorithms to calculate
that tax do we have
Build out its that we do we have
assessments that we call project
assessments we offer managed
audits in various tax program so
every everything from grocers
States personal income tax to
come up with anything that we
have data for we acquire that
data and use that to help us
with the tax gap there are data
site there are programs that
there is no data source the than
in those instances we do field
visit to enforce compliance so
that we can establish what data
sources might be there but to
the greatest extent possible we
try to use data and technology
to automate that process.
Nine and if if I may Mr Chairman
representative Dixon just out on
something that I should just
said I'm she mentioned the
managed audit program this is
something that we
we thought very carefully about
and chose to expand and what
that is is basically you know
were familiar with the typical
audit where the department sends
you a letter saying we intend to
audit and assess you and and we
can do this this way managed
audit is sort of a voluntary
compliance audit where a
taxpayer can come forward and
say you know what I think I'm
out of compliance I'd like to be
in compliance can we please work
together collaboratively to
determine what my assessment is
and the beauty of it for the tax
payer and for collections is
that when you enter managed
audit you have a hundred and
eighty days to paid in full year
assessed amount without penalty
or interest so it's a great give
and take between the tax payer
in the department and what we
find is that the assessments
made after manage audit or much
more collectible than our
regular field audits and just
got it.
It's wonderful Mister chair and
secretary thank you for that my
final item is I would love to
get a follow up as to whether or
not you guys have looked at
legislation that would ban some
of the phantom where and other
You know technology that helps
people avoid taxes thank you Mr
chairman Representative Dixon
act absolutely we have an
amendment proposed in an agency
bill it's house bill No I'm
sorry Senate bill one forty six
can't keep one forty six and one
forty seven separate but
basically it's whenever to tax
agency bills and it immense the
tax evasion statute to make
absolutely clear that if you use
software or device to
artificially cook your books and
make it look like you had less
receipts that's tax evasion and
it's criminal wonderful thank
you Mr chair and madam secretary
I'm really pleased to hear that
thank you Mr Dixon next is
Representative better than risks
of
Thank you chairman and.
it's good to see you.
Hello I want to really really
tough questions for.
I really
Something that just.
My a page five of the difference
worksheet that we received
chairman and secretary.
Nine point four thousand thank
you to contractual services
category to fund the salary
study for.
Special agent for the state.
State personnel office which
would impact for.
All time of please can.
Chairman secretary can do that a
little bit deeper on you know
the date of thank you.
Chair small and Representative
Pettigrew so I believe what this
is about is that you know
there's there's a recognition
that it's difficult to recruit
and retain certified law
enforcement officers in tax and
that is a little unique in that
our tax fraud investigations
division which is called our
compliance program has Senator
certified law enforcement
officers this is the division
that investigates white collar
crime turns them over for
prosecution and so we're we're
our budget request and the
recommendation has to do with a
state personnel office case
study or classification study
that has to do with one Forsman
certification employees in
general it affects those for
within our department.
And it has I'm told it has
already been implemented but we
don't have to but I spoke Mexico
thank you Secretary for that
answer I just.
Ten thousand dollars for four
people same kind of an excessive
amount but
That's all in the details.
Yes.
The chairman of Secretary.
Yes on Saturday were handed out.
And supplementals in the
morning.
Then we have some requests from.
Factset Representative on there
can you talk about some of those
and why would what through
special supplemental or
deficiency side of that.
If I can clarify chairman and
Representative Pettigrew are you
wanting us to go through all of
our nonrecurring court requests
is it just the supplemental for
operating budget.
Falls under section five so they
would fall underneath your
supplemental and deficiency
side.
Thanks for the special I.
Mexico City in the
Representative room miss
Anderson maybe if you want to
start off and then go through
with the secretary.
Mr chair members I'd be happy to
kind of walk us through the
specials and supplementals table
and some of the differences we
do we have included and sorry
it's a little bit small but
there is a sheet that's on the
back of the PS calc which shows
you kind of the differences
between the executive and the
LFC recommendations for each
special and sort of like their
reasoning
between those differences so we
we had a request for it there is
like the one hundred thousand of
for tax scanning equipment
services recommended.
By the exact but not by the LFC
we have a two point eight for
the development and enhancement
to maintain systems of record
which is recommended by both the
LESC and the executive.
we have an implementation of
motor coach changes which is
mandated in legislation where we
have the executive of the
filling the full request for the
and that's five million for five
million and verses the LFC did
two million and now this is bill
language that we're seeing a
difference in with the LFC
recommending the language only
special appropriation which has
existed in past a house bill's
we've got a four hundred and
thirty one million to replace
extraction desks and scanners
because the life of the usable
life of the equipment at TRD
they've actually use this
equipment beyond seven years and
they're pushing it closer to ten
so both the executive and the
LESC are recommending a special
appropriation for an update on
equipment and finally we have
enhancements for the protest
case management system
to implement protests tech
attacks functionality for gin
tax which is I believe the
system that's used to prevent a
to sort of like clothes that tax
gap a little more and help with
the auditing you'll see that
seven hundred and seventy two
and that was recommended by both
of the LFC and the excess.
and I'll let Mr speaker point of
that Mr chair and Representative
had a great really thank you for
giving the overview and the
ginger if there's just too that
I could sort of a little bit
more about just to make sure
we're on the same page I know is
there some new members every
year since I believe the twenty
twenty session taxed Rabb has
been while working together with
the committees to to basically
get a contingent appropriation
and house bill two in our this
is the one where we requested
five million and basically the
the way that the session plays
out as you know the budget bill
gets you know passed over passes
the finish line goes over for
signature by the governor's you
know right towards the end of
the session and typically after
that after the budget has been
set tax committees let the tax
package out and we find out.
What tax bills are going to pass
we have an implementation cost
with each of them
the twenty nineteen session was
probably the biggest tax year
that we've seen in recent memory
and when we totaled up all the
operational implementation
impacts to the Department after
the bill was passed twenty seven
million dollars I think we got
two million.
we've been trying to do since
then as requested contingent
appropriation it's contingent
upon me going to the state board
of finance and requesting
release of the appropriation by
demonstrating that there are
bills that have a cost for us to
implement so whatever the amount
is we go request some portion of
that it's only the amount on
that we scored an FIR is based
on what passed and was signed
and the rest of it isn't
accessed and so that's what
we're requesting their we won't
know until probably the last day
of the session what we're going
to be implementing and so that
was that's why respectfully
with ask for that more than two
million B. consider their
individual bills going through
the session right now that would
cost us more than two million to
implement so thank you chairman
thank you secretary that that
was the date of those hoping to
get thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew next
we're gonna go to UPS of Alice.
Thank you Mr chair of madam
secretary a moderate for my
questions to page five on your
hand.
Okay the first thing that caught
my eye was the.
Cannabis excise tax and set
there that it generates tens of
millions of revenue.
I'm just wondering if there's
any you know any time were
introduced to some sort of the
reclamation of recreation some
of us taking extreme and become
addicted to it it becomes an
addiction I'm wondering if some
of this tax revenue is earmarked
for recovery and rehabilitation
that's my first question thank
you for that question Mr chair
and representative Allison no
the cannabis excise tax is an
eighteen percent tax of which
one third of that goes directly
to the local government where
the cannabis was sold in two
thirds of it goes straight to
the general fund.
There isn't any remark other
than that you might make in
house bill two as a committee so
if we Mr chair so if we have
some people start developing
addiction there's no recovery
plan for them.
Mr chair and representative
Allison I I would say that the
program I'm sort of one to
separate out the revenue from
the appropriation and so the
revenues in the general fund and
then the general fund
appropriation for various drug
treatment products you know
programs at various agencies
that could come from the general
fund where the revenue was
deposited.
Okay madam secretary Mr chair my
second question is also on that
same page reset every day
service innovations.
Four years ago when I was a
freshman we did a field study
for the chair Prof Kerrier and
we had of a mobile unit come to
our area to do a study what
prompted that was a lot of my
constituents we're going to the
field offices and they were
being told that you do not have
adequate information as far as
interest interest systems like
they were told you don't live in
a post office box we need a
street number.
The Navajo Nation in my district
has thousands of miles of dirt
roads and maybe one of one
percent of them are marked as
some of my constituents had to
come to Santa Fe to renew their
driver's license that becomes
very expensive when you have to
drive over three hundred miles
to renew your driver's license
And then right under that says
real ID is currently compliance.
Hello is that compliance when my
thousands of dirt roads are
still on mark with street names
and street numbers so
Representative chair small and
representative Allison first I
just want to extend that MVD
staff still does
look at going out to special
events and so we we could work
together to arrange
at a certain MB D. day if there
is a particular crowded event or
something like that that people
are going to be at we could send
staff out to process those
transactions in the community be
happy to work with you on that
and then to the second part of
your question the the bullet is
just saying that seventy seven
percent of New Mexicos
credentials are real ID
compliant another is seventy
seven percent of all our drivers
licenses and ID's have the gold
star so MPD doesn't have a roll
per se and address thing or or
number in here or anything like
that but we are working on
getting as many New Mexico
drivers with the gold star in
their license if they wanted and
needed and the federal deadline
has been pushed back to may
twenty twenty five just gonna
keep chipping away at that.
Thank you for that madam
secretary and Mr.
Also some of your field offices
the MVD.
They do not take
post office boxes and then some
of them do.
Some of them say it's okay to
use a mile marker and then some
of them say no you can't use of
mile marker we need a street
name we need a street address
and then that takes me back to
the first of of what the first
part of my question where we
said we did a field assessment
in the Shiprock area and I was
told that it produced some very
very promising results so maybe
we'll start sending a mobile
unit quarterly or even semi
annually but since that feels
this was done I have some
missing method.
Mr chair and representative
Allison thank you for bringing
that to my attention I don't
know if that was before my time
or if it was something that was
just being worked on directly by
MVD staff but we have had some
turnover and so miss Gonzalez
and I will go back to the
drawing board and see where we
left off and that we'd be happy
to reach out.
Thank you madam secretary thank
you Mr chair thank you very much
representative Allison next
we're gonna go to Representative
Chatfield and representative of
her and.
Thank you Mr Representative
secretary of a while back I was
approached by one of my
constituents who had been
audited.
he was found Texas.
Both federal and state.
So the federal government should
set him up on a on a payment
plan.
But the state said we cannot do
that you just told.
I just came up what legal do you
so I'm gonna just close business
and give it to a so I'm
wondering is it true that the
state does not make
away from for these people that
might be good at what they do
but not too good to keep in
books to get payments and pay
what they owe and if not is it
not in the best interests of the
state that somehow would we
rather have them paying
something then just give us a
vacant building that we can use.
Mr chair and representative
Chatfield I think probably the
devil's in the details the state
the audit and compliance
division we do offer payment
plans but didn't depending on
the amount of tax owed sometimes
we require collateral and I know
that miss more I can talk about
that in more detail but we the
short answer is we do offer
payment plans but sometimes for
one reason or another the
taxpayer doesn't qualify.
To hear more.
Madam secretary Representative
chairman smaller Representative
Chatfield I'm not aware of a
specific restriction if you want
to get a get me of a contact to
for the constituents information
I can look that up and figure
out what the specific issue with
we've actually moved to try to
get people to apply for payment
plans even our taxpayer access
point so we've removed multiple
barriers that have been there
historically so if there is a
barrier that's there that it's
not allowing that taxpayer to
get into a payment plan I'd like
to work with you on that.
Thank you Mr chair I would love
to have your card and I will.
give them your information and
you all can work it out.
Thank you very much
Representative Chatfield Mexican
good Representative heard.
Thank you Mr chair Mr chair
madam secretary thank you for
all the great things to do and
then taxation what an exciting
place to work and so I have a my
question with you is which
refers to your handout and I
hopefully you I didn't miss
something that you had coverage
as part of the and I'm looking
specifically at page
okay for.
One of the of the big focus for
us in this state is to make sure
that we are growing our home and
I see that you have a mentorship
program and it internship
program but it's this with Santa
Fe community college why is it
so limited Mr chair madam
secretary Mr chair and
representative Herndon thank you
for that question and and we
completely share your your call
I think of trying to grow our
own and and make a career path
for New Mexicans it so happens
that Santa Fe community college
has something called the P. loss
program they approached us and
we've been participants in it
but we also go to U. N. M. job
fairs Anderson management job
fairs and we do regular outreach
with more colleges but the POS
program a Santa Fe community
college is one that's
particularly robust and we've
had
Any semesters in a row we've had
interns from there and some of
them we've hired afterwards.
Thank you Mr chair madam
secretary if there is anything I
can do to help you to bolster
that internship program I think
it's really important to have
students to work in your
department and then also the
into hopefully state and what is
the difference Mr chair madam
secretary between the mentorship
program and your internship
program did you already
explained that he did not but
I'd be happy to Mr chair and
representative Herndon so the
internship program is sort of
any educational institution the
institution that you know trying
to place in turn will work
together with them the
mentorship program is completely
internal we established
Department policy about two
years plus or minus ago that
basically says every six weeks
or every six months we take
applications internally for
people who want to be a mentor
or want to be men toward we
match them together the pair's
meet about once per week we
bring in outside speakers to
share their leadership story
it's been really really
successful and inspiring.
And one last question Mr chair
madam secretary in terms of the
the program at Santa Fe
community college how long has
that been in place and how many
students if you know have
actually come back to work for
you have to go through that
amazing program Mr chair and
representative of hard it seems
like the new theory and has more
on this I I can think of I think
too that have come through that
internship program and then
later been hired and I can think
of probably four to six interns
we've had but you might know in
more detail than that thank you
Secretary chair and also
Representative heard we during
the project for P. less we have
had about four to six that have
come through
currently in our office in the
administrative services
director's office we ended up
having one that came through and
we ended up hiring an individual
for that position and we also
had one that was through the
office of the secretary is an
economist that came through and
so during those programs it's
been going on for a little over
two years Santa Fe community
college fully funds the.
Salaries of those individuals
that are participating in the
program and so none of the
there's no budget impact to tax
and Representative and so any
other traditional type of
internship program would be out
of our vacancy savings to be
funded currently within our own
budgets so it's been a really
good win win situation to help
place those individuals and has
we've also are looking at
currently one right now in the
I. T. division we have had
looked at footage particularly
having potential candidates and
to the I. T. division as well
thank you Mr chairman thank you
thank you very much for that
response and I'm really happy to
see that you're willing to use a
vacancy savings to fund the
internship program and one final
question for sure Mr chair and
madam secretary is there a
maximum on the number of interns
that you will
you have in your department.
Mr chair and representative
internet I don't think there is
you know of course I'm getting
an intern and mentoring that
person and putting them to work
takes a certain amount of
commitment from the supervisor
as long as we've got supervisors
who are able to do that we will.
Go full blast on internships we
we love it.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
madam secretary thank you very
much Representative Herndon
secretary there's no need for
renewal of interest from this
committee and for the interest
of the tax and revenue I think
that's an excellent Committee in
great one question madam
secretary obviously we're very
close does that part do you all
have a a preference between the
executive or the legislative
recommendation Mr chair
and members of the committee I
think that that the two
recommendations are very similar
and although we do support the
executive recommendation I
they're so similar and and hold
that
we can certainly work with
either one.
Thank you very much and
secretary.
Mr chair I would move the
executive recommendation.
Motion for the executive
recommendation as a second by
Representative a cruise there
any opposition to that.
Seeing none thank you very much
madam secretary thank.
Okay we're gonna go now to HSD
three five zero are General
Services Department.
Thanks.
For it is that right I'm yes.
Which includes or.
Could you please.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee I.
We have here today of the
General Services Department HSD
number three fifty in my name is
Joseph Simon I'm your LFC
analyst for the General Services
Department and with me today is
Cecilia and
Acting secretary of the General
Services Department and so so Mr
Chairman just to give you a
quick overview of your LFC
documents the report card for
the General Services Department
you can find in volume one
hundred pages one fifty to one
fifty five additionally there is
some discussion of the employee
group benefits program on page
eighty nine in your in your
volume one and I will discuss
that program in particular
during this presentation the the
volume to discussion it begins
on page ninety six and there are
some supplemental tables in
volume three beginning on page
thirty seven.
So Mister chairman as you can
see from the overview there is a
pretty substantial difference
between the LFC and executive
recommendation and as we go
through this you'll see that up
for primarily in one particular
program
so I think it may be easier
Mister chair Mister chairman
rather than for me to try to
address all of the differences
in the overview to look at the
individual programs we've got
eight different programs in this
department and they all are are
very different and rely on very
different funding sources.
So if you look Mr chairman on
page two of your LFC packet you
can see the budget for the
department's program support has
essentially their administrative
oversight office you can see
there is a difference of a
hundred and thirty nine hundred
forty thousand between the LFC
in the executive I will note for
you Mr chairman that this
program is entirely funded by
transfers from the other program
I'm gonna be talking a little
bit about that as we go through
the different programs and some
of the differences so this this
particular program is entirely
funded by transfers from
elsewhere in the department I
would just say offer the LFC
recommendation the it's a little
bit lower in the personal
services employee benefits
category and we would just note
that there are other you know
just pretty sick since
substantial vacancy savings and
and that program still you have
anything on program support.
So moving on to the state
purchasing division Mr Chairman
on page three of your packet so
the state purchasing division is
funded by two revenue sources
that currently there is a the
small general fund appropriation
for for procurement but the bulk
of the agency's budget comes
from fees received by the
division based on the amount of
purchases off statewide price
agreements so essentially the
vendors of those price
agreements agreed to pay the
General Services Department
small fee and that covers the
expenses of the General Services
Department are you will note
that the LFC recommendation
eliminates the general fund
transfer and the reason for that
is over the past couple years
there's been a substantial
uptick in the amount of those
fees that the agencies receiving
making that general fund
appropriation unnecessary so if
you can if you see the FY twenty
two operating budget Mr chairman
is one point nine million
dollars so far in FY twenty
three the department already
received three point six million
dollars in those fees so it's a
pretty substantial amount over
that and that that's the
rationale for that
recommendation Cecilia.
Mr chair I just wanted to
briefly at the executive
recommendation does support to
fight general budget for fiscal
year twenty four three seven
there was no change.
Moving on to page four Mr
Chairman is the state printing
Division and you'll note from
that there and there are no
differences between the
executive in the LFC
recommendation this division is
entirely funded by revenue
raised by the division to
offering those printing
services.
This is here that.
On page five you will see the
risk management division
division budget this is V.
oversight of the risk management
program including two other
programs within the department
the employee group benefits
program as well as the risk
management funds which I'll get
to in a minute again this
program is entirely funded by
transfers from those other
programs it's a little bit
complicated but the LFC
recommendation does transfer a
slight us smaller amount of
money into the river into the
risk management Division budget
splitting that that lower amount
between the personal services
employee benefits line item the
other costs category and again
this is one of the areas where
we would note that there's six
substantial vacancy savings in
that program so we didn't go
higher I would also note for you
as I mentioned these funds are
transferred from some of the
risk management programs and if
you look in your report card Mr
chairman you'll notice that
there's been a pretty
substantial deterioration those
funds and so I don't think a
hundred and twenty you know a
couple of thousands not gonna
fix it but just being aware of
cost increases is is part of
that.
Celia.
The next
program Mr chairman is on page
six that's the employer group
benefit program.
What
the far left hand side
Representative Trujillo.
So I'm Mr Chairman
representative here I apologize
yes there's two there's two page
numbers you're right so at the
bottom it's page five of nine
there's also a
apologies for that confusion so
the M. it's this this programs
the the employee group benefits
program and this is where the
bulk of the difference between
the executive and the LESC
recommendation
is and you'll notice the at
eighty five million dollar
difference in the other revenues
category so this program it
receives a health insurance
premiums from state agencies
from local governments from some
universities regional education
cooperatives and and other small
entities
you'll notice in the.
In the LFC is volume three Mr
chairman if you care to pull
that out very quickly on page
thirty nine is a fund projection
for the employee group benefits
fund so we talked about this a
little bit on Saturday the
employee group benefits fund
began the year sixty five
million dollars in deficit.
In addition to that the
department is currently
projecting about a little about
thirty eight million dollars in
current year funding deficits
with that with their current
budget so what the LFC
recommendation did Mr Chairman
was look at what the department
is projecting to receive in
revenue in the current year and
adjusts the rate that revenue
number down to what that
projection is I would also note
Mr chairman that the LFC
recommendation does include
budget adjustment language that
would authorize the department
to budget additional dollars
into that program based on
additional revenue collected
pursuant to a premium rate
increase
not in this budget Mr chairman
but in the LFC recommendation
for compensation the LFC
included ten million dollars to
fund a ten percent increase to
these health insurance premium
giving the department additional
revenue to that they would be
able to budget in to that this
program pursuant to that
increase.
Cecilia.
Yes Jerry I just briefly tad Mr
chair in other words LFC is
budgeting expense at expected
revenues for this fund all the
executive is budgeting expected
expenditures so the way that
this is planned out is that we
will be paying we try to give
the agency of much flow to be
able to address that deficit
with a holistic approach and not
allow them to keep running into
negative so that's a little bit
what we'll get more into detail
on this I'm sure that Mr chair
that's all.
So I Mr chairman the next
program is the facilities
management division.
And this program is the only one
in the department that is
primarily it primarily from the
general fund you'll note at
current year operating budget of
seventeen point three million.
So of the twin the executive and
the LESC recommendation there's
a difference of about two
hundred and seventy five
thousand and just on your
difference you I would just like
to point your real quick in the
uses section to the other
financing uses all the way on
the right hand side you'll see
there's a two hundred thousand
dollars a difference between the
executive and the LESC and I
just want to have your call back
to where I was talking about
this transfers into program
support that this is that is
those transfers so the L. the
LFC recommendation eliminates
that two hundred thousand dollar
transfer from the facilities
management division to program
support and that essentially is
the difference between the that
most of the difference between
the executive and the LESC
recommendation I would just note
for you Mr Chairman because this
is general fund doesn't make a
lot of sense for us to
appropriate general fund to the
facilities management division
for them to turn around and
transfer the program support if
you were to want to increase the
purpose of our budget would
probably make more sense just
for you to include that two
hundred thousand to the program
support a program.
There is a slight difference Mr
chairman in the expansion as
well you'll notice the executive
recommendation includes five
hundred eighty thousand for a
ten FTE expansion while the LFC
recommendation includes four
hundred eighty thousand for a
seven FTE expansion the
expansion included by the LFC
was based on a department
request for additional security
officers security guards that
it's currently been funded by
the department out of the
contractual services line.
just to see you.
nothing tax thank you.
We are now on our page eight or
nine depending on which which
set of numbers you're looking at
Mr chairman that's the
transportation services program.
Again this is this is an area
where there's a small amount of
the difference between the LFC
and exec mostly in the other in
the other
In the other cost categories I
will say this is a program where
there's a number of different
sub funds and there's a little
bit of difference between the
LFC and executive recommendation
in those areas the LFC
recommendation does support the
the bulk of the state
Aviation fund request the
differences are primarily in
state transportation pool
program C..
And finally Mr Chairman are a
program is the risk management
funds this this this program is
funded by transfers from other
state agencies and entities
receiving insurance so this is
where your public liability fund
is workers comp other other
programs like that the it LFC
recommendation and Executive
recommendations are exactly the
same on the
on the base budget for the for
the program the difference again
Mr Chairman is in that transfer
the program support the LFC
recommendation as a smaller
transfer.
And with that Mr chairman I
think we walked through
everything and so I can hand it
over to acting secretary Silva
for her presentation thank you
analysts acting secretary so
good to see him please feel free
to introduce anybody from your
team thank you Mr with we I have
great that the Rodriguez with.
Good afternoon Mr chair members
of the committee thank you for
giving me this opportunity to be
about the General Services
Department you should have a
hand out in front of you with
slide show looking at us like to
a few highlights regarding each
of our divisions all of our
divisions support all executive
branch agencies and some support
local public bodies thank
purchasing is one of those
divisions whether it's through
the statewide price agreements
SPD awards chief procurement
officer programs for our
procurement officer training
program SPD support all of state
government I am happy to say
that for the first time since
the chief procurement officer
program was initiated in twenty
fifteen we now have all
executive branch agencies
reporting one hundred percent
CPOs and there is something.
Looking at flight three press
the printing Department not only
supports the executive branch
but the legislature as well
printing does all the printing
for the legislature and because
of this team's outstanding
Representative reputation and
commitment to customer service
that they continue to grow the
customer base increasing the
revenues and twenty twenty two
by twenty one percent.
Looking at our risk management
division this team under this
administration settled the
landmark the Jackson lawsuit a
case that has been ongoing for
thirty five years.
Looking at slide for.
Our facilities management
division if the face of GST a
few highlights for FMD are the
secure storage facility
completed for DPS the small
homes in tier C. under
construction and remodel of a
day care for state employees and
our transportation services
division is our engine we have
begun adding hybrid trucks and
vehicles to our of motor motor
fleet moving closer to the goal
of the increased number of zero
emissions and new emission
vehicles.
So now just talk a little bit
about our budget turning to
slide five.
The general fund accounts for
twenty three point eight million
dollars other revenues account
for five hundred sixty seven
point nine million dollars and
our other transfers account for
two percent or sixteen point
four million dollars.
Looking at slides seven as five
six sorry about that use the
budget consists of three
components are operating budget
our risk funds and our employee
health benefits.
Turning to slide seven.
GST is a total request is an
increase of six point four
percent operating budgets are
increased eighteen point four
percent risk funds are increased
one point one percent and health
benefits are increased six point
four percent in the for hundreds
the five point three percent
increase and the health benefits
and risk funds programs the
request for this year allow
sufficient budget authority for
R&D to prepare for unpredictable
increases and claims costs and
prepare for increases due to the
COVID nineteen pandemic.
Turning to slide eight.
We see the difference between
the executive and the LESC
recommendations let's start with
the purchasing the LFC
recommendation because our
general fund and has SPD solely
dependent on other revenues the
problem with this is that the
national cooperative procurement
on a national level has become
very of all time we cannot
assume that the revenue that has
been generated in the past we'll
continue to be generated at the
same rate in the future with
regard to the facilities
management division the LFC
recommendation only funds and
expansion of seven staff were as
the executive recommendation
funds can additional staff
reductions in general fund at
the facilities management
division what was up and not
only being able to operate
properly but I also not be able
to maintain an additional half a
million and square footage we
are brought on in the past one
and a half years in addition we
will not be able to provide
safety and security in our
buildings to issue that have
seriously adversely impact FOBTs
operations further a reduction
of general fund and
transportation services but the
operation and maintenance of the
state aircraft at risk that
reduction of a hundred and
seventy seven thousand and
general fund as a twenty five
percent reduction with the LFC
indicating we should increase
our rates.
Turning to the next page.
When this administration when we
take a look at the health
benefits fund when this
administration came into office
we inherited a fund that was
already five million dollars in
the negative in order to get
ahead of this this
administration increased by four
percent as premiums in twenty
nineteen and five percent and
twenty twenty then COVID hit the
administration did not want to
burden people who were already
experiencing hardships as a
result of COVID with an
additional hardship a premium
increases this one is the
largest gap between LESC and the
executive branch of
recommendations.
Turn to the next slide let's
discuss a few of our initiatives
in state purchasing we're
looking at creating a one stop
shop for solicitation statewide
giving vendors an opportunity to
look at one website and see the
entire state solicitations.
Whether it's in Roswell or to
use or tier C. they only need to
go to one place and as I
mentioned before we're also
looking at expanding our
cooperative purchasing
procurement program.
Looking at the next slide state
printing is the biggest push for
this bureau is in its increase
the customer base and then of
course risk management which is
probably our most complex
division we're coming to the
realization that the world has
changed in many ways and there
are a multitude of risks and
challenges that we need to adopt
and prepare for this
administration is looking
outside of the box and we intend
to work with spoke on the class
and compensation study there are
conducting in order to see what
people should be paid and what a
commensurate premium should be.
Looking at the next slide.
We look at the initiatives for
facilities management and
transportation services the
facility's Management Division
will be implementing a new rave
panic button software on all
employees phones and Santa Fe we
have begun the rollout to to
agencies with the remainder to
follow in the next few months
this tool is for the active
threat initiative to ensure the
safety of employees working in
government buildings
additionally will be rolling out
the civilian response to an
active event training program we
conducted our first training for
the secretary of state's office
which was a success.
In the transportation division
we're excited to start
purchasing zero emissions and
low emission vehicles this is
been an initiative years in the
making and we're hoping to be
successful this year two budget
this and see this come to
fruition.
A little bit about our
supplementals and special
requests we are requesting a
hundred seventy nine thousand
four shortfalls in the
contractual categories for life
insurance we're also asking for
two point seven million special
to add new vehicles for
transportation division we
currently have two thousand
vehicles in our fleet and twenty
percent of those vehicles have
over a hundred thousand miles
we're requesting money to move
our fleet to incorporate
additional electric and hybrid
vehicles we're also requesting
one point two million for
overhauling both of our engines
on our aircraft.
We also requesting four hundred
eighty thousand special for
seven security guards in our
state buildings and lastly we
are requesting ninety five.
Ninety five million one hundred
six thousand deficiency for
health benefits.
A little bit about the next
slide this is the justify our
maintenance request we have
seven buildings that are coming
online a few of these are in the
slides coming up we have the
final records building that was
completed in twenty twenty we
have a secure a storage building
that was completed in June of
twenty twenty of this year
twenty twenty two this year.
With CYFD pine tree campus that
we will be completed in February
of this year we have the DPS
District one field office that
will be completed June twenty
twenty three.
And then we have the crime lab
this will be completed December
twenty twenty three.
The next slide of which is the
better and small homes is a
project that we would like to
highlight this picture is a
rendering of the new small homes
in truth or consequences this
neighborhood will be the first
net zero community.
Looking at slide nineteen if
they say a picture is worth a
thousand words I'm hoping that
this part picture is worth four
hundred eighty thousand.
A request for a supplemental
these are pictures of vandalism
that just occurred two weeks ago
but depicts the problem that we
face every day which is why we
are implementing the right
program and the craze program
for all of our state employees
we have building damage
catalytic converters being
stolen on a regular basis and
looking at the next slide we
have a homeless issue and all of
our state buildings our
maintenance staff are first on
the scene and not equipped or
properly trained to deal with
these issues therefore we are
asking for the expansion of the
ten employees.
As a result of having to clean
up the of the homeless looking
at the last slide cleanup after
vandalism and responding to
emergencies we have a work order
backlog of five hundred thirty
work orders our current staff is
inundated with requests and now
have seven more buildings coming
online therefore as you look at
geocities budget request whether
it be for security for the
budget to maintain the plane
that support the school for the
blind for health benefits fund
that supports thousands we are
requesting that the executive
recommendation we adopted and
with that I stand for questions.
Mr Chairman just very quickly I
was negligent to not point out
the sheet in your packet on the
supplemental and special
appropriations
Secretary civil went over them
so I won't repeat that but just
so you know the the executive
and LFC recommendations are in
the back of your packet.
K. twelve thank you very much Mr
seven thank Jack into acting
secretary Silva we're gonna look
around for questions.
I guess a couple of quick
questions acting secretary one
the state procurement is
operating in a very robust cliff
I think is we heard we're sort
of.
Double at least what we were
projected for FY twenty three.
As we have larger budgets and
are contracting in more areas it
seems fair to assume that the
contract fees will sort of
increase commensurate to so
what's been put out there do you
it do you disagree Mr chair I
thank you for the question so at
the national level there has
been a reduction in the national
cooperative procurements and we
are anticipating there to be
continue and continuing
reductions in that area.
Okay Mr Chairman kept cannot one
thing on state purchasing so
back during the budget request
like we requested some
additional information on fund
balance for the state purchasing
Fund and I would just note at
that time there was about seven
point two million dollars in
that state purchasing Fund so I
think they don't acting
secretary so was right we need
to monitor that revenue and not
assume it's necessarily always
going to be there but at this
moment in time that money is
there and so the LFC
recommendation you know this
these things that we can you
know look for the general fund
elsewhere and use this funding
while it while it's available
thank you very much seven we
just more member questions going
first representative Garcia and
Representative thank you Mr
chairman of thank you madam
secretary on page five Piedade
I'm sorry it's been others what
your question is I will serve
in.
And one of DFA is and what LFC
is ninety two thousand dollar
difference what what's the big
difference here.
And what is the other.
Mr chair representative Garcia
I'm sorry which program of
Beijing.
Under handout for the.
For the bottom third about the
third line of others.
So
Mr Chairman representative
Garcia so the other cost
category can include a wide
variety of supplies and
materials includes the
departments and maintenance
expenses think other things like
that I'm sure and it's it's a
it's a very broad spectrum of
things purchased by the
department that they're not
contracting for services they're
not hiring employees that's
essentially everything else
that's the other category Mr
chairman and thank you Terry you
know others a big word you know
I'm just looking at the price
there's a ninety two thousand
dollar difference one to another
and it's hard to justify what
we're looking at others and we
just to bring it the big word to
others in the lecture others in
there you know there is no break
down to others.
Mr chair representative Garcia I
can get that for you.
Okay one more question Mr
chairman of of the veterans home
in your state that's very
important to be is it going to
be funded fully enough to finish
it off and to operated at
present Mr chair representative
Garcia yes at this.
I'm going to hold that back to
improve.
Chairman thank you very much
Representative Garcia next
representative.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you secretary
I
think the first question
chairman.
With me on page six of the
different for.
The reference to page three
will.
Secretaries presentation.
I understand that in nineteen we
raise our premiums for twenty we
raise our premiums five percent
we're talking about in
additional ten percent.
Not this year but maybe next
year so that would be a total of
nineteen percent.
Over the last three years.
Four years chairman
Does that affect.
Mr chair Representative
Pettigrew
the individuals that are part of
the frontier employees local
public bodies executive branch
agencies provided employees.
Affects that employee.
Thank you chairman and and thank
you secretary for that so.
Since two thousand nineteen
chairman.
How many races we got given to.
Those team members that we're
just not talking about that
we're talking about giving a
nineteen percent of total from
two thousand nineteen to two
thousand twenty four increase in
premiums what's the raise value
that we've been average raise IT
we've been given those people
and then comparison to what a
nineteen percent increase means
in their premium what's the
offset and we go on positive or
negative when we're talking
about what we need to get more
money we need we need more money
to hire full time employees.
At the same time we're
increasing the rates on their
premiums so with the officer.
Mr chair representative
Pettigrew it depends so local
public bodies
have their own mechanisms and
are not I can't say what their
raises are and what they have
been in the past regarding the
executive branch I think it
might have been two races.
Yes so Mr Chairman
representative Pettigrew on page
seventy two and your volume
three sorry your in your volume
three you can see a history of
pay increases for state
employees.
And you can see the the history
of a four percent increase in
twenty nineteen that wasn't an
increase in twenty twenty a one
and a half and percent increase
in twenty one an average ten
percent increase in twenty two
and then in the LFC
recommendation for FY twenty
four on average five percent
increase.
Thank you.
And thank you for pointing this
one out for sure just a.
I do appreciate that I am
concerned obviously ones an
annual one you know we're not
comparing apples and oranges
chairman I get that but that is
a concern when.
The.
Since
January the eighteenth of purges
we need to give more raises for
employees we need to just to be
able to hire qualified FTEs and
at the same time we're.
Basically chairman decreasing
the benefit package.
When I say that we're having to
pay more to get the same.
So we have an that's a negative
impact and I'm just curious this
is the first time I've heard
something like this in the.
Can it concerns me.
When when we do that especially
when.
it's just a typical premium.
For the outside not in
government.
For a family for spouse.
a spouse and
family.
Three hundred fifty four hundred
dollars.
every paycheck.
So.
When you do that and so now
we're adding another hundred
dollars eighty to a hundred
dollars a year chairman and and
presenters with to.
The reduction in their in their
overall salary.
Over the year over over that
time if we're if we're just
increasing the ten percent not
even looking at the two thousand
nineteen in the two thousand
twenty.
that's a pretty substantial
raise.
That that has a huge negative
affect and I'm concerned about
that and
I would think as many people as
we have a state state level
we're getting a really good deal
on our on our insurance so we're
providing so it does concern me.
Chairman I have another question
but rather take take those
offline and also down and talked
with the LFC and thank you very
much Representative Pettigrew
next week Representative Brown
please.
Mr chairman and madam secretary
acting secretary.
The question about the state
printing and graphics part of
your department
it looks like you're creased
here revenue in fiscal year
twenty twenty two rather
significantly.
I'm just looking at the number
FTEs and authorized nine you
have six of those positions
filled madam secretary Mr
chairman.
Just wondering is getting more
FTEs in places that a
contingency is that everything
contingent on that happening to
expand the services because
there are some goals set for
even doing more.
If you could explain please Mr
chair Mr chair representative
brown thank you for the question
so it's not contingent on having
additional FTEs I think we just
need to fill our existing FTEs
okay thank you Mr chairman and
madam secretary so there is a of
something called the digital
storefront it and I've never
heard that term before in terms
of what your department does Mr
chair chair could you explain
that to us please.
Mr chair Representative Brown so
I don't actually know all the
details of the digital
storefront are you aware of the
digital storefront.
Yeah okay so I'm I'll have to
get back to you on the details
but instead of the print it's
what I'm thinking of the same
thing issues advertising online
so through banners and things of
that nature.
Thank you madam secretary Mr
chairman so I also am wondering
about we have a print shop here
the roundhouse and I I know this
is the legislative space but is
that the print shop under your
Department GSD with printing or
is that a totally separate
operations Mr chair chair
Representative around it's a
completely separate area okay
thank you Mr chairman I I kind
of Marvel that six people can
work that's been done so far and
maybe the vacancies were not so
much a factor before we saw
these numbers but that's kind of
repressive that that few number
of people can do that much work
so just want to commend them for
that.
Mr.
Representative thank you yeah
thank you Mr chair thank you
very much Representative Brown
madam secretary
I don't see any other questions
from members
we have
some sort of moderate you have
some fairly moderate they funded
vacancy rates you you mentioned
no working directly with state
personnel office to better
fulfill some of the needs.
How is that going Mr chair
that's correct we have been
lucky to have such a
collaborative relationship with
state personnel office if we're
successful with our
special and are requests we're
looking at doing a rapid higher
for the security officers and we
do have several vacancies right
now that the state personnel
office is working with us so
it's been they've been very
helpful.
Thank you very much the sector
we're we're going to go to our
recommendation there is a
difference here west staff to
sort of look at a few of the
areas although and and and all
have some members just get a
little bit closer to the state
agency personal data by third.
I thank you Mr chair I would
move the LFC recommendation.
There's been a motion for the
LFC recommendations second by
Representative Garcia there any
opposition to that
recommendation please show
Representative Pettigrew in
opposition
we're going to and now
We're gonna ask Representative
Lujan Representative setting and
and Representative Pettigrew to
just do a little bit of it the
for dive
because the the in particular
the health insurance premiums
are significant challenges that
that we're currently not.
Not ahead of clearly and there's
a lot more work to be done there
thank you very much.
Okay next we're going to
ask the secretary sure to come
up
we have the tourism department
this is agency code for
eighteen.
Prior.
As secretary Schreier I've.
I apologize it's great to see
you and thanks for the.
Okay.
I have to make.
This.
I.
No
And as it just as a quick
reminder.
We want to make sure that all of
our hand out to receive the
night before it causes a lot of
extra challenge for us to get
them sort of minute of.
Thank you for that thank.
Yeah
okay so let's let's hold those
will get those to members
afterwards as a general and I
and I know this is been
communicate as a general rule we
like to have the handouts the
night before our staff does
incredibly difficult job
rough really literally thousands
of peoples of paper every single
day we need to have those before
Mexico will hold on thanks.
With that though Amanda it's
great to see you here today
would like you to kick it off of
the LFC and thank you great to
be here thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Amanda Dick Peddie fiscal
analyst for the legislative
finance committee we're joined
this afternoon my secretary Gen
Trier and her team I will let
her introduce here in a minute
and we also have Simon Miller
from of the state budget
division to talk about the
executive recommendation so
before we get into the different
sheets for the tourism
department I and which is agency
code four one eight
I would like to direct members
attention to a couple things
your first page of your document
should be a high level that
looks like this of the different
sheets are really useful but
this high level will let you
look kind of line by line what's
going on in a difference in the
recommendations of the second
page it should be right behind
your high level page two and
this is again one of those
differences in specials sheet
you'll see for the tourism
department as well as the
economic development department
which will here here shortly a
lot of the differences are where
things are budgeted so in some
cases LFC might have more in
nonrecurring where is the
executive has more the recurring
budget this will help you kind
of tracks some of that because
you'll hear us say that a lot
we're gonna try to keep this
right as possible that this will
be helpful for you.
So that being said I'm gonna go
ahead and just quickly go
through all the US the key codes
and then I will pass it over to
the executive for any additional
comments so we'll start out with
with page three and that's an
overview of the tourism
department the most significant
differences between the
executive and LFC
recommendations is in the
marketing and promotion program
both the LFC in the executive it
recommend recurring as well as
non recurring funding for
marketing and we'll see that
when we get into the program
itself a note on performance I
will say for every budget code
but enlisted reach consensus on
all performance measures and
targets for Taurus.
So moving on to your next page
it we have the New Mexico
magazine of the New Mexico
magazine is a non general fund
program so this magazine
operates entirely from the
revenues that it receives from
purchases and the
recommendations are identical
for New Mexico magazine.
Your next program is key code
five forty seven on page five
and that's program support the
executive recommendation
includes a little bit over three
hundred thousand more in general
fund revenue then the LFC
recommendation.
The LFC recommendation keeps of
program support flat with FY
twenty three while the executive
supported the agency's request
to of find some additional
personnel funding in that
program.
We will go ahead and move on it
too tourism development key code
five forty eight.
again at your LFC and Executive
recommendations are identical in
this program both
recommendations supported the
agency's request to adjust
personal funding closer to
actual spending in the program
and for some small increases in
grants to local governments.
All right so P. code five forty
nine this is where we're going
to see some of those really big
differences on page seven.
So
the executive recommendation
includes about two point three
million or thirteen point eight
percent more general fund
revenue.
the LFC it includes five hundred
thousand in other revenues for
marketing expenditures that's
not included in the executive
recommendation.
in the basic the LFC
recommendation increases
marketing funding by a total of
one point seven three million
that includes seven seven
hundred and fifty thousand for a
national marketing campaign and
nine hundred and fifty thousand
for local marketing efforts and
again that's just within the
recurring budget if you take a
look at your nonrecurring budget
LFC budgets additional money
for national marketing campaign
in that section.
The executive recommendation
increases marketing funding by a
total of three point five
million in this recurring
section including three million
for national marketing and five
hundred thousand for local
marketing and again the
executive also budgeted some
additional funds in nonrecurring
for marketing.
And so down there you can see
some of those numbers
the executive recommended an
additional three point five
million for local marketing and
nonrecurring funding while LESC
did intentional ten million in
non recurring for national
marketing.
Okay.
I hope you're not confused all
right moving on to page eight to
the sports authority of the
executive recommendation
included two hundred thousand in
general fund revenue for the
sports authority that was not
included in the LFC
recommendation that's my spiel
and I will let Simon make any
additional comments on the
executive recommendation.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee again my name is
Simon Miller and I'm an analyst
for DFA
so overall and HSD one level the
LFC recommendation is a ten
percent general fund increase
the executive is about twenty
four percent general fund
increase and not.
I can just be boiled down to
three items so first is the the
sports authority that Amanda
mentioned the executive has two
hundred thousand to revive the
sports authority as a standalone
program the LFC recommendation
does not include the sports
authority as a standalone
program so that's the first
difference the second difference
is in person so funding
positions that they already have
you know not not new positions
but just funding for their
current FTE the executive is
about two hundred and eighty
five thousand dollars higher
than the LFC to at least give
the agency the opportunity to
fulfill all of their positions
the LFC applies a little bit of
a vacancy rate.
Then lastly the biggest
difference is funding for
marketing.
The executive recommendation
includes an increase of three
million for national marketing
well the LFC recommendation
includes an increase of seven
hundred fifty thousand for that
purpose
and I know a lot of numbers are
thrown your way but hopefully
that provided a simple breakdown
of of the the major differences
so thank you.
I hope I could pass it over to
the secretary thank you thank
you Mr Miller great to see you
Secretary in please feel free to
introduce members of your team
thank thank you so much Mr chair
members of the committee
secretary share the tourism
department and very pleased to
be here today two to my left is
a deputy cabinet secretary
Antoinette Vigil who has been
part of the tourism department
since two thousand nineteen and
I'm very grateful to have her
here today
talking a little bit about
New Mexico true and the tourism
department we have had a roller
coaster ride the last few years
but I'm so pleased to say that
tourism is back it is bounce
back faster than the national
average and a lot of that is
because of the investment that
the legislative body has
invested in tourism specifically
to recover from the pandemic but
also because this agency has
such a strong foundation we are
research based we do research on
the front end we watcher KPIs or
key performance indicators as we
launch campaigns and then on the
end we do R. Y. studies a return
on investment so we're very
dedicated to make sure that we
take a disciplined approach and
we make every single dollar at
the tourism department the
public dollars stretch as far as
possible not only at the tourism
department but also partnering
with our local partners in
communities throughout the state
and first before I get started I
just when I think the chair as
well as representative Armstrong
for sponsoring tourism day today
we had people from across the
state here at the rotunda
hopefully you heard all the
drums and music and dancing and
brighten your day so thank you
so much for sponsoring terrorism
day.
So
have you turned your attention
to our power point presentation
here going to this first slide
how do we help businesses and
communities become more
competitive and sustainable in a
global market this is a question
that we ask ourselves every day
yes.
Madam secretary please continue
these are the presentations that
we were just given I think let's
go ahead and try to get him out
but if this sort of highlights
why it's really helpful for us
in the future just to re
emphasize that we need these
handouts the night before yes Mr
chair.
So this is a question we ask
ourselves every day how do we
make ourselves more competitive
in our business sector as well
their communities because we're
competing in the global
marketplace especially for
tourism we invite people all
around the United States to come
here to New Mexico and so as we
build programs as we improve our
programs that's a question we
ask all the time.
If you go to the next slide
strategic questions that we
asked about ten years ago we're
really looking at how do we
unite the tourism industry.
And how do we have a larger
voice with less investment.
Then our competitors.
Ten years ago the budget of the
tourism department was a
fraction of that of Nevada
Colorado and Arizona we also had
all of the our small businesses
are makers are arts and culture
lodging outdoor adventure and
our communities all had signed
load little campaigns going on
and so there's all these little
voices out in the market place
doing advertising that wasn't
alligned there wasn't a unified
message there wasn't a unified
brands there wasn't a unified
strategy to do marketing as over
the course of ten years we
really focused on how do we do
that and that was really that
the foundation of why New Mexico
true was born.
And if you turn to the next page
this is very simple.
New Mexico true is our promise
of adventure steeped in culture
so when you come here to New
Mexico we see are ads we're
we're telling those
adventuresome travelers come
here for an authentic experience
where adventure feeds the soul
and you're going to have an
experience that is unlike
Colorado it's fun like Nevada
it's fun like Utah we have
something here very special and
you see that in all of our
advertising and it's and it's
done with a purpose and a reason
is because of our reserves.
We have if you look to the next
slide we did in two thousand
nineteen a brand impact study
really looking at what messaging
what images that really drives
people to come here to New
Mexico and want to be part of
what we have here is an
experience and you can see
anything that indexes over a
hundred is really good but was
fabulous is that we really hit
the mark in several areas well
over a hundred index and that's
our culture.
And our cuisine and all the
wonderful things that we have to
do here that's different than
those other states that's our
competitive advantage while we
do have a beautiful outdoor
recreation and our wonderful
hiking trails biking trails snow
snow skiing you know what makes
us stand out is our culture.
So going to the next slide this
is our tourism economy
advancement model and we
introduce this during the
pandemic but we've been doing
this at the tourism department
for quite a while we're really
well known for our marketing
people hear about New Mexico
true the C. are at the C. R.
billboards the CS and airports
that they're flying in and out
of but we do more than just
drive demand which is that
marketing piece we also look at
how do we deliver that promise
of adventure steeped in culture
when people come here we work
with businesses we work with
communities we make sure that we
have different programs in place
where we do what we did at
tourism infrastructure
assessments and went through and
looked all the infrastructure
projects that would drive
tourism increase capacity and
help increase the overall
visitor experience to grow the
economy in communities
especially rural.
We also have a vent programs
where we not only support event
sponsorship to make sure we can
help grow events but we have an
accelerator program we do
wraparound services to make sure
that events that really want to
move up and grow get that type
of technical assistance and
consulting that will help them
improve their operations their
profit margins their marketing
and we get the recommendations
and then a grant to the into the
accelerator program so they can
implement some of the things
that we're recommending and then
we also have a cooperative
marketing program both for
events and for our destinations
nonprofits and that's really to
drive tourism to get people say
yes we thought New Mexico true
we love that but where should I
go in New Mexico and this is our
partnership with local
communities historically before
the pandemic we had a budget of
six hundred thousand dollars for
the cooperative marketing
program and we did a one to one
match so communities put put put
for twenty thirty thousand
dollars and we would match
twenty thirty thousand dollars
to put that money together to do
a cooperative branded campaign
with them.
Coming out of the pandemic the
legislature was decided to
invest more in that particular
program because it has proven
results and so we increase that
program to do really four
million dollars and I'm so proud
of the industry for stepping up
and taking advantage of that
program because we were able to
do it then do it two to one
match.
Because many of our communities
their marketing and promotion
budget is derived from lodgers
tax and so you can imagine that
during the pandemic we didn't
have visitation.
Their budgets were depleted and
they weren't able to advertise
for themselves like they did in
the past so it was imperative
that we stepped up as as a state
and did that to to one match so
thank you to the legislature for
making that decision but what we
have seen is that it is working
not only are we able to save
money for local communities
because we are able to buy media
in volume like going to Walmart
we are also helpful able to help
place that advertising and make
sure that the different media
business beat media bias we hold
them accountable to make sure
that the quality is there or
getting what we're paying for
and we're also able to provide
Representative robust reporting
for these local communities so
they can make smarter decisions
with the other funds that they
have so that's just some of what
the marketing programs that we
do have and tourism development
programs that we have at the
tourism department.
So last week on a change this to
the our tourism exchange and
this is something I'm very
excited about we announced it
last week New Mexico is the
first state in the United States
to launch the tourism exchange
so the tourism exchange is not a
website it is a B. two B.
platform that supports
suppliers which suppliers are
businesses that are have
something to sell right so are
been sell tickets or hotels
solar hotel rooms are our tour
operator cell tourism museum
Celtic it sees the where I'm
going so those are suppliers.
And then on the other end we
have distributors so these are
Expedia's our hotel dot com
Travelocity and right now the
big problem for New Mexico
specifically is that most of our
businesses in tourism parks is
small business well that's not a
problem in and of itself but
what it does is that those small
businesses do not have the
negotiating power to negotiate
with the big dogs like Expedia.
So for example we have about
seven hundred hotels in New
Mexico throughout the the entire
state over half of them about
four hundred sixty three I
believe are all independent
hotels so these are not
Marriott's not Hilton's even
those those can be locally owned
franchises are independents
don't have that turn key
marketing operation where they
have the Hiltons and Marriotts
have negotiated with the big
dogs Expedia Travelocity booking
dot com to get the service fees
down so are small small
businesses are paying anywhere
between twenty and twenty five
percent per room that is booked
so you'd sell room for a hundred
dollars Expedia gets twenty
twenty five dollars and that is
a big chunk of money off your
bottom line so what the tourism
exchange does it allows us to
negotiate globally to bring
those prices down so it leaves
more money in these small
businesses pockets which means
more money in our communities as
well so let's talk a little bit
about what this is and why it
really matters New Mexico so
there was a study and I have it
on the next slide to see you
know if you'd like to look at it
in more detail McKinsey and
company did a pretty robust
white paper on the tourism
exchange in Australia and they
wrote it just around the
beginning issue of the pandemic
and there is they were saying
that this could be a real
solution for communities that
have and regions that have a lot
of work.
We're and rural business rural
tourism and they pointed to
Australia.
Back in two thousand and eight
australe I was asking this
question question of how do we
connect our our point of entry
of our tourism with rural
Australia all the businesses in
the outback clearly there like
ninety eight percent rural and
what they're able to do is
create this exchange and so all
these smaller businesses were
able to tap in and take
advantage of all those visitors
coming into Australia and all
these businesses started seeing
significant increases in their
overall income and as a whole
Australia was seeing more
visitors spent but not more
visitors necessarily so it put
all these small little guys on
the global market.
Well the two thousand nineteen
Great Britain said I want to
sign up for that too and so they
started it and then in a twenty
twenty great time in Japan thank
you bye but what happened is
that each of these countries
have seen a significant increase
in value for their smaller
operators of smaller suppliers.
To this page here you can see
the adoption rates.
In Great Britain and local
distributors is this red one
here so a local distributor
could be a a a large tour
operator that likes to package
things up for a media platform
that was a cell tourism packages
online and then you can see the
destination so this is anywhere
from Chama to Albuquerque to Los
crucis to Silvercity you can see
that they have a great adoption
rate as well of all these
communities coming on board
saying Hey we want to be part of
this because it's going to make
a difference for our tourism
economy.
And on this slide you can see
here these are the suppliers and
obviously you know when twenty
twenty hit kind of flat line a
little bit but then it expedited
went straight up so Great
Britain is seen incredible
participation as is Japan.
So just showing a little bit how
it works they'll move on but.
This diagram right here well
it's not beautiful.
It helps a little bit on
explaining so over on this side
here you'll see that their
suppliers on top so these are
your hotels your events your
tour operators anyone that has a
product to sell they can
actually plug into the tourism
exchange through an API.
Fancy good really do for comps
off where connection into their
live inventory so if the hotel
has some sort of booking engine
that they use to monitor their
own booking inside their hotel
how many rooms they have
available the price point the
seasonality of those they that
system can plug into the
exchange then the exchange has
access to live inventory and
from there the owner of a hotel
can say I want to be on all of
these different distributors at
globally negotiated rates or
they want to thank but it gives
them options and it puts the
power back in small business so
this is something that we're
currently rolling out I bring it
here today because this is
something that your constituents
whether it's retail whether it's
lodging whether it's events they
can all benefit greatly from
this now New Mexico is the first
as I said they are piloting it
on us it's the same technology
as what Australia Japan and
Great Britain have but they're
piloting it here the US with us
so that means they told Colorado
not yet Florida not yet
California not yet so we have a
great advantage of being first
to market and bringing on all of
our small businesses in
providing that technical
assistance across the entire
state.
So this is just how your
constituents can get on board so
you can share this website your
all of them tourism exchange USA
pretty easy if you would please
just share that with your
constituents I'd greatly
appreciate it we're gonna be
rolling out a bunch of webinars
and technical assistance later
on in spring.
Okay.
So slide sixteen talking about
little bit about why tourism
matters
you know it's it's it's really
powerful that this particular
industry has grown over by over
thirty percent over the last
decade in visitor spends we do
have a seven to one return on
investment for our marketing
campaigns that we do throughout
the seven fly markets we
currently do.
We also have a five point two
Representative of five point two
GDP for the state and to put
that into some context five
point two is actually a third of
extractive industries so this
industry in particular is
growing is the second largest
employer and so what we love
about this is that people come
into New Mexico they spend a
week or weekend the spend money
and all of our small businesses
in our main streets and then
they go home.
and so we asked what is our
could what work has constituents
think about tourism.
Well our constituents appreciate
the tourism economy ninety for
ninety five percent of our
residents believe that tourism
help small business in the
community eighty nine percent
believe tourism provides jobs
for the community tourism grows
and strengthens community nearly
seventy five percent of
residents believe that tourism
makes their community a better
place to live the USDA
identifies tourism as a strategy
to build a sustainable economic
future for rural communities.
Sharing our culture preserves
our heritage roughly seventy
five percent over residents
agree that tourism helps
community share their culture
with others and the UN world
tourism organization identifies
culture cultural tourism as a
means of preserving communities
asked at risk especially rural
so there's a lot of opportunity
for tourism throughout New
Mexico I feel like we're on a
growth trajectory but haven't
even reached our true potential
and so that takes me to our
budget recommendations.
As you heard from the analysts
both LFC and DFA there are some
some differences
but essentially are the
executive recommendation are is
a twenty four point eight
million base budget and that's
to fully fund our current
positions not new net new
positions these are current
positions that we have people
and that we would like to fund.
And this allows for stronger
financial stewardship and allows
us to serve our constituents
better and to make sure that we
have time to go out to rural
communities to make sure we have
we have the capacity to continue
with our programs to provide
that technical assistance that
all of our constituents truly
want.
To accommodate for a media
inflation we do have a three
point five percent in Kerr three
point five million dollar
increase we have seen media
inflation anywhere from ten
percent to sixty five percent
and the last year and a half we
we we all have seen that our
enchiladas have gone up in price
we go to restaurants but sixty
five percent that makes a big
difference for how many Braniff
Christians now I'm able to get
in different markets and what
kind of media saturation I'm
getting in those markets so that
can drastically impact our
return on investment and we
might have to decide if if we
can stay in all of the point
markets we're currently in so
that is also very critical.
I'm talking a little bit about
our special procreation I
mentioned before that the
legislature was very generous
and giving us a special
appropriation of additional
dollars so we can partner with
local communities this allowed
us to do to to one match is for
our cooperative marketing and
also allowed us to fund our
event sponsors sponsorship
program that had been dormant an
unfunded since the last
administration so that was very
special as well and it's been
very
just critical and rebounding and
growing to a lot of these events
that they could not open up
until July one.
Of twenty twenty one so that was
very helpful for these events.
we also have a special
appropriation of twenty million
dollars that's for our national
advertising this will allow us
to continue to do for season
advertising pre pandemic we did
not have enough funds to do all
four seasons what we would do is
a six week campaign leading into
summer right so spring summer to
invite people to come here to
summer and then we do a short
fall campaign to work to bring
people for winter but without
additional special appropriation
we received previously and in
the previous fiscal years we're
able to do a four season
approach which if you talk to
any of our our our stakeholders
they're going to tell you that
shoulder season we don't have it
nearly as much of that drop off
that we had previously they're
seeing business more stable
which is helping them to stay in
their business it's helping them
to hire more people and to make
those jobs not seasonal but full
time so it's been an incredible
opportunity to see that the
actual results from that so in
addition to the four seasons
this twenty million dollars
would allow us to go into the
San Francisco Bay Area market
right now we are in seven
markets but the stamps is not
one of them.
When we looked at coming out of
the pandemic looking at consumer
behavior we did a study to
really look at which let's make
sure which markets are still
good for New Mexico because we
knew there was a lot of change
happening with consumer behavior
and what we saw was that.
While Chicago had been a
phenomenal market for us in the
past.
It actually wasn't as great for
us to go back into in twenty
twenty one.
But we saw both LA and San
Francisco we're just right for
opportunity.
So we decided we could do both
it would be prudent for us to do
both of those at that time so we
decided to go into LA.
And we went into the LA market
knowing that we had that strong
study on the front end we felt
really good about it we tracked
our KPIs or key performance
indicators and then afterwards
we did in our I study and we had
eight hundred thousand more
trips coming in New Mexico
because of that campaign and so
it was wildly successful and we
decided to keep that market we'd
like to keep it moving forward
but we also know that San
Francisco is going to have a
similar
results based upon our research
so and this is not a new idea
this represents go bay area
market my predecessors have been
talking about it for.
That a decade
so we're very hopeful that we'll
be able to do that there's a few
other things that we would like
to do with the twenty million
dollars major airport takeovers
we have right now we're in a few
airports that we get a lot of
lot of eyeballs a lot of
recognition but we like to
expand that into a few more and
then lastly we have a New Mexico
true certified program where we
have over four hundred small
businesses of our makers people
that make everything from soap
to really nice beautiful title
to jewelry you name it and so we
like to especially with the
tourism exchange launching put a
little bit more investment in
promoting those those types of
products so we can focus on
exports for New Mexico.
And finally the last special
appropriation is the tourism
development fund five million
dollars I mentioned before we
went through and did a complete
tourism infrastructure
assessment which you can find
online at New Mexico dot org
backslash industry see what kind
of infrastructure shovel ready
in your jurisdictions but we
like to have some some some of
five million dollars we can
strategically invest in some of
those projects to move them
forward.
The last flight.
It's just a comparison see you
can see you know with the base
budget what will be able to do
for the executive proposal
versus the LFC
One I think with most
importantly to me I can't do
what I'm asked to do and meet my
mission without a really strong
team and a full team and so I
would ask respectfully that to
fully fund our current
positions.
also we'd love to keep our
current find markets and just
accommodate for that media
inflation which is in the
executive budget so we can have
full media saturation.
And then it down at the special
appropriations there are there
are some differences in the
that's going to have some give
and take I think one that I'd
like to point out is with our
local cooperative programs if we
don't have a special
appropriation for that we will
go back to a one to one match
we'll go back to a six hundred
thousand dollar investment
and we're gonna have to really
consider will be able to fund
the event sponsorship program
again.
So just knowing what each one
will will provide to
constituents I just want to make
sure that was clear.
And with that Mr chair will
stand for questions thank thank
you so much madam secretary
before we go to questions I just
want to say a big thank you your
strategic questions asked and
some answered some unanswered
they really reflects the
commitment that you all and our
staff have had with the
legislative process and it shows
in the progress we've seen so
thank you madam secretary it
really is a a good example of
progress in that area with that
we're gonna go to questions
we're gonna go first
Representative Baca Senator
Garcia than Representative so
Baca.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
guys for your presentation
actually it can like this
tourism department so I guess
one of the the questions and Mr
chairman and and madam
secretary.
As far as the in these markets
you're talking about in San
Francisco the San Francisco what
are the types of activities
maintenance or otherwise that
you're going to be using in that
new market and really Mr
chairman what are the criteria
is about other markets that may
be coming up as we move forward
coming out of this pandemic.
Mr chair members of the
committee of Representative Baca
that is an excellent question so
we have a very disciplined
approach of how we decide which
different potential markets
would be good for New Mexico so
I'm gonna keep it brief because
I can geek out on data as of
runner knows but one of things
we look at we look at the size
of the market we look at the
economy the market we look at
the mobility of the market are
people traveling from that
market then we look at the the
the more that psychology.
They love what we have here in
New Mexico we are not inviting
people that want to go to
fashion week for making apps you
know that's not what we have
here in New Mexico and so we
really the the next thing we
really look at is the psycho
psycho demographics
to see if they would really love
and be
this is a magnetic place for
them and then also we look at
accessibility.
So how difficult is it for them
to get here.
and so we look at our direct
flights we look at the different
flight patterns to see to see
how easy it is for people to
come here so we have a the
beautiful spreadsheet that if
anyone wants to see it at any
time I'm happy to show that but
it's a huge matrix as a value
waiting all of those different
key points.
Mr chairman of my next question
is regarding we was on page five
the sports authority the
expansion can you just briefly
and I I mean.
Ruefully tell me what with this
expansion what with the sports
authority what would be the
purpose what would they do
directors tourism.
Mr chair members of the
committee Representative Baca
what's interesting is that has
been dormant for several years
last legislative session there
was a legislator that put some
of their junior money and some
funds into sports authority to
revive it and this year we have
we're in the process of hiring a
coordinator for the to to
oversee some things and then
also we submitted sent out an
RFP were really looking at what
is the economic opportunity for
sports tourism sports tourism is
highly
And it on infrastructure and so
what type of infrastructure you
have across the state and what
kind of capacity you have to
bring in new business is
critical and so while there
certain there certain
destinations our communities
across the state this is
extremely important and they
want to see this happen that's
not the case for the entire
state so our first step is to do
this study to see what the
opportunity is and then we can
actually start doing that be to
be at in in trying to get more
events sporting events here in
New Mexico thank you and my last
it's not even a a questions for
comments and thank you for the
little tourism our New Mexico
true but one thing that actually
that was missing and there was I
my favorite thing the card you
guys have lawsuit The New Mexico
flag that she goes out and so
like my colleague here yes my
friend he won't admit it but
he's my friend Representative
Garcia.
Given the choice between a house
Representative Penn in New
Mexico plant then they'll always
asking for that so I've given up
all my pen so if at some point I
think those cards are very
effective they were good as we
traveled we passed them out and
if there's any way that that can
be brought back or included as
part of this package I would
greatly appreciate it thank you
Mr chairman perfect thank you
very much Representative Bakit
naging ago representative Garcia
your friend thank you Mr
chairman of all I would rather
we're.
For the.
Anyway thank you Mr chairman of
madam secretary.
I got a question on on small
communities nobody is my
community of recipe the trying
to get things going.
But yet your match is one to one
and you said this time around
might be to one match what is
communities don't have the
funding bill to meet the match
no we're we're the lift that
really left out of what can we
do put dissension.
Mr chair members of the
committee Representative Garcia
that's an excellent question
Most communities across the
state most large majority of
them all have local larger tax
ordinances whether collecting
lodgers tax so there's very very
few communities throughout the
state that don't have that
funding mechanism to promote
tourism
so what we do have instead of
just the cooperative marketing
program we do have other
opportunities we have the rural
pathways program that
specifically for rural
communities where we put them
through I think you better to
create product experience in
their community and then at the
end of that thank you Peter
process and they have a business
plan for that product experience
we then grant the money and that
does not require a match there's
other opportunities we have as
well
like the New Mexico magazine
that requires no match on the
editorial side we have
communities are pitching stories
to our editor on a regular basis
we have travel writers that come
out to communities to then
experience what you have and
write articles so there's a lot
of different programs we have
that are free including our
online directory are tourism
exchange is going to be
completely free for our
destinations our communities to
utilize so there's a whole
series the programs that we have
a list of those free programs
I'd love to get that to you
after this.
Thank you madam secretary Mr
chair you know the reason I
brought that up to the plate and
do all well was days in requests
is no in July and you know the
kind of failed.
They would not advertise
property no just this computer
presentation of what's available
and yet the small communities
are not
they don't have the resources
basically and you know and Mr
chair and madam secretary we've
had the.
Not for about fifteen or sixteen
years I'm not a rope that been
advertising and really should be
good you know it's been going on
for quite a while and I don't
know if they are if you're not
but I have never seen it
advertised anywhere and I would
like to sit down after another
time and the address some of
these issues to see what we can
do not only my community all
rural communities the same thing
they're all having the same
trouble Mr chair members of the
committee Representative Garcia
I'd love to sit down and talk
about that we do have a lot of
free promotional opportunities
specifically for infants but we
also have our of it exhilarated
program given we have the
funding to keep it going next
year that sits down and and for
events are really trying to get
going in that are newer we we
really help them wraparound
services and look at how do we
help them go to the next level
so that might be a really great
programs specifically for the
event you're you're speaking
about thank you madam secretary
Mr Kreisau on your.
Handout Clemente Donald that's
that's in my district know that
advertised we're here everything
else within the city that trying
to do it's just not happening
thank you madam which Mr
Chairman thank you very much
representative Garcia next we're
gonna go to Representative.
Thank you chairman and thanks
for the presentation.
The
I look forward to.
State.
Fifteen more a tourism exchange
launched and sharing that the.
My constituents.
On page seven.
Senator advanced from one of the
things we talk about is a
tourism infrastructure planning
and development.
You gave a web site link for
that yes of New Mexico dot org.
Backslash industry.
And if you'd like to ask any
specific questions Lansing Adams
are tourism development director
who is right here no I'm good
with that chairman I I just
wanted to be able to go to the
link to move to some stuff on
there as you're aware there's
there's maybe not where house
bill two thirty three of the
buildings being run again this
year
Which.
Would initiate six hundred and
fifty thousand dollars for
planning and and right away.
For US three eighty the that
connects
reduces the Texas and we do need
to do some expansion there I
think.
Your department chairman
secretary your department fully
aware of how much tourism
that road brings to New Mexico
how much money that refers to
New Mexico we really truly need
to elevate that road and get it
updated make it a safe corridor.
So that we can continue to the
expand what happens up in
reductions completely outside of
my district for the it's very
important road in district two
and in our area so.
I chairman secretary challenges
review that bill and and maybe
with the Sanchez believes
Sanchez on that maybe in plug in
form when they're doing the
in a presentation to the
committee.
And so with that I appreciate
that and from what I really look
forward to to the loss of your
There is make change see how
that budget as well as vision we
continued chairman and secretary
with respect to
different counties and stuff
let's talk specifically about
Lea County.
Hi act is the tourism department
been with respect to
the county fair will pick one
that's one of thirty three
counties have how much do you
all get involved chairman
secretary with respect to
advertising for County first
different county wide events the
Lee County fair brings in
Hundred to a hundred and ten
thousand people over a seven day
period.
from out of state.
And local and from around the
state from a competition
standpoint has one of those
payouts for for protea that
there is a specifically time
chairman and and secretary so
the
the money in the points aren't
necessary if the to key stuff
for people heading to the PRCA
so I'm just curious how how
interactive is the tourism
department with the county
fairs.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you
Representative for that question
I think one of the things that
we have at the tourism
department is we have a very
robust event calendar that we
actively promote.
And so all of our fairs
festivals and events are located
on that came on that calendar
New Mexico dock work and.
One of the things that we know
to be true from all of our
research is that promoting
events specifically is a great
way to to drive conversion and
getting people to take trips now
right a lot of people say oh I
really want to go to New Mexico.
Maybe one day I'll go there but
then they'll hear about the
county fair the the balloon
fiesta or any of the other types
of events that are out there and
still planned their trip around
that particular event and so as
we move forward with the TIRS an
exchange specifically it's going
to give us a whole new way to
partner with events on promotion
and then also build out packages
so events can optimize visitor
spent in their in their
community so the way we partner
with events now is that we have
our event program that has the
accelerator a cooperative
marketing program in a that
sponsorship program.
Any events that is a tourism
event what we consider tourism
event which is you know they're
inviting people sixty miles out
yes people from the community
here there but there is an
active invitation to bring
interest to the of that they can
apply for any of those three
programs because we know of
answer important and we want to
see them grow so I would say
that would be the first step
that I recommend is just make
sure that they know about those
programs we do send out
notifications about all of our
grant opportunities and programs
but sometimes things get lost in
the mail but that would be a
really great opportunity that we
can discuss in further detail of
how how to talk to them about
participating in any of those
programs thank you yeah thank
you thank you chairman of.
Thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew next
we're gonna go Representative
Dana Cruz than Representative
here.
Thank you Mr chairman.
This so Department.
Secretary I think is one of Mr
chairman I think is one of the
most important departments and
efforts but the state can
undertake and and and attempt to
undertake and there's still so
much more to do you talked about
partnering with with local
communities and that is
essential as well because there
is shown many there's a myriad
of events Mr chairman that take
place throughout the state in so
many towns and and some of them
tend to be less you said there
are there are more geared
towards a local kind of our
audience.
Isn't as an example one of the
very popular ones image in my
community in the south valley of
Albuquerque is the other those
what those are the but for.
And it's it's it had had a peak
and then the wind and always
start to come back to you but it
is that kind of event I think is
so much potential to fit into
your calendar and that's one of
things I want to talk about Mr
chairman do you have a date
calendar website were were if if
I don't know what's going on
around New Mexico but I'd like
to know what's going on per
month legislative day weekend
you have something like that
now.
Mr chair members the committee
Representative absolutely New
Mexico dot org we have a very
comprehensive calendar for
everyday of the week of the year
so I encourage you to to look at
that I will say you know during
the the pandemic obviously we
took all of that down because
they were happening but it's our
commitment that we're going to
be working with communities to
bring those events all back to
life and so that's going to be
something we continue to do
hopefully with the appropriate
budget and staffing.
Gentleman what I find some of
those other events that I
mentioned like say the medical
part of the building there.
Or is it just date statements.
The testing even.
Yes.
Mr chair members the committee
yes local events I think that's
very very important and and I
would encourage you to make a
greater effort as possible so
that municipalities and counties
and towns and villages that host
events are aware that that's
available to them and that they
can participate however and even
those grant matches that you
talked about up lastly I want to
talk about a little bit Mr
chairman
We have some wonderful athletic
events.
Are they included in your
calendar as and I'll give you an
example this gentleman I was on
the athletic commission I won't
point it is mostly martial
artist mostly boxing.
bare knuckle it's it's
frightening primarily including
wrestling.
Are those including your kids.
Mr chair members of the
committee Representative I need
to double check on that I know
specifically for sports if they
are open to the public and they
have a tourism draw than they
would be I would I'm gonna
double check but it's my
understanding that they would be
included now if it is a literal
looked a little league baseball
game we that's not something we
would typically include unless
it was a large regional out of
state championship that was
going to be in New Mexico so we
have to use our discernment on
what we think is going to be
attractive to tourists and and
Dr visitation but there are some
sporting events that would
absolutely be on this gentleman
one of the most popular sports
in the in the world right now is
mixed martial arts UFC
particularly in twenty nineteen
the U. R. C. hosted event at the
Senate star center in Rio
Rancho.
Very heavily attended televise
worldwide.
They we do have occasion to host
athletic events of that nature I
would think that that would be a
natural toward your efforts
around tourism.
Chairman last thing and and some
of what I'm saying is more
common reason question but
sometimes I feel the need to to
maybe prime that pump a little
bit you know try to get people
thinking about different things.
One of my frustrations as a
resident of Albuquerque is that
we have the world famous pipped
for we have a great basketball
playing team playing there today
university Mexico.
And we also have the isotope
stadium we have university
football stadium all in this
little hub.
And if you ever drive to visit.
One of the sporting events at
this location if you get off the
freeway.
It is incredibly ugly.
There is no landscaping it is
prophetic that that that's your
problem I understand that I
understand that what think about
this for a second Mr chairman
you have people from sometimes
all over the country certainly
from around the state coming to
this location to enjoy that the
this the Flanigan Gover and yet
is incredibly unattractive
sometimes full of trash on and
on so between N. M. D. O. T.
City of Albuquerque someone to
really take responsibility for
that but the before I think it
might play a little bit into
what you do.
Is that you could be that
advisory group to say Hey we
host these events for the
benefit of the public.
Hey City of Albuquerque or Hey
N. M. D. O. T. have you thought
about how bad it looks right
there.
And so that's the end of that Mr
chairman thank you very much
appreciate if I could just let
it if you want to we have
important our pharmacy The New
Mexico tourism department
actually administers a clean and
beautiful program keep New
Mexico true and so we do have a
grant program specifically for
that and I invite the city of
Albuquerque's of your
constituents to apply those are
great at thank you for the fall
thank.
Right on target.
You clean it up nice.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
this exciting presentation thank
you for this the world famous
measure affected with national
monuments District appreciate
the advertising a couple
questions I discovered pinon
coffee at love the hot a when
they used to give free little
cups of coffee so as we think
about this problem I live in
south created coffee machines
like twenty five cents for
little cut I think we have to
think about practical marketing
maybe not at all of our places
but like the entry points on I.
forty east and west which brings
me to my first question Glen
Rio.
To stay up Mr chair who staffs
lend Rio.
The entrance on the east and
then who staff the one on the
west.
Mr chair members of the
committee Representative
phenomenal question that I think
I know where this is giving
I think it's important to know
that those buildings are owned
by DOT.
They're bound by duty the staff
is ours.
Okay thank you because Mr chair
my next question was how closely
are you working with DOT I know
the western entrance had
groundhog said it's been you
know the process.
From the chewing through
everything but
When I was southwest provided me
a road trip back home at
Christmas I would to blend real
for the first time phenomenal
employ energetic one person.
But that tourism thing in front
of the building no longer worked
it was vandalized hundreds of
people were driving like we were
because they couldn't fly is
there any plan with D. O. T. to
improve especially those major
road entrances to our state.
Mr chair members the committee
the short answer is yes that is
something that I've been working
with the new cabinet secretary
on a D. O. T. and the previous
cabinet secretary we have a
project under way to put in
quite a bit of technology on the
inside of the property for touch
screens and video presentations
so it's going to be modernized
if you will also be a much
better experience on the inside
there is a lot of
infrastructure challenges that
the.
All of all three of the property
is really
are are in need so that is
something that the secretary of
DOT's looking at we're gonna sit
down after session really mapped
out how to how do we take care
this because we have thousands
of people coming through and it
would be really nice to have a
nice representation on the drive
in of what New Mexico's about
thank you Mr chair what are the
seven locations around the
country where you currently
advertise besides Los Angeles Mr
chair members of the committee
we are in a San Diego Los
Angeles Phoenix Denver Austin
Dallas Houston.
You have to count.
Okay thank you very much at all
metrics metrics on out of state
tourism and state tourism and
then tourism from Asia Europe
Australia South American up with
that given the metrics on that
you know you do I don't have
those in front of me research
director is here but I'm gonna
follow up with you on on those
specifically in regards to our
role right now we have less than
one percent of the domestic
visitation in the United States.
And that if you think about just
doing campaigns we know the
media market the US.
And we're able to get a higher
R. O. Y. because member that
when I talk about accessibility
direct flights we don't have a
robust international hub so
right now that's not our focus
is not international as much but
what the TIRS make changes going
to do is going to put us on a
global global platform we're any
business that participates into
the exchange can also be seen by
a travel agent in China for
example so it's really going to
help give us some parity across
the state without us having to
spend millions and millions of
dollars to enter that different
media markets and nationally
because each media market
legally is different it's it's a
it's just a different ball game
so our focus primary right now
are our priority is domestic for
that reason but we can get you
break down exactly what we have
regarding visitation and where
people are coming from thank you
very much that's my questions
thank you very much
Representative Garrett Neff we
have Representative Trujillo.
Thank you thank you madam
secretary
I've been looking through all my
books and I don't see a line
item for your The New Mexico to
partnership with the Special
Olympics in New Mexico where is
that and how much would it be.
Mr chairman.
Senator Heo
currently the New Mexico tourism
department has a recurring
junior money for the Special
Olympics it's about three
hundred and fifty thousand
ringgit I know because I just
look this up
typically the department twelve
not typically of about two years
ago in the preceding maybe three
years the department request one
time money for that right now
they do have a recurring three
hundred and fifty thousand for
that.
Mr chair to repeat it's three
hundred and I am here because of
the motorcycle three hundred and
fifty thousand Mr chair
representative covering
recurring yes ma'am okay thank
you so much thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative next we
have Representative turned in
the rooms of the house.
This year.
So my question to you.
Log and businesses and there are
a number
of things that.
Is this or is this
So are you is that correct and
are you.
We
have a special.
Mr chair members of the
committee Representative Herndon
let me repeat the question to
make sure I understand it
so at the local level
Local jurisdictions can opt in
to collecting lodgers tax and
create a local ordinance to do
so K.
and in Albuquerque specifically
there are several entities that
Albuquerque does collect that
larger stacks there's I believe
three different organizations
that are recipients of that
larger taxes than
to.
To be specific metrics on behalf
of the City of Albuquerque I'd
be happy to introduce you to
those individuals some of which
are here today but I'd be happy
to introduce you to those folks.
Now.
Thank you thank you Mr
Representative Herndon
Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr chair.
I recently got involved in a
project.
That I know which is going to
satisfy all your bullets on page
sixteen.
The project that I'm talking
about has been in the discussion
and planning stages for over
twenty years and I would like to
be the person that makes things
move.
The project that I'm talking
about is the Navajo code talker
museum.
A lot of people do not know that
it was my language.
When used in World War two in
the Pacific saved America.
Who are the true sense and save
the world.
And we've got nothing.
To show that.
That part of our history and I
think a lot more people to
share the history.
I like what you do what you've
done with the busking Redondo in
fort Sumner.
But that history there is the
sad part of my culture.
I want to see something that's
more positive and I don't think
there's going to be anything
more positive than to honor the
Navajo code talkers with the
museum.
History is that there was over
four hundred Navajo code talkers
we have three of them left.
We lost the fourth one about a
month and a half ago.
We have three code talkers left.
One of them celebrated his
birthday last Saturday at one
hundred and six.
The youngest member that I'm
working with now to make this
museum a reality is ninety three
years old.
He is the former Navajo Nation
chairman Peter McDonnell and I
believe a lot of people know
him.
I know that there are other
Indian tribes that had code
talkers as well.
But the Navajo code talkers were
the ones that were their
language because classified
under the United States
government armed forces so I
believe that this is something
that we owed to the Navajo code
talkers to build but like I said
we've been in the planning and
of wealth planning stages for
over twenty years was what I've
been told and I guess we could
visit on this off line and I
just need distinct the rex and.
I'm more or less leaning towards
having the federal government
bill this museum.
But at the local level I know
it's going to bring everyone of
those bullets that you have on
page sixteen and I want to be
part of the success of New
Mexico tourism department and
that would be my contribution to
that so I need all the help that
I can get to get this off the
ground before we lose anymore
Navajo code talkers I would like
to see at least a ninety three
year old see the building go up
before he decides to leave as
well so that thank you for my
comments of madam secretary and
Mr chair thank you very much
Representative Allison and thank
you for for really bringing that
to the committee here today
thank you Secretary for really
taking it in
so that that concludes our
questions there's madam
secretary I think we're gonna go
ahead and ask for the
recommendation will ask a few
members over the course of the
interim to work and sort of look
a little bit closer and and work
closely with you in the
department Hey for staff we have
some court decisions to make and
perhaps and work to do both a
little bit on the recurring and
certainly within the specials
area to sort of meet this moment
that you're laying out for us
secretary with that we'll go to
Representative Dixon.
thank you Mr chair I would like
to move the LFC recommendation.
Right there's a motion for the
LFC recommendations second by
Representative daylight Cruz
there any opposition to that
motion.
I don't see any opposition up
that and gonna ask
Representative the regular
member Armstrong Representative
Allison and then also
Representative Sanchez madam
secretary will sort of just in
bed a little bit and look a
little bit more closely and work
closely with you.
Thank you very much legislative
members we have two more
agencies to go.
We're gonna ask our the
secretary for economic
development department to come
up.
Okay
Amanda if you could pick this up
with this is agency code for
nineteen.
All right thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee your
analysts have stayed the same we
now have secretary keys and her
team who I will let her
introduce here in just a minute
this is the economic development
department again agency code for
nineteen I will let members
know.
I will let members know before
we get started the same thing
your first page of your packet
should be a high level that's
going to show you those big
differences in the
recommendation in addition to
the different suits and then
again right behind that you have
the specials different states
that shows the difference a
nonrecurring again you're going
to hear us talk a lot about
where things are budgeted in
different places.
so it that being said I know
we're pressed for time so I will
try and keep is pretty short I
like Simon's big three approach
earlier so I'm just going to
delay it the LFC recommendation
increases general fund revenue
to the agency by six point seven
percent in the executive
increases general fund revenue
by thirty one point two percent
the big differences in those
numbers
The first one is in internal
marketing the department
requested about three million
dollars to do an internal
marketing campaign to market the
state to businesses the
executive includes one point
five million in the recurring
budget for that purpose LFC
budget all of that funding in
the nonrecurring section of the
bill similar to how LFC has done
tourism marketing funding.
and the next big difference As
in job training incentive
program funding so the executive
included two million dollars in
the recurring budget for the job
training incentive program the
LFC includes a little over maybe
two hundred eighty thousand
dollars in recurring for J. tip
but again it budgets additional
J. tip funds and the
nonrecurring section of the
bill.
Finally the other of the key
difference in the
recommendations is for
management of the next
generation film academy if you
all remember last year you
approved the creation of this
film academy under the Economic
Development Department along
with about forty million dollars
for the academy this would be to
manage and run that academy the
executive includes in the
recurring budget about one point
five million dollars for that
purpose and LFC includes five
hundred thousand dollars again
for all those there's additional
nonrecurring funding that you
can see on your little chichi.
So that being said I'll quickly
go through the programs.
Her first program code is up on
page five agency code of yours
P. code five twelve
the LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue by seven
percent the executive increase
by about thirty four percent of
both recommendations support the
agency requests to continue the
certified economic development
program that was a legislative
initiative from last year that
the department's going to keep
going.
This is again where you see some
of those differences the
executive recommendation
includes two million recurring
for J. tip that includes one
million dollars for traditional
G. tip and then one million
dollars for multi media need to
which is J. tip your marked for
different multimedia programs.
again LFC includes two hundred
eighty nine thousand dollars for
G. tip
and then your last bullet there
you have that the executive
includes one point five million
dollars for a business a
marketing campaign with an
additional one point five
million dollars in nonrecurring
funding the LFC budgets a total
of two point two million dollars
for marketing all in a
nonrecurring section of the
bill.
an analyst came to consensus on
all performance measures and
targets for all the programs.
So next we have the of film
program of P. five one four
this is where you see that big
difference in the management of
the film academy the executive
has one point five million the
LFC has five hundred thousand
so that brings when you take the
nonrecurring appropriations into
account the LFC recommendation
to a total of one million
dollars for managing the academy
and the executive recommendation
to a total of three million
dollars for managing the
academy.
your next P. code it Pete code
five twenty six
the recommendations are really
close in this one the LFC is
about two hundred thousand
dollars lower than the executive
and that's because the LFC
recommendation decreases funding
for the New Mexico partnership
of the New Mexico partnership of
job creation attributable to
partnership efforts has
consistently following and this
would bring total funding for
the partnership from about one
point one million to about nine
hundred thousand and the
executive just keeps the program
flat with last year for the base
there is one expansion in this
program and both recommendations
supports the requested expansion
for a federal programs manager
the department receives tons of
federal revenue especially when
you're looking at some of the
economic of relief money that
we've gotten so that position
will help them manage some of
that.
finally we have the outdoor
recreation program and both
recommendations are the same
they both keep the division flat
with last year.
With that I will let Mr really
make any other comments.
Thank you very much in the same
Mr chair members of the
committee
Amanda still my big three
strategies so I don't have too
much to add here but overall
there's about a four point four
million dollar general fund
difference with the executive
being higher by four point four
million and as Amanda said
that's really those three items
J. tip operations of the film
academy and marketing to attract
business activity to New Mexico
so the executive is higher on
the recurring side for all of
those activities
so with that I will pass it over
to secretary keys thank you.
Thank you Secretary hi.
Thanks for having us it's lovely
to see everyone committee I
wanted to start by introducing
my team most people know R. W.
John Clark we have our director
of economic development mark
Roper a list of rhetoric is here
from the outdoor recreation
office and also Ivey V. hill is
now with us and she came over
from DFA I did also want to
introduce just very briefly the
people who came to speak on
behalf of our budget I don't
think you're taking any kind of
COVID I didn't see any the
heart of Secretary at the
conclusion of the meeting what
twenty minutes reserve for
public perfect okay wonderful
thank you so they are here let's
go ahead and we're going to buzz
through this because well I know
we speak to most of you on a
weekly basis a lot so
everybody's kind of aware of
what's going on with our budget
PED is being very careful with
taxpayer dollars and using all
of the resources that you have
given us our reversion for this
past year was a whopping five
thousand dollars.
so that is probably are very
best reversion ever John Clark
okay.
R. us this year include
recurring money for federal
grants manager funding for the
media Academy target and
targeted marketing we're also
asking for special
appropriations that would fully
fund to Lita right now the
executive is at thirty five
million and the LFC is at ten
and also need to have as well as
continue our commitment to help
New Mexico small businesses and
incubators were asking for two
million dollars an increase in
need to as part of our of
phasing into our recurring
budget over several years we're
also asking for money for R. E.
D. O. program and we're super
grateful that these are both in
the recommendations from the LFC
so thank you we're asking for
one point five million for a
targeted marketing campaigns and
we've never had marketing money
before it's very interesting
that we are in I would think.
A very good position New Mexico
is getting a lot of attention
COVID the silver lining is that
a lot of companies are looking
to get out of the big cities
we've seen a lot of people move
to New Mexico there's the by the
administration has a huge push
to bring manufacturing back to
the United States and
specifically the southern border
in the Santa Teresa area could
be a huge beneficiary of that so
lots is going on if you look at
slide let's see that was slide
two and three which really just
highlights
our budget asks and then on
slide four you'll hear a lot of
a lot of information about the
film industry this year we will
be running the film the bill in
order to extend the industry
this is an industry that brings
in over eight hundred fifty five
million dollars from outside of
the state that wouldn't
otherwise be here so we're
excited about that
I think you did we have so with
regards to the film industry I
think the only request that we
had was for the film and media
academy so I'm just going to
bring you all up to speed a
little bit on where we are with
that we did get the
appropriation for forty million
dollars last year throughout
this past year we have worked
with the fifteen schools that
want to be our partners and they
are all now agreed on a core
curriculum which is a fantastic
fantastic accomplishment but we
announce that a satellite
facility will be in Los crucis
and we're soon to announce where
the kind of mother ship will be
we have an R. F. P. that I think
when out today for the director
of this so making movements but
really just to have those
partners on involved in agreeing
on a core curriculum is as as a
good accomplishment this will be
a next generation media academy
so.
So it will not compete with any
of those schools teaching crew
training this is going to be
about next generation virtual
reality X. R. V. are really
getting students in there and
actually getting their hands
dirty and working on sets
building sets building costumes
all that kind of good stuff.
Okay so let's see film division
budget request the so that is
just the one point five million
if you go on to slide six now as
some of you know there's we have
a really big tent and my office
we have the Film Office we have
outdoor rack we also have the
office of science and technology
in addition to economic
development but we have three
agencies that are
administratively attached to us
and that is a spaceport border
Authority an office of military
based planning John and I have
taken a different approach than
past administrations and we are
very very involved in those
agencies I sat on the board of
the border Authority and also of
spaceport but we really see them
as one and one in the same and
and the sense of economic
development
programs support
so we're asking for funding if
you this is on slide not seven
if you're following the law
we're asking for funding for fed
of federal programs manager and
very thankful that the at that
the LFC is also recommending
this when we started we have one
federal program that we have
eleven it's a lot of work and so
thank you for that if you go to
the next page we're on to
outdoor recreation this.
Division is really rocking and I
have to say
with New Mexico's new focus on
this investment we are now just
a fifth in the nation and
outdoor recreation recreation
job growth
they're administering grants an
outdoor infrastructure we've we
have paid internships we have
accelerators we have
partnerships with western New
Mexico university
for new certification and by
technology as some of you know
axing this one into the private
sector so she has left us so
we're just asking for a flat
budget for FY twenty four until
we can get a new director in
that position.
If you move on to the next page
slide ten and this is just a
summary of the projects that we
have going and lead and how many
projects we've done we've done
over seven billion dollars and
leverage capital spending since
the start of this administration
with an economic impact of
thirty four billion dollars
we have also the increase the
salaries for these jobs by
roughly twenty thousand dollars
for each job that is there
receiving Lita we really believe
that our north star is our wage
rates and if we can get those up
and we can get these companies
that we're incentivizing to be
here to increase of the amount
of money that they're paying the
salaries and also to provide
benefits than I think that's a
huge win
so our analysis shows that every
dollar in tax money invested in
Lida that's three hundred and
ninety three percent return to
the state with eight more than
one thousand per two percent
return to the state when you
consider the city and county
governments
so like I said our our the
executive with thirty five were
at ten this is a massive program
for New Mexico and
and we could potentially
beneficiary of a lot of movement
that's happening in the world
because of China because of the
by the ministration so I would I
would hate to see that funds not
fully.
Filled up so that could cause
problems in terms of recruiting
these companies so which I tip
job do you want to talk a little
bit about need to.
Sure thank you good to good
afternoon Mr chairman and
members of the committee us so
we need to you can see as well
we're really focusing on wages
that something that we started
focusing on right at the start
of this administration when we
came in we just started taking a
look at what sort of jobs we're
incentivizing and is in
coordination with the phase in
of the increased minimum wage we
also faced an increases in the
wages that you have to pay in
order to get you to funding so
we're really proud of the wage
increases that we've been seeing
in J. tips similar to the wages
of the secretary mentioned in
Lida this is a really important
program it's nationally
recognized as one of the best
job training programs in the
country and one of the best
things about it is that it's
great not just for helping to
recruit big companies to New
Mexico but we can use it to help
small companies that are here
expanding the just need to
create a couple of jobs at a
time so this is a really
critical tool resting for two
million dollars recurring six
million dollars non recurring in
order to continue funding the
program as it grows.
So if you turn on to page twelve
and we'll just bring it to a
summary here so us thirty five
million for the latest six
million for J. to one point five
for the media academy and also
for marketing money I feel madam
five million dollars for at
business incubators right now
the LFC has not at zero thank
you readers are so so key to
helping small businesses work
John read an article the other
day that said a business that
goes through an incubator is
four times more likely to
succeed than one that hasn't we
have woefully failed R.
incubators in the state we have
six of them and they're
incredible we need to support
them we need to make more of
them that is really how we're
gonna help small businesses in
New Mexico so please consider
putting some funds there and
then we do also have the five
point nine for the energy
transition act which was given
to economic development but I do
believe the legislators have to
appropriate this money so just a
reminder also on that
and I think that's it I see we
stand for questions thank you
very much madam secretary thank
you deputy secretary great to
see Mr Roper as well we're gonna
go straight to questions first
will go to require members thank
you Mr chairman thank you for
your presentation I just want to
personally thank you Secretary
for working with the very large
array trying to get some stem
education out of the area I I'm
sad they came a little late to
the ball game but I I'm hoping
that that grows we can always
use that economic development in
rural New Mexico's Carl catching
County so thank you for that
and I do support the business
thank you rate incubator part of
it because you know it's a coral
we've done a few things to get
some incubators going and all
across the state but I I would
really like to see that
supported the other thing I
think I know you're you know I'm
going to ask you about the rule
to.
Tax credit mmhm and if that
situation has been fixed or if
it's still an issue.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and representative
Armstrong so first on the VLA
and I'm just going to comment
for a second the VLA is
currently in the process of
expanding and requesting that
money not only for an education
center but to increase the
amount of telescopes they have
from twenty seven to over two
hundred I think it is one of the
best economic development up
resources and assets that we
have in New Mexico so anyone who
can lend their support to that I
I I think the science is there
teaching there are amazing and I
think that they can really teach
our kids so thank you for your
support on that also with with
regards to the role tax credit
as I said we are introducing
file legislation that will be
senator Nancy Rodriguez who
carries it again and it's been a
debate on that roll on and to be
honest with you it's gone back
and forth between many different
people we would love your voice
in there and
it's right now we have that we
have it currently as it is
because I have been talking to
many people and I know that we
can get the film legislation
passed to be honest with you and
it's.
US one person one thing and
another person another thing and
both of the people want it moved
or they don't want to move so we
haven't changed in the
legislation as of yet and I
really do believe that's a
conversation that needs to be
had amongst legislators and
amongst people so if you have a
group of legislators who really
is passionate about that move
please let me know I know you
are but I I haven't heard from
any other legislators that would
want that so if please let me
know thank you madam secretary
and and Mr Chairman you know
it's about equity.
Across the state of New Mexico.
And you know our rural New
Mexico wants to do film we have
a dying rural New Mexico and I
just think it's about equity and
fairness.
So yet Mr chairman and just so
the members know there was a
sixty mile line drawn from I
believe it was this city's
center or the the county limits
and some of the rural areas that
we really really need help up
are not really in that rules on
because they're too close to
Albuquerque and so that's the
kind that we're having right now
is it was drawn in twenty
nineteen it was us it was
recommended by out see the this
be the line and so but if it
does exclude some lovely
communities that are very rural
because they are too.
Thank you for that explanation I
appreciate that thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much
regular rooms on next services
to approve.
Thank you Mr chairman
madam secretary how do you
determine the amount of Leda
funds that you need annually
you're asking for I think thirty
five and and been recommended
for ten how do you decide it's
thirty five forty twenty how do
you get there Mr chair members
of the committee Representative
dealer Cruz so we look at all of
the projects that we're tracking
and all of the projects that the
New Mexico partnership is
tracking and we estimate of how
much Lida would would.
Those projects would take up up.
How close are they to potential
fruition and so that's how we
get to that number and basically
what we like to do is have
roughly fifty million dollars in
the our account and I know it
shows to you that there is more
money in their but basically
that money doesn't show that
it's been transferred out until
we have committed to these
companies we have said that it's
coming but it hasn't necessarily
transferred out and that
sometimes where we get a little
bit of the discrepancy between
the number that you have in the
number that we have but really
it is our estimate of how many
manufacturing companies do we
feel like are going to come here
in the next year year and a half
and have allocate those funds
and what's been promised already
chairman the secretary what do
you mean by tracking is it is a
company that I've actually
requested Leda funds they might
ask for the the phones yes yes
Mr chair members of the
committee there's an application
process and so when when a
company does apply would they
get on are tracking sheet and
that doesn't mean it's going to
happen that doesn't mean we're
going to give them a certain
amount of money at that point
but that's when we really start
tracking the deal Mr Chairman
secretary so right now you have
about thirty five million
dollars worth of of potential
Allocations in the queue so
roughly we have right now Mr
chair eighty million dollars in
the queue.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr Chairman secretary what were
you allotted last year for me to
funds.
Mr Mr Chairman representative
deliveries fifty million last
year was appropriated for the F.
Mr Chairman the secretary of
that fifty million how much was
issued.
Cool one second let me check
with my as for.
Early right right sorry we have
no this report come up just.
Mr chair members of the
committee Representative de La
Cruz.
Currently as we as we sit here
today twelve million dollars of
that fifty has been out the door
we have another anticipated of
twenty three million that we
anticipate to go out the door by
the end of the fiscal year thus
the thirty five million dollar
request that will get us back to
the fifty million dollars of
that that is the basis of the
thirty five million dollar
request will get us back to
fifty million dollars at the
beginning of FY twenty four.
Thank you Mr chairman
Leader can you describe for the
for the committee please briefly
what what qualifies for me to
funding and what generally does
not qualify.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee I'm gonna bring
mark back up just because he's
fantastic about talking about.
Thank you Mr mark.
More forever academic
development director and.
Mr chair members of the
committee Representative de la
Cruz as in as is established and
local economic development act
in statute qualified entities
for Lita are those that
manufacture and those that bring
he based economic based jobs
back to New Mexico there has to
be job creation component and
economic base of the.
Activity is that that makes
manufacturers on item and or
creates over fifty percent
revenue from outside the sources
from outside the borders of New
Mexico in a non right services
activities that is an economic
base entity the qualifies it for
Lee to the qualified
expenditures are restricted to
land building an infrastructure
meaning that the investments
that we make into a project are
restricted to those items that
will remain with the New Mexico
regardless of the success of the
company of the the items will
not be able to leave the state
of New Mexico at the termination
of the agreement.
Mr chairman do service jobs
qualify.
It's the service jobs qualify
the Mr chair members of the
committee Representative part of
the Las Cruces again non
retail service jobs do qualify
as long as the service itself
generates over fifty percent of
its revenue from outside of the
borders of New Mexico.
If they are exclusive to New
Mexico then they do not qualify
Mr Chairman.
Why does retail not qualify.
Mr chairman members of the
committee the Representative de
la Cruz by statute retail isn't
eligible expenditure for local
leader funds.
Local leader funds meaning city
and county funds can be expended
for retail there are no
restrictions on retail at the
local level at the state level
the restriction is for
communities under fifteen
thousand and we have a policy
within the department that we
look at non compete in new
retail activity for those
especially rural communities.
Philosophically and generally
speaking retail is excluded from
any type of economics incentive
because retail as a result of
the economics that are created
by economic base activity jobs
many bringing money in from
outside of the borders and
generating economy retail
circulates the economy that is
already there thank you Mr
chairman that's generally
referred to as a surge of Mr
chairman last item.
Secretary your your endeavors
your effort your team's efforts
create quite a bit of capital
for the state of New Mexico and
not only on the face of it but
the ball the multiplier Center
involved in all of the
particular activities what have
you considered either through
legislation or otherwise to
become somewhat of an enterprise
fund because you're generating
an incredible amount of capital
and you're you're coming here is
if you've done nothing with the
money that you're given at least
on a certain level it it kind of
gives that impression.
Has that been a consideration
for your department madam
secretary Mr chair members of
the committee Representative
dealer Cruz so let me ask let me
drill down on that so why are we
not taking some percentage of
net profits or some percentage
of the companies that we're
investing in this other question
Mr chairman the that is
absolutely correct you are
creating new money.
And it seems to me that
reasonably you could say look
last year we generated X. can we
at least have some of that's we
can multiply that.
Thank you Mr.
Yeah
Mr chair members of the
committee Representative Cruz
it's a great question we can't
actually force these companies
to give us anything back I just
asked R. W. who's been in this
business for a long time yeah
Mean that company would give you
something back but if per the
state you've generated.
Twenty million new dollars could
there not be a formula created
that you recoup some of that
from the state based on what you
added to the state somewhat of
an enterprise fund.
Mr chair members the committee
we have not thought about that
but that's a great idea to Mull
over in our heads um and work
through that that's a good idea
then we haven't thought about it
thank you Mr chairman no no
other questions thank you very
much of the day Cruz listening
representative Garcia then
Representative Garrett then by
should.
Thank you Mr chairman of
Michigan secretary John
everybody.
The question number one question
is how how big is the project to
be.
If the property to fund.
Mr chair members of the
committee Representative we've
never had a project that has
been too big in order to take on
a we have had projects that we
have not
put forth the amount of closing
funds that other states have put
forth because we just don't have
them for instance Texas has a
lead of fund roughly of four
hundred million dollars
and so we're not competing for
those projects we're competing
for projects that we know it's a
good fit in New Mexico and that
they want to be here but we're
not chasing anything and
throwing hundreds of millions of
dollars after it thank thank you
madam secretary Mr chairman you
know all I'm talking about the
individual parts during grants
to launch their line of get
going they've already put two
point five million dollars into
the project it is shovel ready
but yet we can again funding.
And I would advise that it was
stated to the Economic
Development people that the that
the project was too big he could
not fund.
That's what I heard I'm not
seeing any different on your of
she won one this the to you know
like last year there was might
look in the paper
but barely got five million
dollars Committee coming up four
million Boller cloning of the
U..
What what was that.
I'm one second marquee Madam got
it figured Jareth and if we
don't have to get a detailed
okay and down and and talk about
that in our time through one I
could you know I don't want to
federal the committee with with
all the stuff because you know
there's a lot of issues.
You know every representative I
for the district an animal fight
for money you know there's a lot
of that we need to move that I'd
like to address.
but we'll leave it at that madam
secretary Mr chairman one more
question.
We talked about the film
industry and how much money you
guys are putting into it.
And it seems to me that is going
to school to approve the Santa
Fe you know wrong New Mexico is
not gain the share of money to
do field Representative are from
mental but you know if we had
more money in our districts
roller Mexico we could probably
draw industries into our
communities and a couple years
ago madam secretary Mr chairman
it was stated that.
It's too far.
Is not feasible for us to goal
has fifty miles and and that's
hurting.
The small communities how do you
address that issue Mr chair
members of the committee
representative Garcia actually
this year for the first time
ever we did fifty million
dollars of direct spend in the
rural areas and that was
primarily because of the five
percent off lift that chair
small and also Senator Steinborn
put in the legislation for SB
two and twenty nineteen
the rural areas.
We need to be hyper focused on
them for film they have
fantastic locations many of the
rural areas do not have any kind
of film or television liaison
which here's how this hurts them
is when a production comes in
and says Hey you know we need
this type of set we need this
type of location and we say oh
you should look at to the
consequences are you should look
at Gallup often times it's not a
package product for them we need
to make sure that they have
hotels that there's a place for
the crew to up to work out of
outside of the location and so
we are desperately trying to
work better for the rural areas
and for the tribal areas and
film but every year we ask for
FTEs we do not get them and so
we can only do so much I agree
with you the bulk of it is in
Albuquerque Santa Fe and now Los
crucis and Las Cruces is done a
great job of advocating for
themselves and they have a
fantastic school down there and
they have fantastic liaisons so
we need to improve it but I
would say that improvement that
we made this year was
substantial substantial thank
you madam secretary Mr Chairman
one last question can use legal
funds to the average federal
funds.
Since.
I'm Madam Mister chair members
of the committee yes if there
are federal funds available how
we doing on a project at.
Unlike are gonna bring out more
corporate back up.
Mr chair members of the
committee representative Garcia
we did we did a project in which
we usually to funds as part of
the as part of our rural
infrastructure well that was in
conjunction with federal funds
and San Juan County for the for
these federal funds from in
conjunction with the the funds
to improve and do all other
infrastructure improvements to
that particular industrial park
we also partnered with the town
of towels on another leader for
structure project in which they
use federal funds for their
wastewater of portion of the
project we usually the funds for
the water a portion of the
projects typically that so to
use in conjunction with that
would answer yes to specifically
leverage I don't know if we've
ever had leader funds on the
front end of the leverage but I
don't see any reason why we
could right now thank you for
that the manager during the Mr
chairman that's important
because you know but my
attention to.
The wanted the federal
Just bear with me just a second
federal Economic Development
ministration needed.
What the match put two million
and they will give the six
million to for the project and
you say that's the table right.
Okay I'll do that Miss Mister
chairman
just have a sit down if you
would and we can all more to
deal with.
Rhaetian thank you thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much
Representative yeah Mexicans go
to Representative Garrett than
they should.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
everybody for your presentation
three questions the first one is
requesting a grants manager as
D. O. T. is as is the office of
broadband and my concern is
these all work together because
it's economic development you
need broadband you need road
services is there any effort to
communicate.
With the two work together.
Mr Chairman representative so we
we do work with that you face
grants management bureau but the
issue here is that the reporting
requirements and everything
involved with our requests are
so specific to our individual
requests that no other requests
person at another agency would
have any idea what we were doing
that that's the problem with all
these federal grants they're not
boilerplate third and third that
they don't operate the same it's
not the same reporting for all
of them it's very different and
you have to become intimately
familiar with the programs in
order to be able to manage them
and report on it and just be
clear it's also not just the
federal reporting and we're
struggling it's the management
of the managing the in the
eleven federal grants managing
all of the contractors that
we've hired through them has
been really taxing on staff we
didn't have anyone assigned to
that so we've had to pull people
away from their typical typical
day jobs which is helping
businesses and helping people
and we want them to get back to
those jobs so we just want one
person tasked with doing this
thank you very excellent.
When they should Mr chair my
second question is on reshoring
how does that occur do you find
out about it is the department
of commerce what's the process
and how is that going just in a
nutshell Mr chair members of the
committee Representative Garrett
typically we are approached up
by a phone call by an email
sometimes it's friends who know
me or somebody else in the
department and that's how things
start the New Mexico partnership
is the entity that basically
deals with a lot of our cold
calls and reach out and they do
more conferences and walk the
halls and try to meet with
companies but and that's really
what's mark and I do on a daily
basis is talk to these companies
figure out who's moving where
they're moving what they want
all that kind of good stuff
thank you in my third question
Mr chair is I'd like to know
that six business incubators and
you can email that to us.
Yeah like to okay madam chair I
can rattle off a few of my heads
are met Mr chair and members of
the committee arrowhead is a
fantastic.
is basically an MSU a lot of
these are going to be based at
at
Either to your four year
institution Santa Fe has an
incubator coming out of their
junior college is that correct
community college well so we
have west who is in Albuquerque
and they're also they have to
weather satellite facilities and
they're fantastic San Juan
college what are the two Clovis
that.
More.
South valley economic.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative care of by today.
Thank you Mr chair I'll try to
be quick with my questions and
get quick answers
So the twenty twenty one
strategic plan there are nine
areas is that correct.
could you estimate on the amount
of budget that is spent on the
areas that are not film for
outdoor recreation.
Madam chair members of the at Mr
chair members of the committee
and vice chair are you referring
to our FTP accounts and how much
or.
My point is.
We hear a lot about film and
outdoor recreation and less
about the other six to seven
because I think there's we hear
a little bit more about border
And so when we are looking at
the budget for the agency so not
specifically full time people
but.
My concern and interest to
specifically is whether or not
you know sort of.
If we have nine areas how much
of the budget just goes to those
two that we here so frequently
about.
Madam chair members Mr chair the
committee.
well so the film to fund the
film budget is by itself and so
you can look at the film budgets
of which right here totals.
Nine hundred nine hundred sixty
one thousand
for FY twenty three when you
look at outdoor rack.
What is that we go
one point one five four.
And they have their own specific
divisions and so I think that's
why you are seeing a lot of
attention paid to these two
divisions
and so I think I know where
you're going here well it.
Sorry it.
But I think I am interested in
eliminating for the rest of the
committee and other folks is
that you know the Economic
Development Department has a
wonderful strategic plan that
was done and is very
comprehensive and what I'd
really like to see is make I'd
like to make sure that efforts
to work with the aerospace
cybersecurity biosciences this
is stable in value added
agriculture intelligent
manufacturing global trade
sustainable and green energy.
That we're hearing about those
things and that those there's a
really concerted effort
Led by you guys but with the
full force of the state behind
you because you know I don't
think it makes sense to put all
of our eggs in two or three
baskets if we know that long
term we have to diversify our
economy so that's sort of more
of a COVID I think doesn't
Representative you really need
an answer I'd like to addressing
a possible yes Mr chairman also
vice chair so with the vice
chair is referring to is that
economic development is now
considering in the executive is
considering six new different
divisions for the economic
development department which is
humbling it's really it's
absolutely lovely and as the
chair as a vice chair is trying
to point out.
What you put your money towards
is where our attention can go
because often times you know we
just really do not have a lot of
FTE at all and we're all working
Very very hard so when there are
divisions that that that come up
like outdoor recreation division
we have been able to flourish
an outdoor record because we
have had a fantastic director
and we have three other FTEs in
that division so yes I mean
strongly think about those
divisions because of we are we
are definitely making your money
work and the money that you
appropriate us work so thank you
for that and and all six of them
are good and it's a very very
difficult situation that we're
in right now so but thank you
for highlighting that.
One last question
The
in the strategic plan and then
also when you release the
strategic plan the governor
issued an executive order
directing R. L. D. in
consultation with your
department to simplify and
streamline rules and regulations
for business creation I'm
wondering if that has happened
and where where would I find.
What the outcomes were if you
know that or if I should wait
our task R. LD.
Yeah
Mr chair vice chair members of
the committee are all due to a
lot of that work we were
supporting and I do think that
the super intendant of our LD
does have more information on
that but I will have her
wraparound with you perfect and
she is up next I believe.
She already knows my question
and before I pass it back to Mr
chair for his question I do just
want to say how absolutely
impressive you know I think the
work that you guys do is and we
can see the results you know
with those two two divisions so
with that thank you thank you
very much place to we're gonna
go to Representative Lujan thank
you Mr
thank you all for being here
today and I really appreciate
the conversation that
vice chair Dixon is bringing up
today so on that note we're
looking at six the new divisions
and looking at renewable
sustainable
types of economy building
Investments for state.
Does your.
Budget reflect the amount of of
FTEs that you're going to need
to required if this if this goes
through subject up Mr chair
members of the committee
Representative Lujan no so it
just so you all know if any of
those six divisions do get past
we would need not only FTE but
we would need to administrative
of help with that we did get a
good amount of regional reps
last year which is fantastic
those are boots on the ground
but that's a lot of travel
vouchers it's a lot of
administration and so what we
are realizing is the more people
we have we will need not only
FTEs but administrative help and
then with a call back to work we
have absolutely no tests
available so we would also need
additional office space and
monies for additional office
space because were literally
coming out of the seems right
now Mr chair
Thank you secretary thank you
for being candid about that this
is a having this is this is this
a this funding that we're
looking for is is it was a
contingent upon legislation.
Mr chair
Mr chair members of the
committee what it the funding
for those additional division
yes it would be well our
recommendation is for the
funding but I don't know if
that's actually if the state
could get passed without the
funding is that correct John.
Mr Chairman representative at
the moment there's no funding
for there's no recurring funding
for any of these in either the
executive budget or the LFC
budget soon you as the house
appropriations and finance
committee we need to add
recurring funding an ad FTE if
you're going to add any of these
new divisions to our office
because otherwise division's
would be added without in the
recurring funding without any
people and it would just be
existing in statute without our
ability to actually stand up the
division.
If you are.
Mr chairman members the
committee just a quick note most
of those bills do have
appropriations within them you
have not heard them yet they're
still making their way through
other committees typically as
you know of house appropriation
of finance strips is
appropriations so when those
bills are before you you would
see what those appropriations
for thank you very much back to
have some thank thank you Sir
appreciate that so.
I guess my question when looking
at this we're looking at the
executive we're looking at the
LFC work.
when those bills get to us if
they make it to us.
What what I'd like to maybe talk
a I see with this those actors
budget lines actually look like
Mr chair thank you thank you
very much Representative Lujan
Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr chairman and
secretary I have a question
about the outdoor recreation
division and and basically this.
So one point nine billion in
state GDP in twenty twenty one
and then if you have some other
statistics this is on page eight
of the slide deck.
Mr chairman madam secretary so
I'm wondering how much of this.
Reflects things that were
already happening happening in
New Mexico for outdoor
recreation for example skiing
and ballooning and park
visitation
rafting I guess are a lot of
other activities so how much is
due to.
The work of the outdoor
recreation division and how much
is.
Already there Mr chair and
secretary.
Mr chair and representative it's
impossible to separate out that
number specifically but what we
can tell you is at the number on
page nine is actually now
slightly outdated the seven
million dollars that we received
in funding for the trails plus
grants program is actually
funded fifty four projects to
date with and that's going to
create over five hundred jobs so
that's the result of the
activities of our department we
don't have the data collection
necessary to say what that
resulting GDP number is but the
funding provided has already
resulted in over five hundred
jobs a lot of those in the most
rural parts of the state.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Brown okay madam
secretary Exide most of my
questions were around some of
the additional divisions and I
think I appreciate the members
very much bringing those up and
having the conversation here
today clearly it's an ongoing
work but the work that you all
are doing as a department is
turning more and more eyes
towards supporting the
department and being able to
support the state we're going to
ask for the recommendations
there some more work to do here
again in in a couple of areas
and we're going to be focused on
that work
based on what we heard today.
I thank you Mr chair I would
move the LFC recommendations
great there is a motion for the
LFC recommendation could K. one
second by Representative trio
there any opposition to that
please note Representative
Pettigrew in opposition and then
we'd like to
Would like to just vice chair
Dixon Representative della Cruz
and also refund Baca to sort of
dive in a little bit deeper
again this isn't just for this
session it's as we go forward
during a time of really immense
opportunity.
Thank you thank you so much for
your time thank you.
we're gonna ask a
superintendent.
Come on up it's great to see you
here today with your team.
Trump.
Okay okay it's great to see you
superintendent.
miss Sanderson and just Rivera
thank you guys I like the sort
of the seating arrangement this
is part of a group and I
appreciate.
Okay miss Anderson if you can
get us started off that would be
great good evening Mr chairman
members of the committee today
joining us is superintendent for
Heo and Klay a director clay
Bailey from the regulation
licensing department and Donna
Rivera from DFA that we this is
agency code four two zero and in
volume to its pages one sixty
one through one sixty nine I'm
sorry I didn't put any page
numbers of director Avid has let
me know that I need to get those
on there for you guys next time
so I'll get that more organized
but there is a high level as
Amanda was describing the high
level is a pretty nice overview
of just all the different
departments in the differences
if you want to see all in one
place and that's on the page
office of the special
appropriations for
for our old the.
I'm so in the interest of in
saving time rather than
alternate
I'm gonna go ahead and give us
like an overview of the
differences only for the
division's aware there were
differences between the LFC and
Executive recommendations and
then a little information about
performance measures before
passing it on so I think it will
we can see that overall
The recommendations were either
at the executive was fully
funding the agency's request but
then the LFC actually went above
the agency's request so I think
agencies pretty nice to see that
in this recommendation LFC
recommendation being six hundred
fifty point eight thousand above
the executive recommendation
this is us three eight point
eight percent increase in
general fund over are all these
FY twenty three budget the
executive recommendation fully
funds the budget
ands of the LFC recommendation
exceeds due to additional
funding in the construction
industry and program support
programs
Let's see so briefly I'll run
through those differences mainly
you'll see that there's an extra
five hundred thousand to reduce
vacancies which has been
requested and I think we we
needed that I think the also the
committee was thinking sorely
needed for the construction
industry program
for program support there's a
five hundred thousand dollar
difference in the LFC
recommendation because as you
all may be aware the HSD had a
cyber incident in October and
they are hoping to set up an I.
T. division and so this five
hundred a thousand extra it was
recommended by the LFC for
contract so that the agency can
either expand their F. T. E. or
hire more contractors to assist
with setting up an I. T.
department
and the biggest differences of
all you'll see in the boards and
commissions program which had
the executive coming in which is
a recommendation for of
returning funding four hundred
thousand to the substitute care
Advisory Council and the LESC
recommendation did not include
the funding additional funding
for the Advisory Council
although the LFC recommendation
did include a fifty point of
five thousand for us an actual
extra FTE the whole process
social work licensing and that
was upon a request of sort of a
a request of the health and
Human Services Committee had
commented that they strongly
felt that.
the heard the need for social
workers in New Mexico is real
and that there should be an
extra F. T. E. devoted to help
with licensing processing and
the only last the final thing
was that for the cannabis
control division's performance
measures since it's a new
division they have a new we
designs performance measures and
the in your packet they might
say that there's not a consensus
on those performance measures
but we're all here to let you
know that there has been
consensus I between analysts we
just there were some issues
getting the targets entered into
the system and so we're still
working on that and with that
I'll turn it over to Donna for
any additional comments.
Good afternoon members of the
committee the executive would
just like to go ahead and remove
let you know that the substitute
care Advisory Council
needs to be funded there are six
permanent positions tied to this
program and the of last year
we're actually looking for a
sweet questing a supplemental
for the current here because
there's no funding for the
substitute care Advisory Council
they do not generate revenue
they actually their function is
responsibility for reviewing
foster care programs within
children youth and families and
also to advise the courts on the
on what needs to be done so
we're respectfully requesting
that funding general fund be
reinstated for us substitute I
mean for the US I'm sorry yes
yeah but for FY twenty three as
well as in the net new request
for FY twenty four thank you.
And what that will handed over
to regulation licensing
department.
Thank you Mr chairman and again
I would just like to say thank
you to our analyst both the
executive and the the LFC
analysts have been incredibly
helpful and very very very
interested in the work that we
do so I just want to tell them
both thank you publicly I do
want to welcome the freshmen to
the legislature it's good to see
some new faces and a new members
to the House Appropriations
Committee Mr Chairman
regulations I have worked with
many of you for many of years
and I will try my best to keep
this as short as possible
because I know the only thing
keeping you from dinner right
now is me
so I I do want to introduce
though deputy superintendent he
is the new deputy superintendent
clay Bailey and was the division
director for the C. ID and MHD
for awhile and is now of
basically my right and my left
hand and other dot other duties
as assigned I also have with me
Bernice Geiger who is our PO and
assist my executive assistant
Julia of all this we usually
bring everybody here but quite
frankly we are so understaffed
and the work that we have to
accomplish that it didn't seem
right to have people sitting
here for a whole afternoon so
hopefully I'll be able to answer
your questions if not we'll take
notes and we'll get you answers
to those questions.
We have a couple of high
priorities those priorities
include breaking down barriers
to licensure and all respond to
Representative Dixon question
earlier we also are are very
interested in continuing to
recruit and retain new employees
what we've done to retain
employees in the construction
industry is to give a nearly
fifteen percent across the board
increase to all of our
inspectors across the board and
I believe that was in the
neighborhood of about sixty four
individuals.
Seventy seven individuals and we
are for fully staffed in that
area and we have a full crew and
we do truly believe that part of
that is that we've been able to
retain and we've been able to
get individuals from other areas
who are interested in coming in
working for C. ID so when we
talk about extra money for C. ID
that money goes directly to the
people that are going to do the
work.
We also as it's already been
noted we are focusing our
attention in this coming year on
completing our IT infrastructure
for occupational
professionalizing seen as well
as diversifying our cyber
cybersecurity strategies to
address changing internal and
external threats going back to
breaking down barriers I just
want to point out that we spent
nearly a whole year implementing
what many of you up here voted
for last year and that is house
bill one ninety one that created
expedited licensure for
seventeen different licensing
boards and commissions we had a
full time attorney doing an
analysis to determine what
states were equivalent in what
states weren't she also worked
with each of the boards we had
seventeen different boards and
commissions who had to notice
and hold rural hearings we had
to draft new rules to include
the expedited licensure we work
very closely with the attorney
general's office to make sure
that the lice the language that
would be implemented in the
rules was consistent with what
the law said.
We are also implementing that
into our applications I'm happy
to say that we were able to get
all of those seventeen boards
and commissions with the
exception of one and it was
because we had some technology
issues and we had to cancel the
public hearing and reschedule it
but all of the boards and
commissions out of those
seventeen.
Move forward except for physical
therapy the the the positive
thing about it only being
physical therapy that we weren't
able to change the rules is that
there's only two areas that
didn't have a quibble and so
even if somebody applied for a
license today we will give them
an expedited licensure if they
qualify the two places that
didn't have a quibble Ince's
Guam and American Samoa and
unless we have a whole bunch of
people moving from those two
communities to be safe that said
we do have a a rural hearing
scheduled and we will get that
taken care of sometime before
the end of this month.
We also at are are moving in our
online getting online
applications that remove as many
barriers we're also cutting down
the responsibilities for
licensure where we can we're not
requiring photos if it's not
necessary we're not requiring
proof of non essential education
there's no reason for us to
require that someone turned in a
high school diploma if what
they're getting is a security
guard licence we ask folks to
now certify that they have those
documents and we take for
granted only for non S. now if
you want to be a counselor you
want to be a social worker
obviously we still need to prove
that you've got a bachelors or
the the requisite master's
degree what I'm talking about is
non essential credentials that
have nothing to do with the
profession so we're doing those
kinds of things.
This last year in FY twenty two
the HSD had few reversions this
is the reversions and I know
there's been some questions
about that in the past so I want
to make sure that I'm speaking
the right terms fees that we
take in.
Go back into the general fund we
reverted thirty five million
four hundred.
And forty four thousand point
fifty eight dollars back into
the general fund.
Our general fund reversion money
that we weren't able to spend
out of the seven divisions that
we support and then overhead was
just a little over half a
million half a million dollars
now could we do better
absolutely but out of the budget
that we have and all we reverted
was less than six hundred
thousand dollars I'm pretty
excited about that.
Our non reverting fee revenue
for FY twenty two was over ten
million dollars and so for the
fees that go into a non
reverting in other words they
don't revert back to the general
fund we had over ten million
dollars those fees go back into
the reserve fund in a minute
it's important that you keep
that in mind because I'm gonna
talk about that in just a little
bit those reserve funds are be
R. funds that don't get expended
in this you give us authority to
expand them.
Not going to talk about the the
budget implications because
we've already you've already
heard that what we've asked for
you in relation to specials and
you've given all but one of them
so far and I'm hoping that I can
convince you all to give me this
the last one seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars LFC to request
for us to complete the cannabis
licensing as an online system
that would include cannabis
server servers cannabis
consumption areas cannabis
testing laboratories and
cannabis research laboratories
we've asked for three point five
million and three million has
built been built into the money
that's going to go to do it
specifying that RLD could get up
to three million dollars thank
you for that that's to help us
cover the expenses of of as you
know our cybersecurity incident
back in October.
This is where the this is where
the little bit of a of a
disconnect is and I want to I
want to clarify I was hoping to
come here Saturday and do that
but.
Then get asked we've asked for
five million dollars to finish
up the online licensing that's
what is going to take I've
already gotten a quote from a
contractor the one that we're
using now and they can get the
rest of our license type that's
key more boards but that doesn't
mean fifteen more license types
that means fifteen boards let me
just just clarify pharmacy board
alone that we're working on
right now has thirty three
different license types.
The P. I. board that I've been
working on this personally so
that we because we don't have
enough staff to death delegate
delegate this to someone else
has seven license types.
Our boards and commissions don't
have one license type physical
therapy has to their little bit
easier but many of our boards
having multiple license types
it's a different application
with a different IT technology
structure.
The contractors that we're using
have given us a quote for just
under five million dollars
what's right now in the specials
is two point five million basics
for into I know the members
noted that we had the over the
the full public in open hearings
thank and I know a couple
members noted that thank you and
we saw a number of colleagues
here on the.
Very important for us we've also
asked for seven hundred eighty
five thousand dollars for C. ID
replacement vehicles we got
about the same amount last year
is not from general fund this is
from the mortgage authority
budget so it will be coming out
of reserve funds we think that
if we ask for this type of of
vehicle replacement for one more
year that will be able to then
Go less and have of five year
replacement right now we're
replacing vehicles that haven't
been replaced for too many years
with them also ask for bar
thirty for ten percent for the
boards and commissions division.
My number say that we have about
fifteen million dollars in that
reserve fund right now DFA has
closer to about thirty million
at this very point we're still
obviously gonna spend some
throughout the rest of the year
but that's not general fund
that's money that we need to
rate it paid employees that we
have.
Financial institutions as I
mentioned last year lost their
regulatory credentials with the
Conference of State Bank
supervisors due to mainly being
understaffed I brought this to
the attention of the legislature
last year we knew it was coming
it's not surprising we're not
the only state this non
credentialed but it's not a
benefit for us to not be
credential and what we do is we
run the risk that credit unions
and banks are going to choose to
be federally chartered instead
of charter to the local level.
We have asked for some increase
that's been included in there.
Construction industry
continues to work with the film
industry as well as helping out
in the burn area.
The boards and commissions
division that's already been
pointed out the four hundred and
thirty three thousand dollars
that goes from general fund for
that particular division was
specifically to fund the
substitute your Advisory Council
when I came here during the
interim it was pointed out that
that money was not there I am
taking that money out of the
office of the superintendent so
that we can continue to have
those individuals staffed we've
asked for the four hundred
thousand dollars as a deficit.
That's included in there but
what the what the LFC
recommendation is is to only
give them eighty three thousand
dollars and that means that
we're still not going to have
the funds to do that we cannot
take the money out of the other
boards and commissions licensing
fees so once again I would have
to take that money out of the
office of the superintendent to
keep that function going.
The
cannabis industry total has
brought in just under four
hundred million dollars since
April first of last year that's
through the end of January four
hundred million dollars
hundred fifty seven point nine
million has been medical
cannabis and two hundred forty
point six million has been the
adult use cannabis so as you can
see the adult use cannabis is
growing I'm not gonna say that
the medical is reducing but for
sure the adult use is growing
and interestingly enough for
we've seen the biggest growth
has been in months where there's
holidays for the July.
Big July July was a big sales
month.
Thanksgiving who knew but
thanksgiving seem to bring much
bigger sale of the Christmas
holiday
and new year's much bigger sales
of those months when there's
significant holidays and people
are off work Canada sales seem
to increase I do want to say
thank you to all of my staff
including those that are here
past and present who have worked
so tirelessly to get cannabis up
and running it was a.
Sorry.
He was a big lift that we took
on.
And I think we did pretty darn
good.
Why there.
Thank you very thank and a big
thank you to your staff.
Nine thousand things to probably
have already heard questions to
as I said clay.
The new deputy superintendent.
And starting tomorrow I'm gonna
be taking off quite a bit of
time so
clay is going to be the person
that you're gonna need to reach
out to.
And he's a great guy hello
you'll be there very hard to
find whatever you need.
That Mister chairman Senator
questions thank you very much
We're gonna go to Representative
Sierra for.
Presentation is done thank you
Mr chairman just one quick
question he said something about
cyber office or something.
What did you say I didn't think
about for the cybersecurity yeah
it's one of our so we've got a
strategic planners available
online it's much longer than
what I shared but what we want
to do is we wanted to do with
diversify our cybersecurity
strategies to address internal
and external so about ninety
percent of cybersecurity happens
from social engineering
employees get a link that says
Hey superintendent once your
phone or something or need you
to sign on to this they click
the link.
And then they give up their
password and their username and
People have access to systems so
what we need to do is we need to
diversify that strategy so that
not only do we have up to date
software and hardware but that
we have on going regular
training for our staff.
Mr Chairman so are you working
with do it because that's part
of their updating do it and then
the we're gonna have a cyber
security officers of which the
so you're working with them yes
madam Mr chairman I'm sorry I
didn't address to Mr chairman
Representative yes we're working
very closely with do it.
Thank you thank you
Representative Sariñana next
we're gonna go to Representative
dela Cruz then representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
secretary on average how many
licenses do you have of their
New Mexico their act.
Mr Chairman representative very
good question and it's
superintendent not secretary my
staff calls me super and it
makes my day every day
so we have over five hundred
fifty thousand transactions that
five hundred fifty thousand
transactions that we do every
year and that includes licenses
are somewhere in the
neighborhood of about two
hundred sixty thousand licenses
and the rest of those are
permits and inspections that we
do.
Thank you so madam secretary
secretary so print server to
really super.
Madam speaker thank you Mr
How do you police these licenses
not so much the ones that are
active in people have paid for
you know those are there but the
licensure.
Activities how do police or is
it your job to police that
someone is complying with the
law.
Mr Chairman representative it is
our job to make sure that
individuals who are ported to us
to have violated the law that we
do an investigation and that we
follow up on it so we have a
complete we have a compliance
group in boards and commissions
construction industry
manufactured housing cannabis we
have complaints and securities
we have certified law
enforcement and security is we
have compliance in each one of
our divisions and the bulk of
what we rely upon is complaints
from the public.
Mr chairman of superintendent so
if someone decides I'm assuming
that you licensed barbers.
R. if someone decides Mr
chairman to.
Rent a van and start giving out
her cuts at the flea market is.
It would be have to be based on
a complaint that you might look
into that Mr Chairman
representative that would be the
best way for us to get that
information correct thank you so
much Mr chairman thank you very
much of the day a cruise and if
they have representative Garcia
them some Baca Herndon in the
hall of fame Garcia chairman if
you were intended law is.
Can recognize gentleman next to
believe that have a white hat on
today the.
Thank you Mr Bailey
How much more did the cannabis
industry put on your plate for
what to do.
Mr Chairman representative I'm
not sure I can answer that I
don't know how much more will
work loaded to put a new.
The cannabis industry now Mr
Chairman representative I have
bags under my eyes and gray hair
as a result of it it was pretty
significant.
It was pretty significant for
many of my staff.
Take on that responsibility Mr
chairman of.
On your on your field workers
thank you home inspectors and
how it is Victor hello you
stepped up on that.
Mr Chairman representative Matt
defer to we thank you
superintendent Bailey Mr
Chairman.
If we're the better best place
we've been in years of the.
The extra fifteen percent we
headed for retention which is
only temporary right now but
we're working to make it full
time has helped immensely it's
not only retain what I was lose
and a daily seem like a daily
basis but it's also brought it
other applicants that come to us
what good workforce so many
factor housing for instance I'm
fully staffed there try to
create a position for another
frontline individual inspector
was fully staffed
the other divisions for instance
I know the superintendent Katie
were fully staffed there's a
constantly something that goes
on it seems like through
attrition ladies and gentleman
got really sick or something but
overall electrical bureaus one
we struggled with the worst and
right now I believe I've got one
position or trying to feel and
it's a new one that we created
down south to try to add to the
to the you know the problems of
having down there so through all
the bureaus you might find one
inspector or we've got a new one
we are doing for general
building but overall we're this
place since I've been there it
you know the last fifteen years
at least.
Thank you Mr division director
Mr Chairman.
I don't we all the recommended
list of the two well as he and
executive you know.
Broadband enterprise.
The regional people or if you'll
recall.
A little bit under rate and I
mentioned by this you said look
at some you know I don't want to
go with those but we should
really look at it six hundred
fifty thousand dollar difference
from one to another and we
really should look at trying to
fund them a little bit better
because they do have a lot going
on chairman and in all I've
worked with both I have mobile
home that houses and they've
been Rory responsive with all of
but a lot of time you're running
full fan matter of fact Mr
chairman I had a the gentleman
live in Los crucis coming to
inspection for me because the
the the one catch up to it and
his name is Lucas with that all
school and his good gentleman
approved that deal Mr chairman
Fred that far to do an
inspection you know we really
need to look at the funds for
native people thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much
Representative Garcia next we're
going to go to Representative
Baca than incentive heard.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you superintendent my questions
going to be here on the online
licensing because I think that's
kind of what I heard kind of
kind of jumped out of me a
little bit so I'm can you Mr
chairman of superintendent can
you tell me as far as currently
how long does it take us to from
the time of application to we
get the license issued and we
get the work of that's done
thank you Mr Chairman
representative so it depends
upon whether or not a complete
application has been filed so
we're we're striving to have
every application that comes in
online a pair of eyes on that
within three days that's what
we're striving to do in many
cases though what happens is let
me just give you an example
you've got social workers and
they've just gotten out of
college and they want to get
licensed as a social worker well
first they have to apply with us
we have to approve their their
College credentials.
And we have to show that they've
either been trained in New
Mexico.
The cultural competency.
Because it's included in all
their college for the day taking
a special course for that if
they're not in the social worker
before the next thing we do is
we approve them to get they're
going to take their down and so
we enter them into the database
system and they get notification
they've got up to eighteen
months to take that exam will
give them a provisional if
they've never had one but.
But once they take the exam.
Get that information we can
issue the license code
completely right but there are
some times there are steps that
are outside of that so it would
depend upon what kind of license
type but we do strive for the
online and I review the online
on a very regular basis to make
sure that there's not
application sitting out there
reviewed for that we look to
have eyes on it and read at
least analyzed for what might be
missing.
Thank you and thank you Mr
chairman I guess the question is
and I I I was kind of paying
attention in the.
I heard the numbers five million
dollars.
Right currently we bought two
point five million so I guess a
Mr Chairman the the additional
funds how what the B. use and
I would expedite the process of
getting people license and
getting people on the on the
spot the.
Percentages so we have fifteen
boards that still are not online
that we take in paper up.
the delay with that is that they
have to fill them out they have
to print them out fill them out
bill the man with the check and
then we get them in we process
that process the application
excuse and we have to notify
them probably via paper what
they're missing what they still
need to do and then they get it
to us and then we can issue
that's a very delayed process so
having that online and I really
wanted to be able to show you
all like how the system is
working so that you could see
the beauty of how quickly it can
happen but there's not time for
it so if you'd like to give me a
call though to be happy to set
up a meeting I can show you that
system online that system I can
open up and look and see how
many applications were submitted
how quickly they were reviewed
and how many are still pending
pharmacy I thank you Mr it might
might just my final comment is
going to be as I was working
place.
Of the online lost licensing
process was a game changer
because of the fact that we're
able to get people license and
out into our classrooms and so I
will touch base offline
regarding those fifteen of job
losses or license classes so
that we can make sure that we
get those people out there work
in our communities Mr chairman
thank you thank you we're gonna
go to Representative Herndon
Representative Lujan.
Madam.
Hi the.
So
they were responsible for.
Mr Chairman representative and
actually my former deputy
superintendent
it's what's happening now is
that the federal government is
going is doing those
examinations and we're
authorized to be with them for
those examinations but for those
those thanks the federal
government at this point really
has no confidence in us because
we have about a one to six
hundred and thirty nine one
staff about six hundred thirty
nine licensees now that isn't
all banks and credit unions
that's all the other financial
type institutions that we
license to but the ratio is too
high for them to express that
confidence and allow us to be
credentials.
Thank you.
There.
At.
Mr Chairman representative what
we are looking for is one
employee and we try to be as
conservative as conservative as
possible we think that the
second employee that we need
which is to go out and do
cybersecurity for banks and
credit unions can be done in a
contract so we think that that's
probably a better suited
responsibility for a contract
the group because it's such a
highly specialized
technical service that would be
provided and we don't believe
that we can employee someone
full time to do just that and to
have them be a server security
expert and also an examiner or
anything else that we do that
it's asking someone to be a
little more diversified than we
think we can get so that's an
employee and potentially in the
three hundred category do
contracting.
Five thousand.
Way to go.
Those occupations where we are
lacking.
By.
For.
This is really inform Mr
Chairman representative in the
deferred to super deputy
superintendent daily Mr Chairman
representative are you asking
are we assisting other outside
entities trying to develop and
get other people into the
trades.
Or other organizations that are
licensed.
That equity pause for a great
thank you go ahead please Mr
Chairman representative we work
diligently all from all the
trades work with outside
entities that we can right I
mean there's there's constantly
a need for labor you know hands
on that's because the issue all
the way across we work with you
all the work without such for
whatever we can.
With that we bring our people to
right we get our that that it's
a difficult thing it's even more
difficult with wage wise to get
somebody on the trade but
they're getting better at it I
think they're making a bigger
effort at it but we have to
start with their yelp right we
we're losing them I started in
the L. P..
As a kid before I was even out
of high school thank you just
blew it and and nowadays we've
lost that so there is a push for
that and will work with
community colleges and stuff but
it is a challenge it is going to
consistently be a challenging a
lot of times is because the
hands on labor are getting the
state money if as you could get
one in and IT field or you know
right now the health field right
I mean there's a lot of things
we've lost a lot of people to
but I do believe they're getting
better at getting the young
folks back in to get them
interested in bringing them in.
Just wanted to make sure.
The.
As the.
Thank you Mr they are separated
by Representative one hundred
percent right thank you thank
you Mr chair thank you super
from.
And everybody else has been
doing this work quick question a
couple quick questions that five
million dollars for the
That you're asking for
for the online.
Applications course at funding
coming from Mr Chairman
representative that would be
coming out of the boards and
commissions reserve funds
perfect thank you so much
appreciate that is wondering
about that and so I'm gonna just
switch gears now to the the the
cannabis sales what what are
those sales what we what we see
now as a I I know we've been
waiting for.
More information and I think the
reporting that that came in I
don't know if his in October but
where are we now Mr chair on the
Mr Chairman representative let
me I have pulled up earlier.
We're at.
We're at just under four hundred
million dollars total just under
just over a close to a hundred
fifty eight million in in
medical and a little over two
hundred forty million in the
adult use.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
thank you superintendent for
that
my question goes back to in
regulation of course of what you
do it at this agency.
Mr chair I am sponsoring some
legislation that you had put
forward last year in the
background checks for the FBI
background checks what are.
What kind of background checks
if not by the FBI which we don't
have in place are we achieving
through regulation Mr chair
thank you Mr chairman
Representative because we were
denied the ability to do the
department of justice background
checks which is biometric
fingerprint background checks
what we do is a GPS background
checks and that really only
addresses any crimes
convictions here in New Mexico
and so quite honestly what it's
doing is it's is it's keeping
track of individuals who are
here in New Mexico but it's not
giving us any ability to see
whether or not someone from
another state outside of New
Mexico has a criminal
background.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
superintendent for the
information how many of the
licenses that we have in place
or from out of state.
Mr Chairman representative I
don't have those numbers right
now but I certainly can we can
get that information for you and
and get them thank you Mr chair
thank you Secretary what would
it cost for us four of the state
for your agency to employer have
those those addition the FBI
background checks in place
search Mr Chairman
representative there's no cost
to the agency for the background
checks the applicant would pay
for the biometric.
fingerprint background checks.
I appreciate that and then Mr
chair and superintendent I think
we're in a we're in a very
Particular place right now when
it comes to this this industry
the sensitivity around it and
what we have what we have opened
the doors to what we are not
protecting the state with and I
think that it is imperative that
we get this type of legislation
in place get this past because
we we we don't know who who are.
Holding his licenses in our
state thank you for the time
chair Preciado.
You very much for seven hundred
percent from.
Mr chair thank you so much
superintendent Trujillo I've.
Have a question about the salary
increases is associate here that
in fiscal year twenty three
rather than fill vacancies the
decision was made to increase
the salary by fifteen percent I
thought I heard you say Adam
superintendent that that was for
inspectors in the construction
but the footnote here in our
packets as it was to all
employees
Mister chair Mister Mr Chairman
representative I'm not sure what
the footnote is referring to but
the fifteen percent salary
increase was specifically for
the manufactured housing and
construction industries the
other increase what I believe
was like a three percent and
then a four percent or four
percent of three percent it was
about seven percent overall for
all employees that was a one
point eight million dollar
expense but that was something
that the legislature
looted and I believe house bill
two.
Thank you Madam Mr chair so I'm
I'm looking at thank goodness I
don't see a page number here
anyway it there's no fort no in
front of it although it's down
in a footnote section so I can't
tell what it's actually talking
about but regardless of that Mr
chair settlement superintendent
the reference here is to a
temporary salary increase I
don't actually know what a
temporary salary increase is do
you give it one year and then
not again Mr Chairman
representative exactly what a
temporary salary increases what
it is is it's a it's a tool that
we can use through spoke rules
to give someone a temporary
salary increase for retention
there's a there's a couple of
things that we can use it for
what what we did because that is
a quick process was the on the
what to call it to just be
temporary salary yes I yes I
that is a quick process and then
behind the scenes second step is
for us to work with both and
that we're working with them as
we speak to make that permanent
okay thank you Mr chair thank
you thank you very much
Representative Brown thank you
madam superintendent you you've
done and incredible job under
very challenging circumstances
we deeply appreciate your work I
do want to see if we can get
follow up maybe with Mr Bailey
miss Anderson were shown funded
vacancies approaching forty
forty full time employees again
these are always in perfect
calculations a snapshot in time
back in twenty twenty two so we
want to know what the numbers
are now but knowing those
numbers is very important as we
sort of
sort of move through the process
I think we're going to ask for
the executive
that's the what the executive
request was but we know that
there's some clearly someplace.
There might be some upward
pressure both in terms of on the
special side and as we've heard
here today in a few of of the in
a few of the pickups with that
we'll go by surtax.
Thank you Mr chair would move
the executive recommendation.
Second rates removed by by two
addiction saying my
Representative Baca thirty
opposition to the executive
saying then that's adopted and
we'll look forward to continuing
to work closely thank you very
much superintendent okay with
that we're gonna I think we have
a brief public comment it only
concerns the agencies that are
presented on here today course
is taxed rate of GST tourism
economic development and
regulation and licensing.
And we'll ask please come on up
we ask that you limit it to two
minutes ideally to one minute
and.
But but please feel free to take
the time that that folks need to
express
what they've stayed here today
and we deeply appreciate you
staying here today thank you
very much for having me
thank you chair members of the
committee my name is Brian Evans
I am the business representative
for I out to local for eighty.
Here the film workers union I
represent a little over eighteen
hundred members throughout the
state and twenty two counties so
hopefully several bills thirty
three I'm just coming here with
a pretty humble request which is
to increase the FTEs for the New
Mexico Film Office minded
decisional three so as you guys
know we are rapidly going the
pandemic strain had like to see
a film office that is also
growing with the industry that
can raise up to the demands so I
think one of the most important
parts of increasing the FTEs is
making sure that we're properly
marketing or state or state and
in particular of marketing the
rural areas of our state so just
as many commander committee
members have expressed I would
love to see more growth in our
rural areas the best way to do
that is to have staff that's
able to properly market the
state
secondly I think our Film Office
needs to respond to producers
inquiries very quickly film is a
fast moving industry they will
move to another state before you
know lunch time and I think it's
important that we have adequate
staffing so that they can
respond quickly to producers and
worries and then finally just
making sure that there's proper
enforcement of the regulations
of the Film Office so having
better staffing levels will help
with that so we're encroaching a
billion dollar industry twenty
twenty three might be the year
that we break a billion dollars
and it's my hope that we
continue to to build and grow
the staff office so they can be
Moores Sanchez.
Those are my main points I want
to thank everybody for your hard
work on this committee and
please take that into
consideration thank you very
much Mr of yes.
Okay members thank you I know we
got started a little late
apologies for going a little
long but deeply appreciative of
all the members great questions
and input today we'll see you
again tomorrow one thirty.
