Courts and others dust and what
have you before I'd like to go
ahead and see if if R. AG is
prepared to go first.
I don't see him on
do we have someone for the AG's
office here.
Madam chair I just gave them a
ring I haven't heard back but I
can let you know if they call me
back okay so we don't know let's
just give them a couple of
minutes and the if we can get
him in the next two or three
minutes that we're going to go
ahead and have the Attorney
General go first
and that would be agency called
three oh five we let him go
first and then after that we go
back to the regular agenda
that's posted
And that would be our district
courts agency code.
Two thirteen three to forty
three Bernalillo county
metropolitan court
administrative office of the
district attorney's which is two
sixty four.
District attorneys of two fifty
one to two sixty three and then
to sixty five and then the ATA
so let's just give it a couple
minutes and if we can get the AG
on we'll take our first thank
you everybody.
Then there will be able to get a
hold of them.
Yes she's calling the EDD should
be joining in just a minute okay
all righty then I'm gonna go
ahead and count on them going
first and then as I said earlier
we'll start then with the
district courts and and we'll go
from there as the agenda is
indicated.
Give me a thumbs up Amanda when
they're on.
Yes.
Thank you.
All righty I'm gonna go ahead
and call the house
appropriations and finance
committee to order.
I see we have a whole bunch of
people on this panelists list
here.
But I need to have the analysts
start and we're going to as I
said we're going to start.
We're going to go ahead and
start with the AG so if we could
just get the analyst please.
Good morning madam chair that's
me Connor Jorgensen I'm the LFC
analyst for the AG and we have
Brian Chavez of the department
of finance and administration
with us.
Well great well welcome Conner
and Bryan and we'll hear from
you all first and that is agency
code if you all would just of
state what the agency code is
everybody can get to it.
Yes ma'am Attorney General is
agency code three oh five.
Three zero five.
Okay.
You're gonna find a real quick
high level overview.
And then we'll turn it over to
Mr job as for any additional
questions on the Attorney
General.
So overall.
There's about a one point two
million dollar difference
between the LESC and the
executive rack the LFC
recommends
more than the executive the LFC
recommendation fully funded the
agency requests.
the biggest difference is you're
going to note and the revenues
on that first page the executive
recommended seven hundred
fifteen thousand dollars more
from the general fund bended the
LFC.
Our really big chunk of the AG's
budget.
comes from consumer settlement
fund.
and so the executive
recommendation reduce dependence
on the consumer settlement fund
and increased the general fund
appropriation to make up for
that so that's the biggest
difference in revenues and the.
Executive recommended seven
fifteen more in general fund
wall the LFC recommended one
point six million dollars more
from consumer settlement fund.
When you move down to uses for
the HSD rollout you'll see
there's only one difference
madam chair that's in person
where the LFC recommended
One million one hundred sixty
two thousand more than the
executive and again the LFC
recommendation is what we
funding the agency requests
both recommendations fully
funded the contractual services
and the other costs
Categories.
I would say there's two there's
two programs within the attorney
general's office there is the
legal services program.
And the Medicaid crop brought
programs there were no
differences in the Medicaid
fraud programs so what we just
went over was essentially the
difference for.
The legal services the last
thing I would point out is that
We got
a recent projection of consumer
settlement fund balance and we
anticipate that with the LFC
recommendation I at the end of
FY twenty three third be about
twenty five million dollars
available balance in the
consumer settlement fund if the
LFC recommendation was taken
with that madam chair like to
turn it over to Mr Chavez for
any additional.
Comments.
Eddy Brian go ahead.
Hi good afternoon madam chair
again on Brian Chavis the
analyst for the executive and
I'll actually be.
It's all afternoon.
Is.
A few points on there was a six
hundred thousand dollar request
in the two hundred category that
the executive data funds and
that was to that actually
request was taking care of back
in December of.
Ringing up attorneys to that
level so look like that cost was
around two hundred thousand
dollars in December be a total
of four hundred thousand dollars
for the next fiscal year and
that budget and their budget was
able to absorb it.
Without the executive also
increase at the along with LFC
on in that and the executive
applied of one percent vacancy
rate on on their budget.
with that I like to turn it over
to the Attorney General but it
it's.
Right Attorney General.
Madam chairman members of the
attorney general's having a
small issue with is doing but if
we can just get a couple minutes
I'll jump right.
Okay he should be coming right
on here.
Three so would you like to start
the presentation and then when
they it Attorney General gets.
gets on well let him add
comments.
Okay looks like he's on madam
chair.
I don't see a smiling face any
worse.
Okay well we're all ears.
I don't see him either
if I could I'd like to just ask
try a curry and one of our chief
deputies to go ahead and start
with the Texas be New Mexico
update if you can and and maybe
the tobacco update.
Absolutely madam chair I thank
you committee members appreciate
your time this afternoon I think
probably the our looks the
start is with Texas The New
Mexico so we just completed a
three day session last week in
our mediation that we had
undertaken starting in December
from during the trial break
because if you remember we were
doing half of the trial the fact
witnesses this fall and or this
past fall and then we were
planning on doing approximately
nine weeks of expert witness
testimony in the trial starting
on March fourteenth we during
the break we engaged a mediator
of judge Arthur Boylan from
Minneapolis who is most notable
for settling the two thousand
eleven NFL labor dispute we
thought if you could Rangel all
those NFL players perhaps you
could help us in the lower Rio
Grande and so far so good we
have made enough progress and
the other parties have asked us
to and we feel like that
mediation is going well enough
that we have consented to the
judge stay in the trial schedule
and allowing us to focus for the
at least the next several months
I'm pursuing the that mediation
on the settlement aggressively
so that's where we're at as far
as update as far as our request
for the special appropriation
connected to this litigation we
are in the unfortunate position
of having to prepare as if the
mediation isn't gonna work but
hope that the mediation will
work because if we don't prepare
as if the mediation isn't going
to work what will happen is we
will be caught flat footed when
we are having to preserve resume
the litigation so the
appropriation requests that
we've included for this next
fiscal year.
Is to cover any remainder of
trial that we have to pursue
after this this Madam but also
even if the settlement is
successful there's going to be
enough clean up if you will that
we have to work full full blown
on the technical issues that are
gonna surround implementing any
kind of mediation outcome and
then we also are any any result
will have to be approved by the
Supreme Court so they'll be
future finally ends and legal
work to be done there so it's a
it's a it's an all in
appropriation request us gives
us the support that we needed to
continue taking the aggressive
litigation approach that we've
been taking and also wrapped up
hopefully a mediation that
results in a in a settled
resolution that all parties find
acceptable.
The other a request that trees
asked me to cover the tobacco
appropriation which we requested
as you all know tobacco is an on
going and
Complicated issue the settlement
that the state reached in
nineteen ninety nine and we've
been working on implementing
Eversense has resulted in
perpetual litigation and while
the Attorney General remains
committed to exploring other
options and maybe even ways to
get out of the perpetual
litigation that we've gotten
ourselves into until that
happens we are forced into the
unfortunate situation of one of
litigating or excuse me
arbitrating over whether or not
the state diligently enforced
our our obligations of the
master settlement agreement in
two thousand four at the same
time we are working and during
up for a full arbitration about
whether we diligently enforced
for the years two thousand five
through seven so are
appropriation request related to
that is four million dollars and
we anticipate that that will
help us cover the R. arbitration
that is scheduled we we should
we will be in Cherry February
twenty eight for the arbitration
about two thousand four but
unfortunately that years
arbitration doesn't end with the
hearing and because then we have
to if we're found on diligent
which is likely they will have
to fight about how we
appropriate or a portion the non
diligence are from the tobacco
manufacturers to the other non
diligent States.
Additionally we are so we'll
have we'll have that fight on
our hands for the next fiscal
year and then we anticipate that
our arbitration for the two
thousand five to two thousand
seven diligence will be
commencing next fiscal year as
well so we're we're fighting on
two fronts
in the tobacco rounds.
Three.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee it looks like the
AG is getting blocked on his end
so I'm not really sure how to
proceed
we have a month face time and
we're watching him enter the
links but it's it's he's getting
a box I don't know if you can
either get a fresh
invite emailed or if.
okay I can bill are you hearing
that way can we get it we get
the AGM.
I'm sure we will try to send
another link right away it'll
probably come from Sandra Sandra
would be all state we'll get on
that now okay okay thank you.
Already do we have a lot
bringing in the AJ.
We're working under madam chair
one thing that can happen is
have him come over to research
stories that and use for video
these invitations were sent out
Friday and apparently folks are
not locating it from that early
time they were sent out.
Okay Mister area in the same
building same area
unfortunately I'm not the AG is
dialing in from his residence I
do also have a Malik yes here
and he's logged in on his
computer but I don't see him on
on your screen either so I think
his rank as an issue as well.
Okay
let's not get me started on all
that.
Mandy knows how I feel about
what's happening here but let's
I think I'll tell you what.
I feel like we need to let the
AG say something here so we can
either move on.
To the next presentation or give
them a few more minutes and then
if we
we have to do that we'll have to
either reschedule ham or thank
you Mr very end of today.
What if it's okay madam chair if
we could maybe move on to the
next presentation and hopefully
that allows the AG time to iron
out his Lincoln we can jump in
there is that okay.
Already let's go ahead and move
on a committee thank you very
much let's move on to the
district for.
Let's start with that analysts.
Right thank you madam chair
members of the committee Amanda
Dick Peddie with the legislative
finance committee myself and
again Mr Chavez from DFA will be
your analyst for the district
and metro metropolitan courts
this afternoon
I will point out for members you
should have one packet with all
the District Court and those
agencies are two thirty one
thirty two forty four your first
page of the pocket should look
like this is the general fund
high level with all the ports on
their really good resource to
quickly see the difference
between the recommendations for
all point.
Before we get started I will
note something for members the
LFC and general fund
recommendation for the District
Court is going to be slightly
higher than the executive the
reason for that is the LFC
recommendation includes a ten
percent salary increase for
judges baked into the base of
each budget as well as an
average of two percent increase
for all judicial staff those
salary increases are a big part
of why the LFC recommendation is
going to be a little higher and
you'll see in the courts it's
usually only twenty thousand
thirty thousand dollars higher.
The executive does include a
recommendation to increase
judges and court Allori five
four percent but it is a
separate proposal so it is not
included in the budgets before
you.
That being said Brian I will
alternate between the district
courts and very briefly because
that's pretty much the
difference in all the
recommendations and then we'll
turn it over to each district
judge to make a very brief
comments because I know we're
pressed for time today and have
a lot of presenters.
All right very good thank you.
Right Mr Chavez do you want to
go ahead and start with the
first initial district and I
will take the second.
I'm sure.
All right.
Madam chair we have our agency
to three one first judicial
District Court.
On the A. L. C. recommendation
is a hundred one thousand
dollars more than the executive
and that is due to the ten
percent increase for judges and
a two percent increase on the
executive supported the agency's
request.
Recommendation supported
additional funding for Rio
Arriba on was almost magistrate
courts.
And with that I will send that
to chief judge Marlowe Sommer.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee
I'm.
Judge Mary Marlowe Sommer chief
judge for the first and out next
to me distancing is Kathleen
Vigil our CEO I'm I'm sort of
puppetry to hard rock and hard
place I'd like for you all to
see our budget request but I
know you they were hand
delivered to you and I also know
that Amanda said that we're just
pressed for time and I know you
I know we are so rather than put
it up on the screen unless of
any member would like me to do
that after the presentation what
I'm going to address I think
that the
Obviously the LFC recommendation
is the one we request and
I will not address the salary
portion I think that the LFC
analyst can address that.
Yeah stand for any questions but
we are also happy to stand for
the questions on the budget but.
In addition separate apart from
the salary increase of we're
asking for really a three point
four percent it's a very low
percentage over the FY twenty
two base budget
it's the three hundred sixty
seven thousand one hundred
dollar increase since last year.
I'll go down the line a hundred
and seventy thousand five
hundred.
Dollars.
Is for funding the warrant
enforcement program.
For employees at the Santa Fe
magistrate court this replaces
what the AOC was picking up.
This is no longer going to pick
that up in FY twenty three.
Of of forty eight thousand five
hundred is for the recurring two
percent judge salary increase
not to be confused with the
salary increase for us for now
it was authorized in the FY
twenty two a budget was built in
and we also obviously we we will
need to cover that is recurring.
A nineteen thousand five hundred
is to cover increases in
insurance premiums and GST rate
something grant certainly quite
predictable.
Twenty five thousand two hundred
is funding for security camera
maintenance in the magistrate
courts and I think that's what
the LFC and LESC was referring
to a replacement funding is no
longer provided by the AOC
starting in FY twenty three.
Hundred three thousand four
hundred dollars is the increase
in other costs.
so that is a sum total when all
is said and done of the
additional three hundred sixty
seven thousand one hundred
dollars.
We have special request we have
a backup storage.
Good twenty thousand for data
backup storage it's our
computers are getting quite
full.
Ten thousand dollars for two
medical detect detectors that's
for the Santa Fe County the
first judicial district
courthouse.
Of the metal detectors are I
need to be replaced and then
thirty five thousand for a
vehicle we are spread ourselves
out between the.
Rio Arriba courthouse up in TA
and the Los Alamos courthouse
and our vehicle we have two that
are are old and are required.
Much maintenance now
I can turn it over to a Kathleen
right anything else and I can
also answer any questions on the
the increase that we are asking
for of a hundred sixty seven
about I can't read hundred sixty
seven.
Hundred fifty two thousand for
the salary increases for the for
the employees of the judges.
Okay I think at this time I
don't have any questions on that
and that and that's okay because
we're gonna roll through all
these district courts anyway
and but you'll but I want to
stay locked in because that
doesn't mean that you can't get
a question after somebody thinks
about so I'd like to go ahead
have the analyst move through
we're gonna take this all in one
motion when we finish or finish
the court so if we could
analysts please thank you judge.
Thank you madam chair members
moving on to the second judicial
District Court we have agency
code to thirty two again at the
LFC recommendation is about five
hundred and eighty eight
thousand dollars higher in
general fund revenue can be
exec Uteck those reserves we
mentioned it the executive again
met the original agency requests
both recommendations include
some supplementary funding for
the Indian child welfare act
program and analyst reach
consensus on all performance
measures and targets in in less
Mr Chavez has anything to add I
can.
Get to chief judge ward British
all comments.
Act.
Judge.
We're getting a lot of feedback
here is that maybe maybe should
turn the.
Turn the volume down.
Okay J. it's.
Hard to hard to understand.
It's still pretty scratchy hard
to hear it's
Almost like it's echoing.
Amanda could we have maybe I
think that's what she did was
saying maybe CEO Christina oxen
could make our comments of
course go ahead.
Good afternoon my name is catena
Watson on the court executive
officer for the second judicial
District Court that we have
before you with a request of one
point two percent over and above
our FY twenty two request we do
appreciate LFC is
recommendations support that
recommendation at this time
small items over and above what
is being requested by LFC
includes funding for child
support hearing officer we hope
to convert to over the over a
series of years again
transitioning that division from
a contract position to general
fund
and some other other ancillary
pieces would include I'm ninety
three thousand seven hundred
dollars for the two percent
increase for additional
compensation over and above that
was which was appropriate in FY
twenty two and are what plan of
eighteen thousand four hundred
dollars that's an in a not show
we do have some other special
appropriation requests in a
separate request for some are
funding I believe you all have
received our hand out we are
available to answer any
questions.
Do you have that that
information I don't have anybody
stand up at this point but I'd
like you to stay on because
you're there may be questions.
So let's go ahead analyst.
Madam chair agency to thirty
three thirty additional District
Court.
the LFC recommendation.
Is two hundred sixty two
thousand dollars more general
fund revenue I'm again not to to
the increase of salary for
judges and staff.
the executive applied at zero
percent vacancy rate.
the executive also recommended
expansion for three hundred
sixty five thousand dollars.
for pre trial services.
both analyst reach consensus on
all performance measures and
targets.
And then if you have any
questions or.
We come from thank you Brian we
can.
Have the chief judge I just make
a couple comments.
Thank you end up folks if you
can't hear me let you know good
afternoon madam chair and
committee members for the house
appropriation finance committee
I am district chief district
judge manning at it than Los
crucis with me should be someone
the remote world they were both
doing that CEO as well as the
mentality of our.
Are requests this point is for
the LFC recommendation that ten
million six hundred sixty four
thousand that's an additional
three hundred seventy one
thousand dollars from our base
budget for FY twenty two.
with the three hundred seventy
one thousand that out at sea
has recommended we could
probably paid the ten percent to
percent in person salaries
judges in person that's two
hundred seventy four thousand we
could then.
Yep portion of our pre trial
services ninety seven thousand.
Our pre trial services we
started last year in July and it
was at that point a a project
we're hoping to get the amount
of three sixty five percent
sixty five thousand as part of
the base budget so we're still
lacking two hundred sixty eight
thousand in that part of the
project.
Even with the three hundred
fifty one thousand the third
judicial still has a number of
deficiencies we have a total of
four hundred seventy five
thousand plus deficiencies and
I'll go into what makes up the
deficiencies we have forty five
thousand two hundred dollars
that is owed forty two percent
of the judges salaries increase
for FY twenty two we never got
that interfaced budget we've got
a fifty five thousand dollar
deficit for our work in person
program clerk we need to bring
that card into our base budget.
You all know we did some
consolidation with magistrate
court not all of the costs were
brought over we still have
thirty six thousand eight
hundred dollars in costs that
need to be brought over that's
part of that deficiency we have
seventy thousand four hundred
dollars due to increase in
security costs for the largest
magistrate court and the in the
state the dynamic county
magistrate court and as I
mentioned before we have two
hundred sixty eight thousand
plus.
Are still owed the deficiency
for the pre trial services
program which by the way is very
successful we've got ninety
three point four percent return
rate
from our pre trial services
efforts we have real briefly
since supplemental requests that
echo what I've just talked about
the operational cost magistrates
thirty six thousand eight
hundred as well as the security
contract increase of seventy
thousand point four per
magistrate court we'll have some
special request to upgrade the
phone system and magistrates
court that sixty four thousand
eight hundred dollars as well as
upgrading the audio equipment in
magistrate court that's twenty
five thousand nine hundred total
of ninety thousand seven hundred
we are withdrawing our trip
District Court forensic.
I did a twenty five thousand the
motivating or initiating factor
is been resolved
so we're withdrawing that part
of the special request.
And as you probably heard from
the Supreme Court AOC we're
strongly supporting the R. but
funding request part of which
we're requesting five point six
million dollars for and an ex
that's greatly needed at the
dynamic District Court basically
we run out of room and we hope
to get some consideration
from you folks again we favor
LFC and with that I stand for
any questions thank you.
Already we do have a question
Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair I think
this question is for mystic
petty and I'm just wondering
about that pre trial services
request
for that third judicial district
three hundred and sixty five
thousand and if that is County
or anywhere in the funds that we
appropriated.
Or.
Included and some of the LFC
recommendations.
Madam chair representative Dicks
and if you look at your high
level.
It's a really good breakdown of
how much of the LFC
appropriation is for the raises
and then what's left over so in
the case of left over so in the
case of the third judicial
district there's about seventy
thousand after included in the
LFC recommendation after the
races that would go towards
those pre trial service
programs.
Okay at thank you madam chair
thank you miss Dick Peddie.
Is already thank you
Representative are there any
other questions for the judge.
I don't see any any other hand
Sir but if you would hang tight
to we're finished with the
courts I would appreciate that
thank you madam chair thank you
Sir our next.
All right madam chair members
next is the fourth judicial
District Court of HSD code to
thirty four the LFC
recommendation is about four
thousand dollars last general
fund revenue than the executive
again this ten percent increases
are included but the executive.
Recommendation at the agency
requests so they're just a
little bit higher there analysts
reach consensus on all
performance measures and targets
and Mr Chavez if you don't have
anything to add we can get it to
chief judge Priebus.
I'm sure that.
Right chief judge.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee members and good
afternoon
Our report it right now it's
asking for an increase of five
point four percent over the FY
two base budget are we are
asking for funding for a case
manager for adult drug court to
replace funding that will no
longer be provided through
federal funds from New Mexico
department of health we're also
asking for fifty three
Thousand four funding for
workforce programs loyalists
Vegas magistrate court also
because we're going to be losing
the funding from AOC in FY
twenty three for that
we're also asking for twenty six
point two thousand funding for
contractual services all for
software maintenance costs and
software services and that is
just to bring us back to
original amounts prior to
reductions.
Course we're also asking for
funding for maintenance costs
are for a lot of our equipment
as well as the eighteen point
nine thousand for the funding
for the two percent salary
increase that was approved in FY
twenty two and we do have a
special request for two vehicles
we have four vehicles and we
currently use two of them really
aren't up to par in terms of
driving anywhere outside of our
county we do cover three
counties here and that is our
special request
we have submitted.
Handout in regards to all our
requests to make a little bit
easier to roll over and and I'm
hoping that all of you have
received those but I stand for
questions if anyone has any.
Already thank you judges
Representative Castellano.
Thank you madam chair thank you
judge I guess my question be
like Representative Dixon on
Amanda would be on the.
Unless.
On the drug court I think it's
seventy five thousand dollars.
We look at that maybe amendments
to prevent twenty five dollars
for the.
Given to the courts in my
district is it is very needed in
in my district.
Madam chair representative
Castellano I'm on your high
level sheet you will notice that
in addition to the races for the
fourth judicial District Court
the LFC recommendation includes
aside from those right is an
additional hundred and fourteen
thousand dollars general fund
revenue which could be used for
that seventy five thousand
dollars drug court everything
else would be up to the pleasure
of the committee.
Madam chair thank you madam I
just think it's very important
and very of that we are we funds
from court thank you madam chair
thank you judge already just
keep a note on that for catch up
clean up okay.
Thank you madam chair okay did
you did you get that staff I did
okay thanks Amanda all right.
All right next.
And madam chair members of the
committee on HSD two three five
fifty additional District Court.
On the Alsea recommendation
includesd fifty six thousand
dollars more on the executive
the executive supports the
agency's request.
For either recommendations
recommends include the following
legislation on.
And this is due to the executive
including and one judge one
judgeship in expansion and the
Representative LLC
recommendation includes two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
for new judgeships which is
built in their base budget.
analysts came to consensus on
all performance measures then a
do you like to anything.
Clarifying comment for members
because I know this
differentiate for that looks a
little funny both
recommendations do support the
request for a judgeship the
executive just included as an
expansion where is the LFC
included in the base but for
either recommendation staff
recommends that language that
would go in house bill two that
just says axe mounted dollars is
appropriated for adoption.
I can give it over to chief
judge Hudson.
Right go ahead Sir thank you
madam chair members of the
committee and James at some I'm
the chief judge for the fifth
judicial district with me is
track economic Crowhurst our
chief executive officer and
rust already our chief financial
officer.
There are two major components
to our request the new judge
position that was a just
discussed and then are of a
general fund
request just some of the basic
background for of the fifth
judicial district when I think
sets us apart is our our
structure that were fairly
focused on core services for
example we don't have hearing
officers or commissioners are
are.
Staff attorneys are
or law clerks the new position
judge position that's
recommended and we appreciate
the.
That it is supported as much
needed and Eddy County that will
be alright and
of the separate to have of Bill
but over the last since two
thousand twelve there's been a
steady increase and in that case
is there the work flow study
done by the courts are commended
two point one judges for the
fifth judicial district and the
reason census data suggest about
a fifteen percent increase in
population
Just to find that the we
generally right do it support
the LFC recommendation.
Primarily because it includes
the
compensation increases but that
will still leave us short of
of meetings and is central needs
there's approximately a hundred
twenty one thousand of.
Under twenty one point of four
thousand
available increase under the.
LFC recommendation
that are request really as two
separate categories are general
fund request as two separate
categories if I if I were gonna
groups and one would be
absolutely essential to
continuing a providing core
services and those are great we
need
the three of funding requests
are are absolutely essential
include a and H. R. specials
we've just for this for for
dessert third year now we have a
hundred twenty six full time
employees in the fifth and we
have one
HR specialist she simply cannot
handle that workload
it's too much for for for one
person
we're currently having to have
other employees to take off from
there is to support her we're
having over time
but with a hundred twenty six
employees that and simply isn't
tenable to have one person
do that.
The second it absolutely
essential position will be a
court certified court monitor
that would go along with the new
judge of position the two
hundred fifty thousand includes
or provides a.
For the judge in the trial court
administrative assistant but not
our of our certified court
monitor we don't have enough
critical mass of.
Judges since we're spread out in
three counties where we can pool
court.
monitors and then the third
absolutely essential is already
affects cost and that would be
funding for the two percent to a
judicial salary increase that
was funded for their share of
but not going forward.
the three that a request service
request I would group into are
greatly needed category would
include an attorney senior of
position and this was initially
funded and approved in the FY
twenty one a budget and then was
taken out
but we think this is a necessary
to coordinate our our
alternative dispute resolution
programs and to provide
assistance to all twenty of our
judges we have eleven District
Court judges and nine magistrate
court judges spread out through
the three counts we're asking
for funding also for a judicial
specialist
we think we're understaffed the
work one study indicated there
is a need in the district for
twelve point one additional
The clerks were asking for the a
half time clerk position and
cars bandmaster court to be
increased to full time and then
the a warrant Enforcement
of funding
our total request is the at
three hundred seventy five
thousand eight hundred of that
to the absolutely essential
amount would be the hundred
sixty five thousand three
hundred and while we generally
support the LFC.
a proposal that still would
leave us to.
Shortfall of almost forty four
thousand to meet those needs
with that I will stand for any
questions I'll certainly stay on
the line for questions thank you
Sir I do we have anyone with any
questions.
House Bill that Catherine brown
is caring.
The madam chair yes I understand
that our and and that and then I
believe that includes the
thirteenth judicial district
okay also yeah I was just
curious okay representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Brown is having
trouble getting on the internet
she sitting in the office with
me and yes it is that the
legislation that she's caring
did you have any questions it's
one to house bill one twenty
four just wanted to let you know
thank you madam chair.
Okay very.
we're gonna go ahead we don't
have anybody else for questions
so if we could let's go ahead
move on to the next the next
district.
Madam chair members sorry about
that our next district is the
sixth judicial District Court
HSD CO two thirty six the LFC
recommendation is about seventy
thousand dollars four hundred
more general fund revenue within
the executive recommendation
again that for those raises the
executive met each of the
request and applied at zero
percent vacancy rate.
Emendations and provide some
additional funding to expand
problem solving courts in the
district and analyst reached
consensus on all performance
measures and targets and unless
Mr Chavez has anything to add he
can pass it over to chief judge
Jennifer Delaney for additional
comments.
Madam chair nothing that you
doing.
Already Sir let.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is chief
judge Janet grilling with six
judicial District Court and
today I have with me and really
you know who is my CEO and
Angelica Garces who is my CFO
the six is comprised of three
district courts and for
magistrate point located in
Grant County held I'll go and
Luna which house for District
Court judges and for magistrate
court judges.
The six is granting or is
requesting that you grant yes
LFC is recommendation plus a
little bit more today in
addition to what LFC is
recommended we are also asking
that you give us an additional
twenty one thousand that was
approved by the Supreme Court
the unified budget to fully fund
our Grant County pretrial
services officer three major
areas with regard to increase
that we're requesting is first
of all we're requesting staff
attorney previously we had a
staff attorney and.
We were granted a pre trial
services manager is one of our
positions back in twenty twenty
however in the special session
we lost that funding well as a
pilot project to the with the
AOC for pre trial services when
our staff attorney resigned in
twenty twenty in October of
twenty twenty we decided it was
necessary at that time to shift
the funding to the pre trial
services program manager however
our staff attorney position is
vital to our district and so
we're requesting as LFC has I'm
putting their budget that that
be fully funded next we are
requesting a total of seventy
five thousand which is an extra
twenty one thousand from what
you see from LFC for a part time
pre trial services officer
including county and a full time
preacher I'll services officer
in Grant County as I said we're
part of the AOC'S pilot project
and it's our goal to take over
these two positions that they
are currently helping funding us
helping us fund right now we do
have over three hundred fifty
defendants on pretrial services
in the tri county area and it is
greatly improving that
defendants are rectus reducing
the dependence failure to appear
right in helping us to
adjudicate criminal cases more
timely lastly as you've heard
from the other point we are also
requesting additional salaries
and employee and salary
increases the only other thing I
wanted to mention is we
additionally have a special
we're we're requesting forty six
eight and that is for short all
that we have with regard to
security personnel in our Grant
County District Court sorry
Grant County eight summers the
magistrate court and Denning
magistrate court and so we are
requesting you had in the
additional twenty one thousand
for the pre trial services
officer and the forty six eight
that we ask for in our
supplemental request and at this
time all stand for questions
thank you madam chair.
Already thank you very much and
we do have one question and that
is Representative Sweetser and
because I need to jump into
another meeting quickly I'm
gonna turn this over to
Representative Sweetser good
timing and I'll be back in a in
about twenty minutes
Representative Sweetser you get
to ask questions all right thank
you very much madam chair and
thank you and chief judge
dealing for being with us and
then I just I know that we're
showing a hundred and thirty
seven thousand vacancy rate on
the high level.
For this district so I'm sure
that you will direct is there
for the pre trial services
pilot edition that the chief
judge is asking for but I was
just hoping you would also
flagged this one as well for
ketchup cleanup to see to see
what we're doing I think the pre
trial services have have been
very effective as chief judge
delayed you mentioned and so I
think it would be nice to to be
able to take a look at that so
thank you for them and I
appreciate it.
Thank you and since I'm Cherry I
don't see any other questions so
chief judge delayed if you would
hang around in case their
questions at the end as we wrap
up all of the districts I would
appreciate it thank you madam
chair.
All right thank you an analyst
will now go to the second
judicial district.
Madam chair a agency to thirty
seven.
On the LFC recommendation is
thirty eight thousand dollars
more in general fund which again
is due to the races.
the executive recommendation
supported the agency's request
and both analyst reach consensus
on all performance measures.
Amanda would you like to any
anything.
Thank you.
All right now we can turn it
over to chief judge Moore.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Dennis Murphy I'm the chief
judge for the second judicial
district
I have with me today mining CEO
CFO Jason Jones as well as my
deputy CEO will Romero online
thank you for your time this
afternoon our district is
comprised of four counties
Sierra Sapporo caption and
Torrance counties covering over
twenty one thousand miles.
space.
That we must travel we have
three district judges we have a
District Court and a magistrate
court in each of our four
counties.
We are asking for a three point
five percent increase over FY
twenty two budget
For a total request of four
million two hundred thirty five
thousand dollars that increase
includes the two percents
judges salary increase that was
approved in FY twenty two as
well as
They would other expenditures
and
our district generally supports
the LFC requests
and with that I will keep it
short and sweet will stand for
questions very.
Thank you chief judge Murphy do
we have any committee questions.
I don't see any but as with the
other chief judges if you would
please stay on the line until we
wrap up all of the districts I
would appreciate it thank you R.
thank you chief judge Murphy all
right to the eight.
All right madam chair members
the eighth judicial District
Court agency code to thirty
eight the LFC recommendation is
actually about forty one point
seven thousand dollars last
general fund revenue than the
executive
it still includes the ten
percent increase for judges as
well as a two percent increase
for staff and both
recommendations include funding
to help support establish a
domestic violence court the
executive recommendation
supported the agency's other
priorities in addition to an
expansion for that Mr I was
court so there's just a small
difference there and that's what
makes it up analyst reaching
fences on all performance
measures and targets.
And Mr Chavez you have anything
to add if not we can get it over
to chief judge Emilio Thomas.
madam chair not to ask.
To judge chief judge chances.
Madam chair representative side
the eight judicial district is
house Colfax and union counties.
Are pretty much all of
northeastern New Mexico joining
me is Carl Brooks our CEO and
also deputy CEO and more are on
the line if there are questions
down the road after my
presentation.
I'm sure there will.
I need somebody to meet the.
Lost you guys already on no.
I I very much appreciate the the
salary framework that we are
working with in the context of
of everyone's presentation so
I'm not going to go over a
number of those requests for
support for are not only our
staff that the the increase were
potential increases for judges
salary are one of the important
things thank you you did hear
from the on analysts and the
recommendations and if you see
on our hand out essentially our
our second main bullet points
are details LFC is
recommendation are with the
recommended increase of two
hundred thirty four thousand
the the points that I did want
to make in our presentation as
that would leave us essentially
from what we're proposing a
hundred fifty six thousand two
hundred dollars short of some of
our important needs some things
to point out as you guys go
through the legislative session
focus on pre trial services some
of the other initiatives that
you're stand that affect the
courts our drug court was gold
certified by the administrative
office of the courts I believe
we were the first district to
have that happen and also the
only current district that is
gold certified an important
thing as we expand our courts
also with the family domestic
violence court and working into
a wellness slash mental health
court is those services are just
post judgment or post conviction
but they do really applaud for
pre trial services and are
similar situated circumstances
that all of the districts are
confronting so we do appreciate
the recommendation and and
continue to use are essentially
our family domestic violence
where we've got started with
grant money and are looking for
permanent funding.
On the on the issue that I I
want to really.
What in everybody's mind is if
we do use some of that funding
for either the expansion or or
permanent
family domestic violence where
we would not have funding for
our our warrant parts and you've
heard a number of districts
forty do that but we have three
I believe that some sorry it's
two point five I think we wrote
three we have two point five
weren't clerks that we received
in the consolidation with AOC of
the magistrate court courts that
are not permanently funded so if
those were not funded we have to
find a mechanism to pay about a
hundred thirty seven thousand
for those salaries and those are
positions that have long
standing from our court and are
are very much much needed
another point is when we go
through this and we try to
evaluate what we're gonna
utilized as far as expansion and
like I said we'd be grateful for
any type of expansion as we are
also the only district and in
the state are only judicial
district that does not have a
dedicated I. T. technician I'm
so damn we're balancing that and
finding the needs and not giving
the Attorney General to much of
our time but ideas obviously
become a bigger issue that we've
seen just managing ensuring
all our requirements operating
working all of the the
presentations in court
proceedings that we have on
Zoomer Google need to important
so again I I think our handout
really delineates that the only
other points that I think you
have heard from a number of the
other districts there was a two
percent raise that was granted
for the judges but it wasn't
recurring funding and so for our
for our district that it amounts
to approximately twenty one
thousand two hundred dollars so
again we're allocating that that
a hundred and thirty eight
thousand operating increase it
doesn't cover.
Really a large portion of our
expansion are expansion outside
of salary increases would be
give or take about two point
five percent so I I think it's
relatively clear in our hand out
but if there are any questions
either madam chair members of
the committee I stand for
questions.
Where education thank you judge
Janice we do have a question go
to Representative Dixon.
You madam chair and thank you
judge Travis I was wondering
about the family domestic
violence support and how you
measure success for that
purpose.
I'm.
I think that's a great question
I'll ask measuring success and
and that's where again I want to
emphasize it's not just post
conviction but its pre sentence
and and really it's looking at
the recidivism rate that we have
here in Dallas County as to
domestic violence on that that
court is really in its infancy
stage as.
In approved and and beginning
and and give or take about
October of two thousand twenty
one and so as we have offenders
as we increase education as we
increased monitoring as we
increased by and not just from
law enforcement district
attorneys public defenders and
other members of the defense bar
I I think we'll have real
performance standards where we
can show
accountability let you know
lower levels of recidivism and
and other other tangible
measures that show that that the
program sort of like you see
with drug point is really having
a substantial impact in our
community.
Thank you judge and thank you
madam chair.
All right thank you and thank
you judge Thomas as well it if
you would as the other judges
requests please round we get to
the state and the power
steering just in case some
questions come up across the
board so thank you and analysts
to the night.
Madam chair on HSD to thirty
nine on the record the LFC
recommendation includes thirty
two point thousand last general
fund revenue than the executive.
and that's due to
Again the two percent of the
executive recommendation
supports agency request and
analyst reach consensus on all
performance measures and
targets.
Would you like to add anything.
Sorry madam chair members of the
committee.
I think prices are cheap
educator or maybe judge Clements
taking over I'm not sure who's
here for the night.
Judge Tatum is here.
Madam chair representative yes
thank you judge if you what all
right madam chair thank you and
members of the committee my name
is drew Tatum I'm the chief
judge of the ninth judicial
District Court and with me is
Kevin spears are where executive
officer also on logged on and
just no up I'll be very brief
the north is curry and Roosevelt
County and I want to first of
all just thank you all for
everything you've done for us
our local legislators have been
very supportive and I can't show
my appreciation
much more they're just also what
they do and and supporting us
representatives Crowder in
Sheffield.
now we do have the the request
in and we do support the LFC
request we support the salary
increases for staff and judges
outside of the compensation
increases we are looking for
funding for proofed but unfilled
positions to include an I. T.
technician a security bear with
and also looking for funding for
treatment court case manager
position that position was
originally funded through a
grant with the the D. O. H.
which does expire at the end of
the fiscal year and finally we
are looking for funding for pre
trial services position here in
the north and just quickly we're
we're busy business as usual
we're doing everything we can
we're doing a lot of trials
we're doing selections offsite
our with our local community
partners Clovis metallocene the
counties as well and we've done
a very we've done a lot with the
money that you've given us we
generally revert very little
money back and we use try to use
every penny that you all give us
so I appreciate them the men
members of the committee and
madam chair so we would stand
for questions.
Thank you very much chief judge
Tatum do we have questions
for the night.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair note the
question is just a comment I've
got the best seven judges and
and the assistance that they
have in the whole state so I I
have no questions for I'm just
very proud of of so honored to
represent that group they're a
great group thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative Crowder
you despite all of us in bad
light that that thank you for.
So education if you would stay
with us as the other judges have
so we get to the and since you
are the best in the state
according to Representative
Crowder at I'm sure that that
you don't mind hanging on so
thank you for that thank you
madam chair and thank you
Representative Crowder.
All right analyst to the ten.
All right madam chair members
agency code to forty the tenth
judicial District Court the LFC
recommendation is about thirty
eight point three thousand
dollars general fund revenue
higher than the executive
the executive recommendation
supported the agency request of
both recommendations included
some funding to explore or begin
a drug court program in the tent
analysts reach consensus on all
performance measures and targets
and unless Mr Chavez's anything
to add we can give it to you it
chief judges career metro for
additional comments.
Madam chair nothing at.
All right thank you chief judge
Mitchell.
Madam chair thank you very much
I have with me my for executive
officer Amanda hammer.
Judicial District Court is where
he Harding in the pocket
counties.
With the only court.
As one District Court judge but
we do have three magistrates we
have six different facilities
because we have two facilities
in the checkout.
That is kind of important as we
start talking about things
further on.
Page three items that we want to
address one we're a little bit
in front of but last year with
my work hard on the budget work
with the committee and all the
analyst somehow we forgot to
leave out other state funds.
So I have copy machine money
coming in I'd like to be able to
spend it so we ask you fourteen
thousand dollars there it's a
little thing but it would be
important to us.
Compensation we agree with the
LFC it is critical critical for
judges it's critical for staff
you've heard from Chief Justice.
The percentage your recommended
for judges is wonderful I
appreciate it all of us
appreciate it.
But it doesn't even keep up with
what you're compensation
commission is recommending for
the judiciary.
It doesn't address what Senator
survive just as suggested.
For our highest paid justice or
Chief Justice would be paid
whatever the lowest judges rate
in the federal courts.
So well we appreciate it very
much please think about what the
chief is proposing here.
The staff or staff as you heard
from Marty I'm sure our staff is
about ten percent behind the
executive two percent will make
a difference to.
We have a lot of single parents.
Two percent will matter we would
like to get caught up.
The last thing is that.
Really appreciate the drug court
exploration money we're the only
district without drug court.
You were last on the list we ran
into the first financial help
them and we just haven't ever
had resources of the state.
Where I was comfortable but year
after year you'd be able to give
me a recurring appropriation for
drug court.
Hopefully hopefully we're
getting to a place where we can
do that.
Or whatever agencies that run
life supporter back reading
healthy and we need to start
getting drug court here.
This is the only three counties
in the state don't have access
to adult court.
We need that extra need to get
into that.
The last part is the
consolidation with my district
courts was absolutely wonderful
thank.
We can still keep finding cost
that should properly be with the
District Court to run their.
When charge of them now.
In those cost for some things
like equipment security
equipment door locks that kind
of stuff needs to be transferred
over.
Administrative office of the
court wants to transferred over.
But because there's six
facilities here for us it's a
big number.
In that between drug courts so
these were still down so we need
the extra money for the facility
costs that's around seventeen
thousand.
That madam chair would like to
have the LFC recommendation I
will be here all afternoon if
anyone has questions thank you.
Thank you chief judge Mitchell
we do have questions for you
will begin with Representative
Dixon.
Thank you madam chair
I was wondering
Actually I my question is fine
to wait and I know that the
other two questioners of not and
opportunity thank you very much
all right thank you
Representative Dixon
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair I wondered if the judge
Mitchell could go dive a little
deeper into the
copy machine ready in the
fourteen thousand dollars that
that they seem to be short.
Madam chair representative
Chatfield frankly I missed it
last year.
Normally we get a general fund
amounts and we get other state
funds about other state funds
our copy machine but.
Last year as things were
developing we got really focused
on general fund money and we
ended up being the only court
that doesn't have other state
funds.
It just got left out.
Fourteen thousand dollars it's
going to be a little bit higher
this year than it has been
historically historically was a
ten thousand dollar
authorization so we're
collecting the money you just
don't have any authority to
spend it.
Like to have that authority
before the end of the fiscal
year.
We still needed Representative.
Yes the wrong button.
Thank you I don't know if
there's something we can do
about given authority to to that
to spend those funds if they're
already coming in but the same
the same from the not be able to
use of.
Thank you Representative and
miss petty if you would make a
note of that park had to clean
up for that language that would
be wonderful.
Madam chair I can definitely
make a note I will note that the
tenth does have about eight
point four thousand dollars in
other revenues but we can make a
note to look at the fourteen
thousand dollars at the copy
machine Revenue.
Thank you Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Thank you very much madam chair
and I just wanted to a group of
support for judge Mitchell and
that I'm and every judicial
district we do not have adult
drug courts we need to really
look at instituting those
programs we know that they work
we have historical data that
tells us that work and I would
also like to echo support making
sure for once we implement those
adult drug court programs that
we have access to medicated
assisted medication assisted
treatment therapy for those
struggling with substance abuse
disorder in those districts so
that we can identify those
individuals that are currently
justice involved because of drug
issues that we can send them to
a drug court for proper
education and that we can get
them access to programs and
resources and support that can
help them get off drugs that are
leading to the recidivism thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Hochman
Vigil and and Amanda I also make
note of them being the only
district without a drug court so
I I hate to put too many things
on your list but I do think that
is probably something else we
need to work out because as the
representatives said they
they've been proven to be
effective and chief judgment so
you have a comment.
I just want to clarify the
fourteen thousand dollars for
the current fiscal year.
We've got the eight thousand in
the next year but we need the
fourteen for the current fiscal
year thank you.
Thank you and thank you Amanda
for keeping up with all of our
districts as we go we appreciate
you.
All right thank you know more
questions for the tenth so let's
move to the eleventh.
Madam chair agency to forty one
on the eleventh judicial
District Court.
The LC recommendation is
seventeen thousand dollars more
on than the executive.
the executive fully supports the
agency requests both
recommendations include twenty
two began drug court program.
Analysts consensus on all
performance measures and targets
and with that I'll turn it over
to chief judge curly or must not
be of any Madam.
Good afternoon.
Sure.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can hear you chief judge
thank you good afternoon madam
chair members of the committee
purchased early in the chief
judge for the eleventh judicial
district I'm joined this
afternoon by our CEO wells in
Najaf a little bit about our
district we are.
Two counties San Juan County in
McKinley county roughly two
hundred thousand.
Populations we have a district
judge's nine magistrate judges
and child hearing support
officer that are spread out most
to counties and six buildings.
We would.
First of all thank you for for
the support we've had over the
years as a earlier chief and
said are a.
Our local legislators are
incredible to work with for us
and and they're looking out for
sentencing to this committee is
always.
More than fair to us we want to
thank you for that
we are general fund request as a
three point one percent increase
thank you this brief we do
support the LFC recommendation
as well that includes the salary
increases in operating expenses
for us that's about eighty six.
Thousand seven hundred dollars
for that.
We also would ask.
For the committee to look at an
additional.
Sixty nine thousand three
hundred dollars as.
Chief financial just mention
part of what we've had happen
with the consolidation is so for
the district courts is a little
bit of an unfunded mandate with
that consolidation so that that
money's would include a warrant
enforcement position
Pre trial services which is
which is so.
In the district court and
magistrate in chamber
maintenance for the magistrate
courts those are all the
expenses that we have had to
take on that house so I'm I'm
not gonna go in more detail of
stand for questions but I do
want to mention money we always
deal with money that's what this
committee deals with people are
important to you and I want to
let everyone know that evokes
worked with wells in mass over
the last twenty four years wells
is going to retire this will be
his last session that he will be
involved in at least directly as
the CEO of the eleventh he's
done a great job I know that
everyone who's worked with him
over the years of the
Legislature knows that as well
but I I did want to let today
pass without recognizes wells in
his work over the years.
Thank you for that and is he on
our soon today yes he likes to
hide if you if you'd size all
of.
Yeah madam chair can hear me yes
Sir I can thank you for that
thank you judge early first up
for the kind words in honor of
privilege to work with many of
you over the years it's really
gonna miss all of you
it's been very rewarding work so
I appreciate all you do on a
regular basis for the citizens
New Mexico especially here first
it is in San Juan McKinley
County so I've truly enjoyed
working with you so thank you.
Thank you for your service Mr
nap and I'm sure you're leaving
them in good shape sure they
will also miss you as well you
lose those people that have so
much institutional knowledge and
that it's hard to keep up so
thank you for that do we have
any questions for the eleven.
It doesn't look like it but
chief judge relief as with the
others if you don't mind hanging
on to we get to the end of this
hearing and just in case there
are some over arching questions
for all of the justices I'd
appreciate it
Thank you very much and we are
to the twelve.
Thank you madam chair members of
the twelfth judicial district
agency code to forty two there
is that tiny tiny difference
between the recommendations the
LFC recommendation includesd
about four hundred dollars more
general fund revenue for the
twelve judicial district that
includes those raises and the
executive recommendation
supporting HSD request for
performance analyst reach
consensus on all performance
measures and targets and unless
Mr Chavez's anything to add he
can give it to chief judge I.
Angie Schneider are.
Madam chair nothing at.
All right to judge Snyder.
Thank you madam chair thank you
very much good afternoon
everyone madam chair members of
the committee I then she started
I and the chief judge for the
twelfth judicial district and
that is Lincoln and Otero
counties we have to District
Court and three magistrate
courts and I am joined today by
Andrea karr in our CEO and
hopefully well received our our
hand out as well.
We are seeking a three point six
percent increase over our FY
twenty two base budget that is
funding for twenty five point
four for the cost to fully fund
the FY twenty two a judicial
salary increase or seeking out
fifty two point one for our
veterans treatment court and
seventy one for our four eight
criminal alternative dispute
resolution program and thirty
six point two four
operating costs for just a
general increase as of our
operating costs and we also ask
that you support the are adopt
the LFC recommendation and so I
just want to thank you all for
your for your service to our
state and for for what you've
done for our community and with
that I'm offering and will stand
for questions.
All right thank you chief judge
Snyder I don't know what you're
doing and like you know chair
counties to get recommendations
within four hundred dollars but
you're doing something well do
we have any questions or for the
twelve chief Jed Snyder.
I don't see any but as with the
other judges if you read hang on
for just a few more minutes and
just in case we have some over
all I'm sorry I do see
Representative Ezzell with the
question.
Representative.
You are muted.
I don't have a question are you
just needed to see if my audio
is working can you hear me.
Yes ma'am we can thank you all
right thank you all right and
with that we will go to the
thirteen.
Analysts.
Madam chair our agency to forty
three on the LC recommendation
includesd sixty nine thousand
dollars more general fund in the
executive.
the executive supports agency
requests since apply to deter
percent making sure it for
funding both recommendations
supporting you judgeship in the
base budget.
analyst reach consensus on all
performance measures and targets
and with that I'll turn that
over to Amanda for additional
comment.
Madam chair members I just a
quick note on the thirteenth
again we have that enabling
language for the judge of that
is included in both
recommendations and I can turn
it over to chief judge I called.
All right.
Okay madam chair can you hear
me.
We can hear you Sir okay the
reason I ask I'm home I'm safe
self isolated home so I was
wondering if my internet
connection was good in any event
up my name is George I well I am
the chief judge for the
thirteenth judicial district
joining me today is much you'll
call Rafic I will be giving you
a little bit of a description of
our district in Colorado state
will be going through our are
requests.
Our district is quite large we
strayed from Arizona to the east
side of the Sandia mountains we
have a quarter location we have
a magistrate court in Cuba it
District Court and the
magistrate court and Bernalillo
we have a District Court
magistrate court in requests we
have a District Court magistrate
court in the students and
provide the magistrate court in
the land some of the
municipalities that we serve
include in Cibola county grant
in Milan in San Juan County we
have Cuba have a speech proceed
those Bernalillo Kerala's Rio
Rancho probably some other
municipalities that I forgot to
mention in lexicon we have busca
funds but also those two moves
but then and alleged County we
also have a ten Pueblo as part
of the Navajo Nation part of the
Jicarilla Apache reservation.
R. we're suffering from growing
pains.
I as I think the fifty is also
suffering from growing pains
since two thousand ten we have
our.
Added another almost seventeen
thousand people to our district
in the past decade we've added
more people than the current
population of twelve other
counties in the in the state.
Twenty eight almost twenty nine
percent of our growth since two
of the state growth has occurred
in our our district right now
with the second most populous
the district in in in the state.
Our.
We the national center for state
courts shows that we need up
approximately nineteen more
judicial specialist and three in
at almost the almost three and a
half judges are just like
judge present mentioned earlier.
Representative Brown is carrying
a bill that includes both the
fifth and the thirty three I
want to recognize and thank her
for for doing that for us all
also I I don't think the growth
in our in our district is going
to stop in anytime soon
especially with investments by
companies such as Intel and
Facebook in Rio Rancho and
mostly not.
We continue to grow I think our
needs are many and are requests
are few and with that I'll turn
over of what we request you to
my CEO Colorado state.
Members of the committee.
As teachers and the other judges
and we're really grateful for
the analysts recommendations in
the committee's time today on
the district judge.
The district three staff.
For three forty nine point three
and my best information is the
LFC recommendation just as two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
in there for that that is.
The committee could do to help
us narrow that gap that that
would.
The gap and we really appreciate
it we.
Fifty eight point eight for
three new judicial specialist as
director yes madam chair.
The
state could study that shows me
nearly nineteen court FedEx
just for three this year right
now I don't see any funding in
in the
Just for that again that that's
really important to us.
through the some of the funding
for some funds for two judicial
sessions positions as.
Point three for those two
positions.
If.
How to use vacancies to to make
that to keep those two positions
to keep.
just a specials from from
getting even larger we.
Services a request and then if
they
did find that a request to help
with that judicial compensation
that was just one time this year
and then also the staff.
Security system maintenance that
we need to pick up starting next
year.
I
was very happy to Senator said
committee's questions.
We have one Representative
Brown.
Thank you madam chair the
question I have is for any of
the maybe the LFC analyst in the
language for the thirteenth
judicial district and also on
the fifth judicial I apologize
for the technical issues I had
getting into the meeting it says
in the language there that this
is contingent upon enactment of
enabling legislation of the
first regular session of the
fifty fifth legislature we are I
believe in the second regular
session of the fifty fifth
legislature and I'm missing
something there.
Madam.
Madam chair representative brown
you're correct that's a
technical error on my end make
sure to amend it okay sure and
and and and and if you'd be sure
it's for both locations here in
the District Court of budgets I
appreciate that and then madam
chair it also like to just
express my concern that both
judicial districts are needing
the three hundred forty nine
thousand and some but of
seasonally recommending two
hundred fifty thousand and I
really like an explanation as to
why the lower amount is being
recommended by LFC.
Representative Brown the LFC
recommendation prioritized the
actual judgeships and one staff
member where is the executive
fully support the request to
include all the staff that
that's why you're seeing that
difference there all right thank
you very much thank you madam
chair.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair a thank
you judge for the good
presentation.
The question.
Was the the issue on magistrates
from where the house and taking
care of an.
More coming.
Representative Garcia up it
affects all wrapped you just had
a meeting what was so folks last
week and I think Mr actually
could probably explain that a
lot better and I can't.
Thank you.
That.
We continue to work on this
issue it's a really important we
have any other.
Our.
In terms.
To us that magistrates.
The good taste and good.
Boller County.
I need to so even though the
details of what we're talking
about right now if I may.
Thank you Sir thank you madam
chair the only question I have.
Right we have any questions from
any of the members with any of
the districts.
We've had time to think about it
Representative Dixon go ahead.
Thank you madam chair this is
actually a broad question and
I'm wondering R. as we find more
pre trial services if we have a
set of performance metrics that
we're going to be able to use in
the future to monitor
effectiveness thank you very
much.
All right and let's at all
school we get already well when
we get to a party in front of us
process that question as they do
stay on top of of the
performance measures for a
number of the different pieces
of legislation that go through
Carl your hand is up did you
have a question Sir.
Click there okay.
Chair I can briefly addressed
Representative Dixon question as
well okay go ahead.
thank you madam chair
representative Dixon last year
in house bill two there were
four measures for pre trial
services including things like
you know the number of arrests
for people on pre trial services
you know recidivism for pre
trial services those were
actually included your before as
well and it would be to be towed
but AOC was kind enough to agree
to track them and report them to
the legislature and this last
year they were included so the
reporting times a little late
but AOC has lots of great
information at least on the
second and we should start
seeing the statewide next fiscal
year.
Thank you madam chair.
Right Representative Crowder you
have a question for one of the
courts are going just a general
question madam chair
I'm not fully understanding.
How the budgets we're looking at
have a relationship to the
proposed seven percent increase
for all state employees is that
it in addition to our all the
state employees all the judges
and all the positions are
eligible for the seven percent
can someone a mentor someone
just address that quickly please
Amanda.
Madam chair of course
Representative Crowder that's a
great question the answer is yes
under the LFC proposal of the
LFC framework for judge
compensation is a total of
seventeen percent that would be
the ten percent that you see in
the base budget here and then
the seven percent separate
compensation package that we
often see in what we call
section eight so yes the judges
would be eligible for that
additional seven percent pay
increase and seem story for it
the staff raises it would be two
percent built into the base in
addition to that seven percent
for a total of nine percent.
Thank you madam chair thank you
man.
Okay do we have anybody else
that has a question of the any
of the judges or the analysts I
don't see any hands up so I need
a motion on this recognizing of
course where there are some
differences we can all cause
each court was different and
you'll see differences as they
were presented in terms of
general fund years that's the
kind of thing we look at again
and catch up so I'm gonna go to
Meredith Dixon are you are you
prepared to make the motion.
You are muted.
Thank you madam chair
mascot verification.
Thank you madam chair
The
LFC is recommendation is.
are we just doing the judiciary
grand total or is it being ruled
District Court.
Do the district we're just gonna
do the hearing that we just had
and that would be the HSD.
that point that we just Sir.
Right here.
Madam chair I believe it's ten
thirty one we did not give you
thirty one is three.
The court we have not done
anybody else at this time.
Okay madam chair yeah.
I guess I would move the LFC
recommendation although it is
higher in certain categories of
for the general fund but you
mentioned that will be going
over that and catch up we not.
The plan is is that because most
of this budget's been developed
around LFC recommendations we
take this piece them look at
each one of the Courts again and
see if there's anything that's
been missing and that we might
need to to back fill.
What we have a motion the LFC is
our second piece.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Sweetser is there
any opposition to the.
Saying none we will move on now
thank you very much everybody.
What's on to the next category.
Bernalillo county metropolitan
court is that right Amanda yes.
Two forty four.
The folks.
Correct right and I can start
real quick although over of
quick overview and a technical
note for members for early
County metropolitan court the
LFC recommendation is about a
hundred and thirteen thousand
dollars higher in general fund
revenue that the executive again
that includes those ten percent
increases for metro as well for
judges in two percent for staff
the executive recommendation
supported the agency requests
and analyst reach consensus on
all performance measures and
targets I wanted to point out
something for members you'll
probably notice on the LFC
recommendation the sources don't
match the uses they did
yesterday and I printed them out
this morning and they did not
this new budget systems been a
little funky but the correct
number for the sources and uses
is going to be your topic number
there you are twenty nine
million nine hundred and forty
one thousand two hundred so just
in November when the motion is
made that number that second
number thirty million is
incorrect.
Brian is there anything like
that.
Madam chair nothing at.
It over to chief judge Dominguez
ready we're ready okay good
afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee thank
you for your time and I'll make
this quick I have also with me
Robert W. our CEO and our CFO
Rachel monarch they may go into
further detail and are available
for questions about your
And your well with that said
Bernalillo county metro where it
is still the busiest court at
the courthouse on transitions
that we've made have been huge
regarding COVID this year six
thou well sixty six thousand two
hundred eighty six virtual
hearings took place.
So that was a huge change and of
course we've continued to do
preliminary hearing examinations
which are something you were to
metro court as well as
supervised
Individuals that have competency
issues on felony cases are still
pending in the metropolitan
court we are thank you LFC for
the recommendation and asked
that you adopt that there are a
few.
Things that were not included
and we are also asking that you
re examine or perhaps consider
and they are part of the unified
budget those include
specifically re classification
of positions for technology
security specialist as well as
court case manager for competent
competency to stand trial in
addition to that the remainder
of our judicial specialist are
funded by warrant Fund are only
three and in able to if we can
get additional funding will be
able to remove those from the
warrant Fund in addition similar
to what she I.
Judge Chavez stated the two
percent judicial increase from
last year we still was not
reoccurring so we have some
shortfall there in addition to
that we would like additional
funding for both security and
janitorial services and I'm
gonna turn it over for Robert to
do at to fill in anything I may
have missed out on thank you Mr
Padilla thank you Robert.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
Chief judge Dominguez did cover
everything and go we are
requesting that you support the
LFC recommendations with those
additionally increases thank
you.
All right let's go to questions
are there any questions that we
might have for the.
The judge.
You know I don't see any hands
up that doesn't mean I see
everything on this.
screen.
All right let's go to
Representative small for the
motion.
Thank you madam chair I would
move the LFC recommendation for
the Bernalillo county
metropolitan court.
Right we have a motion to have a
second.
The second.
Okay we have a second I think
that was representative Garcia.
Is there any opposition to that
motion state non thank you very
much judges thank you very much
Robert Padilla thank you.
Thank you thank you.
Okay let's go to the next.
Thank you muted strait of office
of the dust district attorney.
Two sixty four is what I've got
in front of me.
Your.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Henry Valdez and I'm the
director of the administrative
office the district attorney's
and with that have the.
Let's let the analysts speak
first and then also.
All right we'll go to the
analysts first thank you Henry.
All right madam chair this is a
HSD to sixty or it's actually in
the back of your packet.
but the district attorney's
packet you'll find it starting
on page.
Twenty one.
Madam chair would you like to go
back and start with the the
district attorneys after the A.
O. B. I..
So we weren't yes okay.
So overall the LFC recommended a
general fund increase of three
and a half percent while the
executive recommended an
increase of eight point three
percent.
The recommendation continued are
the LFC recommendation continued
use of three hundred six
thousand from the district
attorney's special revenue bonds
well executive recommended
reducing reliance on the funded
by about a hundred thirty five
thousand dollars per year.
You're looking at expenditures
the executive recommendation to
our.
Directed the entirety of the
additional revenue to the person
category.
Well the LFC recommendation
recommends holding personal flat
relative to the FY twenty two
operating budget and increase
the other costs category by
eighty six thousand dollars and
that's to fund IT expenses of
the LFC and exec reached
consensus on performance
measures and targets like to
turn it over to Mister Brian
Chavez for any additional
comments.
madam chair nothing to add with
that we could send it to
Mr any of all this.
Right now we're ready for you
right.
Thank you madam chair I'm sorry
for that
but I do want to state that the.
That dina loose the president of
the New Mexico discourage
Association
is currently in another hearing
in Senate Judiciary and so she
won't be able to address this
committee today but I do know
that before you get started with
the dust as a whole are they
would like to do a brief.
Presentation concerning their
uniformed properties request on.
While for that to we're gonna
allow for that and okay thank
you with regards to the
administrative office of the
district attorney's we
appreciate both the
Connors and Brian's hard work in
working with us and we really do
appreciate both recommendations
as they relate to R. as this
committee is heard for for the
last couple of years that are
case management system or CMS
which is part of the our statute
regarding AODA that we develop
and maintain a state statewide
case management system
CMS was the one life statewide
in two thousand six so much of
the development of CMS occurred
before that also it is it is now
you know in both terms of some
of the equipment and in terms of
some of the programming is
outdated
and it's you know I want to say
it's a relic all but it is
vastly getting to that stage it
still functions of course but it
doesn't function at nearly the
speed and and the effectiveness
of the new system would would
function at of the the executive
dead
in other state funding is
recommended three point four
million dollars to upgrade the
CMS and LFC and recommended two
point five we would appreciate
that if the this committee goes
with the LFC recommendation that
they would add an additional
eight hundred thousand into that
why the CMS is very important is
not only
does it provide the data that is
necessary for this committee and
other legislative committees.
to understand what's going on in
each of the districts and us you
have an apples to apples
comparison
unlike most states are where
there's not a statewide case
management system this allows
everybody to be considered you
know a case is the case and
numbers are going to be the
numbers wherever they be and the
start of the in in.
Whatever part of the state they
may be all but it's most
important function and really
why CMS's design is really to be
able to assist all the offices
in getting a case from its.
Inception all the way through to
completion and the case
management system with without
it
it would be impossible for the
districts to do the work they're
doing on a be impossible for
them to be paperless which most
of them are it would be
impossible for them to be able
to go into a court room well and
be able to handle the amount of
cases that they handle without
CMS well we do experience of
downtime or deadlock issues
because of the antiquated nature
of some of the programming and
that does result in.
And not difficulty for the
districts are when they're in
court or even when they're just
attempting to do work within the
office also we want to thank
both LFC and DFA for recognizing
that that does need to be
increased and we appreciate both
recommendations on.
And if this committee could
provide it to increase the LFC
recommendation by the eight
hundred thousand well we have.
Did sit down with several
companies and have
demonstrations on talk to them
about our needs and it's about
what will cost to get a system
here in New Mexico that will be
able to operate
On a statewide level with
regards to the rest of the
recommendation.
You know of course we appreciate
the the DFA recommendation as it
does
allow for for more funds into
AODA and with that.
Madam chair we would stand for
questions.
I think we're gonna hear from
each one of the dust that wants
to talk if we could just start
running through it with the
district one your.
Madam chair committee members
were good afternoon and thank
you for the opportunity
presented here before you again
today
I Marcus Montoya education
district attorney judicial
district is the House confection
you counties I will be just
generally going over the New
Mexico District Attorney
Association our committee as a
whole before we move into all
the individual districts as Mr
well that stated they're least
is locked up in another hearing
right now and Senate Judiciary I
have with me today to discuss
some of our uniformed priorities
Mr Jeff available was contracted
to review in route reserves the
and and dust composition
classification structure offers
I'd like to begin as a in
association.
I thank you for our priorities
which this year were the
attorneys commit retention and
dishes additionally the funding
for the it would be AODA CMS
system which is very critical
and Mr mothers are commented on
that the organization
appreciates the LFC
recommendation and recognizing
our priorities this year
additionally would like to thank
the DFA well as for the focus on
getting all of the staff
increase statewide.
When we last percentage you in
the fall
we presented most of our
conversation confiscation work
was completed now we are all
fully completed with that study
I'm gonna attempt to share my
screen to just go over.
That with the committee.
And as you can see.
Committee members.
re classification we're mostly
trying to be competitive with a
higher minimum salary for
creating a new prosecutor that
new salary begins a sixty five
thousand dollars twenty one to
two thousand twenty one dollars
and then we have the
corresponding pay bands for each
step up in title and
compensation
eventually resulting chief
deputy district attorney and the
maximum salary at hundred forty
eight thousand dollars
approximately
the salary range minimums and
midpoints will assist the
district attorney's recruiting
retaining these attorneys
throughout the system so that we
do not have to continually
compete with other state
agencies as part of the study Mr
Mandela if that members have any
questions as to how we can do
and how competitive we parallel
other state agencies you
certainly can stand for
questions at each of these
classifications.
We would additionally ask for
another ten percent in our two
hundred categories and what the
LFC recommendation was for these
purposes the elected district
attorneys by statute we require
separate language for increased
so we were also as an
association respectfully a
request that we receive an
additional ten percent for
elected salaries and that we
will with this new.
Salary structure have the chief
deputy who make substantially
more than the elected in
additionally the deputy district
to attorney who would be making
more than the a locket
potentially this year trial
attorney will be making about
the equivalent of a elected
issue to turn.
Other than that the
You
Mr Senator questions if there if
it's more prudent I can go ahead
and move into my a presentation
I'll keep this we since you've
already listen to me mostly our
difference and LFC.
Recommendation was a
approximately thirteen thousand
greater than the D. F. A. L. a
recommendation and so just
anecdotally I'd like to share
with the committee the eight
alright the attorney we start at
fifty we wanted to give a raise
after a year prosecuting up to
sixty five they were offered
seventy five plus percentage in
a small.
Judicial districts the cost of
living is a bit up.
InTaos and it is my other two
counties are we certainly
couldn't compete with this
current salary structure all
with what a small town private
practice can offer a first year
prosecutor a first year attorney
as far as salary is concerned
other than that I think Mr about
Ella and I will both stand for
questions regarding either the
compensation package
restructuring or the eight thank
you okay.
Nice job this Madam to senior
it's been a while
hope you're doing well in the
recognize some of the committee
members of both the new faces
and kind of veterans will call
that so and I see representative
Garcia is a former marines on a
Senator cell provider
Representative Garcia.
Thank you he likes that.
Already let's go to
Representative Trujillo she has
a question.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me because I struggled with
this.
We can hear you you know I've
been listening having ask
questions and I keep going back
all the way to the Supreme Court
justice in the office of the
courts administrative office of
the courts in the issue of of
salaries and I was looking at
the of the Montoya is
spreadsheet there regarding
salaries.
And.
What's happening but it seems
like we've the state has gone
into this wage suppression mode
because I cannot believe that
the assistant DA makes almost as
much as the state Supreme Court
justice and and it just.
May Day bank in another sheet
that he had or the same sheet
the assistant one of the
assistant DA's would be making
as much as a high level of
teacher would make in the third
in the third tier.
And I feel like I'm in the.
In the twilight zone of what
happened where we.
Keeping their wages so low and I
realized madam chair that we've
had no money.
But in order to keep and retain
good quality dust and judges and
lawyers.
Just like yours we have got to
give them some significant
attention in order to keep them
and and raise those wages it's
just stunning to see that
information and I hope that as
we move forward with this today
that will consider strong we are
raising those wages for all of
them I think you probably were
all as a stand as I was.
Thank you.
Right thank you very much do we
have any more questions.
We don't right now but if you
gentlemen could please hold on
as we go through the hearing
there may be a question at the
end.
Thank you very much.
Thank you I we may well change
the name tile and have the first
additional district attorney
next already very good thank you
thank you.
Madam chair yes you want to go
through all the different sheets
followed by the analysts
followed by the yes these are
straight to the agency no let's
go to the different shades by
the LA so we would.
Okay
madam chair I just want to take
a brief moment the very first
page of your district attorney
is packed up there's a general
fund high level.
and just like with the courts I
think you're gonna see a bunch
of things sort happening over
and over as we go through the
through the presentation so.
Starting from the first page
You can see the recommendations
are really close the executive
recommended a five point one
percent increase while the LFC
recommended a five point two
percent increase so there's only
a thirty five thousand dollar
difference total between the but
you recommendations.
But there's a there's a pretty
big differences
Once we get to the actual
individual districts.
and so I would like to just take
a minute if you go to page two
of your presentation you can see
that LFC recommendation
methodology and essentially what
it did is it included like the
courts it had a growth factor of
two two and a half percent on
the base it has an attorney pay
factor in there I'm gonna work
loaded just for and when you
some those three things out you
got to the to the total LFC
recommendation and you can see
the the percent changes by
district range from three point
nine percent would be the
smallest single increase and it
goes up to six point seven
percent.
And then on page three
there's a map of the judicial
districts for your reference
The last thing I wanted to point
out is that.
We got some information and Mr
Montoya just spoke to at.
Are we got some information on
the compensation package so it
looks like is that in order for
the district attorney's to
employment the pay structures
discussed their cost about
thirteen percent.
Which is actually winds up
really close to the LFC
recommendation which has about
six and a half percent.
Attorney rate in the base plus
another seven percent that would
be in the back of the bill so
those two are are.
Pretty compatible I would say.
So with that
you can start on the first
judicial district attorney this
is page for.
There is an overall one hundred
twelve thousand dollar
difference in the.
Person category.
Where the LFC recommended more
funding than did the executive
essentially it's it's that pay
package both are.
Recommendations fully funded but
since the request in contractual
services and other costs and I'd
like to turn it over to Mr
Chapman's.
Good afternoon madam chair
Dennis branch of scientific
knowledge to also to dust.
I would like to hear on a few
things on first of the
compensation package for the
executive is not built into any
of these based budgets so a
tech.
It would be built on which would
be the four percent across the
board as a dust came in with
a with a request for the
attorneys on.
Instead the executive
recommended it for all of them
which includes our staff which
is four percent.
going into agency to fifty one
hundred executive did recommend
an expansion of increasing FTE
as a needs some for assistance
trial attorneys on that's a
total of three hundred sixty
eight thousand dollars.
And with that else in that two
of the first.
District attorney merry comic
all rights.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee I would
first like to start by extending
our thanks and gratitude to both
DFA and LFC we submitted an
expansion budgets and a
relatively large increase our
overall budget and I believe
that both of them listen very
carefully to the needs of the
first initial districts
what we would be asking is sort
of a hybrid of both budgets I'd
ask you to follow the DFA for
our general fund and for the new
positions I'm gonna share my
screen quickly if you all don't
mind
it shows our expansion budget
request this is the first
expansion budget that the first
has asked for in at least twelve
years so we are still operating
at the two thousand I think nine
or ten
amount of employees that that
was given back in two thousand
ten and the population is
growing quite a bit and that
time and so has crime
unfortunately and we did request
a total of eleven new employee
positions but for gets us at
least part of the way there and
we very much appreciate DFA.
Part of the LFC package that we
would ask that this Committee
follow is the the pay package
that is especially important for
the first initial district right
now we actually have no I'm
funded opening open attorney
positions we are fully staffed
I'm gonna knock on wood while I
say that because probably by the
end of the day that will have
changed and the reason for that
is we are in in the first but
particularly in Santa Fe we are
always competing against other
state agencies and I think it's
Representative Trujillo just
mentioned we're we are the the
lowest rate state agency in
Santa Fe and so what happens is
my attorneys come in they get
two to three years of experience
and then they're taken by
another state agency and I do
not begrudge those attorneys or
the other state agencies but we
do have constant turnover and so
we're constantly training and
having to try to keep up with
these large dockets
and so this pay package increase
with very much help with
retention
as I said we do not have a
problem with with recruitment
but it is for tension that is
the issue and my attorney's are
working flat out in fact on the
second page if you look at
our jury trials we did twenty
six and calendar year twenty
twenty one that's more jury
trials than we did in two
thousand eighteen two thousand
nineteen to that or two thousand
twenty and so my attorneys are
all I'm worried about burnout
and if I can't pay them for what
their worst and for how much
they're working I I will
continue to lose experienced
attorneys
I would also like to echo what
AODA has asked for for our CMS
system
it is it's past the end of its
life and it is desperately
needed and so I would also ask
that this committee.
Recommends the full amount
requests for CMS and I thank you
all and with that'll stand for
questions.
Thank you very much I don't see
any questions so let's let's go
ahead and move on thank you
thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
Shares of the next
next up is the second judicial
district attorney.
That's gonna be on page six
there is a one hundred forty
three thousand dollar difference
overall the executive is higher
in and that is from the general
fund.
Party of that difference is in
the person category.
Right.
Madam chair members of the
committee you'll see.
The executive also includes an
expansion request for the
investor independent
investigations bureau four
hundred and ninety four thousand
dollars.
On.
And that's all I have to.
Okay.
We need our our DA.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is James
person I'm chief deputy and
second judicial district.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair.
We'd like to make sure that the
committee members received a
copy of the response to the
status update on Bernalillo
county crime there was email
early this afternoon and we just
like to highlight corrected
numbers of a conviction rate of
eighty three percent.
A declination rate of thirty
seven percent and dismissal rate
of sixteen percent.
And with that I'll turn it over
to our chief administrative
officer Carl Martinez.
Okay let me ask did everybody
get a copy of that because I
don't have it so I I need to
have somebody send that to me.
Connor of Bill we need to make
sure the committee gets a copy
of that did you send that also
the LFC James.
We did madam chair okay you have
a copy that Connor.
I do not but it might also be
related to I believe house bill
I.
And I have not been working on
that but we can dig around and
try to find a yeah make sure
that the whole committee gets a
copy of that thank you.
Chair members of the committee
thank you for your time the
softer.
I just quickly want to highlight
a couple things first of all we
want to thank both the LFC and
DFA further recommendations and
really listening to the concerns
of the second judicial DA's
office for us the big concerns
are lost of funding coming from
federal grants that will be
ending here in September so
needing to replace some of those
key positions related to our
sexual assault kit initiative
and our community based crime
reduction requests the other
thing is I believe both the LFC
and DFA have recommended an
extension of our special
appropriation funds which is
super critical to our needs
since that also funds of many of
our crime strategy unit
employees so we just wanted to
highlight as well as to just
echo some of the other.
Comments made by the previous DA
and I'm sure you'll hear moving
on as far as retention and
recruitment we did an analysis
of our loss of employees since
COVID is happens and we have
lost on average and I'm looking
at just other DA's offices and
other state agencies we lost our
employees for approximately ten
percent more rate than what we
can pay and so we as well even
though we are in a large
metropolitan area are also
struggling with not only
recruitment but retention of
quality attorneys so other than
that I stand for questions that
the committee may have thank
you.
I don't see any and so thank you
Carla let's go on to the next
one please.
Madam chair of the next one up
is the third judicial district
attorney.
The LFC recommended four point
three percent increase from the
general fund well the executive
recommended a three point one
percent increase.
the LFC Executive
recommendations both reflect the
agency requests for other
revenues.
The LFC applaud the entirety of
the additional recommendations
to the person category to fill
vacant positions while the
executive record recommendation
reduce that category five fifty
eight thousand seven hundred to
better align with prior year
expenditures are both
recommendations fully funded the
request for contractual
services.
The executive fully funded the
request for the other costs
category well the LFC
recommendation help back
category flat relative to the FY
twenty two operating budget
LFC and executive staff reached
consensus on performance
measures and targets now turn it
over to Mr troubles.
Right.
Madam chair nothing at.
All right can we go ahead and
have the DA office
representative please.
Yes good afternoon madam chair
this Gerald buyers District
Attorney third judicial district
and madam chair and other
members of the committee thank
you for taking the time to
receive our presentation this
afternoon
Most importantly I wanted to
thank the committee for all of
their support in prior years in
providing the funding necessary
to keep our agency operating
especially down here on the
border we are also requesting
that the committee follow the
recommendations of LFC and the
four point three percent
although it didn't hit the level
of the six point seven we
certainly appreciate the the
four point three and we can
certainly use that one of the
topics that we have been
struggling with as of the
committee has heard from other
district attorneys offices is
the situation involving
retention of attorneys and
compensation rates I will let
the information that has been
provided to the committee to the
committee stand I have nothing
substantive to add to that or in
addition us specifically other
than to stress the fact that in
the number of situations in
which we have lost attorneys of
the amount of compensation has
been of of considerable import
also I wanted to let the
committee know that even though
we are in a pandemic the
pandemic has not.
reduced in its intensity or
ferocity our attorneys are still
doing pre trial detention
motions even to try to keep the
public safe at a success rate
hovering between thirty five and
thirty eight percent of with
regard to the new pre trial
detention rules and of that
additional work load that goes
to those attorneys also we're
having to look into the
possibility of the impact of
dealing with the expungement of
records and so those are some of
the challenges which are facing
us we are currently short we
have currently six unfilled
Attorney positions however I
would strongly recommend of the.
Salary adjustments as proposed
by district attorney Montoya as
being.
Extremely helpful in attracting
recruiting and retaining of
these qualified professionals to
keep our community safe and with
that I'll stand for questions.
All righty thank you Sir let's
go is there any questions for
the third.
I don't see anything the so
thank you very much but I'd like
you to stick around in case
there are.
Thank you Sir let's move on
Connor.
Yes ma'am of the fourth judicial
district attorney there is a six
thousand seven hundred dollar
overall difference
the LFC is lower than is the
executive the entirety of that
difference is in but the person
category once again the LFC
recommendation is slightly lower
than the executive
recommendation Mr Johnson.
No.
Right we need to do a place.
Yes good afternoon madam chair
my name is Tom Clayton I am
blessed and honored to represent
the people of all what are some
negating wanted to pick
counties.
What in the north central part
of the state and beautiful part
of our of our state and I just
want to first thank madam chair
and the committee and all all
representatives in the on the
efforts that you're doing and
done in the past
our delegation from from this
area has been phenomenal in the
past well this is my first term
as the district attorney but
I've served with previous
district attorney for this in
for sixteen years and our
representatives and served us
well all we stand in support of
request for the funds for
recruitment and retention all I
don't want to re.
The state what they have
indicated but that is critical
all yesterday excuse me last
week one of my attorneys left in
the left a lot because you
dislike the office one it
because he disliked of the
colleagues because there was a
change in pace of change in on
the issue of compensation so I
think it's something we need to
address
we also support the request for
the salaries for elected
officials to go up because I
address as addressed previously
the question becomes when you
have of some of the lower
ranking on incoming attorneys
making as much or more than the
elected as well as judges and so
on it has an impact all an
adverse impact so we are asking
that you prove the budget as
request.
Right do we have any questions.
I don't see any service so let's
go ahead Connor go ahead.
All right madam chair up next is
the fifty judicial district
attorney overall there's a
thirty three thousand four
hundred dollar difference in the
recommendations be LFC
recommended a hundred sixty one
thousand dollars more than that
the executive however it also
recommended a hundred twenty
eight thousand dollars last in
other transfers
but the executive that's
generally related to grants the
entirety of that thirty three
thousand dollar difference is in
the personal services employee
benefits category I'm now turn
it over to Mr jobs.
I'm coming.
Right we need today.
Madam chair of the center of all
this DA Diana Lewis could not
break loose from the.
the Senate Judiciary Committee
that all right I apologize you
know you noted that earlier and
so I'll be a I'll be handling
her her recommendation she does
indicate that the LFC
recommendation is what she would
prefer she also wants this
committed now that she fully
supports.
All of course the the.
The.
It just presented by the New
Mexico district attorneys
association she is one of the
dust that has a as a real
difficult time recruiting and
retaining attorneys down into
the southeast part of the state
on and she constantly loses
attorneys to not only private
practice but to many other state
agencies I think what you've
heard from just heard from all
D. A. Clayton is that people
often leave because thank you
get a job that pays them more
and they actually have less of a
hectic schedule and so with that
I know
her CFO is online as well so if
there's any questions of me or
also Switzer we'd be happy to
answer that thank you.
Right well I don't see any hands
up and if you would share with
her we we know she's done a
wonderful job and you know if it
was a few years ago that she's
the one who set up the whole
data fees so we could really
understand what was going on.
Our with pre trial and and these
other things so if you would
just make sure she knows that
is certainly appreciated all of
her work.
pass that on all right let's go
on Connor.
All right thanks the sixty
judicial district attorney
There is a fifty thousand dollar
difference overall but LFC
recommendation is higher from
the general fund.
When we get down to uses the.
Both recommendations increase
the personal services employee
benefits category it's just the
executive increase them by about
thirty seven thousand dollars
more than could be LFC
where the LFC increased
contractual services and the
other costs category more than
the executive and that was done
to reflect the agency requests
turn it over to Roger is.
No comment.
All righty let's just go ahead
and go right into the dust
presentation go ahead Sir.
Good afternoon madam chair good
to see if it's been like for
maybe two months since I saw you
last it's just nice to stare you
can see a map I just wanted to
start off then by of course
thanking the madam chair and and
and the whole entire committee
not only for what you've done
but what you continue to do that
helps my district and that
allows me to serve the people of
all of my communities I also
like to just go a little quicker
so to my representatives that
can be Sweetser and thank her as
well for all the support and all
the help that she's given us
tremendous and I appreciate her
more than words can say I'd also
like to thank the LFC analysts
to Mister Jorgensen as well is
that the panelists Mr Childers
for all their hard working for
them being so supportive of us
and trying to help us along as
far as our budget and how it
affects our service and what we
do for each of our communities
I'm sure you know the sixty
additional district is comprised
of three counties Luna grant and
you double.
The way southwest corner of our
state two of my counties border
the Republic of Mexico needless
to say that affects a lot what
goes on in my County as far as
the criminal activity in and the
prosecution's that come to my to
my office
I wanted to also mention their
forty employees of that there on
in my district right now we have
to attorney positions that are
open one secretary position and
I believe one victim advocate
position so we're almost to
capacity not quite we're close
of as I'm sure you all could
could could some mice I'm
advocating for the highest of
the to recommendations of the
LFC at the recommendation of the
there's a difference of like
fifty thousand dollars of with
that funding I I feel that you
can continue to work in my
district in the in an addressing
what I mentioned earlier the
complexity that's increased
tremendously at the border of
these is taking a real funny
little changing twist it's not
so much destruction out public
still is drugs and also real
problem coming through there now
but it's also involving in my
area of sex trafficking human
trafficking things of that
nature that my office and and my
prosecutors law enforcement work
try to work hand in hand with
the federal law enforcement
agencies that also served in my
district and try to protect the
border as you all know we're
we're really rural district it
has additional quirkiness when
you when you're rural one of
them of course is the retention
and the recruitment of attorneys
and keeping the prosecutors on
hand in my district I would say
roughly a third of the
prosecutors commute of I would
see about roughly the majority
of them from Los crucis we even
have one from the Pasco Texas
believe it or not they come
committees to my office so all
of those things that to expenses
in line item concerns going on
on your budget and you're trying
to fund keeping good people
trying to make sure that you not
only recruit of the people that
you need to have but also
retained the ones.
That you already have so I just
wanted to share that with you I
also be and and in support of
the us for the ten percent
increase I hope it's something
you all would would consider for
for not only my district before
all of my colleague dust that
need the same kind of support
one of the last things I wanted
to bring up is that so we are I
I we feel we need a real urgent
computer I. T. up right we
haven't had one since twenty
fourteen my district is working
real hard to go paperless so
it's it's real dependent and
will necessary that our
technology the the up to date
and up to speed on some of the
most current so so that we can
stay effective when we go
virtual things of that nature
that we've kind of had to do
because of the COVID surgeon so
for and the last thing in
relation to that currently I am
currently working the remote
schedule with my staff but in
the B. type schedule trying to
keep them safe I know that the
COVID thing is surging so even
more crucial you know so that we
can become or state affected
when we're representing the
district in in the in the court
proceedings so all of those kind
of these I know we all have that
summer in common some are not
common but the I just wanted to
thank you all again for the
opportunity to address you and
and I'm hoping that you approve
budget that we're asking for
which is the higher one and
hopefully we get a little more
with the ten percent that madam
chair stand for questions.
Already Sir right I don't see
any hands up.
So why don't we go ahead and
move on Connor thank you Sir
thank you.
Madam chair next is the seventh
judicial district attorney
you'll see there is a an overall
difference of twenty thousand
dollars the executive is higher
than the LFC
and once again the entirety of
that difference is in the person
category I now turn it over to
Mr jobs.
Madam chair on.
Connor and everything.
All right if we could please Mr
DA.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm Clint Welborn and
the district attorney for the
seventh judicial district which
is catching Sierra Sapporo
imports County I'm starting my
twenty second year as the
district attorney and the senior
district attorney at this point
I'd like to thank the chair and
members of the committee for all
the support you've given us in
the past I'm sure you'll give us
this year also
also want to thank Connor for
his work that he's done he's
we've had is our analyst before
we're happy seeing back we work
well for him before in the past
than Bryant for his work you've
just attended many of our
meetings that we've had to get
input and become more acquainted
with what the district attorney
said and how we work and we
really thank him for that effort
in both their work on our our
budgets.
are a.
Recommendation is a little bit
higher and so we are asking the
committee to take that
recommendation
We are.
We have had a problem you've
heard and I'm just echoing it
same thing that all the other
districts should have said we've
always had a problem recruiting
attorney specially our rural
district we have a very small
communities that is not
necessarily place young attorney
wants to go to so we've always
had a challenge recruiting
attorneys but we've had some
some success we're taking those
attorneys this year however the
we lost three attorneys during
the course of the year and we
had
the two attorneys that we're
looking at retiring and then one
attorney was looking at leaving
the office to to run for public
office and I was able to so we
were and we only have ten it
turns to to start with so that
was more than half our staff we
were looking at losing all at
one time I was able to talk to
two attorneys retiring into
putting that off for a while to
help us a little bit and then
the one attorney has decided not
to run for public office so
that's a going to say this but
the loose if we had actually
lost six this year that would be
and more than half of our staff
and I would have to continue
with the cases of cases the all
white whatever attorneys leave
they have to pick up.
Other terms have to pick up the
files and go for those
prosecutions even though they
are have a full workload
so we've always had that problem
in this year for the first time
recently we've had problems
recruiting support staff we've
never had problems in the past
reporting support staff but for
the past year maybe a little
more than a year we've had real
problems challenges getting
people just apply for positions
that we have opened a support
staff secretarial and support
staff so that's been a real
challenge for so I would like to
ask the committee to also the
Our vice president Mr Montoya
integrated all districts are
requesting additional ten
percent for recruitment and
retention that's that's really
needed I can't tell you how much
it's really need for all the
districts across the state so it
S. important to are the
committee to consider that it
also
The elected's in the past have
not been included in the
compensation increased and we
have special language or a
separate statute and I think
this is been echoed by Google
district attorneys
to keep pace with the cost of
living and everything we would
just support the committee to
consider that also that language
of compensation for the elected
to as one sentence kind of a.
Discouraging when you have
supports are attorneys
underneath you that are making
more than elected and or or more
than judges of and with that I'd
stand for any questions a
committee may have.
Right we have any questions.
Mr Welborn I don't see any so
we're gonna have you hang a with
us until the very end if you
don't if there are questions so
let's go ahead move on Connor.
All right madam chair next up is
the eight district attorney
Overall there's a twelve
thousand eight hundred dollar
difference the LFC
recommendation was higher than
the executive by about a mile
there's true differences in
terms of uses one is in our.
The person category where the
LFC recommendation included an
additional sixty two thousand
eight hundred dollars where the
executive how the category flat.
Then in contractual services
well basically opposite happened
the executive applied fifty
thousand dollars to that
category and the LESC
recommendation.
Legislative out smaller increase
doctor turned over to Mr jobs.
Madam chair on nothing at.
All right if we could go ahead
and go into the aid quickly.
Madam chair this is Andrew from
the by thank you presented when
he did his overall when he
started out so we we've heard
that one eight
thank you thank you Sir let's go
on to the night.
All right madam chair and
members but I judicial district
attorney you can see there's a
hundred ninety eight thousand
dollar difference between the
LESC and the executive
recommendation be LFC
recommendation is higher
and once again the entirety of
that differences in personality
mostly supports the races in the
LFC recommendation now turn it
over to Mr chair.
Jennifer.
Already a going at.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee again
I'm Andrea read also my CFO
Steve north is on the zoom with
me I want to also begin by I
think this is about the eighth
or ninth time I've been in front
of this committee it this
committee is always treated the
night very well as I think I
mentioned before I'm retiring so
this will be the last time a
friend of the committee I wanted
to say thank you for always said
to read into north very well and
all agency coming in front of
the committee for sure I would
like to also thank LESC for all
their work on our budget that is
a recommendation that we're
asking the committee to go with
in addition to the ten percent
of the other dust are asking for
for the two hundred category for
recruiting and retention I think
that recommendation definitely
took into account what the needs
for the ninety additional
district are specifically do
Raul pay issue that's been
brought up before D.
differential pay I think I've
mentioned many times I've
watched my attorneys walk over
to the public defender for an
additional ten thousand dollars
just because as they have that
rule rate
in addition what's happening is
there hasn't been a necessarily
decrease in crime there's been a
increase in violent crime which
is causing us to need more
experienced attorneys to
prosecute those cases and those
are the cases we don't have the
attorneys to prosecute so what
we're doing in our district in
many other districts as work
contracting out to more
experienced attorneys and having
to use our money it and move it
into a contractual basis in
order to actually get some
experienced attorneys to
prosecute I think in my district
I have to so I think that's
something we don't want to be
happening but what we're
basically you're required to do
at this point to get competent
prosecution on some of these
very violent cases that were
seen during.
Comment other than that
everything else is just
repetitive of what the other
district attorneys have stated
so I don't have anything else to
add just again thank you and I
appreciate all talking and and
your service over the years to
the ninety additional district.
Right it was Representative
Crowder question thank you madam
chair.
Very quickly madam chair a RDA
and your readers serve the
community of curry county and
and that Roosevelt for twenty
five years in the DA's office
she is going to be sorely missed
she is taking her personal time
and come to Santa Fe as an
expert witness for many of the
legislators she has gone way
above and beyond what IDA could
have done in and we're gonna
mission be thanks thank you
Representative Crowder.
Representative Crowder were all
going to research is done a
great job for the state of New
Mexico and certainly on behalf
of the house appropriations and
finance committee we want to
extend a hearty thank you and
have fun on retirement.
Thanks.
J. R. I..
Okay if we could Connor list go
head move on please.
Madam chair next is the.
District attorney the overall
difference is forty five
thousand three hundred dollars
the executive recommendation is
higher than the LFC and once
again the entirety of that
difference is and the person
category now turn it over to
Brian jobs.
Madam chairman no comment.
All right let's go to the DA
please.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee good afternoon I'm
Timothy rose the and it sent to
the school district level echo
of all the coming concerns in
the request that we have from
the DA's Association AODA I
would like to make a comment on
this a dust quest for the for
the CMS upgrades something that
I've noticed for the last decade
or more that we really really
need a number to the CMS system
every employee of the district
attorney's office is working in
works on cases utilizes and
needs that program to be able to
do their jobs but also like to
add will request from the to the
judicial the judicial.
Of course for the request for
drug court.
Of program that's that's not in
existence never happened
existence in the tent we need to
with our judges and our law
enforcement
people up by weekly basis and
equity County in the Balkan
Harding and that's one of the
things we've talked about over
the last year is having a joint
recommendation the support that
program.
Which leads me to my third
request which is not in our
appropriations request because
it came a little later than the
deadline for submitting our our
budget.
or law enforcement agencies or
courts and our office as
developed over the last few
months a pre trial services.
Project our office spent about
thirty thousand dollars buying a
GPS monitors breathalyzers of
substance abuse the quicker
testing kits and we started to
implement a pre trial services
for the first time in and the
consistency.
Some of you may have known that
most pre trial services.
divisions are dealt with through
the courts and the in this
through the courts budget.
Again that's yet this never had
a pre trial services.
Division and now with more
people being released for pre
trial detention rules etcetera
in the through the pandemic we
have a lot of people out of
conditions of release that
really no way to supervise.
So we've we've now have the
equipment I hired a temporary
employee to start that program
when you get up and running over
the next several months again
it's a temporary position but we
what we really need to keep that
program going is another full
time position.
So we like the the committee to
to think about consider a
request is not in our request so
far which is added to the small
pulley the full time employee
of.
Prosecution specialist of mid
range for that is fifty five
thousand approximately so we'll
be talking to our our
representatives and senators
over the next week or so
potentially get that through a
junior bill or sentiment but
otherwise I'd like to bring that
up madam chair and and if it's
possible to have that considered
by the committee is part of our
our budget to this committee was
put a note to that staff on that
don't let me forget that okay.
Already do we have any questions
for Mr rose.
I don't see any service please
hang tight with us until we
finish up.
Thank you thank you Sir.
All right Connor.
Okay madam chair next is alive
division one.
Overall there is a two hundred
ninety four thousand dollar
difference the LFC
recommendation is higher from
the general fund there's all
also the LFC recommendation is
eighty three thousand dollars
lower that is the executive from
other transfers again those are
those are generally program
grants so the total difference
that is two hundred eleven
thousand dollars and once again
the entirety of that difference
is the person services category
I now turn it over to Mr jobs.
madam chair nothing at.
Right let's go to the DA.
Madam chair members of the
committee always a pleasure to
see here madam chair hope you're
doing well.
One of the fun things about have
the last name Ted Rowe or the in
in the eleventh is I'm always at
the end of the list ago on stuff
so a lot of what I have to say
is already been been mentioned
so I would just I I can move
beyond that
I would like to thank you on my
CFO I do believe she still on
here hopefully she is but all
the hard work she does
throughout the year and working
with the LFC and DFA in
preparing our budgets so I would
like to give a special shout out
to my CFO we I would also like
to thank Connor Brian for their
tiredness working efforts
throughout the past year and
building this and and a special
thank you to David Abbey for all
the hard work he does up there
at the LFC.
I think most of what I could say
has already been said I would
just like to point out
We don't need expansion of our
area of we need recruitment what
we're suffering just like all
the others are my last little
time down for attorneys which
gets me pretty close to twenty
percent of my attorney staff so
a big thing we pushed on in the
big thing that's been recognized
today is it is our serious in
desperate need
for the recruitment abilities
and so we need the flexibility
to go out and recruit and retain
of course we all want to ask for
or Hey recommendation this.
For fourteen years it's always
been a lower recommendation and
it's a pleasure to be here the
committee looking at the the
higher ones and all higher ones
the LFC I would just ask that we
make sure that even vacated.
Basically with Aston or a base
budget is fully funded and then
we build from that that's always
a concern we all know how
vacancies can really affect or
based budgets but in order to
build we need to make sure that
we are fully funded where we can
be in our base budget and then
build from there and I think
caller mentioned the beginning
when we're talking about one
thing we're looking at for
recruitment and retention of the
term uses the thirteen percent
increases I think that's
absolutely necessary for us to
do and I would ask this
committee and madam chair if you
all would seriously consider
that
so my recommendation my
preferences of course LESC
committee with an understanding
that we're full for fully
funding the base and then going
for some of the extensions I
would also like to mention.
Mr Lee mentioned that to you all
some of us are looking at having
the contract attorneys because
we're suffering greatly from
having an opportunity to hire
experienced attorneys you all
know as well as we do that one
thing you really don't want is a
young or baby prosecutor having
a high profile.
Excuse me a high profile or you
know those had a murder rates
the rates cases of that sort you
know we need experienced people
who can do this and so.
One thing we noticed this year's
I believe it's representative
Garcia and Representative Dow
both have a bill for the return
to work I would like to point
out that that would assist the
district attorney's offices as
well in the event that we go
find some people that have a lot
a lot of experience expression
prosecution and bring them back
in to help us on those certain
case so I would like to give a
little bit of a shot up for all
the members to keep the return
to work in mind it would benefit
our offices greatly.
Last point out I believe that
the.
Do a well worn pointed out is
just a reminder that I think
it's appropriate for the elected
district attorneys to receive
compensation and raises along
with other electors throughout
the state we always believe that
we need that special language in
there just like judges do and so
we which we what we would ask in
support of course for any
compensation that goes along
with that we feel it's
important.
just just for the electoral body
and for the district attorney's
themselves to have that
opportunity and to stable
inflation
I really can't pretend to know
what you guys are going through
two months ago when we look at
this stuff I think they were
saying inflation just nationwide
was at like six and a half and
we're already over the age range
I I thank you for all the hard
work you do madam chair I know.
There's no one out of the nose
this budget and this committee
more than you do so I thank you
for what you do it's not an easy
task but we appreciate every
opportunity you give us to as
the governor said I think there
and we're trying to think big
and how we can help just our
constituents are counties or
districts in our state so thank
you for all that everybody does
not stand for questions.
Right thank you very much for
the presentation let me ask is
there any questions for division
one.
I don't see any for right now
but we do ask that you hang
tight we get through all this
questions and I I know that
Henry is going to
provide the information for
division two.
Memory.
Want to start honor go ahead
Conor o'clery.
You madam chair and then.
So the.
Division two because it is
agency code to sixty five you'll
find on twenty
twenty three in your packet.
Overall there is a forty seven
thousand dollar difference in
from the general fund the LFC
recommendation was higher and
once again the entirety of that
amount of personal services
category I'm not sure it over to
Mr Chavez.
Madam chair nothing at.
All right.
And we were ready.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee
This tourney from Gallup.
Miss Martin extends her
apologies for not being able to
be here she had a family
emergency over the weekend that
necessitate leaving out of state
also she requested that that I
present I know her fiscal
officer to do as is with us
today so she's available on to
answer any questions but
miss Martin R. O. does request
the LFC recommendation on and
fully supports the our pre The
presentation done by the New
Mexico District Attorney
Association.
And with that will stand for
questions etcetera.
I don't see any so why don't we
go ahead Connor and and move on
them.
Okay madam chair and then we're
back on the twelfth this is on.
there's an eleven thousand three
hundred dollar difference from
the general fund that the LFC
recommendation was higher than
is thank you to and the entirety
of this difference is and the
person category I'll now turn it
over to Mr job.
Madam chairman of COVID.
Go to the DA.
Thank you madam chairwoman my
name is catching on the dust
from the twelfth judicial
district and that comprises of
terribly County.
as always to create the the
efforts of the of the LFC and
all over.
Representatives and senators in
Santa Fe
I understand that I might be a
you might be beneficial to me to
focus on privative at this late
date in time so I will be a very
very quick with my comments.
I need a for over thirty two
years and the all most of those
years have been in terrible
Lincoln County so I think I
understand what our local
problems are and while I'm not
going to go into the a retention
and recruitment I think it's a
very good idea to to consider.
I Geographic pay as one of those
tools that we might be able to
use for recruitment.
I I have the chart from the
hello PED the public defender's
office and the I was a bit
surprised that
when they recruited attorneys to
Alamogordo they consider
Alamogordo to the I guess
geographically challenged and
they pay
three dollars and fifty cents an
hour more for attorneys that
come down here no that doesn't
sound like too much per hour but
over the entire year that works
out to be over seventy two
hundred dollars and then not
been read us so they get
Geographic pay up to about sixty
seven hundred dollars.
Now you know in the big picture
that may not sound like a huge
amount of money but if you
consider a young attorney route
Law School either from Texas
tech were you on amber some
other state you know that that
might draw you.
To a certain area and certainly
on the other side of the aisle
as a public defender and I think
it's probably incumbent upon all
of us to to consider that on the
IDA side as well.
it's hard really to compare what
we do with public defender's
office is just just like apples
and oranges while I understand
the comparisons of the
legislature but well we we have
a the comparisons are really not
appropriate best Bonner
statutory functions and what we
do
we up do a lot of investigations
that do not end up as a as a
criminal case and I think that
all we all need to kind of
understand where where that's
coming from now during the.
Comment crisis last eighteen
months to two years we were
along with the ninth judicial
district we're couple districts
that we're we're chosen and
suggested by the Supreme Court
to run a pilot project regarding
COVID trials and I'm proud to to
let you know that we during that
fiscal year we did seventy one
District Court jury trials and
the.
COVID that's a big challenge
it's a huge challenge and we we
had great success during that
time add to your three for St
Martin trials and and both of
the counties
in fact that number seventy one
I think you'll you'll find that
that's the most in New Mexico.
And certainly Clovis import
talus was a close second but
to that to is is there are a
real testament of the employees
that we do have a currently we
we have allocated by the
legislature a total of sixteen
attorney slots.
Plus the elected DA for a total
of seventeen but currently and
and and probably not on an
unusual time period we we only
have twelve total attorneys at
the time.
And so this is nothing new here
and and you're out lose a couple
in a couple are and we're we're
pretty much around that time
that that number of constantly
and so of course we would love
to have a full full slate of
attorneys but to without help.
We're not going to get close to
that but we we've taken a look
at both LFC and and DFA and we
appreciate their.
Their study of of the the budget
request LFC is a bit higher.
We would like to suggest that
that is more appropriate we also
asked maybe some consideration
for from some other monies to
help us on that project project
to to get some of Chloe's closer
to the mid point in our budget
to and and we would consider
that a retention type
allocation of money.
But that's kind of the
highlights and the lowlights.
This year we appreciate you all
and all I certainly will stand
for questions or anything that
should have have for me
regarding our our our budget or
what's going on in and Lincoln
and Otero County.
Thank you all righty thank you
Sir I don't see any hands up so
we just ask you to hang on until
we finish the next
the next office and then if we
do have questions we'll go ahead
basket that time so thank you
certainly thank you okay Connor.
Thank you madam chair.
The final presentation is the
thirteenth judicial district
attorney you'll see the the
first difference is the LFC
record are the executive
recommended five hundred
eighteen thousand dollars more
from the general fund the end of
the LFC the LESC also
recommended one hundred fifty
thousand dollars from fund
balances not in the.
Act recommendations of a total
difference in terms of revenue
was three hundred sixty eight
thousand dollars and the
executive was higher the
entirety of that amount was in
the personal services category
and I would now turn it over to
Mr jobs.
Madam chair members the
committee just one note on the
executive the executive did
recommend an expense request an
additional seven FTE for US
seven hundred twenty one
thousand dollars.
With that I would turn it over
to the district attorney by real
more real.
We go ahead.
Afternoon madam chair members of
the committee I want to echo
what some of my predecessors and
said and thank the committee
certainly and the analyst Brian
and Connor for their hard work
on this.
Obviously I am I am reckon I am
asking that you go with the
recommendation with from DFA as
far as the expansion that's the
that's the critical difference
that that I see of course I
would also ask that the
committee considered the pay
package that has been
recommended by the LFC and judge
I pull actually summed up what
the issues are in our district
and the need for the expansion
when he said the thirteenth is
experiencing growing pains.
we have the highest.
We Sandoval County was the
fastest growing county in the
state per the last census we are
the I believe if not in the
fastest growing judicial
district we're certainly one of
the fastest growing judicial
districts we have a huge
spillover effect from
Albuquerque that has really
increased our attorney's
caseload we average around two
hundred cases per attorney which
is unsustainable and all of the
request and I'm advocating for
they all go hand in hand just
like the other district
attorneys have said
riteaid retention and
recruitment is a problem
the expansion I feel would be if
we need more attorneys but if I
can't pay them and it's it's not
gonna really do any good because
I'm I'm not gonna be able to
keep that.
So along with that contract
services just like everybody
else said you know our violent
crime rate has increased even
since the last since the numbers
we gave you from the the that
when we submitted the budget
are violent crimes in all three
counties continues to increase
in fact over the weekend we just
had a new homicide and Cibola
County in requests so I I did
submit a handout weeks pretty
much
Summarizes and in the right the
rationale and the the nature of
the expansion in our priorities
and and the justifications for
those so with that I will stand
for questions and again I want
to sincerely thank you madam
chair and the committee members
and the analyst for their hard
work on this.
Thank you very much we have a
question representative Garcia
thank you madam chair all.
Not really a question madam
chair to concern
of the barman year old mansion
and judge Michael mention you
know the going rate we're going
through in this district and
the.
If you look at all the numbers
the thirteenth was hit the
hardest five hundred eighteen
thousand dollars and.
Madam chair if we get staff to
reconsider an adjustment on this
that would be very much
appreciated because at the end
of the day we're gonna wind up
hurting and all.
That's about it madam chair.
Thank you very much.
We go to the full committee
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair looking at
the PS count sheets madam chair
where they do have the seven
bacon's on the PS cap sheet but
under the funded vacancies that
it's a negative three point
three thousand and dollar by
three hundred forty two
thousand.
In the whole it's it's.
Yep can LFC analysts maybe help
me understand our our however
the shown a negative number.
In their funded vacancies in
color in.
Sure you madam chair and
Representative Crowder so often
times what we see it with
shortfalls in person is a
negative funded vacancy rate
which essentially means there
are more people working than
there is budget for when that
happens there is often agencies
will have to move money from one
budget category into another and
or tap on the balance and so I
think.
Representative Garcia is point
You know that that was part of
why the LFC recommendation
included a six point six percent
increase it was the second
highest.
All the district attorneys and
it is at least partially and
Response to that that person
issue in the district and again
the big differences LFC you did
six point six percent DFA
recommended fifteen point two
percent.
Good thank you madam chair and
Connor I guess.
Curiosity is this an indicator
of of the of the situation where
they could have transferred
money out of PSEB for contract
labor the creates this kind of a
number.
No Sir
I'm negative funded vacancy rate
typically just means.
Of the the budget that they have
in the category is insufficient
to hire the folks.
All right thank you card thank
you madam chair.
I don't see any other hands up
I'm going to go to
Representative Sweetser
promotion.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for everyone's participation
I would move the LFC
recommendation.
Representative Dixon.
What okay we have a motion and a
second for the LFC.
Just want to remind all the
presenters that during catch up
clean up we will be looking at
those differences it doesn't
make sense that the.
That we wouldn't particularly
any here we have more funds
available I want to assure you
that will be the plan so we have
a motion and a second.
Representative Crowder thank you
madam chair.
Ketchup I know you you mentioned
and I completely agree that
would look the chance for some
of their needs they expressed of
I'm curious about.
We're gonna look at all
Representative Crowder okay.
Thank you madam chair I heard
mention it the the dust are not
going to be eligible for the the
elected the ETS are not to be
eligible for the seven percent
how is it being dealt with.
Connor do you want to respond to
that.
Sure madam chair and
Representative Crowder so the
seven percent will apply to
everybody who's statute is not
set by salaries so in order to
change the I. salary statute
would need to be a bit and that
is not part of the.
A recommendation at this point
it would need to be a separate.
Okay so neither the exact or LFC
recommended it for the elected
is that correct.
The LFC did not.
Okay I thank you madam chair.
Right we have a proper motion
and second is there any
opposition to that motion.
Your hands up Representative
Crowder is that being here in
opposition.
Okay all righty is there any
opposition seeing them with tech
in the LFC what the
understanding that we would be
looking at this during catch up
thing up I'm gonna have to
excuse myself I've got another
meeting that just started so I'm
gonna turn the video over to
Representative Sweetser want to
thank everybody for their good
work and the great presentations
today.
Representative Sweetser thank
you thank you madam chair and
thank you everyone as you know
at the beginning of our
afternoon we were having
technical difficulties with the
Attorney General and I Noticias
patiently been on all afternoon
so we we wanted to give him an
opportunity we've talked about
the budget but Attorney General
beau there us and if you at this
time would like to address the
committee we are we are all here
is for you yes madam chair woman
I'm never going to miss an
opportunity come before the
great House Appropriations and
patiently waiting was really a
privilege to to listen to many
of our judicial colleagues are
district attorney colleagues are
in and many of the
infrastructure in the justice
system I will start off by
getting right to the point and
say that we would always
appreciate the LFC
recommendation there are some
strategic reasons in addition to
more money we're a revenue
generating agency and so I think
any additional investment is
great committee wants to
legislative resources gives us a
real ability to go out and
generate revenue in terms of
regulating and policing the
market place one that comes to
mind where this committee has
invested generously in in the
AG's office in person of course
is in the opioid crisis as you
know I'll be briefing the LFC
members out of for revenue that
will be being generated not only
for the state on a historic
level but also local governments
municipalities and cities will
also benefit from this opioid
litigation funding that will go
to abatement and so even when I
hear small magistrate court
rooms and judges talking about
needing programming vital in the
rural communities I do think
that the LFC.
And also some of the local
governing bodies will be
hopefully designing of good
programming that this opioid
crisis has really really
decimated for generations in
addition requesting the LFC
recommendation I'll just close
with this because
you're all very well versed in
terms of we have the same
challenges in terms of
recruiting and retaining
retaining our employees I will
say that the more emphasis that
you're placing on the criminal
justice.
Reform.
Area in terms of of pre trial
detention in terms of penalties
are clearly today you for a
really on overwhelmed tired
administration of justice and I
think it even goes well beyond.
salaries and are stealing great
prosecutors and law enforcement
personnel from each other I will
say that it's mirrors the great
teacher shortage that I don't
know that just in addition to
salaries and you know me
stealing of employees from
agencies even if you give me
more money I don't think we're
going to to really build in the
solutions for the next five ten
fifteen years and so the public
safety crisis that we're engaged
in
really I don't even think will
be solved thank god we have more
revenue but I think other new
incentives such as a different
type of pension track.
different time the student loan
incentives we really need to
build up the a feeding system of
public servants because the
applicant's just are not there
and and it very mirrors the
education shores were you take a
school like you no we don't have
students wanting to be teachers
police officers judges
prosecutors and public defenders
with the pool is too small and
so I don't think structurally
some of the just the increases
in raises a budgets are going to
solve this crisis and so I just
sure that because I've seen
where we've given pay raises for
eight years and we just can't
keep up and I'll close with this
and this is why it's so
important I was glad to listen
in for hours today just to catch
up.
You know it was just a few weeks
ago that we were all a little
shocked by the this the young
infant that baby in the trash
can down in southeastern New
Mexico.
And
Diana loose.
Basically called our office not
only because she needed staff.
And and I made the call thinking
that I would get a bunch of
excuses from prosecutors that
are tired from COVID and would
make the drive from Santa Fe to
Albuquerque but I have
volunteers at our office a
partner with for drive down
there prepare pre trial
detention hearing.
And and I didn't even ask them I
suggested that analyst needed
help she called us.
the other thing to note that
some of these that gets lost and
I and you're all my colleagues
and so I'm going to speak more
like a a guy who's been your
partner for many years it's
embarrassing when Diana looses
taking national calls from CNN
and needing to provide
transparent answers on a case
that really we're trying to to
administer and make sure that it
doesn't reflect all children in
New Mexico and she tells me that
she doesn't have budget for a P.
I owe the public information
officer and so I think that the
lacking of infrastructure is
there and I think you have a
great.
A great skill to climb but I'm
really confident because what
you heard today and all the the
presentations is there is some
good bipartisan spirit are
agencies land officials and
staff to each other all the time
but I just think the flexibility
of actually looking at some of
those incentives a little
differently is really in your
hands and ideas and solutions
are going to come from from this
body in really saying okay how
many prosecutors did we need to
Kerry county not tomorrow but in
ten years if not I I hope that
you're gonna see great
prosecutors like from curry
county continue to retire we're
all becoming dinosaurs and tired
but I I I look forward to maybe
after the session an exciting
conversation about really
setting the bar high in terms of
what you want your your judicial
your prosecutorial your public
defenders to look like in the
next ten or twenty years I think
we need to shoot higher New
Mexico and I'll close with this
New Mexico is one of the unique
places where we are sitting on
one of the most wealthy natural
resource.
Our investments in the in in the
United States and in the Middle
East what with the discovery of
the Energy pockets and with some
of the offices that we can
generate revenue I think that
you looking toward really not
just building the infrastructure
related to penalties and jails
and statutes really saying what
do we want our judicial
prosecutorial public defender in
law enforcement.
Workforce to look like could we
be the best and brightest and
and most energetic pension
system an incentive system with
student loans I don't think
officer should pay at all when
they decide to get a degree in
New Mexico I don't think a
prosecutor public defender
should have to pay tuition to
come to one of our public
institutions I don't know why
we're struggling with student
loans and and and I just sued
the hell out of the of student
loan company to get loan
forgiveness for public servants
and it took me five or six years
and so I think.
What our our system is too
cumbersome and we're not just
losing prosecutors and officers
because of Hey but they don't
feel appreciated the workload is
insane but I know this committee
potentially has some of the
solutions and the resources to
really reinvent what we want
that system look like in five or
ten years so I'm gonna shut up
and the thank you guys it was a
real honor and again if you
consider the LFC wreck we'll
sign up for the year and and
look for to working with you.
Thank you thank you very much
Attorney General Balderas I came
on the committee late this
afternoon I was under the
impression that the analysts had
already presented.
And I'm getting the nod from
Connor that that's true so I
just want to make sure we were
we were good on that before we
went to questions so thank you
for that Connor and we do have
some committee questions for you
Attorney General Balderas will
start with Representative lane.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr Attorney General appreciate
the work you do on behalf for
citizens and the November
December I'll see many you have
presented about the gold king
mine settlement
and you had you had offered to
have your staff reach out to me
as you know I'm born raised
aspect Ms runs rolls right
through my town
and I didn't receive contexts if
you I just it just kind of a
gentle reminder if you wouldn't
mind having them reach out to me
because I know you mentioned
there is a need to get some of
those dollars and in these local
communities that were that were
in fact impacted by that awful
money still such a project that
thank you madam chair honorable
representative yeah I'm I'm I'm
disappointed we didn't we didn't
get back to you you're you're
going to be critical of
distributing some of those
funds.
Thank you for that next we have
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you Attorney General
terrace for presenting in front
of us this afternoon sorry about
the delay Madam I just have one
question regarding the
it's the multiplying effect of
some of the settlement funds
that we've seen and the high
level and high level budgets
presented to us for the term of
attorney general's office and so
my question madam chair to
Attorney General beau there is
is
There is do we have any plans as
these funds continue to have
higher and higher balances and
we get supplements and more more
cases does the agency have plans
to utilize some of those funds
for retention and record
recruiting or in the alternative
do you have any plans to get
some of these dollars back in
the pockets of folks that were
affected rather than using it
for agency needs thank you madam
chair yeah of madam chair woman
Representative open deal yeah
that's that's a great question I
think I have two answers for
that question the first is.
I think that
We've become accustomed to the
fact that that I'm aggressively
going to sue on a national level
I'm not gonna sue just locally
and wait for consumers to be
taking advantage of by a small
business we will we really
change the model and really put
New Mexico on some of the front
end litigation across this
country and and and it doesn't
matter that we're not Silicon
Valley in California doesn't
matter what we're not New York
in Wall Street but really
companies pay attention in New
Mexico because we aggressively
file lawsuits and we you allow
us to partner with some great
state employees and our state
agencies but also you allow me
to go recruit some of the best
attorneys around the country for
violations and claims and and
pains that occur in New Mexico
so that's very that's very
important but I think
Representative you this
committee could get as proactive
as you wanted once you have
noticed that a settlement coming
in to to director I generally
allow the settlements to come
back to the consumer protection
fund so this committee's
oversight can really determine
I'll give a good example recent
one with Google we sued Google
because children's privacy and
information was being
distributed through the school
system in the schools didn't
quite know but Google did they
agreed to give us three three
four million dollars just for
privacy violations and change
their practices but this
committee could design how you
want that education and
programming to to be played out
on we're not the best agency to
educate so many good agencies
that you could put this money to
work in those agencies but those
consumers the children the
families could receive a direct
benefit that you guys could
style so that's that's built
into the state line in the
second piece to your question is
we absolutely do collect
millions of dollars of direct
rested.
Yushin in terms of mediation
resolutions we put dollars back
into constituents hands all the
time by negotiate so it just
depends on the case but I would
say that that's a great
opportunity that is if if
Why I don't know how much we
brought in this year thirty
forty million dollars that this
committee could help me design
and I'll give you a good one
that we're behind on the opioid.
Litigation where we settled with
four companies I'm suing eleven
more companies but I need this
committee's input to tell me how
is it that you want to reduce
harm in addiction as it relates
to the opioid half the money
potentially is coming to your
committee and the other half is
going directly to counties and
local roads without stand for
questions but thank you I hope
that that answers a little bit
of of your question
Representative thank you madam
chair thank you Attorney General
Balderas and I would be more
than happy to work with you on
the issue of the opioid
settlements in the interim Sen
interests it's initiative very
much interest me thank you madam
chair.
Thank you Representative Hochman
Vigil we appreciate that as well
Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair thank you very much
good afternoon Attorney General
Baldur's it's good to see you
again thank you good to see
Representative.
For a long time ago.
Anyway what I might I have to
brag on our district attorney
Diana loose she has done a
magnificent job down there in
southeastern border of the
State.
We are.
Being faced daily with.
Drug trafficking human
trafficking exploitation and I
know that there was an incident
about four five years ago I was
appalled whenever I heard about
it I was notified by the Travis
county sheriff's department
about the humans that had been
smuggled and that will be there
was gusting.
I think there was a hundred and
twelve of them that were locked
in a box car out in the middle
of nowhere they got one tortilla
one glass of water a day and it
was all for human trafficking
for sex and for drug does
distribution.
Whenever I am in with miss loose
about what is going on in our
area her concern is.
There's not enough help I am
glad to know that she was able
to reach out to your office you
didn't mandate that people help
out in that case you were
discussing earlier.
But that people had compassion
enough to volunteer.
And.
To me that.
That touched my heart whenever I
heard you say that.
But I do have to give a shout
out to her and all of the people
that work.
With her in the.
The fifth judicial district
because it is getting harder and
harder and harder for them to
get everything covered that has
been coming to.
And.
I just want you to understand
the pressure the specially our
order
districts are facing.
With illegal activities
happening all the time they are
just overwhelmed and our I want
to be very aware that that's all
I have thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative and
thank you and your staff for all
hanging in with that so long
site that's all of our questions
I'm
very helpful for the progress of
Texas V. New Mexico you know
that's where my heart always
goes so thank you guys very much
for the update on that and and
and your good work with with
both mediation and.
Litigation if it comes to that
so thank you and with that I
will go to Representative Dixon
for a motion.
Thank you madam chair I would
move the LFC recommendation of
second tier I'm sorry thank you.
That's okay thank you
Representative Castellano for
the second is there anyone
opposed to the LFC
recommendation for the Attorney
General.
All right I don't see anyone so
again thank you for hanging with
us it's always great to have you
on.
Attorney General Balderas and
your staff and and I always find
things that you're working on
fascinating so we appreciate
your thank you sorry for the
technical difficulties and and
we'll look forward to continuing
to work with your office so.
All right thank you thank you
committee we are over time but
we are done have a good evening
and we'll be back at it tomorrow
afternoon thank you analyst as
well have a good evening
everyone.
