Allison.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Anderson.
Is that.
Representative Armstrong as it.
Representative Brown.
Here.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Crowder.
President Crowder.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia your.
Representative.
Representative hot then via.
Here.
Representative Lane.
I am here.
Representative Ladda.
Here.
Representative study on up here.
Representative Webster.
Representative Trujillo.
Vice chair small.
Your.
Madam chair lonesome.
Here at looks like we do have a
quorum wanted to make a couple
of announcements before we jump
into our first judicial District
Court and that is HSC will be
made in on Saturday at nine AM
and that will be subcommittee
CND those are the sub committees
that were originally scheduled
to meet last Friday and due to
some issues here at the capitol
we weren't able to do that so we
will be meeting at nine AM
that'll be subcommittee CND and
that's to complete those the two
subcommittees list of agencies
that they had and there will be
new zoom links sent out for that
Saturday meeting.
With that being said I would
like to welcome everyone here
this afternoon to the house
appropriations and finance
committee hearings and our
schedule today are the district
courts and we'll just go right
in order we're gonna start with
the analyst still put that a
different shade up.
Speak to the differentiate them
the representative from that
District Court will be asked to
make a few comments so quicker
let's go ahead and just start
with the first judicial
district.
And analysts please introduce
yourselves.
All right.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Amanda Dick
Peddie analyst for the
legislative finance committee we
are joined by Brian child
analyst for the department of
finance and administration I'm
really quickly before we get
into the first initial district
I just like to turn members
attention to pages sixteen and
seventeen of your packet and I'm
sharing that on my screen now
just so you can see the page I'm
talking about.
These are high levels they show
the detail recommendations of
the LFC and the executive it's
just a good resource to have as
we go through all the individual
budgets you can see all the
courts in one place at the same
time.
Here's another note for members
the LFC recommendation for the
courts is part of a broader and
unified budget recommendation so
even though the LFC
recommendations you'll hear this
afternoon are going to be higher
than the Executive
recommendations those increases
are offset by a one point six
million dollar reduction from
the administrative office of the
courts yes he can see exactly
what I'm saying here.
Yes college is your LESC over
and under.
Your online I you have the
administrative office of the
courts with a negative one point
six million dollars that's what
you all the doctor yesterday and
HSC.
Thank all the district courts
you're LFC has modest increases
great will increase of one point
seven million.
With that I will go ahead.
It starts with our first usual
district.
The first court for revenue the
LFC recommendation for the
general fund is two hundred and
seventy six thousand higher than
the and the executive.
In the base the LFC
recommendation including
additional funding to support
the newly created district
judgeship and associated staff
in the first usual District
Court the executive
recommendation keeps funding for
all operations lacked it Justin
FY twenty one operating budget.
Analysts response on all
performance measures and
targets.
And.
Unless Mr Chavez from the FAA
has anything to add we can turn
it over to a district judge Mary
Marlowe Sommer.
All right thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee good afternoon I am
chief judge Mary Marlowe Sommer
of the first judicial district
also in the meeting is our chief
executive officer Kathleen Miss
Vigil.
The first judicial District
Court encompasses the district
and magistrate court in the
counties of Santa Fe Rio Arriba
and Los Alamos.
I would like to give you a
little recap of what the first
judicial District Court has been
doing thanks since COVID hit
March of twenty twenty.
First of all we've been open to
the public the clerks offices in
all courts are invested violence
are self help our family court
services in our jury Services
offices.
We've continued our filings on
new and existing basis across
the board civil criminal and
family we've arranged for pro se
litigants and others to file
pleadings remotely.
From March twenty twenty two to
November of twenty twenty we've
conducted jury trials and bench
trials.
Kathleen.
Already we need the correct.
Chart please.
All continue up and for time
from March twenty twenty two
November twenty twenty we've
conducted jury trials and bench
trials in the District Court
we've held twenty one jury
selections and this is your
March and November of twenty
twenty during the COVID the
magistrate courts of health
sixty five jury and bench trials
combined.
During the past eleven months
we've kept the public safe and
our employees safe with one
possible COVID positive
originating in the Espanola
courthouse that's out of a
hundred and forty three
employees.
And despite the mixed messages
about having juries come into
the courthouse once they serve
their feedback has been
favorable.
So I'm not sure on Kathleen you
want to put that up for or
Do you all have to hand out.
Okay so we would like would you
like me to keep going Madam well
what I'd like you to do if you
do have that handout could your
staff but that of generally the
shared screen comes from the
presenters we had a just a
second ago
I don't know why it's not.
Let me.
Right here I'm sorry about that.
Okay do you see that now yes we
do thank you very.
Our budget request for.
FY twenty twenty two is for a
total of ten million six hundred
two thousand six hundred dollars
included in this amount is three
hundred thirteen thousand
dollars recurring funds for the
to ten judgeship which you know
was authorized in FY twenty and
effective in FY twenty one.
And then sixteen thousand four
hundred dollars in recurring
funds to fund a one percent
increase for employees earning
less than fifty thousand dollars
a year.
And finally one thousand dollars
in recurring funds to fund the
workforce investment plan
increases.
This request puts us just shy of
the house budgets twenty twenty
one funding of ten million six
hundred twenty seven thousand
dollars before the special
session.
The LFC recommendation is
certainly preferred over the DFA
recommendation by the first
initial District Court.
We are also asking for a hundred
and eighty nine thousand dollars
as a supplement request for FY
twenty one based upon falling
short after the shave in the
past special session to the
division ten judgeship which
again was improves approves FY
twenty twenty and if if in
twenty twenty one.
We're asking for FY twenty to
the capital outlay in the amount
of sixty dollars for an
electronic queue management
system it's our clerks offices
and a hundred and sixty thousand
dollars for courtroom video
displays for our Los Alamos
interior idea District Court
rooms to bring them are with a
tech if thank you so much and I
stand for questions madam chair.
All right I'm gonna ask the
staff to call up to the
Point high level general fund so
we can look at that again.
I just want to explain why there
might be some confusion as to
the general fund amounts.
Madam chair the help from the
first without sharing your
screen I can share my already.
Thank you.
Again I just want to remind
everyone based on the actions
that have been taken in because
this is a unified budget.
You can see online I where the
funding is coming from
and where those amounts are made
up and is if you look at line
seven is the difference for the
first judicial District Court
and so forth down that last
column of LFC over over and what
the funded amounts are.
so it is it's not really a Major
general fund increase because
it's coming from another piece
of the unified budget I mean
that's kind of the highest level
way of without getting
completely under the weight so
let's go to the committee and
must ask if there's any
questions from
any marks number I don't have.
Yes Sir.
Most.
Make sure that we mute everybody
that isn't talking.
So.
If that would happen that would
go a long way so.
Let's go is there any questions
I have Representative Chatfield
go ahead Sir.
You have to mute.
Thank you madam chair.
Through the use of a comparison
papers and it's on page eighty
two involuntary also I see that
the.
Thank you see right four six.
The thirteen District Court is
in the negative numbers although
we always watch this if it gets
to be a high number of me to
have a.
We're finding more more
issues and what they have or
what they're able to the field
so when I look at it last year
to go into the six out of
thirteen or is negative numbers
I'm just a can somebody explain
to me does this mean that
they're having trouble making
payroll or or what is that me.
Okay Amanda you want to talk
about that David it's on it's
the page eighty two on volume
three the funded vacancy rate
Maria for FY twenty two budget
request and he's looking at all
the District Court starting from
agency code to thirty one so
forward.
The staff at so I'm Madam chair
representative Chatfield the
courts have wide single line
item appropriations so all there
funding is in one line item
called appropriations so they
actually have a lot of
flexibility in how they pay
employees however after the
district magistrate court
consolidation of twenty eighteen
Senator court struggled to repay
work because they absorb all the
magistrate court employees and
judges that were previously paid
through AOC on their payroll so
some point still get reimbursed
from AOC or were enforcement
clerks were very District Court
employees and several courts you
requested supplemental funding
for personnel.
I believe the LFC analysis shows
that the LFC recommendation
provides increases for person to
try and get that money they can
see I'm funding agency right
gap.
madam chair I guess my my real
question is to the east these
folks have the money it takes to
make a roll in the coming year
we.
So one of these options.
Madam chair representative yes I
don't believe accord has fallen
short of he will I don't think
RT from the administrative
office of the courts let happen.
Thank you madam chair.
All right see I I don't notice
anybody else's handout for this
District.
We do not so I need a motion.
Thank you madam chair I would
move the LFC recommendation okay
we have a motion to have a set
of the federal
All right we have a second
Representative Garcia is there
any opposition to that motion
saying none okay thank you folks
from the first judicial if we
could now let's move on to the
second judicial thank you madam
chair thank you madam is
already.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee on
Bryant's this with part of
finance and administration.
therefore our agency to thirty
two the second judicial District
Court on the LC recommendation
for all revenues it is a hundred
thirty four thousand hires in
the executive the LFC includes
three hundred thousand for all
mortgage regulatory fund of the
regulations and licensing
department for the courts for
closure settlement mediation
program.
For the base the LC
recommendation includes
additional funding to support to
newly created district
judgeships associated staff the
second judicial District Court
the executive recommendation
keeps funding for operations
flat with the adjusted FY twenty
one operating budget.
there's also some language
recommended by LFC and all that
was three to consensus on all
performance measures and targets
Amanda would you like to add
anything.
Madam chair members I will just
note that that language you see
at the bottom of the different
sheet this is language that just
authorizes the transfer of money
from the mortgage regulatory
provide at the regulation
licensing department to the
courts and that money would
provide a foreclosure settlement
program that language at all.
I'd like to ask the analyst to
do because we don't have the
district map right up in front
of us if you would just referred
to of the geographic location
for the second judicial district
in from up will will continue
with each one that way.
Madam chair thank you the second
judicial district is Bernalillo
county okay all righty so who is
going to speak on behalf of this
district but afternoon madam
chair members of the committee
my name is Stan would occur on
the chief judge you're the
second judicial District Court
here in Albuquerque Bernalillo
county right we will have on the
lines of our of New C. all
content of what's in our chief
financial officer dimple deploy
and are deputy chief financial
officer Annika's cells I want to
echo of what chief judge Marlowe
Sommer indicated in terms of.
The.
Of the fact that the second
judicial District Court was all
along with all the courts across
the state have remained open
doing this pandemic obviously
this pandemic is is negative
effect on the operations of the
court to some great what we've
been able to maintain a court
operations the second is no
different than any other a
quarter district in the state we
documented
with the direction of our our
Supreme Court or Chief Justice
protocol to make sure that we
can keep our employees say from
the public that continues to
come into the courthouse safe
with screening on screening
questions to your checking we've
improved significantly
disinfecting and sanitizing of
areas partners significant
public.
Contact and and I'm very very
proud of our of our core damage
then this job to keep.
Comment out of our court and and
to keep our operations going
forward.
we we are asking in essence
You know still restoration of
our FY twenty one budget before
it was reduced that would
include.
Thank you five hundred seventy
eight thousand dollars with a
new judge you I know you see
that you're on the screen and I
know that.
Recommending for House again I'm
not sure why.
The hundred thousand last what
the what the the I am seventy
eight that we're requesting to
be restored includes the two
judgeships the two previous
games that go along with the
judges and one monitor because
of the increased number of
judges
in that request we're also
requesting a course of three
hundred thousand dollars for the
foreclosure solar program here
in Bernalillo county accountable
size of not working funding for
that program is going to be for
school and for we are have been
in touch with of our program
director Chris with Pakistan
talks with a foreclosure firms
here in Bernalillo county and
and and.
Receive medication that they are
just holding off what's the
moratorium's are lifted to file
almost foreclosure petitions.
One of the foreclosure firm
sounds roughly about six hundred
seven hundred petitions that
there would file that will make
up about twenty five percent of
all petitions were concerned of
course we need to have this
program in place of funded so we
can make sure it's fully staffed
to handle those we have a six
significant success right goals
parties that participate in our
culture settlement mediation
program of success rates upwards
of eighty to eighty two or three
percent it's a very successful
program we expect that we're
going to need more than ever
almost moratorium selected.
In addition to that request and
I'm let me go back to the the
foreclosure settlement fund.
I am well we're greatly
appreciate all well LCS
recommendation to use
transformed from the Arnold we
Fund and and we're very thankful
that the only concern I have
you in seconds it's not a
recurring.
One and that's why we're asking
for the in our general fund we
will take whatever funding we
can get to be very thankful for
we would for sure of course they
have in on our general fund but
certainly we will take whatever
funding but we can get a well.
If the committee sees that.
In addition we're asking for.
fifty eight thousand four
dollars for it program I know
that's not part of the LFC
recommendation I don't think
it's part of the executive
recommendation as well but I I
have to slides on board met
program he's here in the state
where we have a substantial
population of maybe people are
hearing from the county we have
a significant number of our
native people living here and
and in our children's division
of our court we have in our use
of the neglect cases that we see
regularly we have a fairly.
A good number of native folks
that families are involved in in
in that arena and because of
that it will comes into play and
if you know anything about the
FY regulations of course is very
time consuming it's very
important I think it's very
necessary to make sure that
the culture native balance as
much as you can incandescent
rain
make sure that they are intact
and cultures and customs are are
staying in that process and it
will court is designed to do
just that to make sure staffing
was done properly to make sure
the contract with the tribe's
to make sure.
There was the open lines of
communication about what to do
with native children in those
circumstances it's very
laborious exercise and we well
you know whether we get funding
or not we're still obligated to
do it and we've been doing that
sort of on a shoe string of some
degree would have we have to
take folks from other opposition
cortisol to help us with that we
take them away from their
primary jobs that help
accommodate that program and so
we're asking for funding to
to help shore up that meet and
we're asking for twenty six
thousand dollars and with
increases I know that that's
also not.
Recommended and the LESC for the
I don't think it is accurate as
well but certainly the increases
are here we are required to
cover goals and we're asking for
help to build to do that as
well.
Actually finally.
I must ask for.
The special appropriation right
three nine nine thousand more
dollars for.
Are I. T. refresh if there was
ever a time when we need to make
sure that our hardware computers
or servers our software is up to
date licenses and all of those
things it's now because of
course we're using I T. our
computers all of which remote
access to most kinds of
mechanisms more now than we ever
have certainly see that going
for for a good long while and so
we need
to have R. I. T. a refresh is
part of a four year
restructuring plans or asking
for that to be funded as well so
with all of that I stand
request.
All right.
With that being said let us see
if we have any questions will
start with Representative
Sweetser the Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you chief judge would occur good
to see you again I just had a
quick question on your
foreclosure settlement mediation
program is that something you
had in the works or is that a
response to COVID and what's
happening
you madam chair Representative
Sweetser not we we have had that
program of going for a few years
now and this report the program
because there was a need and
the still in the I think that
they what does happen with
pandemic is that it has the need
to set up it's been compounded
because of that and as you know
on the you hear all the
projections and predictions of
what's gonna be happening once
more for in selected certainly
we expect of that the numbers
that will happen just see pop
will we'll triple blasts in two
thousand nineteen of the file
there were a thousand petitions
filed I believe
and we expect certainly that
will have three maybe four
thousand petitions filed in
twenty twenty one so so it's
been a program that's in
existence and it's been
incredibly successful our our
our our current program manager
Christopher pack and and so the
white or during just a few right
now because meeting the funding
for the store
over the program general but
they are one of mazing job even
during the pandemic and so it's
a program that's up of going
it's very small and
the
very success thank you request
thank you and thank you for that
madam chair it is something I
think we are gonna see as three
or four fold increase on one
month the moratorium's are
lifted so I appreciate your
looking ahead for that and I'm
being prepared not John the spot
but do you know teachers would
occur are you the only district
with this kind of program or
other districts also income
income.
The thing that Madam chair
representative Sweetser all of
the thirteenth judicial district
also has a programs that restore
partner programs were I think
they started.
Just about the same time I'm
sure that you'll hear from from
a chief judge art wall about of
their program they have broken
ones.
All right thank you thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Sweetser and taking over for
manager Lundstrom just for quick
sack we'll go to now to
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
chief justice Whittaker nice to
see you here I'd to have
questions with regards to the.
Foreclosures settlements
facilitation program with I
believe you'd stated earlier
that you're expecting upwards of
six hundred or so cases to be
filed the minute the moratorium
is lifted my question is is the
three hundred thousand dollar
appropriation going to be enough
to handle this demand.
Mr chair representative on the
hill.
Frankly I don't know.
The we we certainly are have set
the program up in the hopes that
the funding it in that in that
way we will be are not forced to
to be able to handle the influx
and the and the six hundred plus
filings are just from one closer
part so we're talking.
There's at least for five or six
other brands that we know are
waiting to file their their
numbers a little bit so the last
thing that there's more risks
are there's a good number you
know I I certainly think that
we could use another body I I
know our program manager press
back was was.
Attending this you would you
would be asking for as many
folks as he could get the help
of the program and and so I
think we're going to have to
look out for body work for this
program because of the numbers
that are coming you know they've
been able to handle.
To to some degree of course
what we've seen pre pandemic and
I think with the simplex we're
gonna probably have to look at
adding another person to
so I guess the answer is our I
hope it will be about but but
I'm not sure.
Thank you very much
Mr chair and chief just weird
justice to the judge would occur
Just a segue from that question
how many pro se parties are
litigants do you see passed
through the settlement
facilitation program versus
those that are represented.
No I don't know that I have that
answer I I think so for that we
could you know lots of those are
R. C. O. Mr chair Representative
profit behind not sure if she
knows that number as well.
I I know that it's a it's a
fairly significant number we
could be upwards of a quarter
I'm I'm I'm speculating but
upwards of a quarter to maybe
half of all of the folks that
are in that program across it
may be more than that
and I maybe sort of.
So shortfall in.
But maybe more.
Thank you Mr chair chief judge
would occur for those pro se
litigants
Process what would happen to
them if the settlement is the
program is available.
Well you know Mr chair
Representative apartment
building I mean they get sort
of.
The group wound up in the in the
in the system in a way and you
know when you've got firms are
represented by legal counsel
when you've got self represented
litigants I mean they really
don't know the rules and I don't
know really how to spend four or
advocate for themselves and the
and so I I don't think that many
of them will do well correct.
Thank you very much Mr chair two
that includes my questions.
Thank you very much
Representative Hochman Vigil
I don't know that I see any
other questions from committee
members
we would move to a motion then
without any other questions.
Mr chair I move the LFC for the
second judicial district.
Thanks mostly is there a second
for that second.
Thanks to the Representative
Sweetser moves sand by
Representative Dixon to adopt
the LFC recommendation is there
any at opposition to that
motion.
I don't see any.
Okay with that then the LFC
budget recommendation for the
second judicial dist district
will be adopted thank you so
much chief judge would occur in
in and as for very informative
questions and the dive into some
of the really excellent programs
you are offering.
Thank you to check members of
the committee very much.
X..
Okay.
The next we're gonna go over
again to Amanda those are the
there thank you very much Ms
Dick Peddie and go to the third
judicial thank you.
All right Mr chairman members of
the committee the third judicial
District Court at easy Dona ana
county where I'm from.
I'm not for revenue the LFC
recommendation for all revenue
sources is two hundred and fifty
two thousand higher than the
executive two hundred twenty two
thousand that is general fund
revenue and the remainder is
from on the balances.
The LFC recommendation includesd
additional recurring funding to
support the newly created
district judgeship and
associated staff in the third
judicial District Court the
executive recommendation keeps
funding for operations lacked
the FY twenty one budget and
analysts reach consensus on all
performance measures and targets
very quickly before I ask Mr
child is a do you have anything
to add I did want to note I
should mention this earlier the
LFC recommendation also includes
a special appropriation for two
percent raises for all judges
that's not included in this
section for but it is included
in section five the special
appropriation.
There Mr.
No comment.
Okay we can turn it over to you
I believe we have chief judge
are yet up from the third
judicial District Court.
I hope everyone can hear me
Chair small or or madam chair
members of the committee I am
chief judgment about it than
with me I've got our CEO Mr
David wound up also we've got
our chief financial officer
Rosita done in W. court manager
Stacy Max and we're pleased to
be with you this afternoon
it is amended to cater with
companion to County dynamic
county is the second largest
county in the state by
population so is the city of Los
crucis
we have had in the past FY
twenty one the budget that was
approved at ten that ten million
two hundred twenty three
thousand.
After the four percent shaping
COVID came in it was reduced to
nine million nine hundred forty
two thousand.
The FY twenty two LFC
recommendation is ten million
one hundred sixty four thousand
the executive recommendation is
the flat nine million nine
hundred forty two thousand
thousand.
we are requesting the LFC
recommendation ten million one
hundred sixty four thousand
really what we'd like to see is
State FY twenty one approved ten
million two hundred twenty three
thousand
The.
Just to justify the need for
this is of course I've I've
pointed out we're one of the
most populous districts in the
county we are also as a District
Court in the standalone District
Court the second largest court
in the state by I think it's we
are as magistrate court the
largest magistrate court in the
state are Anthony court branch
itself would be a the fifth
largest court in the state.
we have had a prior two thousand
nineteen study done our workload
needs and that's indicated two
point four judges thankfully
we've gotten one judge in the
last fiscal year and we also had
a need at eleven plus support
staff members
we are at this point.
Undergoing some negative impacts
as every other court is because
of the COVID.
Our level of frustration and
fatigue has set in at a high
rate because of the additional
electronic workload in the
executive side and caused by the
COVID.
I in addition
the third judicial district has
a backlog of criminal case
filings about a thousand cases
of the assistant district
attorney informed us I think it
was last week that they've got
about a thousand criminal cases
to file they have involved with
it yet it's been a problem with
the preliminary hearing method
and so they're waiting for COVID
to clear up to file these cases
in addition to those one
thousand criminal filings.
Our court has four hundred to
five hundred criminal jury
trials it need to be conducted
we are waiting again for COVID
to open up completely at this
point like every other court in
the state we are conducting
trials we are open for business
we have been open for business
throughout COVID but we had to
do it at a reduced rate because
of spatial limitations as well
as other limitations caused by
the COVID.
I would point out that we have
had no civil trials in this
districts since August hopefully
that will start again
this month.
The impact on our court is we
have eighty seven percent of our
budget out of the general fund
for person
of with the number of
deficiency is a deficiency is
that we've had in the past our
our current vacancy rate and I
will pointed out is close to
seventeen percent we average
about five to six percent year
the reason it's that high is
that it to be at the beginning
of this last fiscal year twenty
one there was some talk about
four percent I'm sorry five
percent shape in addition to I
graduated.
So we've allowed our vacancies
to stay open anticipating
further budget cuts fortunately
that may not happen so we're
working at this point as hard as
we can to fill out this
vacancies but right now the idea
of doing more with less is not
realistic and not sustainable
of we are losing quite a number
of of funded decisions or or.
The funding for sessions by
outside agency HSD.
Has funded about five or six of
our positions they got that but
five percent so that's increased
our efficiencies with
participate for that for the
fiscal year FY twenty two our
deficiencies will be two hundred
forty one thousand and ninety
two.
Fortunately one of these is a
judgeship shortage that we've
got of under thirty two thousand
I believe Amanda said earlier
that that amount is an amount
that will be directed in one way
or another trail see who should
reimburses backed none the less
even with that we still have a
significant efficiency I would
point out that the other items
are requesting our capital
outlay funds in that's to
provide for security X. ray
machines walk through detectors
of fifty thousand five hundred
twenty one dollars building
improvements we need to renovate
portions of the clerk's office
to accommodate the expansion of
our court that's about twenty
eight thousand so total capital
outlay is seventy eight thousand
eight hundred fifty two dollars
that's separate from the special
request a supplemental
proficiencies part of which I've
talked about hundred thirty two
thousand for the shortage for
nine judgeships ninety thousand
for a shortage
And district to district courts
was there any concept of saving
money or was this merely an
administrative consolidation
that would.
result in the same money or more
money being required by the
courts.
Medical professionals Mr chair
representative.
Both formerly the magistrate
court for managed by ANC which
is centralized in Santa Fe so
especially for rural magistrate
court such as you know the third
musters as it was very difficult
for HSD in Santa Fe to match to
manage that point so there have
been time and resource savings
associated with the
consolidation I I miss the
answer to your first question
about the shortfalls really at
least in LFC is Alice's there's
only two.
It really struggle with
shortfalls that would be third
and tenth and those are
addressed in the LFC
recommendations so so yes it
does take time and resources as
well as makes it easier to
administer the point.
Thank you for that response Mr
chairman that concludes my
question.
Excellent thank you very much
Representative Anderson and are
there any other questions from
the committee for the third
judicial district.
Okay seeing no questions from
the committee for the third
judicial district let's go to
Representative Sweetser for the
motion please.
Are you Representative Sweetser
your muted.
Mr chairman I move the LFC.
Okay I'll move the motion from
chair Lundstrom all the.
There's a seconds from start to
is there any objection to that.
Say no objection the LFC
recommendation for the third
judicial district has been
adopted thank you very much
chief judge ID at the
in and all of your staff thank
you very much thank you chair
and committee thank you.
All right let's move to the
fourth judicial district Ellis
I'll talk about where the forest
is located.
Madam chair members of the
committee our agency to thirty
four point judicial District
Court Sierra County Guadalupe
County.
the LFC recommendation includes
fifty thousand dollars more in
general fund revenue in the
executive the Aussie recommend
the L. L. C. recommended
increase for personal cost
Alicea knowledge knowledge to
show the court currently have a
small negative agency right or
more positions filled within
funding for those positions and
the analyst reach consensus on
all performance it's Amanda
would you like to add anything.
Representative also more
counties also in order.
Okay let's have the district
Representative please talk going
to speak place.
Madam chair in a general walk on
the chief district judge for the
fourth judicial district and and
it is correct we are
comprised of San Miguel mora and
quality for County which means
basically Las Vegas more on and
Santa Rosa and so we are in the
northeast region of the state
and so I want to make sure we we
got our where we're from all the
context of that and so thank you
today for for having us here
today together with me on is
Robert Graham our quarterback of
officer he's on the on the video
as well Madam chair of the two I
want to recognize and thank the
analysts for the hard work that
they do I know that it's not an
easy task for them to do all
this analysis and work and so I
want to recognize them and thank
you as well and probably.
Equally as important more
important I want to thank all of
you who are members of this
committee for the hard work that
you do year in and year out
between sessions.
And trying to figure out what's
best in terms of the budget all
of for every agency and branch
of government within the state
of New Mexico thank you very
much for that in and certainly
appreciate the effort and time
that it takes to do that also
want to take a second to
recognize
our of member are representative
from San Miguel County Campos
costly high no I know he's new
to the legislature I want to say
hi to him and appreciate the
fact that he thought of
participating in a member of
this very important committee
impacted the turned out I had
his son in court this morning
he's a brand new the attorney
and that he he appeared before
me and so it was a pleasure to
have him and I don't know if any
of you know all but he in by his
son on gross your and I on our
referees taking on the
basketball courts and those kind
of things together and it was
nice to see him finally get
through law school and become a
member of the bars so I
appreciate that and and want to
recognize unless you
actualization representative to
your son.
Thank you all just as Baca for
those kind words and you've
always been a mentor to them so
I I thank you for those thank
you madam chair.
All right.
Thank you madam chair and so
with that of I really just want
to cut to the chase of we're
asking that you recommend or
pool the LFC our recommendation
of one point three percent
increase from or difference of
from our budget really we're
we're bare bones in terms of
what we're able to do based on
the the money that we have now
and then the shape that we went
through.
during the special session and
we're asking for the committee's
recommendation to help us to get
to a point where we can
Basically do what we're supposed
to be doing in and meeting out
justice and and delivering
justice for the constituents in
the fourth judicial district on
it's a minimal request we're not
asking for anything all right
just and I just want to tell you
a little bit about our district
we have in our district in our
core forty eight point five
FTEs currently have three point
five FTE that are vacant we
purposely done that in fact one
of the FTEs that's vacant is my
court monitor I'm not fill that
position I'm using other courts
staff to fill that position just
to make up some salary savings
to plan for the future because
of the dire prediction there was
with respect to the budget and
New Hope and thankfully it's not
as bad as it was so we carry of
basically at this point seven
percent vacancy rate.
The majority of our budget
ninety three percent of the
budget is is really invested in
people and giving people jobs in
northern New Mexico where jobs
are not that plentiful on and so
we we invest a lot in people and
and we
you know we're we're real happy
with the people we have.
We're very grateful for the
people who work they come from
one of the come from uh down in
the valley they come from all
over San Miguel County to come
work for us and then we have of
course our work I think one of
the county and in more County
well we have as I mentioned we
have five locations in San
Miguel County there's the three
District Court fights in Moore
county we have a a site that
serves both of the more up
District Court as well as the
magistrate court you want to
come have a magistrate court in
the district district a District
Court in different locations and
then here in San Miguel County
we have our District Court in
our magistrate court all of
these courts have been operating
the entire time since March of
last year during the COVID
comment pandemic
just like we would any other
time we've not we've attempted
to do our best to not cut back
on any services to maintain core
operations are and to do that as
best that is officially if we
could through the use of of what
we're doing here today remote
the hearing
and and we've learned right now
I think we're all pretty good
all the courts to around the
state are pretty good at doing
their hearings through this
medium impact just before coming
here today I was conducting my
drug court today and my drug
court building usually takes all
afternoon to get that taken care
of but I started early and was
able to finish about ten minutes
into the the start of this year
and so I was afraid I was going
to be a little bit late but it
worked out that I was able to be
here and so we've been able to
do a drug court and it's really
difficult at times to do it not
in person because you like to
have those people in front of
you like to be able to contact
connect with them the judge with
the participants are and you
have to do it remotely and.
For the most part it's work and
it's difficult at times it takes
a little more time but we've
been able to do it and I think
it's because of the people that
we have on staff to make these
things possible
and so.
just want to let you all know
our employees at the fourth and
I think around the state are
working hard to continue to work
hard in spite of and despite the
the the pandemic it's really
weighing heavy on everyone at
this point in time but we're
we're persevering and people
continue to do that of who the
months weeks and months to come
and so in this in the fourth
we've only reverted twelve
hundred seventy dollars on and
with that that so all all I have
to report to at this point in
time again thank you for your
time and for your attention and
and for your support and I stand
ready to answer any questions.
C. will thank you judge Baca and
and for your folks being here
today is there any questions
from the committee on the fourth
judicial District Court.
And if not I'm going to ask
Representative Castellano for
the motion.
Madam chair I make a motion that
we accept the LSE's
recommendation for district.
For all right we have the motion
and do we have a second madam
chair I second the motion all
right we have a motion and a
second is there any opposition
to that motion.
I don't see any opposition but
again I'd like to it is.
It's a proven to and I'd like to
thank you again judge Baca for
your presentation to get today
and we're recognizing one of our
members some of the treatments
for his his son so thank you
very much for that.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee have a
nice day and take care of
yourself all righty thank you
very much.
We're going to move to the fifth
judicial district.
R. one that includes Chavis said
in Lee County.
We could analysts.
Madam chair members we have the
it's judicial district manager
said any child within the county
the LFC recommendations for
general fund revenue is one
hundred thousand dollars higher
than the executive
recommendation.
The LFC recommended increase is
to decrease the court agency
right the judicial district has
seen increased caseloads in the
last few years associated with
oil activity in the area poor
performance analyst reach
consensus on all performance
measures and targets Brian
anything that.
I'm gonna.
Already with that with that
being said let's let's turn to
the presenter for the fifth
place.
Madam chair and members of the
committee on James had some of
the chief judge of the fifth
judicial district with me by
video are canon Crowhurst
Are at chief executive officer
and of Russell Harty our chief
financial officer.
In addition to the counties that
we cover let me tell you a
little bit about the fifth
judicial district we actually
have twenty judges eleven
district judges and nine
magistrate judges we have nine
courthouses
and we have a hundred thirty
full time employees
well we've asked for is to be
provided the funds necessary to
continue to provide the
essentials of cordial Services
that I think that we've prided
ourselves doing
responsibly for for years our
our some of our request is up on
on the screen our our total
budget request would be the ten
million six hundred seventy two
thousand nine hundred dollars
and what what we did ask for was
increase of the two hundred
forty four thousand nine hundred
with a flat budget of the fifty
Daschle district would be under
funded
by a hundred thirty nine
thousand a hundred and forty
dollars of a significant portion
of that as you can see is
unreimbursed expenses related to
the magistrate court
consolidation and while there
are obviously a dollar expenses
associated with that I would I
would say that I believe that
the consolidation
as head of the benefits of far
outweigh what the costs were
we're talking about in terms of
how well we're able to manage
the the courts and work together
the relationships that we have
those judges I think is improved
and I think so it's been a
success.
The only way we're meeting these
cost at this point in time is
that we are I have not failed to
essential positions one is our
deputy chief executive officer
and I came to you a number of
years ago and tell you how much
we needed that that person with
the magistrate court
consolidation with COVID now
it's it's it's even of it's even
more
and we're also keeping a
Judicial specialist to position
on failed all our other
vacancies and we're trying to
fill in as quickly as we can
we're having either interviews
or have the applications on all
our other current vacancies.
At this time
so.
I would say to the given the
workload and how we are it the
visit judicial district is is is
really a understaffed as well if
you look at the work load study
that the a judiciary did.
A couple years ago a year ago
you know it indicated we needed
two more judges and needed we
needed a twelve or clerk staff
said we're not we're not asking
for those but I I simply tell
you that to give the idea of
of what we do here were
basically structured to provide
those court judicial services
and and very little else we have
you know judges and their staff
are clerk staff bailiffs in the
administrative staff so we don't
have hearing officers or staff
attorneys know commissioners we
really don't we have a couple of
problem solving courts
but no other real services now
the LFC proposals certainly
would go a long way to allowing
us perhaps at least to fill that
deputy CEO position we greatly
appreciate that we also
requested however a senior
attorney position of funding for
that this was a position that we
had for last year but then the
the funding was was removed
and we really had wanted to try
and get that of position failed
to provide support for all
twenty judges and to work on our
alternative dispute resolution
Services perhaps use them as a
hearing officer as well and then
help the judges and improve the
efficient administration of our
cases
so at a minimum we would have
certainly for the LESC of a
proposal but we would ask for
your consideration for the
entire amount with that to madam
chair I'd be happy to stand for
questions.
All right what have you take
down your document please so we
can say with may have some
questions got a couple here
restart with Representative
Meredith Dixon and then we'll go
to Representative Phelps
Anderson.
But thank you so much madam
chair and
Mr Hudson second correct yes.
Thank you I'm I was wondering I
was interested in the in the
note about the caseloads have
increased so substantially in
the last two years and you know
associated with increased oil
and gas activity so my question
is what sort of the lag time
between with oil and gas
production and activity in the
area in in increasing caseloads
and then if.
If there's a downturn sort of
how you know the lag time for
the courts to feel that effect
as well.
Thank you very much thank you
madam chair representative
addiction it within the packet
if you got it there we do have
some I think it's on the seventh
page of of some District Court
case load information
of for you and there was a
slight decline
last year it's difficult to
predict
what the cases are because you
may have a decline in
economic activity but that may
mean an increase in in cases
whether debt collection cases
unfortunately criminal cases or
domestic violence cases so it's
hard to tie or predict if you
will
relationship necessarily between
the economic oil and gas
activity and and the caseloads.
Thank you very much thank you
madam chair that was my
question.
Ready Representative Phelps
Anderson your next Sir.
Thank you madam chair judge of I
want to just spend a minute of
following up on that senior
attorney position that was an
expansion item that was granted
to the fifth judicial district
last year and I believe in the
in what we generically refer to
the sanding I believe you that
was withdrawn is that correct.
Madam chair representative
Anderson yes Sir that is
correct.
Thank you up judge sort of a
follow up in in the previous
discussion and funding of this
position it's sort of in the
back of by money that this
expansion might differ of.
Used to be brutal about it an
additional judge or two in the
fifth of could you comment on my
observation.
Madam chair of Representative
Anderson.
Actually last time we asked for
three attorney positions and and
got them out before the
expanding so we're only asking
for one at I think that we're
still gonna need the judges down
the road I think that's probably
at least two three years at this
point we really don't
it where we really need one is
an Eddy County and given the
courthouse situation there there
there really isn't a facilities
I think that this attorney
position would help.
A bridge that impact if you
would but I do I do I really
don't think it would could
replace it especially because
you we're gonna have that one
attorney working for all twenty
judges.
Thank you a judge and I and I
didn't mean to imply that
one senior attorney might differ
judges forever so if I left if I
confused you on that I apologize
madam chair
I look forward to of.
That concludes my questions
thank you.
Representative Crowder.
Your needed Sir.
Thank you madam chair just one
very quick question I noticed
that on the transfer of personal
service employee benefits was
zero throughout the course but I
did notice there two or three
course it had reversion to at
the end of the year and in the
fifth happens to be one of those
can you help me understand.
Why you weren't able to get that
money put to use.
Madam chair representative
Crowder yes Sir I think
unfortunately it was some
miscommunication we actually
submitted requests and there was
confusion about what agency it
was because I think that that
was the the DA rather than the
fifth judicial district and so
with the the percentage and and
our our CEO can correct me if
I'm wrong or add some more
information
but we had requested that
because we had a lot of expenses
associated with with COVID.
Trying to get our you know it
barriers in court rooms and
everything else a built in but
because of that confusion.
We weren't able to get that done
and perhaps use that as we
wanted to.
Okay so I I think I hear you say
madam chair Mr Hansen you file
in a timely fashion it just got
caught up in the bill through
the cracks or something that
there were I think there is one
or two that we did yes Sir okay
all right thank very much just
curious thank you madam chair
okay about a year hand is up do
you have a comment to make.
Yes madam chair members just for
the benefit of the committee you
won't see any transfers out of
the personal services employee
benefits category for any of the
Courts and that's because they
have a single line item
appropriations so they don't
have categories to transfer to
and from it doesn't necessarily
mean that person funding isn't
sometimes used for you know
court barriers or contracts
expire and just something's not.
Okay Representative Crowder your
hand is up again yes I just
wanna make ask Amanda it is that
only in the unified budget that
we will run into that.
Representative Crowder yes
that's correct it's only the
courts the independent judicial
agencies so the standard special
compilation commission that have
that single line item
appropriation.
Thank you very much I I learn
something new thank you madam
chair.
Right I don't have any other
hands up so I'm gonna go
to Representative Phelps for the
motion.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair I move the LFC.
All right we have a motion to
they'll say we have a second.
Second primary care center and
with that being said is there
any opposition to that motion
saying none the motion is better
proofed and thank you.
Judicial district thank you
madam chair members of the
committee.
All right let's move on to the
Senate
district please.
Madam chair members of the
committee our agency to thirty
six six.
Or
it serves the counties of grant
Luna and Hidalgo.
Revenue of the LFC
recommendation is seventy three
thousand dollars higher than the
executive the majority of which
is general fund revenue for the
base the majority of the LFC
recommended increase it is for
personal including retaining
employees through the judiciary
is workforce investment plan.
the executive recommendation
keeps funding for operations
what with the adjust adjusted FY
twenty one operating budget.
At analyst reach consensus on
all performance measures and
targets.
All right with that being said
where is this place
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair I know it
well it means Silver City large.
Okay.
Got a question for many are
let's go to the president are
please for district six.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee I am
speech such Jennifer Tilly I am
keeping the sexes as you heard
is Grant County we county and
held on I'm gonna put a the
document that we provided to you
all previously.
and as you can see we have fifty
seven employees for magistrate
court judges and for District
Court judges that are housed in
seven different warehouses
within our district.
During the pandemic crisis and
the economic hardship judicial
branch has continued to deliver
access to justice for all who
are involved in litigation
before this court and we will
continue to do so three years
ago the court adopted and and
budgets navigated towards
implementing our campaign for
judicial excellence the three
initiatives in the campaign for
judicial excellence we're
simplifying organizational
structure in streamlining case
processing improving I. T. for
the public and making processing
and making processes excuse me
and programs easier to
understand and to access for the
public when developing the
targets I never realized how
critical and impactful these
initiatives would be for the
courts during the COVID nineteen
challenges the court stayed open
and provided a safe environment
for our staff and the public and
provided access to video
platforms for hearings the
judges and staff and the six
have risen to every challenge
the COVID has thrown at us and
continue to serve the public
with excellence.
District Court education court
excuse me is requesting the full
budget that we requested
initially which is the five
eight eight nine however if the
committee is inclined to not
follow the full budget requests
we are requesting the LFC
recommendation of five seven
eight five seven the difference
in the funding for that
difference excuse me in the LFC
funding verses the DFA funding
would be to give us back some of
the salary and benefits that
were previously shaving and
shave the guests during the our
last budget cuts.
We believe that the courts have
worked extremely hard during
this time period and we know
that economic hardship is
extremely difficult for everyone
to deal with but it is
imperative that our court system
continues to function and that
function at a level that we're
able to adequately serve the
public so what you're asking to
take all of these things into
consideration as we continue to
deliver access to justice and
promote public trust and
confidence in the judicial
system I do apologize that it
failed to mention that my CEO
Melissa frost is here with me as
well and she has been a an
incredible partner as we have
navigated through COVID nineteen
together.
And at this time I will stop
sharing.
All right we do have a hand up
for questions will start
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you the chief judge the lady
since I have the opportunity to
visit with you a little bit I
thought you might share with the
committee from some of the
actual things that have affected
through COVID in rural court I
mean you're you've experienced a
lot we've done a lot of media
releases of early releases shut
downs whatever this kind of give
you a sort of a a high level of
what you had to experience.
Thank you madam chair
representative Sweetser I'm
eight it is been very difficult.
And business is not business as
normal for all eight of our
judges we had to immediately
switch from having people in our
court room on a daily basis to
using technology that that
hadn't previously been
implemented we know that a lot
of these changes are going to be
long lasting and really we have
recognized that their access to
justice issues that COVID has
allowed us to give people
additional access that they
didn't have before but the
change over night was not
something that any of us
anticipated or that we were
prepared for
but judges stood up they learn
the technology we had our
judicial information division to
help us out with really
explaining to us how to run our
hearings you are TCA's our
trackpoint administrative
assistants getting hearing set
and fielding phone calls when
you request for settings came
out with either a phone number
to call into or the video link
and the general public having to
understand that they could no
longer just walk into the
courthouse
because at it because we weren't
businesses usual are mediation
programs had to change online we
have we contract with attorneys
in each of our district is get
to see limited pro Sekunde
ourself representative I think
what against we have to assist
them in getting all of that
online we started accepting
pleadings via email in cases
that are not the file and how to
explain to all of the self
represented litigants which we
have a very large number of
hearing the six judicial
district how to use email to
submit exhibits how to screen
share with there was a lot of
teaching then that judges trial
court administrative assistants
and clerks took on so that we
could function and move cases
former
and so I am very proud of our
Senator on rural courts because
we yes stepped up to some big
city technology challenges and
we meet the needs of the public
but it has been very difficult.
Thank you for that madam chair
and chief justice Delaney I
think you guys have done an
amazing job and I know all the
courts around the state share
the same thing I just wanted to
have you expect that I I believe
also madam chair I just saw
relief that you are changing
jury trials or are Halbur
starting or something's coming
up with the change.
This.
To I I apologize madam chair
representative seats are the
Supreme Court has allowed us to
re commence jury trial starting
February first I have my first
one since the November shut down
next Tuesday a we are trying to
prioritized individuals that are
in detention so that we can so
that we can get them justice as
quickly as possible and we're
gonna hit the ground running we
are concerned about your showing
up we're gonna call in larger
panels and we have all of the
safety precautions in place to
ensure that everyone who steps
into this courthouse will remain
state while justice is being
served.
Right thank you very much to
judge thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair and judged
alleni I'm I was interested in
the note about that your
workforce investment plan and I
was wondering if you could
elaborate just a little bit on
that thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative despite Dixon the
workforce investment plan was a
Judiciary wide plan in order to
increase employee salaries
especially because the judicial
employees went for a very long
time without seeing any type of
increases in their range and Hey
and I know that my CEO Melissa
frost can better answer
questions with regard to the
with and so I will turn it over
to her at this time.
Listen.
Thank you madam chair
Representative one of the most
important aspects of the
economic I believe already can
correct me if we're gonna pass
this along it's been three years
and we really focused on certain
positions within the agency that
we knew we needed to compete
with other outside sources with
bringing our employees up to a
good standard rate of pay and so
with that our first movie with
the with
program was to move our clerks
in a position where they are
competitive the courts actually.
It was a competitive area where
everybody could potentially feel
that there was a need to at I'm
I'm sorry I'm getting a little
tongue tied and nervous I
apologize but
for a better employment
So this is about the third year
we've been doing this right now
throughout the years it gets
smaller and smaller with our
increases because we've actually
maintained a good set of
standards for paying these
employees.
I don't know if already wants to
chime in he's an expert when it
comes to whip.
Okay briefly Arianna please.
This Madam it's a once we got
the clerks increased about
eighteen percent because you
funded it we want to make sure
everybody kept a career
progression so their truck lines
in the workforce investment plan
when you had certain times in in
a position you have to be a
floor at least had a floor for
your pay rate and of blue is
right over the three years so
many people have been brought in
and above the floor that is less
each year and that's a great
thing needs of your employees
can make a positive a positive
review.
If you're positive you should be
in the courts and if you do we
want you to reset those minimums
in the courts been great about
it and it's a mandatory part of
every courts a request in the
budget first thing in the year
who's gonna pass one of those
lines what do you need to bring
them up to the minimum level so
it's it's career progression and
it really works for our clerks
reaching that huge decline in
the vacancy rate among the
judicial specialist and expert
actually is when that are H. R.
director but I can answer
questions on.
Thank you and thank you madam
chair that concludes my
questions.
I don't see any other hands up
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you and chief judge dealing with
that I move the LFC
recommendation.
Right we have a second to second
the motion chair.
Okay we have a motion and a
second.
For the six judicial districts
LFC is there any opposition to
that motion saying none it has
been approved and I'd like to
thank all the folks for their
good work today.
This move into the seventh
judicial district and I'm gonna
ask Gail Armstrong where that
is.
Thank you madam chair that
Sapporo Sierra Torrance and
captured.
Okay very good let's go to the
analyst.
Madam chair members of the
seventh judicial District Court
for revenue the LFC
recommendation includesd thirty
four thousand more general fund
revenue that the thank you.
The small increase the LFC
recommendation is intended for
personnel recruitment and
retention court executive
recommendation he's funding for
operations black each estate FY
twenty one operating budget and
analysts reach consensus on all
performance measures and targets
and as Representative Armstrong
mentioned this is capturing that
zero Sierra at Sapporo in
Torrance County so it's a really
geographically eight.
Mister you have anything you'd
like to add.
Nothing more.
Okay we can take the there you
go let's see we've got any
questions for many the committee
members.
I don't see any hands up so
those pretty well okay we get
Representative Crowder go ahead.
Sorry madam chair.
This is the other court that I
noticed madam chair that had to
substantially large reversion.
I'm curious if they ran into the
same complications as the fifth
or if they could explain that.
The reason for such a large
reversion.
Madam chair representative
Crowder I don't know who we have
from this seven on it's all they
are okay we have Jason Jones I
believe you all right see you
the second judicial District
Court alleges that.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee can you hear me
OK.
And I apologize for not letting
you talk I just jumped the gun
here so please go ahead Sir no
that's perfectly fine my name is
Jason Jones I'm the CEO for the
seventh judicial district I also
have the legal Merrill on this
afternoon she's our deputy CEO
and she plays an important role
in prepare budget every year.
She's on with me as well more
chief judge could not be present
today.
We had a couple of preliminary
hearings this afternoon as well
as a detention hearing say sends
apologies to the committee.
All first I'll go straight to
the to the question of
Representative Crowder.
it was a substantial reversion
and.
part of it was we had some
management upper management of
the magistrate courts retired.
shortly after the.
Well spring time of last year.
And quite frankly we had a hard
time filling those positions we
did multiple
recruitments in order to get
qualified individuals and so
there is a delay there we did
have another
person legal position as well
but I will say this the the
substantial part of what you're
seeing is a magistrate court
judge position.
In our judicial district and
it was essentially taken for the
entire year.
Without going into too much
detail that that that position
it was on unpaid administrative
leave.
so it's still a pending matter
so that's.
That that's a substantial part
of what you're seeing so that's.
Not the norm.
That you see such a reversion
from a court so that it public
that explains what you saw
there.
Thank you for your response to
this Jones it does explain and
and I appreciate that are I was
getting concerned if there's.
Issues when you're trying to to
transfer the money or utilize a
somewhere else and you get into
a heck out but yours is
different than out of and I very
much appreciate your response
thank you madam chair.
All right do we have anybody
else for this district.
I don't see any any other hands
up and I'm gonna call on
Representative Armstrong for the
motion
I was looking at the same issue
that Representative Crowder have
had raised that I I agree that's
a that's a reasonable response
on all this so Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair I'd like
to move the LFC recommendations.
And we have a motion to have a
second.
Thank you madam chair okay we do
have a motion and a second is
there any opposition to that
motion saying that it's been
approved and thank you Mr Jones
for your presentation today
thank you madam chair thank
thank everybody for the time.
All righty thank you now if we
could move to the eighth and is
Representative Chatfield on.
Yes madam chair and.
Wirth the eighth district.
Goal status unique and.
Right very good okay let's go to
the analysts.
Madam chair members of the
committee HSD to thirty eight
eighty two additional District
Court.
the LFC recommendation for
general fund revenue was ninety
thousand dollars higher than the
executive recommendation
the age judicial District Court
is one of the few courts that
was sounded below FY twenty.
Twenty levels during the first
special session of twenty
twenty.
Are the LFC recommended
increases restores it court to
FY twenty levels and includes
additional twenty per person
currently the court has a
negative funded vacancy rate or
more bill positions and funded
positions are the executive
recommendation keeps funding for
operations flat with the
adjusted FY twenty one operating
budget and will panelists came
to consensus on measures and
targets we like to add anything
on.
All right
now please thank you.
Questions from our let's go to
the presenters excuse me if we
could place.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee this is chief
judge million Chavez for the
eighth judicial district I thank
you Representative Chatfield for
your introduction to our
district we are district of
three district courts inTaos
front tone and Clayton which
make up that are make up those
three counties we do have three
district judges I magistrate
judges with for magistrate
courts during this pandemic as
many of you guys have
experienced and in your lines of
work in your representation for
the legislature is things
haven't been fair all wrong all
around for employees for people
in our personal lives and our
professional lives our court is
done an amazing job in adapting
incorporating safety procedures
protocols everything that we can
do to ensure that our courts
keep running and that we have a
fair administration of justice
despite what's going on around
us some of the things that we've
done to ensure that people have
access is making it easier as
best as possible in our rural
communities for people to access
court hearings that take place
over zoom Google needs or other
platforms are we've provided
tablets we've worked on hot
spots give self help desks at
our various chords we've
instructed judges working with
calling people being a little
more flexible on their schedule
and and a little more
understanding when people are
not able to access or fully
understand the platforms the
zoom platformer the Google hang
outs that the courts generally
use it's been for the most part
of positive experience obviously
I all I'm of the impression it
still doesn't take the place of
in person hearings because of
the content that court see on a
regular basis but it has been
impressive I I will say our
staff has gone above and.
Beyond it implementing safety
procedures working with people
and keeping the case is going
are we did see a decrease in
caseload and nationally out this
the real start of the the
pandemic or when appropriations
really began to become suspended
in slow down I am a huge issue
and I heard in some of the
questioning of some of the
representatives
you know that we are restarting
jury trials in fact our district
has three jury trials going next
week Amer I capital murder case
going the following week and
frankly it it's one of the only
ways to ensure timely
administration of justice it's
something that does have to go
forward and the protocols and
tremendous work from Mayo C.
from the Supreme Court from our
margins he response team and
again our own staff as as really
insured a really safe save
presumption of jury trials the
ones that we did this summer and
I anticipate in the in the
coming weeks when we we restart
with that being said I I do very
much appreciate the the
recommendation of the LFC and
that they have.
Requested a release that shaved
amount of ninety thousand you do
see our our hand out in our
handout relatively is is it's
basic in that we had asked the
shave was we have been awarded a
hundred and sixty one thousand
seven hundred dollars the mid
the bulk of that was to go
towards funding the warrant
clerks for the clerks that are
currently rate from one fees
from AOC additionally there was
a a reoccurring shortfall that
that happened through
consolidation in two thousand
nineteen are we trying to break
that down a little bit for you
but during consolidation we were
made to you we weren't funded
for communications contracts
other equipment and maintenance
and that's where the forty one
thousand eight hundred.
is asked for and so the money
that is A. as is recommended by
LFC will will take into account
some of those operations are
what I what I do want to point
out and and I know in a lot of
the presentations we haven't got
too much into the supplemental
requests and I'm gonna ask our
CFO PAM a and and CEO Karl
Brooks are also on the line but
this may if you kind of scroll
down to our supplemental
requests.
are supplemental request report
in my understanding a
recollection is DFA did
recommend our supplemental but
LESC did not and so we're in a
place where we do need our
supplemental but on the other
hand the recurring or general
funds are recommended by LESC
are preferable in a lot of
respects important part that I
wanted to make the the committee
aware that eighty three thousand
that we're asking for we did get
a capital appropriation for a
jury assembly room a
consolidation of our clerk's
office the jury deliberation
rooms that construction is under
way in fact just to the left of
my office and perhaps I should
have set up there
the jury deliberation room
project is being completed this
week
then to go forward and and again
that's funding that we already
received and and cap in our
capital request to do the jury
assembly room we need to move
the the clerks office or the
consolidation of our towers
District Court clerk's to the
magistrate court room have the
proper furnishing and furniture
filing and so forth so that that
can happen so that the jury
assembly room can be created and
essentially work in a
circumstance where you guys have
given us the great shell of a a
beautiful car but we don't have
the engine we don't have the
transmission we don't have the
things that'll make it work and
that's what our that capital
request I mean that's
supplemental request is for its
for the furniture the filing
system all the things that we
need in place I once a
renovation project is done that
complete renovation is
contemplated to be.
And and to believe be completely
renovated by June of this year
so it is something that we would
have these large beautiful open
spaces we wouldn't have the
furniture infrastructure to make
them work and that was the
primary request for for that
eighty three thousand now
perhaps it should have been put
in a special a special request
we tied it to supplemental
because even though it's not
technically capital it did go
without capital funding that we
did or for that project that we
did receive and so I I think
that's really important to note
is again very generously were
funded for that capital project
but we were not given the the
funding for the furniture of the
other things I needed to go and
and really making that project
run the next component is that
thirty four thousand requested
again and that's for this
current year for the mad
magistrate shortfall and I I
want to point out if you look at
the top of our handout it's not
redundant.
Or it's not it's not duplicative
of the forty one thousand eight
hundred for recurring funds
that's our shortfall this year
and we have made up some of
those costs through vacancy
savings we've delayed
maintenance costs and so forth
but for this year we do have a
shortfall of thirty four
thousand and an appropriate
question maybe well what did you
do last year with your shortfall
and for us in in discussing the
vacancy rates we had we had to
do we had to judge positions
that have significant delays in
re filling them and the reason
that's important is again the
judges salaries did allow for
substantial vacancy savings that
did a lot of that did provide
for us to make up the shortfall
in the magistrate court
consolidation
the last thing that I'll finish
with and I know you guys are
very busy and a lot of time and
I made the classic Attorney
mistake of pretending to be
brief and and very long winded
but not.
There has been budget in the
consolidation that we've seen
you know if those benefits all
will be you know will be even
read more readily apparent in
the future but we're working on
consolidating our phone systems
copy machines
you know other things that are
going to be cost effective not
to mention the benefit to the
public and having that that
organization under one roof.
MFA to the staff again having
that communication all they the
HR the majority of the H. R. and
so forth under one roof so I
hope I I hope that answers a
number or at least what I
perceived as as questions I just
really want to emphasize that
eighty three thousand and our
supplemental request was to make
our capital project to to really
make that run and that thirty
four thousand is is the
shortfall that we are facing
this year are with that madam
chair I I do stand for any
questions that the committee may
have.
Okay and I'd like to remind the
committee that supplementals and
specials are heard at a
different time that set a
different point in our budget
building process find that the
judges gone through this but I
prefer that we not get into any
detail on this right now because
of the another subcommittee that
deals with that with that being
said could we are going to
remove this document and we'll
go to questions.
Do we have any questions from
the committee members
regarding the eight judicial.
District.
All right so I'm gonna go to
Representative Chatfield
promotion.
Right chair LESC.
We have a motion and we have a
second.
Okay we have a second is there
any opposition to that motion
don't have any opposition so I I
would like to say that it is
approved and I'd like to thank
the judge and and his support
staff for being here with us
this afternoon thank thank you
very much and let's go ahead and
move on to the night.
And I'm gonna ask Representative
Crowder where that is.
Madam chair the ninth judicial
district is in current and
Roosevelt counties primarily the
clothes hello Sir in east
central New Mexico.
All righty with that being said
analysts.
Right madam chair members of the
committee for the nineteenth
judicial District Court the LFC
recommendation for all revenues
includes two hundred and fifteen
thousand sixteen thousand of
which is general fund more than
the executive recommendation the
executive recommendation funding
for operations flat with the FY
twenty one operating budget the
LFC recommendation includes
additional funding mostly for
person currently the ninety days
judicial District Court is just
about fully staffed for
performance analyst reach
consensus on all performance
measures and targets.
I'm.
Already shaking his head no so
let's go to committee members
are excuse me let's go to the
north presenter place.
Afternoon madam chair this is
drew Tatum I'm the chief judge
and the line judicial District
Court and with me presenting is
our CEO Kevin spares and our new
CFO Jamie one of them and I want
to first of all just thank you
all for hearing us out here in
our requests and any other
concerns we may have I will be
brief I know that original
request in the unified budget
was to include the restoration
of the cuts from last year
proxies hundred seventy nine
thousand four hundred dollars I
know that the situation the
budget I know what's the
committee in the legislature has
to consider and with all that
all those taken into
consideration we respectfully
request the LFC recommendation
for our our district and just a
little bit of background and how
we've been doing we've been
doing well considering
everything that's been going on
I'll give a huge shout out to
our our staff they have been
extraordinarily resilient and
professional during these very
difficult times and I'm thrilled
and honored to work with each
and everyone of them we've been
doing a lot of jury trials
before of those trials were
suspended in in November we just
started Jerry trials on Monday
in fact I selected three jury
trials yesterday for trials that
were set to go today tomorrow
and Thursday unfortunately in
today's trial had to be vacated
due to some comment concerns but
that did not involve anything
within the court consolidation
is going extraordinarily well we
are working hard to cross
training everybody so that if
somebody is out to work a court
is short on people we have
people that can come in and help
in other courts and I think it's
gonna work out very well and I
really am proud of all our staff
and how consolidation has been
working out.
And we've been doing a lot of
mediations and I think over a
hundred plus mediations and as I
said the jury trials are going
well we do we have conducted
approximately sixty jury trials
during this time and hope to add
to that tremendously as the
backlog is that with our
district as well as other
districts around the state we do
conduct our selections on
offsite locations to ensure that
there are social distancing
requirements met as well as one
of the masts.
The in all weather.
Protocols put in place but we're
we're we're hanging in there and
we weathered the the cuts from
last year we've adapted to
everything that's uh and brought
to us and we will overcome and
we will continue to overcome
with that being said madam chair
all stand for questions.
Thank you let us see the scene
the hands up.
S. R. one up.
no we know we don't not even you
Representative Crowder right.
All right we simply got it all
covered here so let's go
Representative Crowder.
Thank you for your thank you
madam chair thank you for your
presentation a judge Tatum
Mr spears I know we didn't hear
from you good.
Madam chair sat I would like to
move the LFC recommendation.
And we have a motion and we have
a second.
It Madam chair all right we do
have a second is there any
opposition to that motion saying
none it's been approved and I'd
like to thank the judge there
are from the north and the staff
that was ready to answer any
questions that we might have.
Very much thank you for being
here today if we could just go
to the tent and that's close
Representative Chatfield and
where would that be Sir.
Representative Chatfield.
Yes.
Okay that's hardly wait and one
more get.
The county it's got the long
walk monument in it so let's
think about that we're aware
that be.
Yeah.
Already thank you Sir let's go
to the analyst.
Madam chair members of the
committee agency to forty
institutional District Court.
Our revenue the LFC
recommendation includes fifty
thousand dollars more general
fund revenue than the executive
recommendation.
Base the tension additional
District Court as requested
supplemental appropriations the
last two years for shortfalls
related to the two thousand
eighteen district magistrate
court consul of consolidation.
The LFC recommended increased
prevents the shortfalls in FY
twenty two and provide a small
increase for personnel.
The executive recommendation
keeps the funding offer
appropriations flat with the
adjusted FY twenty one operating
budget.
And both analyst reaching taxes
on all performance measures and
targets then you like anything.
Chair members.
What slide.
Judgmental are you going to
speak today yes thank.
Nice to see you again Sir we're
all ears well I'm joined today
by Mike Corder executive officer
Marian pate.
Visitations pretty I mean you
just saw the supplement we need
twenty thousand dollars last
year you all were kind enough to
give us twenty thousand dollars
a supplemental money so we can
meet payroll we met a real.
We had enough money from you
last year to get through this
year but then the setting
occurred so we made the twenty
thousand dollars yes.
At the end of the day.
The LFC recommendation of fifty
thousand dollars means that next
year it won't have to come back
and ask for more supplemental
funding.
The fifty thousand dollars makes
this whole from the magistrate
court consolidation.
All.
That was a very good thing it's
been really challenging but it
was a very good thing.
We have found all sorts of
opportunities.
Frankly wish the legislature had
not given us the motivation to
provide as many savings as we
found but we did find a lot.
All so we would like simply the
LFC recommendation and the
supplemental funding with that
I'll stand for questions.
Okay we'll make sure that we
know that in the supplemental
hearing that will be coming up
soon so thank you very much just
go to the committee do we have
any questions for this district.
Is on here so I'm going to ask
Representative Chatfield
promotion.
Thank you madam chair LESC.
Okay we have a motion and we
have a second second.
We have a second
such a stellar presentation Sir
no questions a quick motion
that's how we like things and
will make sure that the.
We can make good on that
supplemental request so with
that I want to thank you and it
has been approved for the LFC
thank you Sir thank you madam
chair thank members of the
committee all righty all right
let's move on to the next
district.
I'm going to ask Representative
Ryan where is.
Thank you madam chair the
eleventh judicial district
encompasses what the most common
referred to as the most
beautiful part of New Mexico
which is San Juan McKinley
County is up in the northwest
part of the state why not get to
the chairman's hard doesn't it
so let's go to the analysts and
I will go to the president
presenters.
Madam chair members of the
committee for the eleventh
judicial District Court to be
LFC general fund revenue
recommendation is a hundred and
fifteen thousand dollars higher
than the executive the LFC
recommend recommendation
increases funding to support the
court's pre trial services
programs and provide a little
bit additional person funding
the executive recommendation
keeps funding for operations
flat would be adjusted FY twenty
one operating budget once again
analyst came to consensus on all
performance measures and
targets.
And unless Brian has anything to
add I can turn it over to the
chief judge Karen Townsend.
Madam chair of the all right if
we take the screen down and.
Representative excuse me of
judge Townsend please you we we
had a when I was elected many
years ago we had the number from
your neck of the woods it
represented the area and now she
served on the HFC Committee for
many many years I apologize
judges will turn it over to you
that's that's correct.
I certainly know our worry wells
and create the.
Memories Representative Townsend
and I also appreciate.
Representative planes good
introduction so as madam chair
and members my name's Karen
Townsend and I am the chief
judge of the eleventh joining me
today is our CEO well the nap
and judge Curtis curly.
We do have a presentation or
handout for you look at today it
explains that the eleventh
district does contain six court
locations in San Juan McKinley
County we have eight District
Court judges one hearing officer
I ever District Court judges are
in San Juan County three
McKinley and we also have nine
magistrate court judges six in
San Juan three McKinley County.
And I am happy to report today
that we had did not have any
comment exposures in the court
despite the extremely hard hit
that the counties that comprise
comprise eleven have taken.
And the courts in the eleventh
work or hard hit but it wasn't
because of exposure within the
court.
We have stayed open throughout
the pandemic conducted jury
trials safely when we've been
allowed to our budget request
for fiscal year twenty twenty
two is to call the LFC
recommendation because we are
requesting an additional two
hundred thirteen thousand six
hundred dollars this restores us
to our budget request before the
shape the additional two hundred
thirteen thousand six hundred
dollars will be used to help
reduce are extremely high
vacancy rate and we would like
to reduce that from fifteen
percent to seven percent and to
provide funding to pre trial
services we currently have six
hundred sixty defendants under
pre trial services to provisions
in our county we'd like to
expand the service to McKinley
County.
We also have a capital outlay
requests outlay request for an
integrated phone system about
hundred twenty five thousand
seven hundred dollars to be used
at all six locations we do have
a special request for furniture
and a vehicle request
And I would also like to speak
in support of the security
request for funding that the AOC
four yesterday the eleventh
receives a portion of those
funds that two hundred forty
three thousand and.
Last year we were able to
establish security at all and
our magistrate court locations
and it's important we keep those
positions funded would like to
eventually have them in our base
budget.
And having said that I would
stand for questions and thank
you for your time.
All right we could take down
mail shared screening.
Let's let's go to the committee
let's start with Representative
lane go ahead Sir.
Thank you madam chair I've
appeared many times in front of
the judge judge Townsend so it's
nice to be able to.
Representative her for once I
cannot pass up the opportunity
so on this topic Madam chair of
pre trial services I know that
the pilot program was launched
and and San Juan county and the
eleventh judicial district my
question is when was this
program started and and has been
making a positive impact in our
judicial system.
What we have the program for
quite some time
Senator Neville stir.
Helped us with some funding
quite awhile ago but it's only
been in the past the lower year
that we have partnered with the
AOC on the pre trial services
program we have now in using the
have that they established and
that
partnership has is.
Green I think we have screened
over at thousand defendants for
the program
accepted six hundred sixty in
the program and as I indicated
we we certainly would like to
expand it McKinley County it's a
very valuable program.
Thank you madam chair those are
my only questions thank you.
All righty
Representative Allison did you
have anything else Sir.
Thank you madam chair I just
want to make a comment I had a
question but judge Townsend and
answered it I'm glad to hear
that the COVID didn't have any
effect on the courts of.
Hey being shut down the
reservation help some because it
reduce a lot of traffic going
into the talents and
That's about it it's it's good
to hear that there we didn't get
infected.
Thank you.
Already thank you representative
Allison I did have a question at
one time one of the issues that
had come up with this particular
court was
issues around finding court
interpreters
is that still an issue or is
that something that's been
resolved.
Well as a result of the new
procedures madam chair that we
had to put in during the COVID
is our interpreters are.
Share via the audio visual so
there remote.
So we're getting five right now.
Madam chair as well.
Yep go ahead well then.
Can you see me I'm I lex like
some of Representative Blaine's
hair
I'm sorry share some.
Okay well would you have your
your correct madam chair you
previously that was an issue of
some years ago that has since
been resolved in as judge
Townsend said even prior to
COVID the use remote
interpreting has has helped
tremendously for the the lack of
interpreters that may be
available in our part of the
state in killing someone
counties.
We had a well did we had a judge
we lost to judge of believe
I thought he had passed away is
that been filled in all of our
judgeships are filled now.
Madam chair of fortune we
haven't lost to a judge I think
we all of our positions are
filled and we just recently
filled the most recent vacancy
with judge on to in Gallup with
the governor appointing him so
of the three district judges
obviously galloper judge to poly
judge you're gonna judge
Peterson.
All righty okay I don't have any
other questions but I'm gonna go
to Representative line promotion
please.
Thank you madam chair I would
move the LFC recognition.
We have a second for
representative Allison is there
any opposition to that motion
saying that it passes and I'd
like to thank the folks from the
eleven thank you very much thank
you madam chair thank you
members.
Okay let's go to the twelfth
judicial district.
This is.
At
each other in the twelfth.
Okay we're gonna go to the
analyst first but this is going
to be a question for
Representative Dixon worse the
twelfth located.
The twelfth is Otero and Lincoln
County okay right outside of
your district so let's go ahead
and go to the analysts and then
we'll go to the judge go ahead.
All madam chair members of the
committee agencies you are you
are you still.
Or.
Other revenue the LFC general
fund revenue recommendation is a
hundred twenty one thousand
higher than the executive
recommendation.
For the base the LFC
recommendation includes
additional recurring funding to
fully fund to the newly created
district judgeship and
associated staff from the
twelfth District Court the
executive recommendation keeps
funding for all all for
appropriations flat with the
adjusted FY twenty one operating
budget.
And both analyst reaching
consensus on Sanchez and for you
all right.
we could let's go to the
representative for this district
please thank you madam chair
this is and members of the
committee this is Angie
Schneider on the chief judge for
the twelve traditional which as
Representative Dixon said is
Lincoln and Otero counties and
it is and honor to be before you
all today I'm joined today by
our CEO archery who cari and I
think I was going to try to get
our hand out on the shared on
the screen here.
Thank you and hopefully you all
Alex are kind of the top is cut
off a little bit but hopefully
you all got got the sheet and I
I'm I'm gonna focus just just
very very briefly on the the
statistics that we provided the
evidence all of the hard work
that we've done in the twelfth
during the public health
emergency and I won't recite all
of that I'm just Ag and hopeful
that you all have it in you can
look through those numbers at
some point we have conducted at
head coach a lot of our hearings
and jury trials non jury trials
and then I I a lot of the other
judges have said a lot of the
other chiefs we really
I found new ways to provide
access to justice it's it's
something that will last well
past to this pandemic which will
be an extra eight which is an
extraordinary outcome of all of
this in terms of meeting
litigants where they are in and
making a point more accessible
and being mindful of of other
challenges that people have to
get to a courthouse so I think
that that is something that's
I'm very proud of I know all of
us are in the state for the work
that the judiciary's done with
regard to the business before
you today in our sheet here
we've got supplemental request
special cross I won't go into
that will we'll wait for the
appropriate time on that but but
madam chair members of the
committee we ask that we're in
support of the LFC
recommendations for our general
fund appropriation asset you
support that and with that madam
chair I will stand for any
questions you may have.
Okay.
Thank you very much just go to
the committee do we have any
questions what this of this
judge.
I don't see any hands up at this
time.
So I am going to go to
Representative sardana for that
motion.
Thank you madam chair
I move the LFC recommendation.
And we need a second.
The second from representative
Allison.
Is there any opposition to that
motion saying not it has been
approved and thank you very much
The presentation today thank you
madam chair.
Go to the next district the
thirteenth and I'm gonna ask
Representative Garcia where that
is.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair of that
district encumber football Santa
Monica county judges are good
honorable judge judge judge
George will show Johnson James
Raul just Christopher the best
in a new was judges Amanda
essentially on renewable which
you're provide data requests
Thank you for the opportunity
madam chair and it was said
earlier those are pretty is part
of the state I think he was
wrong my district is a breeze
part of the state nice is thank.
All right let's go to the
analysts going.
Madam chair members of the
committee and the thirteenth
judicial District Court the LFC
recommendation includesd two
hundred eighty five point four
thousand eight hundred and nine
hundred twenty nine thousand of
which is general fund revenue
more than the executive the LFC
recommendation also includes a
hundred and fifty five point
seven thousand dollars from the
mortgage regulatory fund of the
regulation licensing department
for the courts foreclosure
settlement and mediation program
so the you Madam program you all
heard about in the second thing
Bernalillo county that program
also exist in the thirteenth and
this is the same funding source
for that.
In the.
The thirteenth judicial District
Court was one of only two point
that was sanded below FY twenty
funding levels that during the
first initial session of twenty
twenty the LFC recommendation
restores the courts you FY
twenty funding levels and add
some additional funding per
person the executive
recommendation keeps funding for
operations lacked the FY twenty
one operating budget the
previous court again we just
have that language authorizing
the transfer from the the
regulation licensing department
and for performance analysts
reach consensus on all
performance measures and targets
last Mr Chavez's anything to add
I can turn it over to the chief
judge I called.
All right.
To.
You madam chair and members of
the.
Okay.
As we can.
Okay first I want to thank you
for the work that you do if
we're hearing test this
afternoon our I have to concur
with representative Garcia about
the I. I started medical career
in McKinley county so it is a
real pretty part of the state.
But we live in god's country.
That is right and thank you very
much for that that plus we
appreciate that.
It anyway what I would do this
afternoon just describe our
district and I'm gonna turn it
over to our CEO Colorado state
who will get into the fiscal
challenges that we have in our
and a request by district is
quite large are both realize and
population every why we start on
the side of the Sandia mountain
to go all the way to the Arizona
border.
just to give our.
The flavor of some of the some
of the municipalities that that
are within our district I'll
just leave some Cibola County we
have the lan and requests you
will is a County some of the the
bigger stuff municipalities are
but then the school must bolster
farms Sandoval County we have
Rio Rancho corral as part of
your thank you all we also have
ten Pueblo to be part of the
Navajo Nation and part of that
figure the actual reservation.
Are we have eight courthouses in
our district magistrate in Cuba
a district and magistrate court
Bernalillo a magistrate and
District Court in grants a
magistrate District Court of the
students in the magistrate court
that.
We have a hundred seventeen
employees plus a district judges
at eight magistrates judges.
Some of the challenges that
we're we're facing is we are
actually the second largest a
judicial district by population
our population is over a quarter
of a million people is rather
diverse urban or rural we have
we deal with issues that that.
The the comfort from from both
for what area are population
grew by over six percent from
two thousand ten to two thousand
and nineteen.
Up the latest case load study
shows that we in fact need three
and a half judges dissented over
eighteen additional judicial is
of specialist we're asking for
those but just for information
purposes I'm throwing that out
there.
Once again.
I'm just describing the district
that I'm gonna turn this matter
over to our CEO how rash State
Farm should be on.
Okay.
Members of the committee thank
you as miss Dick Peddie
mentioned in
special session this summer we
got cut hello our FY twenty
funding levels that combined
with some losses of other state
funds
ended up presenting a challenge
of about almost three hundred
thousand dollars less funding
here in FY twenty one than we
had last year in FY twenty to
meet that we are running a real
high vacancy rate at its seven
point seven percent November
we've been able to hire a few
people in our back to six point
eight percent were hoping to
continue to to improve on that.
I'm.
For next year we're just looking
hoping to fill as many of our
judicial specialist vacancies as
possible as judge Michael
mentioned we need nearly
nineteen brand new clerk
positions to meet our needs that
was a staff study the AOC had
done
and most of I want to thank both
of our analyst for including
that funding for the foreclosure
settlement program.
That's been a real successful
program for us since January of
twenty fourteen and
we informally polled.
Some of the plaintiffs
foreclosure attorneys that
routinely practice in our
district and they said they
expect as soon as they're
allowed to
says a federal foreclosure
moratorium is lifted they expect
to start filing between a
hundred fifty and a half to a
hundred and seventy five new
foreclosure cases every month
and so we're really expecting a
lot of those to come down the
come down the pike
unfortunately.
I think with that will be happy
to stand for the committee's
questions madam chair.
Well let's go to the committee.
I don't see any hands up but
I'm.
Shuffling through here to see if
we do I do not so you not an
excellent job in making your
presentation I'm gonna go to
representative Garcia for
motion.
Madam chair of reforming my
motion I would like to see
Haidle what she does is the key
to a major people.
Okay.
Thank you.
Madam chair I would like to make
importation to accept that she
recommendation the thirteenth
judicial District Court I think
we have a motion to have a
second.
I'll second it we have a motion
and a second is there any
opposition to that motion saying
none it is a proof Gen we'd like
to thank the thirteenth for your
presentation this afternoon.
Many are next our next step
presentation.
Is going to be you've got that
up there.
This is going to be the
Bernalillo county metropolitan
court and I'm gonna ask
Representative Trujillo course
that.
This is a trick question.
Madam chair I believe it is in
downtown Albuquerque okay I just
just checking just making
stricter your with us all right
let's go with the analysts.
Madam chair members of the
committee you can see two forty
four million County metropolitan
court.
Revenue the LFC recommendation
includes two hundred six
thousand dollars more in general
fund revenue than the executive
recommendation and budgets fifty
seven thousand and on down from
court fees not included in the
executive recommendation.
The LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue to the
court primarily for personnel
costs to improve recruitment and
retention.
The executive recommendation
keeps funding for operations
flat with the adjusted FY twenty
one operating budget.
And both analyst came to
consensus on all performance
measures and targets are without
all will ask Amanda she has any
questions or any comments.
Madam chair members no comments
I believe we have chief judge
Dominguez or further comment
from the agency all right eight
chief judge to Manchester next.
Thank you and good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee thank you for your
time and your patience this
afternoon and I just gonna go
ahead and give you a quick
overview of natural Cork natural
court is the busiest time court
in the state we have nineteen
judges total sixteen criminal
three step all and we have
numerous specialty court
programs including homeless
court and as well as our drug
courts
we'll go ahead and I'll share my
screen with you to go through
the budget okay.
And are you able to see that yes
we are thank you thank you just
wanted I'm so proud of myself
that I did it so with that said
LFC recommends recommended in
we'd ask that you support one
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars for PS and be to move
this funded.
He is to the general fund there
are some special request in
there which I'm not going to go
into detail as it's not the
appropriate time including our
special appropriations request a
refreshing of our courts more on
system which is completely at
the end of life and as I pointed
out before we are a quarter
record and we heard domestic
violence D. W. I. cases as well
as felony cases.
Within and part of COVID
there are no longer grand jury
presentations the metropolitan
court is hearing the bulk of all
preliminary hearing so it is
essential that we have that
recording equipment to
preserve all testimony of
witnesses and victims and have
that information available so
the parties can resolve the case
I'm in addition to that we have
capital request
portion of that is for Metropark
operating system to replace
obsolete and the obsolete
systems that we have as well as
lock and security systems and
with that I will also say that I
have Robert to do average G. E.
L. and our CFO Rachel monarch
and I'll be happy to stand for
questions thank you.
Right.
Okay we have your your page
taken down that we can go to
questions.
And I do have a question I have
a question but I'm gonna ask you
that Representative Hochman
Vigil take a peek at the
personal services employee
benefits calc Shea my question
is are authorized positions able
to funded positions and then I'm
going to ask Representative
Dixon.
To let me know if there's any
any are cached versions to this
this agency question I have for
you judge is how many cases does
the Bernalillo metropolitan
court here year.
This year we're down in actual
filings we're up to well down
from what we used to be about
four thousand and then as far as
actual hearings we can give you
the exact amount in the chat and
we can pull those numbers for
you but you know we have have
heard roughly I believe three
hundred bench trials this past
year as well as a handful of
jury trials.
So is it any issues around COVID
this year in terms of the
problems are with with COVID
inside the court absolutely and
like judge Delaney said in her
district we've risen to the
challenge some of the challenges
include setting up virtual
platforms it is really important
that we get access to justice so
we've updated our website as
well so you can actually click
into each of our court rooms if
you'd like to listen into the
proceedings we were the first
court house to come on board was
jailed which is been an
excellent resource and we're
also able to livestream our
hearings which are generally
done if we have a jury or bench
trial or at the request of
parties in advance and that's
something we had to come up with
with very very short notice so
we're constantly working on our
virtual court room in addition
to that big change are we don't
have to create a virtual wall
search warrant an arrest warrant
citing process for officers here
in the county where they can
submit their warrants to be
processed electronically by the
judges and also filed here in
metropolitan court so they would
not have to come down to the
courthouse and minimize exposure
and that's been
Very very popular with law
enforcement and that's and also
big project we've been working
on I'm in addition to that we
had to adjust a remote our
checking system for the numerous
officers that check in that way
they can check in remotely
rather than.
Happened to come down and
quarter to call in we know we
have several different court
rooms at the same time so we
have a centralized check in
system so we've had to develop
that as well and
Other than that we've just been
working hard and trying to
improve our operations we've
remained open and
Really have strived to keep
everybody safe at our
courthouse.
Okay thank you very much I'm
gonna turn to the two wraps
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you madam chair and I have
the performance measures summary
different sheet in front of me
but I'm sorry I didn't catch the
rest your questions if you could
repeat it I can tell you off the
street now yeah I'd like to know
are authorized positions to
quibble want to funded
positions.
I'll decisions of the defendant
positions.
I don't believe so madam chair
but I would defer to you I'm not
I don't know if that information
is included on the sheet to have
in front of me know let's let's
look at everybody let's look at
column a authorized for FY
twenty one.
And then we'll look at funded
vacant on on and off.
And then we'll look at the fact
that they don't correlate so my
question them to the LFC staff.
Particularly David if you're on
the if you're on this call how
is it that an agency can help
authorized FTE and not any money
to pay for them.
The LFC analyst.
Madam chair members of the
committee I don't think again
it's on but I can attempt to
answer this so.
I believe what we're looking at
is the he asked how she and
we're showing three hundred and
forty two authorized FTE in
metro court and only two hundred
eighty eight point eight those
positions
The the agency if you see in
column F. does actually have a
small funded vacancy rate of
point seven
I think what's happening and I
might have to you know do some
more digging or defer to Rachel
Myrick mark right now it might
be that a lot of these positions
are existing or authorized which
is not filled and chronically
not built but I can ask Rachel
if she knows a little more.
That answer happens before we
end with this agency so I'm
gonna ask Representative Dixon
did you have a have an answer.
well so I did sorry madam chair
I did look at the reversion of
for the metro court Bernalillo
county agency record and it
appears that six thousand seven
hundred approximately was
reverted up in this last year
and about ten thousand the year
before.
All right any comment from the
the judge on that.
Yes madam chair representative
Representative so I'm gonna go
ahead and have Mr Padilla
address those concerns.
madam chair members of the
committee yeah we did have a
small reversion and one of the
unique things with the actual
court is we do own and operate
our own building so we do have
to leave a little bit of money
in there just in case of our
mammoth unit goes down which is
our food heating and cooling in
June or any other late expenses
that we have to spend money on
of the for the size of our
budget six percent I believe is
on the less than one percent so
we're very proud of that the
version.
Sorry.
Okay statement on the is David
the chatter Charles Lee.
I don't see them.
I don't see either are you might
also know a little more I've
been thinking through this
question AOC also reimburses
courts for some FTE so in metric
or for example were enforcement
clerks those are paid relax
report budget they're paid
through AOC are you taking it.
Okay that's not it.
I've already answered the
question.
Representative chair members of
the committee.
Mexico has had some longstanding
vacancies and I believe those
are these on funded positions
I'm like other master course
where we do fund by
reimbursement that work large
metropolitan court runs its own
program for war clerk so they
generate revenue and pay those
people out of the revenue solely
confined to the Bernalillo
county metropolitan court but I
think the answer is that there's
some on funding of positions
that have long term care and.
Thank you you're right all right
so we're gonna we're gonna look
at that as we go through all the
ages agencies we have these
authorized positions that aren't
funded and I think that's
something I want to have the
committee
but a pen and as we go through
the different different agencies
all right we need a motion for
this summer Representative
Christine Trujillo.
Madam chair thank you I move the
LFC budget.
That we have a motion and we
have a second ticket madam
chair.
Okay we have a second for that
motion
and we appreciate that.
Is there any opposition.
Saying that it's been approved
and would like to thank all the
folks with the Bernalillo county
metropolitan court today and I
actually know where that is is
that right across from is that
right across from the convention
center in downtown Albuquerque.
No.
We're
Court lowest in fourth.
Madam chair moments weren't
already well I've never had to
appear in front of the Courts
some next time I drive down
there look thank you everybody
thank you.
The judicial standards
commission next.
All right madam chair members of
the committee we had agency to
the judicial standards
commission.
The judicial standards
commission requested a five
percent general fund revenue
decreases the LFC recommendation
reduce general fund revenue by
three percent well the executive
recommendation capped Revenue
flat with the FY twenty one
operating budget.
In the base the executive
recommendation includes fifteen
thousand dollars more for
personnel costs than the LFC
recommendation and asked to
address a projected shortfall in
the category after the agency
awarded some salary increases at
the end of FY twenty.
For contractual services and
other costs there is less than
eighty five thousand dollar
difference between the two
recommendations
for performance analyst reach
consensus on all performance
measures and targets.
This afternoon we have with us
the that director and CFO Randy
really well as well as Chris to
Diaz Chavez unless brands
anything at.
Thank.
Chair members creating account.
Okay let's go ahead we'll go to
the presenters for the judicial
standards commission.
I thank you madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Randy Roybal all and the
executive director CFO of the
commission I had been with the
commission and been instrumental
in guiding it in some parts
since nineteen ninety eight and
I can tell you and all the
decades the two plus decades
I've been there I've never seen
a more devastating impact upon
my agency than the combined
impact of the oil price war and
COVID had through the instrument
of the a budget tool our current
budget was reduced four percent
In June like everybody else as a
result of the devastating impact
of the oil price for New and the
pandemic we understood and as
we've indicated throughout this
process and in our request we
fully complied with all the
directives the directive was to
look to space not people to
absorb that cut and we did that
we.
As a result of that cut
And and and you know we had to
we had to cut more than that we
had to eliminate every phone
every telephone line we cut
every training opportunity for
commission members which we have
a lay majority commission so the
most of them are not lawyers or
judges yet the judge judges and
decide whether they will should
be removed or retire
involuntarily or disciplined
in the the current
recommendations I can tell you
we only submitted every our our
budget with the five percent
rate reduction request because
we were told to and I believe we
were probably only judicial
branch and to do that did and if
we weren't where one of the only
ones that did follow those
instructions and turn in the
budget with the re with the
reduction what we really need
member it just madam chair
members of the committee is the
executive recommendation which
is a flat recommendation because
that at least stops the bleeding
from what we're currently
bleeding out but that
recommendation continues to keep
my agency which is a
constitutional commission we
were adopted in nineteen sixty
eight by the people R. as
article six section thirty two
of the constitution we are the
judicial ethics and conduct an
oversight agency for the
judicial branch we do with that
the ethics commission the state
at epics Commission does but for
the judiciary and we've been
doing it for fifty years longer
than they have we do the same
type of work we're basically law
firms with prosecutorial
experience for like DA's so
we're we're predominantly fixed
expenses of the office phones
you know training Barbie is that
kind of stuff and then we have
staff personnel costs that's it
that's really where it is the
needs of the case each
individual case really dictate
what our expenses need to be
there very difficult to put.
Decked from year to year but in
general in FY twenty when we
started at one thirty to seven
for our operating costs in the
four hundred category we were
fully funded in operating
expenses but when when when you
all implemented the four percent
cotton took us down for this
fiscal year to one a one six in
operating expenses that cut a
huge amount out I was forced to
break my lease for my agency and
we surrendered our lease at the
end of December.
We have we had to go through the
process to find and procure a
temporary space to house
essential furniture for basic
functions of the agency and we
pro chair just long long term
containers storage for our
hearing virtually basically have
a court room because the
constitution does require us to
try judges and investigate
judges in sheer caught
virtually complete
confidentiality the only time
cases are made public are when
they reach the Supreme Court on
a recommendation for action so I
think you all would agree were
super important we're extremely
important to ensuring that the
rule of law is maintained in our
state I think we all have seen
recent what recent events how
important that is in the the
courts are what held right in
the federal system and I can
tell you in New Mexico our
courts are strong and they will
continue to be so but they are
only as healthy and as good as
their weakest member if you have
a a judicial unelected judicial
officer a judge on the bench who
is alleged by of by someone a
member of the public a law firm
another judge someone of
misconduct or some sort of
unethical illegal behavior we
are the entity that deals with
we are the one that the
constitution requires look at it
and right now we only have space
for to people out of our seven
that ours are are filled you are
very welcome I think we have
already alerted around us to
please remove the eighth
position that is not funded it
hasn't been for years
and I would love it to be we
really needed to do we need that
position but for the last years
you all have not deemed it fit
to go to to find it and that's
fine so you can take it but that
seventh position that is filled
is is needed I can tell you that
if you adopt the LFC
recommendation that takes my
operating it's.
This is from one oh one six
to eighty thousand dollars for
the whole year for my agency
with seven FTEs my office space
when fully with all my furniture
of with my hearing was
approximately three thousand
eight hundred square feet we
currently have a temporary space
of nine not just over nine
hundred square feet with like I
said only space for to people I
am currently in the process of
putting together in our of P.
which will be issued I believe
in March so I can prepare a new
hopefully permanent office space
based on hopefully a new budget
that will take us past the
pandemic and rebuild but that's
really going to that's really
going to be on you I can tell
you that the least that I broke
our rent was seventy thousand so
if you take is down on the LFC
recommendation to eighty that
give me ten thousand to operate
an entire agency with seven
people that and that's
depositions trials travel all of
which is currently not fund.
current fiscal year I have no
money for travel so none of my
investigating attorneys can go
and speak with court staff for
lawyers or litigants who have
been harmed your claim that a
judge is wrong them or done
something improper or illegal we
have no money to actually have a
trial in person right now I have
six cases that are on deck for
trials I have one scheduled in
April that one is scheduled only
because the air the issue is so
narrow we determined we could
successfully do it be ism which
my commission was successful in
on a on a flight we were able in
a two week time when the
pandemic hit and the public
health order came down my
commission without much training
got on soon and we started
conducting our meetings and our
hearings V. as in a they are not
it's not ideal for a body that
makes decisions is Borton like
this to do it in that manner but
it's the best thing that we
could come up with it so next
next best thing and I think it's
working for the time being but I
can tell you we need our hearing
back we need to get back
together as an office staff we
need to work in the same
building and that's going to
require me to get an office it's
going to cost at least fifty
five thousand dollars and I
can't operating agency on twenty
five thank I really need it
anymore just leave me alone
leave the agency alone give us
the executive at one of one or
you know
I really would prefer you put
some money back in because I'm
really afraid that for the rest
of this fiscal year we're just
gonna keep these trials on hold
that means the judges cases will
not actually really be addressed
we just have research them the
staff has made recommendations
the commission believes actions
needed but we have no money to
act we will at that point when
those come up I can promise you
we will go to the state board of
finance I know that's available
I will do that I've already been
had discussed that we've been in
touch with both our analyst.
We've talked with the
subcommittee in October but I do
want to let you know it is a
dire circumstance for our tiny
little agency we are not part of
the unified budget we do not
have anybody that that helps
craft or manager obtain our
budget we have to lobby for
nineteen our budget ourselves we
are part of the branch but we
are independent of that of that
point we have to because we we
oversee them in some in some
sense
Yes that being said your three
hundred category or fixed costs
and that's audit and I. T. now
that we're fully remote my I. T.
expensive has have only
increased and if anything I need
more money because ideas pretty
old and we need to get camera
equipment to be able to conduct
meetings and hearings to to
enable the staff right now we're
using our personal laptops and
and iPhones to be able to do
this and this just not it's just
not appropriate for an agency of
our time when I started in the
agents the HSD in ninety eight
we were tiny little obscure
agency hardly anyone knew us in
state government even among the
legislature
we were no in the in the United
States for the work we do I can
tell you that not only have we
met we've exceeded all our pre
performance measures since they
were first implemented we have
gone from obscurity to becoming
a leader in the nation I serve
three three terms is that as the
national president for our
organization our professional
organization that oversees all
the very state agencies of my
type or across the country and
in Canada and the U. K. it
cetera my deputy director
Phyllis to Mingus is with us
today is currently on the board
I'm still on the board of
directors for the national where
do we become a very important
leading agency we do good work
we've gained a really good
reputation we're worked hard
with the do with the bench the
bar the legislature but
unfortunately this financial
crisis has really hurt us I'll
stop now I know I've gone a long
time but unfortunately I I
really feel I needed to get it
all out and I needed to tell you
what in in full in full affect
what the situation is and I
would be happy to answer any
questions as well as I deputy
CFO Christa Josh Chavis can
drill down if you have very
specific questions on the
budget.
Thank you Mr or ball you know we
don't mind candor
we think that's a good place we
know what's going on we can take
the temperature of agencies that
way I'm gonna go to questions
and see if we have any questions
from the committee at this point
because I'm gonna suggest a a
motion so if there's any
questions from the committee.
I don't see any
So with that being said what I'm
going to request the committee
look at is the executive
recommendation and they that we
take another look at this during
catch up clean up so with that I
need a motion place.
Thank you madam chair I would
move the executive
recommendation for the judicial
standards commission with also
your for these to look at this
and catch a claim.
All righty is there second
second.
Okay we do have a motion and a
second for that
Is there any opposition to that
motion.
So so it's been approved I I did
want to ask you Mr Roybal when
was the last time you have I
know when years and years you
all provided a document the
judicial standards commission
report
when was the last time that was
published I know you all had at
one time we have in here HSC
when people were allowed in the
building and then they were
mailed to us at one time but
when was the last one published.
madam chair there still being
published we are required by the
by a statute or statutory.
The provisions to published one
annually we just stopped
printing it in hard copy form a
decade ago with the first
financial crisis this isn't the
first time I've let this agency
in a financial downturn
unfortunately in the nine two
thousand ten eleven we had that
that that was about three
thousand dollars to bring up
about you know four thousand
copies and get and mail them
distributed to everyone that
needed a copy or wanted to copy
we went to electronic
publication we used to send
letters we've tried to send
emails I believe that was done
or should have been done we at
least try to to to send letters
or emails to members of the
finance committees both Senate
and house because really our
agency is so small and so
obscure and the work that we do
so narrow and so discreet that
it's it's almost it takes up a
lot of committee time and every
time we come before committees
for various things when it comes
to budget you know our numbers
are so little because we're
little but the work that we do
is huge and you know when we
have a district judge on trial
or we have allegations that are
I don't know Supreme Court
justices violated the law you're
not in the case but personally
like out in the world you know
we've got to be able to respond
I think one of the six cases I
have is serious allegations
involving a district judge of of
physical inability to perform
which may involve compelling
independent medical examinations
that means the state pays for it
but I have no money to compel
that this is a judge who may not
be appropriate to stay on the
bench yet the judge remains and
so we have money to do our
investigation at first and then
to recommend and and have to try
to the judge already well we we
understand that Mr strive also
we appreciate IT nine I would
like to say one thing
You made a comment that nobody
knows you well they sure did
when those publications were
sitting out front of HA of state
and some of our local judges
were right in that report for
all the violations so I'm going
to ask if our staff if you'd
send that link for the most
recent one I'd like to have that
printed off for our committee
for those who'd like to see it
or maybe you just want the
length I need to see something
in hard copy I'm very interested
in this report so I'm going to
ask staff to print that off for
me and we'll just do it here at
the capitol so we can have a
hard copy that you madam chair
no problem all right with that
being said thank you and I think
this concludes unless bill comes
running in here to tell me
something different I think this
quiz are hearings for today.
And we will fire back up at one
thirty tomorrow and that is
Administrative office of the
district attorney's so do the
DA's tomorrow and and have that
in full committee I want to
remind the committee we are
meeting at nine AM on Saturday
morning catch up on what we
missed this last Friday and be
the two subcommittees
so be prepared for that and
we'll see you all same time same
place tomorrow with a different
group of presenters thank you
everybody thank you madam chair
thank you madam chair viability
of good evening.
