find the difference sheets for
each one of the respective
special schools and a summary of
the consensus performance
measures.
So overall, the Department of
Finance and Administration
recommended 3% I n G increase
for the special schools, the LFC
recommended.
A 7% increase. So when you look
at that top sheet
You'll see for New Mexico
Military institute the
instruction in general purposes
line. The LFC recommendation is
$48.3000 higher. Um, then the
executive on the next two lines
Enemy has to R P S P s. The lfc
recommendation held them flat.
The executive recommendation
increased the athletics funding
by 258.
Uh, 1000. The Noles legislative
scholarship by 406,000.
Next to the school for the blind
and the visually impaired. There
is one difference. It's ah
$17,400 in the I n G category,
the LFC is higher.
And for the school for the
death. The difference is
$75,500.
The LFC is higher instruction in
general purposes. That's the
summary of the recurring budget.
Analysts have met and reached
consensus on performance
measures and targets now like to
turn it over to Ms Macias for
additional comments.
Thank you. Connor, Mr Chairman,
members of the committee. I have
no other comments to add that
kind of already touched on Thank
you.
Thank you very much, Mr Macias.
Thank you very much, Mr
Jorgensen. Uh, with that, I
think Let's go ahead and does
any question well, we'll have
you as analysts there will go
ahead and invite Dr Herbal. Dr.
Beecher, General Grizzle, um to
come on up, General Grizzle. If
you, um do we understand
correctly, that you all have a
meeting pretty soon after this.
Okay, so we'll start General
Grizzle with you and, um
Folks, uh,
Yeah.
This opportunity. I appreciate
the opportunity to talk briefly
about New Mexico Military
Institute.
Basically this, uh, session I
want to say thank you.
Uh, the items that we've asked
for assistance with pretty well
been taken care of. We had to
our PS PS. It was mentioned to
increase our transportation
costs. I've talked about this
for several years about the cost
of transportation to come and
pick us up in Roswell. We did
hit 200 miles just to come and
pick our cadets up to take them
to their activities.
So the additional funding is
just tremendous. We appreciate
that very much.
Second is for the Noles and
that's your program that we
administer on your behalf. But
over the years, the costs have
just risen. And there are things
that are passed directly through
to the cost of the nose, For
instance, uh, room and board
Our infirmary costs are
healthcare costs, and the
overall costs have risen, so
this increase will allow us can
do continue to honor the intent
of the program, which was a 50%
scholarship to the student to
come to the enemy. My
And again. I want to thank you,
darling for the funding, But
over the last couple of years
you've helped us amend that
original language.
And first the nose when it was
implemented in 1989 was
restricted to your district in
your district only and we were
only using about 70 of the 112
scholarships.
So, with your help, we amended
that and now after July 1st. We
can use them if we have
qualified applicants, we can
still award him the nose.
Since then, we've been able to
award all 112 every year.
The other thing that you were
helped us do is the, um it was a
limited to four years and we're
a six year spectrum program so
again with your help, we removed
that language. And now a student
can come to enemy my for the
entire six years.
And you'll see in the brochures.
I handed you two things one. Now
the corps of cadets is
represented by 36% from New
Mexico.
And very happy When I first came
here 15 years ago, that was only
about 16%. So we brought that up
considerably this past year
alone with the changes that you
helped us implement. We saw
another 6% increase in the the
students from New Mexico coming
to enemy might for those
additional funds are just
tremendous. We appreciate that.
The one area that I'd like to
point out again on the front is
academics. That's what we're all
about, and the one brochure
brings up the number of I won't
go through them. I'd like you to
read them, but the number of
publications that have
recognized us as either the
number one high school or number
one junior college in New Mexico
in certain areas.
The A. C T scores for my high
school 25.4 is the average a CT
scored enemy My That's 23% above
the national average. So again,
we're very proud. We think the
money that you give us and I
think we use it effectively in.
It's reflected in the scores the
Knolls on the bottom. You can
see the amount of money we were
able to award.
To the New Mexico students, and
that's been a tremendous help.
We very much appreciate it.
The last couple of things that
are in the budgets that I again
just want to say thank you, for
one is the
Additional funding for the
salary increases. As we started
talking were not included in
that when you the Legislature,
increased ped or HDD, and now
with your help that funding for
all three of the special schools
is in the budget this year to
help us with that 6% increase
that was implemented last year,
so we very much appreciate that
help in that regard.
And I believe we have it so that
it will be taken care of going
forward when you do that. So, Mr
Chairman. If there's any
questions, I could answer, I'd
be more than happy to do so.
Thank you very much. General
Grizzle, and we're going to go
first to ranking member
Armstrong, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank
you for your presentation. I
just wanted a was curious about
the updates on your, uh,
dormitories where the showers
were so horrible that where we
went and toured it, and I just
wanted to brief update on that.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Certainly Mr. Chair,
Representative Armstrong. The
one third have been completed
now.
And the 2nd 3rd will start as
soon as the semester is over.
It's very difficult to obviously
do that with the cadets there,
but again thanks to your help
and funding, we have the money
to complete the next third.
That will take approximately a
year and a half to do and then
we'll go after the last amount
of funding for the last 15. So
one third finished one third
funded and that'll leave US one
third to finish in about a year
and a half.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you for that. I'm happy to
know the update. Appreciate it.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you very
much. Ranking member Armstrong.
Are there any other questions?
Uh, C n none. Thank you, General
Grizzle. You bring us I think
really record of accomplishments
of progress and thank you very
much for what you all do. You're
welcome. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move. The committee adopts the
LFC recommendation.
Okay, There's motion. There's a
second by represented Chatfield.
their adoption to the adopting
that motion, saying none. Okay
now if we could have, uh, Dr
Herbal from the school for the
deaf, please. Good to see you.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. Thank you for having
us here today.
We have a handout. I'm not sure
if you all received it.
Pizza gray paper.
Really? I will just summarize a
lot of what we've been doing in
a couple of sentences.
As many of you are aware we are
statewide agencies were serving
deaf and hard of hearing
Children throughout the state,
not just on our campus.
We're really proud of a couple
of recent accomplishments, so we
set up a diagnostic hearing
center in Gallup.
And the reason that's so
important is because when babies
are screened in the hospital
Only one out of 20 babies that
don't pass the hearing screening
are actually deaf or hard of
hearing. 19 out of 20 are
hearing they have normal
hearing, but they just don't
pass because maybe they have
some fluid in their ears when
they're bored or something like
that, So the follow up is
critical, especially during the
pandemic. The follow up, you
know, parents weren't getting
those follow up tests, son and
so there are some babies that
were identified very late as
Steph or hard of hearing, and we
know from our studies.
Throughout the country. The
Children who receive language
and communication early
From zero H zero birth they
develop on the same trajectory
as any hearing Children would.
But if they're late, that
trajectory changes so much.
And so in Gallup, we really
didn't have access to that
diagnostic center. Parents would
have to drive from that area all
the way to Albuquerque and many
parents didn't have the
resources to do that. And so we
set up a Tele Health Center in
Gallup. And so now we're looking
to do the same thing in Las
Cruces and the eastern part of
the state as well. So we're very
excited about those efforts and
the funding you were able to
give us his really helped.
Us to be able to do that.
We are concerned about the
impact of the pandemic on deaf
and hard of hearing Children.
We are starting to see them come
into the school systems. These
are babies that were born during
the pandemic, especially in the
southern part of the state.
Where families maybe you went to
Texas to have their babies.
And they're hearing status was
not reported to do the
democracy, New Mexico Department
of Health and so they're coming
in later than we would expect,
But that's something we're
working hard to repair.
So we continue to serve many
deaf and hard of hearing
Children throughout the state.
As General Grizzle mentioned we
are been, you know, challenged
by the increases to salaries in
the last two years.
75% of our funding is from the
permanent fund and the land
maintenance fun.
Often people hear and think, Oh,
those funds are oil and gas. Oil
and gas is going up, so they
think that we're getting higher
funds from that. But the New
Mexico school for the deaf
Specifically our land is not oil
and gas.
And so our funds are fairly fat
flat. They go up a little bit.
We get increases every year, but
it's it's fairly flat, and it's
nothing we can control. It is
what it is. So we really count
on the Legislature to help that
offset the cost three year
appropriations, so we
respectfully ask for the LFC
recommendation to be accepted.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Doctor. Herbal. It's great to
see you here today. Thank you
for sharing the progress that
you, uh, have made and we're
gonna go first types of Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I just want
to commend the doctor and her
staff are doing a great job.
They serve our entire state. I
was fortunate to take a tour
last year and, uh,
They did a broad overview of the
work they do.
And I'll say the same for the
school of the blind. I won't
comment when they're off, but
I think we need to do what we
can to help them.
This is important work. They do.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Absolutely.
Thank you very much.
Representative Sanchez. I don't
Yes, please represent Luhan.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I teach one
echo with representative Sanchez
has said this is a school that
is has historical value to our
state.
And
Into our community here,
especially Santa Fe and part of
my part of my district, and I
just want to say thank you for
the service. And really, we
looked to give you the all the
support that we can. Thank you,
Mr Chair.
Thank you very much.
Representative Wuhan shirt.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
Two things I just wanted to
Comment that I appreciate you
flagging that although the funds
come from the land grant
permanent fund that they don't
necessarily increase I. That's
probably a misconception that
many of us have, um and so I
appreciate, um, the additional
information and education on
that. Um and second, I want to
compliment.
The
Translation or the
The service what it was
interpreting. Thank you. The
word was escaping me today. Um
Just excellent. So thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you very much for
vice chair, Dixon. I would share
the same. And I think the point
of pride for this committee that
we have this strong LSC
recommendation with that. Let's
go to Representative Sanchez for
the motion was the lfc.
Thank you. It's been moved by
represents Sanchez saying
goodbye, vice or ranking member
Armstrong. Is there any
opposition to adopting that
motion? Seeing none. Thank you
very much.
Thank you. Thank you.
Okay, Finally, we're gonna ask
Dr Beecher.
To come on up.
There we go. Good afternoon, Mr
Chair, Madam vice chair and
members.
Patricia Beecher, the
superintendent of the New Mexico
School for the Blind and
visually Impaired. I'm really
happy to be here today.
We're excited to be celebrating
120 years we were founded in
1903 like an MSD. We serve the
entire state of New Mexico and
the students who are blind and
visually impaired throughout the
state from birth through 21
years old.
Um, we had last year We had 109
students on our campus is but we
served 1800 students and that's
in your handout. We we served
18/1800 students received direct
services last year.
We did over 1000 evaluations in
the state.
And we served over 2400 students
overall during the last school
year.
We also provide adapted
materials.
Four students throughout the
state, and we sent out over
242,700 of those adapted
supplies, books and learning
materials.
We also have an assistant
technology, loaning library and
do a system technology
evaluations. We do a low vision
evaluations and we're soon to
purchase new vision screening
tools so that we can do early
childhood vision screenings
throughout the state as well.
We also participate in multiple
research projects throughout the
nation.
We presented at 12 national
conferences last year.
We have lots of extra curricular
We have lots of extracurricular
activities, including Braille
Challenge.
Adaptive skiing.
Blind soccer summer camps, Girl
Scouts strategic games.
It's important for us to be able
to work on the expanded core
curriculum for students who are
blind and visually impaired.
That's us, uh, curriculum
specific to students with vision
impairments that is nine
categories and helps them access
the core curriculum. So we do we
teach both the core curriculum
and the expanded core
curriculum.
We are very appreciative of the
of the support of the state of
New Mexico.
Because of you. We can have all
of these programs throughout the
state.
Um right now the expenditures
will outpace our revenues. Um,
and in FY 25 like the MSD and,
uh and Naomi.
Because of the salary increases.
We look like we're gonna our
expenditures are going to
outpace our revenues. We do
appreciate, um lfc
recommendation and the inclusion
and higher ed for salary
increases. We respectfully ask
for consideration of the higher
LSC recommendation.
And I'd also like to mention
that within the lfc
recommendation we did. We did
ask for two supplementals. Um
the LSC is recommending approval
of the 514,000 supplemental for
the GSD, um, payment. We also
requested a $600,000
supplemental that is recommended
by the executive for current
Uh,
Salary increases so we would
respectfully ask for your
consideration on those
Um I also want to point out that
we did. We did Braille or
appreciation at the bottom of
the back page. Um, and on the
back page, you'll be able to see
what Dr Herbal was talking
about, Um, that there are slight
increases on our L G B F.
Year to year to year. But
they're not. They're not
considerable, and they don't
keep up in pace with the salary
increases.
Thank you very much. Thank you
very much. Superintendent. I'm
gonna look to see if there's any
questions. I don't see any
Um, thank you were proud of our
LSC recommendation will go to
Vice Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chair before I
make a motion. I just want to
recognize that I understand that
This is the last time that
Superintendent future will be
sitting before us since she is
retiring. So thank you for your
service. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
And so, Mr Chair, I would move
the LFC recommendation. Okay,
It's been moved by Vice Chair
Dixon, second by represent
Montoya there any opposition to
adopting that motion?
Saying none. Thank you very
much. Thank you.
Okay?
Now we'll Ah
Go back to our agenda members
and we're gonna start. Madam
Secretary is great to see you.
Of course, When we get to see
you, Madam Secretary, please
feel free to introduce your team
and the team back home if you
want to, uh
Very thank you for your
leadership. Thank you for being
here. We'll start with Mr
Jorgensen members. This is
agency code 950.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
Members, um
So you should have a hearing
packet in front of you, or it
will be titled FY 25 budget
requests of the higher education
institutions and higher
education department in the
first page.
Looks like this. I'd like to
take just a minute to go through
some background.
Um, as well as Gibson
definitions for some of the
terms. We're going to be hearing
this afternoon, and then we'll
jump into the actual
recommendations. So the first
thing I'd like to touch on is
appropriations and enrollments
for the fall of 23, New Mexico
Higher education institutions
experienced the second
consecutive year.
Of
Enrollment increases. This is
very likely attributable to the
passage of the opportunity
Scholarship, which pays for
tuition and fees for returning
students, as well as part time
non traditional students.
Um
So if you'll take a look with me
to the graph on the right hand
side of the page, you can see
sort of the history 10 YEAR
history of appropriations and
enrollment in higher education
institutes, And I think the big
takeaway so the bars are showing
you what that FTE enrollment is.
Those are down about 24%.
Over the last 10 years, the line
is showing appropriations. Um,
those are up 51% over the last
10 years. The vast majority of
that increase has come in the
last two years when the
Legislature has appropriated
another $375 million for higher
education. A really big chunk of
that is attributable to the
opportunity Scholarship, which
is currently budgeted at 146
million.
Recurring.
Um you'll also notice there's
some pretty big increases for
the base I n g budget totalling
around 100 and $78 million
Um, and a pretty good chunk of
that is related to salary
increases that the Legislature
has passed over the past. Um
couple of
A couple of years being built
into that I n g base, so that's
Uh, snapshot of where we're at
in terms of enrollment and
appropriations with the
historical context.
Um
Like to talk a little bit about
student outcomes. So, according
to the U. S Census Bureau's
American Community survey, New
Mexico currently ranks 41st in
the proportion of the population
that has a college degree that
is happening despite the fact
that New Mexico has led the
nation. We've done better than
the national average since 1996
when the operator or win the
lottery scholarship was created.
We've led the nation in the
college going right. So if you
turn over to page two
Um we can see the fall to fall
retention rates for new
students.
Um
In New Mexico. We've
historically lagged, um, the U.
S as a whole.
And recently that gap has
widened a little bit and right
now or in 2021, the state ranked
49th for completions within 100
and 50% of
Uh, normal time, So that's six
years for a four year degree.
Um, so I think those two issues
the graduation rates and the
retention rates are really kind
of critical and they speak to a
need for students supports. So
one of the things we're seeing
right now is students leaving
the K 12 system unprepared to
succeed in higher education? So
about a third of students right
now are doing some sort of
remediation when they when they
get to higher education.
Um
Apart from those academic needs,
the University of New Mexico ran
a basic needs survey assessment
this past year and one of the
things are two of the things I
found.
One was a half of students
reported being housing insecure
19% of two year students and 16%
of four year students reported
experiencing homelessness in the
last 12 months, So a lot of our
students are facing some pretty
big barriers to success
academically.
There was a 2023 lfc evaluation
that you all may recall that was
on financial aid. And one of the
things that found was that
Research indicates college
funding and financial aid have a
tendency to boost student
outcomes overall, but that New
Mexico colleges were performing
below expected benchmarks given
our funding.
The evaluation also found that
funding for college operations
specifically for students
support
Have higher estimated.
Impact on those student
outcomes.
So with that, I'd like to talk a
little bit about
The budget categories. We're
going to be discussing this
afternoon. First instruction in
general, you've heard this term.
I'm sure ad nauseum instruction
in general are all the basic
operating expenses.
Of a higher education
institution. This is the portion
of the budget that is related to
the funding formula.
The funding formula is directing
only new money, so it does not
reduce budgets. It only
increases them based on a set of
performance.
Metrics. Most of that is, um,
degrees awarded and student
credit hours or your major two
drivers in the funding formula.
The funding formula is updated
every year, um by a
Technical working group that
includes HDD Higher ed
Institution, Um, Institution
staff as well as L. F C and D F
A
This year, there was
Essentially 11 large change. Um
and it was to increase the
proportion of
Funding distributed through the
formula.
Four performance from 10% to
20%, so it doubled the
performance funding.
Ah, available to institutions
through that formula, and what
that should do is raise the
ceiling for those institutions
that are making good progress in
Either student credit hours or
degrees awarded, Um they will be
able to qualify for
Larger slice of that of that
pie.
Um
Next. I'd like to touch on
categorical funding and research
and public service projects of
on Page three. You can see that
pie chart there that's breaking
out for you. The the I N G, Um
the RPS P, which is 174 Million
and categorical funding, which
is 34.5 million, so
Categorical and our PSP.
Funds are single line item
appropriations, and they're made
for things that don't really fit
in the N G base. Things that
aren't necessarily, um
Academic in nature or
operational in nature. So think
Athletics receives funding
through categorical
appropriations. Other R P S P s
would include things like the
New Mexico Department of
Agriculture is an R. P s. P
under an MSU.
Um
In the last session, the
Legislature asked HDD lfc D F A
and higher education
institutions to take a look at
The R P. S. P s currently
authorized, um and see how many
of them were
Could be included in the I N G
base. A number of the R P s. P s
that existed were things for, um
I n g services like student
support is typically an I N G s,
uh, service, but it was being
included in RPI. SPS, So Hee
prepared guidance. That memo was
sent out to higher education
institutions.
And when the higher education
institutions came in for their
annual are PSP hearings.
They suggested, which are PS PS
fell under those that guidance
and should be rolled up in the
base. So the sort of long and
short of it is that there's just
under 60 R P. S. P s that have
been recommended for inclusion
in the I n G base worth about
$10 million and I just want to
make very clear.
None of the recommendations are
defunding R P S. P s. There were
no cuts to any of those R P S. P
s. It's just that that, um that
funding was moved from its
specific line item up into the
into the I N G base and we have
a detail of those later on in
the packet on page 10.
if you'll turn with me to page
six.
I want to go over the spending.
the spending summary on the high
level document, so, Page six. If
you look at line three, the
executive recommendation is a 3%
increase for new money
distributed through the funding
formula. The LFC recommends a
1.5% increase so online for you
can see, the executive
recommended.
About 11.1 million more.
Three distribution through the
funding formula, then did the
LFC.
If you take a look down at line
11, you'll see targeted
investments. These are
appropriations that are not made
through the funding formula.
Um
They are made on the basis of
the proportion of I n G that
each institution receives so
bigger institutions will get a
bigger proportion of this
funding. There's two buckets
there. There's one for students
support for $3 million, and
there's one for faculty
compensation for $7 million so
that funding would be
distributed directly based on
the size of the institution.
Um
If you go down to line 18, you
can see the health sciences
center.
I n g.
Recommendations. The executive
recommends a $2.5 million
increase while the LFC
recommends a $1.8 million
increase. And then there's one
more targeted investment online.
22. That's $1 million for salary
increases for medical school
faculty.
So that gets us pretty much
through the I N G.
Base. Next up is our PSP
starting online 31. Overall, the
recommendations are pretty
close. The executive is
$753,000 higher than the lfc.
Um, on that there's a couple of
differences in the approach and
how we got there. So the
executive includes $2.2 million
more than the LFC for
Athletics and includes
And
And the LFC includes 2 Million
more for healthcare service
programs. These are generally
nursing programs than the
executive
Um
Executive also has $2.1 million
more for
For centers of excellence,
including a new center of
excellence at New Mexico Tech.
And other R P s P s. You'll see
a $2.5 million difference.
Um $2 Million of that difference
is due to water initiatives such
as aquifer mapping and produced
water research. So that's the
wrap up on our PSP again. Not a
big difference when we got down
to the higher Ed department.
This is where the majority of
the differences are going to be
$18 Million of that difference
is down there.
And really in the higher ed
department. Um, the one that
sticks out is the lottery
scholarship, which the executive
recommends funding at 11.9
million more than the LFC.
Opportunity. Um
One note on that you won't see
it on on this high level. The
LFC has committee endorsed
legislation that creates a
tuition trust fund.
That tuition trust fund, uh,
holds $959 million.
Um, from the Tax Stabilization
Reserve fund and is designed to
pay increases.
In both the lottery and
opportunity scholarships.
Because the LFC recommendation
also presupposed this trust fund
It did not include additional
recurring funding for the
opportunity scholarships, so
that's
Explains the big difference
there.
Um, on Page seven. You'll see
higher Education Department high
level and I'd just like to take
you through the rest of this
packet.
Very quickly. So you're familiar
with what's in here?
Page eight is a summary of all
of the non recurring general
fund appropriations. It's a side
by side Exact lfc.
Um, page 10. That's your summary
of our PSP roll up so everything
that was recommended for
inclusion in the base is listed
on pages, 10 and 11.
Page 12 is the detail sheet that
shows everything for all
institutions, so it'll show your
I n g recommendations. Your
categorical you're our PSP and
Branch college funding Rex and
this, um
Pretty much mirrors. What? What
you would see in
The General Appropriations Act
Page 17, You'll see the higher
education Department difference
sheets.
And then on page 22. There's a
summary of all of the, uh
Performance measures and and
consensus targets recommended
for inclusion in G A. So that
takes you through, Uh, higher
education packet. I'd now like
to turn it over to Ms Macias.
Thank you, Connor, Mr Terror
members of the committee. I'll
just briefly touch on a couple
of executive. High level points.
um, for the department in
itself.
The executive was higher. We did
include 11.9 Million for
Opportunity Scholarship. We also
include
Included 2.25 million for tribal
technical assistance centers.
This was, um, due to house Bill
280. That was a legislative
mandate in the 2023 legislative
session. We also included $1.2
million for maintenance and
operations for the Longitudinal
data system. Um, within the
recurring budget, there's also 1
million for dual credit.
1 million for graduate
scholarships, programs and
500,000 for an anti hazing
initiative. I would also like to
mention that
For the higher education budget.
The executive included. Five new
F T E for institutional finance
and financial aid. UM and the
Indian Education division,
whereas the LFC recommended only
to F T, um
And
That concludes my points for the
higher Education Department
Alternate over now to the
secretary. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr CIA's Madam secretary.
Good morning or it's not the
morning as you can see, I still
have maternity brain. Good
afternoon, Mr Chair, Madam vice
chair and honorable members of
the committee. I am Stephanie.
Whether he is and I am the
Cabinet secretary of the New
Mexico Higher Education
Department. And thank you for
your time today as we present
the executive budget
recommendation for the higher
Education Department first.
Did you want to do tuition or
after
Do you after, Okay?
Now. Over the last two years,
New Mexico has experienced
nationally recognized and
monumental growth in the number
of students pursuing degrees at
our higher education
institutions across the state,
thanks to historic investments
by the governor, and, of course
you as the Legislature, New
Mexico is leapfrogging other
states and college affordability
and access since the passage of
the opportunity scholarship in
2022, the number of new Mexicans
pursuing higher education has
increased by 6.7%, reversing
over a decade of enrollment
declines that we
We have seen. It's exciting that
our state is actually leading
over other states just beginning
to actually recover from
enrollment losses suffered
during the pandemic.
Now I will be referring to this
handout that you should have
today. And if you start with
Page one, the average enrollment
this year across the higher
education sectors was 2.3% with
the highest enrollment growth
actually going to our
comprehensive universities, so
that's Highlands, Western,
eastern and northern New Mexico
College as far as individual
sectors are concerned northern
New Mexico college in the
University of New Mexico,
Valencia
You'll be happy to hear that
representative Vodka had the
largest enrollment increase of
their communities at over 12%
and as I stated earlier, New
Mexico's enrollment post
pandemic has increased at nearly
7% since 2021. I do want to draw
your attention to a mistake I
made on that page for branch
campuses, They should have an
enrollment increase of 5%. Not
that red number that you see
there. The red number actually
goes to the community Colleges.
Now cumulative degree
production. Let's look at graphs
one
Since 2018 we as a state have
awarded 145,000 degrees ranging
from certificates all the way to
graduate degrees during the last
academic year over 29,000
students completed a credential
and increase of nearly 9% over
the prior year. As you can see
on the graph, the highest rate
of completion is within stem and
healthcare fields at 46,784,
followed by humanities and
general education at 43,470.
Data forwards in the most recent
year also shows a large increase
in undergraduate certificate
awards up by 33.3%. Many of
these secret certificates can
complete it in one or two
semesters, and this increase
could be a result of the
opportunity scholarship covering
those degree those credit
bearing certificates. I'd like
to turn your attention to the
bottom of the sheet where we
talk about full time employees
and vacancies. The higher
Education Department oversees
1.5 billion in state capital and
federal dollars.
Serves over 110,000 students in
25 faculty members across 24
public colleges.
For tribal colleges, three
special schools and, of course,
the University of New Mexico's
Health Sciences Center. Now the
agency has made continuous
progress and filling existing
positions are current vacancy
rate. Thank you to the acting
secretary in acting deputy when
I was out is at an all time low
of 9%, representing just five
vacancies, all of which are
posted in the process of review,
interviewing or awaiting offer.
As a matter of fact I signed to
today.
As we have mentioned before, our
agency will need to further
support in several areas to
achieve staffing capacity to
current initiatives and scale up
of a successful programs.
therefore, requesting five FTE
and institutional finance,
financial aid in Indian
education graph two shows the
public education and early
childhood education and care
departments have the second have
300/300 employees. However, we
as a higher education department
managed the second highest state
funded education portfolio in
the state.
At 12%.
Of the overall state budget Now
I'm page to
the opportunity Scholarship.
Over 42,000 students are
benefiting from the scholarship
program of those students.
Awardees were most likely to be
Pell Grant recipients, Hispanic
students, female students or age
24 younger in the fall. 2023
semester had additionally in a
preliminary assessment students
receiving the opportunity
scholarship were likely to be
retained from fall to spring
semester compared to all other
student groups in the state of
New Mexico.
We are requesting a small
increase to accommodate the
summer semester totaling 157.9
million. It's important to note
that the agency has also
increased applications for our
loan repayment programs by over
600% since the beginning of this
administration, and this past
year, we broke a record with the
Health Professional Loan
Repayment program, awarding 700
to 24 Mexicans with loan
repayment assistance, whereas
the previous year we only did 40
for health professionals across
the state.
Now that we have shown that
there is interest and we can
actually get the program out
there for community support and
interest. We are asking for $15
million for the Teacher Loan
repayment program. We are asking
for $15.1 million for the health
Professional Loan repayment
program and $500,000 for the
Minority Doctoral Loan Repayment
program, which has historically
been underfunded.
Now on Page three. We're going
to touch on a couple more
initiatives before I handed over
back to you, Mr Chair.
We have highlighted other
projects. We will be working on
in the interim that we have
already made significant gains
on one digit, which which Connor
mentioned was the basic needs
project in a survey conducted in
partnership with the state of
New Mexico and the University of
New Mexico's basic needs
project. We saw some numbers
that were really hard to look at
and see Conor touched on those.
Therefore, we are asking for
continuous support in addressing
the needs of our students. We
have a proven track record at
our agency and providing that
kind of support since 2020 the
governor, Luhan Gershon's food
Initiative and art agency has
awarded more than $1 million to
projects aimed at improving
sweet food security on college
campuses and in FY 23, the
agency awarded food security
grants to 15 campus based food
projects, including food
pantries, Campus gardens
resource centers supporting an
estimated 15,000 students, all
of which are in every single one
of your communities across the
state of New Mexico.
Are asked is $2 Million, which
is estimated to support 30 to
60,000 students in the coming
year. Now House Bill 280 was
passed last year to establish to
tribal education technical
assistance centers in New
Mexico. The central focus on
supporting tribes, nations and
pueblos to spend down state
funding develop, culturally and
linguistically relevant
materials, enhanced recruitment
and professional development of
indigenous educators and more,
but to support the intent of the
law is Nicole mentioned. We have
to have a recurring
Appropriation of $2.25 million
to continue that support for our
indigenous students and
educators across the state of
New Mexico and our institutions.
Also we have heard the news
related to hazing in New Mexico.
We need to put a stop to this
practice and ensure that
students on all of our campuses
feel safe and supported.
With that the higher Education
Department will be putting
forward an anti hazing bill this
session. Mexico is only one of
five states without anti hazing
laws or policies in the books.
The portal will ensure that
students have a place to report
instances of hazing and receive
the support in for for ALS that
they need to set to process a
report.
And getting the mental and
health behavioral health
services they need. Half a
million dollars will allow us to
set up a division provide to FT.
administer the portal and
provide statewide training for
administrators, Faculty staff
athletic programs and other
student programs. The New Mexico
Longitudinal part data system on
the bottom right hand corner is
part of a C two I T budget
request. We are requesting 3.725
million for Phase two of the
system, which will begin in
July 2024 and it's
Edgell to conclude for
September. 2026. This system
will help state agency US
policymakers, educators and
families identify student
challenges early on make
targeted policies and
interventions for those students
and also Dr student success from
the early years into the
workforce and not in your
packet, but equally important to
us at the higher education and
the department. I know many of
you is the adult education
program. We're asking for
200,000 for high school
equivalency test.
Free vouchers and 100 $50,000
for upgraded instructional
materials, both of which are
instrumental to the success we
are seeing in our program. I
also want to report that we had
a record breaking year again for
adult education with an
enrollment increase of 11%. This
is stuff that we have not heard
in state government in a long
time for both of the programs
that we administered in closing.
I want to mention that my agency
colleagues are with me today,
ranging from directors to the
deputy secretary, and, as you
know,
I recently returned from
maternity leave just two weeks
ago, and I'm doing my absolute
best to get up to speed for the
legislative session. However,
please note that they will
likely be re supporting me in
responses today and last
comment. I want to express my
gratitude to Deputy Secretary
Patricia through Hell and
director Gerald Tony. And, of
course, are fantastic.
Division directors for serving
in my absence and making sure
you have your questions answered
each and every day during my
maternity leave with that a
stand open to questions
regarding the higher education
Department in our budget. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you. Members of
the committee.
Excellent. Thank you so much.
Madam Secretary. Thank you to
both of our analysts remembers.
We're going to go first through
questions with regards just to
the higher Education Department
budget, and then we'll invite
representatives up to from our
community colleges. Four year
institutions in independent
community colleges will take a
vote at the end of all of that,
but right now
We'll go to members for
questions with the higher
education Department. First
representatives. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Uh,
Maybe this should wait until our
new Mexico State comes up. But
there is a several universities
that were
Involved in a collaborative
effort to select the site for a
reforestation center.
Uh, maybe, uh, I just wanted to
ask, you know, Connor, the LFC
recommended zero on the special
for the construction of that.
For the exact requested 30
million. Can you tell me a
little bit about why the lfc? Uh
Didn't recommend funding the
center. I know we've been
through a lot, Mr Chair in the
model community with those fires
and just seemed bright that, uh
That ended up being the location
chosen for that important
project. Uh,
Connor? Yes. Uh, Mr Chair
Representative.
You're absolutely, uh, right.
About the LFC recommendations so
with regard to the reforestation
center
Uh, where we're at right now is
There's I think a little over $9
million of a $10 million prior
year Special appropriation
remaining.
Um, one of the things that
happened was site selection, uh
concluded a few months ago. So a
lot of that funding has not yet
been expended. So
There's some planning that needs
to happen. There's some design
that needs to happen and a big
question that's hanging over.
All of this is what, uh, what's
going to happen with federal
money?
Um, because it isn't all just
state funding, and I believe
there's about $11 million that,
um
We think that the federal
government is going to come in
with
For that for that center. So
determining what those federal
sources are and what the need
is, if any, to fill to fill
those gaps, I think is
Is where staff um, has landed on
that.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I
know this is going to be in the
specials and we'll discuss more
than but I had
I thought it would be
appropriate just to get a quick
description on where everybody's
at and I know I'm going to
follow up with em nerd and them
to see
Where they had in
Regards to Ah, planning and
design and those issues. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. Absolutely.
Thank you very much represented
Sanchez and thank you for
flagging this. We're going to go
next door since that Indiana
than to representative Buck.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you for your presentation.
Welcome back, Um, on your
presentation on Page five. It
says cybersecurity funding.
Um, unprecedented time of
security incidents and reaches
across all industries is the
higher education department or
any of their entities. Have they
been hit lately? Is it something
that's happening constantly? Can
you give me some information on
that?
Mr. Chair representative. I
don't have any information on
the frequency of how often that
there is a cyber security threat
on our campuses, but I will say
it is monitored daily. There are
threats that do happen all the
time and the higher education
institutions will actually be
presenting on that very topic in
their presentation right after
us, and they'll have all that
information for you.
Okay?
I will wait. Mr. Chairman. I'll
just wait for that. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Represent vodka, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank
you panel for your presentation.
Ah!
Personal thank you for sharing
the positive information about
what's going on in my county. I
appreciate that.
Mr Chairman, Secretary.
My question. You mentioned a
number about that we lead in the
area of funding for college. But
our graduation could you could
you highlight that again,
please?
Mr Chair. Yes, we have increased
higher education funding because
of the increase of overall state
funding over time, And with that
we have a cradle to career
system in this administration
that were really diligent
company that includes early
education, higher education and
then, of course, public
education with that, though, um,
remediation retention and
graduation rates have been
generally stagnant. Except the
last year we did see a large
increase in completions and
awards, and we're really excited
to report that, but there has
Been an increase in funding and
we are looking into that there
will be a study that will come
out that will address that. But
I know that Mr Jorgensen would
like to elaborate on it since it
was in into his presentation.
And thank you, Mr and it really
It's really brave and I'm going
to get to really what I'm
interested in Mr Chairman.
Is, I think that and I said this
to some of my colleagues
earlier.
Is that part of the reason we
have in my opinion?
Um, fewer people graduate. We
have more people entering
college, fewer people.
Finishing college or to your
college.
Was that it? Actually for our
students, they see that as
something different and my my
goal. My challenge is through
the interactions of higher Ed
and K 12.
That our students have exposures
to both concurrent enrollment
degree programs, certificate
programs so that students don't
think I'm finishing high school
and now I'm going to college or
I'm going to community college.
They will see that as a smooth
transition or an extension of
what they've already started.
And so I think that you know we
had to be intentional about
that. We also have to fund that
to make sure that our
Schools across the state
interact with that. So, um, Mr
Chairman and Connor, do we have
any idea as far as the funds
that are
If there are any funds that are
directly for that purpose.
Of K 12 as far as communication
collaboration on degree and
certificate programs, Mr
Chairman
Uh, Mr Chairman and
representative.
Typically, um
Dual credit funding is
It's a component in the funding
formula, but it's largely what
we might think of as as
unfunded.
Um the institutions aren't
necessarily they're not
receiving a
Payment like I would
For a regular credit course. Um
At the same time.
There is
There is funding that exists on
the K 12 side. There's a
prohibition from institutions
charging tuition.
To do a credit students, but
there is no prohibition on
institutions working with
schools or districts. Um
To to provide joint programming,
for example, and I do believe
some of that have
Happens, but I'm sure we have a
room of experts and thank you in
my last question is really going
to be in
Is do or hybrid institutions.
You know, we're talking about
certificate degree programs,
whether it be welding whatever
you want to say that our
students start in their high
school career, and they
continue.
Is there. Money set aside for a
judge, you know for higher Ed.
That encourages that and
actually helps to fund those
that we may get a professor or
instructor from CNN, or you and
M to come to our schools and
provide those opportunities for
our kids.
Mr Chairman, Um
Mr Charron and representatives.
So right now, there's in the LFC
recommendation for the
expendable trust. There's $80
million
That would go for, um, workforce
training that would not
necessarily be credit bearing
training. That's the big um,
that's the big new part is that
we've had funding available for
credit bearing training, but not
necessarily for programs that
are non credit. This funding
would also be eligible to be
used for apprenticeships and
internships.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. So I
have thank you very much from
sandbox. Next. We're going to
represent the Han then
represented Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, as I'm
looking at the
I guess it's a non recurring on
Page eight and some of the facts
on there.
Um Mr Chair and then trying to
put this together We lfc did not
approve the 11% opportunity
Scholarship increase, but what
I'm seeing here
Then again, these are non
recurring funds. Um, there's
quite a bit, um added from lfc
and recommendations, and I'm
looking I'm going to the
graduate stem scholarships.
The technology enhancement
funding social work. Endowment
funds, Um
Was this done, Mr. Chair? Um
To I'm not going to say
supplement, but to offset maybe
The not
Having the 11% increase.
Because I mean, these are
scholarships. These are these
are funds, Mr Chair.
Mr Charron, representative.
No, these, um non recurring
appropriations, So there's uh,
looks like healthcare loan
repayment is a big one. That's a
continuation of a prior year.
Um, appropriation, Mr. Chair.
I'm sorry. I'm looking at lines
2526 and 27. And these are funds
and scholarships, Right? Yeah.
Graduate stem is also a
continuation of a of a prior
year. There was an appropriation
made for that last year. Um,
Technology Enhancement fund is
not a scholarship program.
That's um
That's for research and
distribution for matching grant
funds for research universities
and then the social work
Endowment funds. Um back out
flagged during the interim as an
L HHS priority and is also a
reflection of a continuing
effort from last year when
Funding was appropriated for
that, too, and that battle pay
it could be used to pay for
financial aid. But none of this
is meant to
Ah offset opportunity. I
appreciate that. I'm just trying
to put this together and make
some sense of it for myself and
and just having that historical
value and information is
important as well. Um
And so I appreciate that, but
also on here, uh, lying 28 for
the college basic needs. I
guess the executives looking at
$2 Million, I can tell you that
As we visited different
Universities and colleges
Throughout the interim, we saw
that that there was food out for
the for the students, and it was
like no questions asked and
just, you know, nutritious and
Value is
What would it and it and Mr
Chair can
I think Secretary said this
This helps 30 60,000 students.
Is that correct?
Mr Chair. We estimate with the
$22 Million investment. We can
hit anywhere from 30 to 60,000
students with a $1 million
investment. We were able to do
15 million, but with the work
that we're doing now in the
targets, we can definitely get
that number up.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. Thank you for the
information. That's that's a
Mr Chair. 15,000 not 15 Million.
I apologize. Okay. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you, Secretary.
Um, that's great. I think that
you know, I think we were doing
those sorts of things and you
know, that's why we travel the
state during the interim, and we
were in different locations and
we see those those funds being
used. I think it's it's really
important, especially in the
rural areas.
And the last thing Mr Charge
just wanted to look at was the
behavioral health and looking
for that where I circled, it
might have to direct. Okay.
five. There's 929. Thank you
Behavioral and mental Health
Initiative statewide executive
here has 500,000. Are we seeing
this anywhere else in the budget
that I'm not seeing Connor, Mr
Charcoal
Um, yes, Mr Chair. I think one
of the things that's
Important here is that if you go
back to our summary on page 6 $3
million for student support. Um,
that's in the LFC wreck. I think
both recommendations.
Are recognizing that students
support is is a massive area of
concern. Um you see it here in
in recommendations for non
returning, You're seeing $3
million in the LFC for
recurring.
That recurring funding could be
used for some of the same
purposes as the non recurring.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Appreciate that, And I was
missing something with that Just
just stood up a bit.
Mr Chair
Secretary. Did you want to add
Mr Chair? Um, Representative
Luhan. I just want to mention on
Page seven online 12, you'll see
that the executive included $1
million are mental behavioral
health as well within the
occurring side.
Alongside the 500,000 in the non
recurring
Mr Chair. I'm
Maybe we need to talk about
about this and how this is, um
Reflected in other parts of the
budget to ensure that those
fundings are going for
behavioral health purposes
because I was seeing in two
different places.
And so, Connor. I look forward
to talking to you about that.
Thank you. Mr Chair.
Next, we're gonna go to
represent Chatfield ranking
member Armstrong and keep on
going from there.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Mr Chair.
When we go through this budget,
we kinda look for
Major oversight or major places
where we think there's something
missing and
And I'm just gonna have to talk.
Uh, reiterate representatives,
Sanchez's, uh, concerns are our
communities in northern New
Mexico burned to the ground. You
go where somebody's happy home.
used to be in. There's a little
puddle of aluminum.
And that's not pretty burned out
Cars blown, Uh
Propane tanks. The trees are
dead.
Mineral soil. No fences along
the highway because they all
burned.
Ah, until we fix that we will
have flooding.
We will have
Mineral soil blowing
We will have erosion.
Uh, the 10 million last year. I
think some of it was for the
reforestation center.
And some of it was for the Egg
Science Center.
Because a forest doesn't just
have trees.
Forest has shrubs and grasses
and all the other things that
hold the soil and feed the
animals that live in the forest.
So we appropriated some money.
To the science center to do what
they have been doing for years,
and that's the
To grow.
Seed, stock and seed or local
for native species, oftentimes
localized native species. It's
adapted to a certain elevation
or whatever.
And, uh, we know that the
federal government has not
passed the budget or last time I
Got out of here early enough to
watch the news they hadn't which
is not too often, but they will
pass a budget.
And there will be some money in
there for the reforestation
center.
And when that happens, we need
to be able to answer the call.
We need to put some money in
there and I appreciate
The current of the maybe they're
concerned that that
Federal money is not sitting
there.
But the devastation in our
forest is real.
And unless we invest in
watershed restoration in the
existing ones that haven't
burned and we and in receding,
uh, replanting.
And restoring those areas that
have burned. It will, uh, only
get worse. I mean, that's our
watershed. That's our drinking
water. That's our farming water.
That's our
That's all the water we have.
And so I would just urge us to
take another look.
At putting zero recommendation.
Into the reforestation center.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much. Representative
Chatfield. We're gonna go next
to repeat. Remember Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And and
thank you for the presentation
And congratulations that your
back and have a beautiful baby.
Um, I was curious if you could
talk to me a little bit about
student services and what that
encompasses.
Mr Chair representative. Student
services encompasses advising
tutoring. Um, anything that a
student needs as a one stop shop
is a really great example. I
like to use where they even have
financial aid. There. There's
the student services centers
such as Veterans Student
Services Center Central, which
is a Hispanic serving student
services center. Those are some
examples of the things that we
have on campuses to serve our
students.
Thank you so much for that. So
that does that include
behavioral health.
Mr Chair. It could include a
student health center on campus.
Um, when it comes to
particularly the money for the
higher Ed department, we
categorize mental behavioral,
health dollars and basic needs
into categories for student
services. Thank you, Mr Chairman
And thank you for that
information because I know a lot
of the entities that I represent
are wanting.
More services for their
students. And so that's a That's
a big one for me, Um
That I'd like to make sure that
we're funding the other
situation that I'd like to ask
about his number seven the
certificates and degrees
Category. There's a pretty big
difference between the executive
and the lfc. And can you talk to
me a little bit about that?
Connor if you don't mind
Uh, representatives line 77 on
page 76. We have six and maybe
your seven. This is the
F Y Yeah.
Oh, I m g Yeah, um
Mr Chair and representatives. So
those breakdowns between lines
five and nine are essentially
telling you, Um what is
What's going on with the funding
formula. So how am I breaking
down? That 2219 63.1 above that
you see in in line four, and
it's saying, Okay, Here's the
funding formula components. Um
and you can attribute each one
of those amounts to it. So there
is no difference in the funding
formula components.
H e b, d F a Lfc all use the
same version of the formula. The
difference. There is just that,
Um Yeah, it's the percentage.
the the executive recommended
twice as much funding through
the formula. Okay, thank you.
For that. I was a little bit
confused right there. And then,
um
I would like to see under
agriculture.
You know, we're
There's almost a million dollars
difference there.
Uh, online 38 Page six.
Um
I know they're big numbers and a
million compared to what's being
put in. There is not that much,
but a million dollars is still a
lot of money.
So just just food for thought.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you very much. Representative
Armstrong.
Alright, bring remember we're
going to go next door, said
Brown than reps have Herndon.
Thank you very much. Mr Chair
and Secretary. Nice to see you.
Welcome back.
Um, I think I have two questions
for this afternoon. The first Mr
Chair. Um, Madam Secretary is
regarding adult literacy. I see
that the G D budget is putting
in it Looks $750,000. It's on
page seven of the handout.
Some have $50,000 per statewide
use for adult literacy and Mr
Chair I serve on the board of
directors of the Carlsbad
Literacy Program. It's adult
literacy, and we board members
would like to think that we're
making a difference that these
adult literacy programs are
helping prepare adults to be
ready for college.
And, um, I recently, um, revised
the memorandum of understanding
between Southeastern Mexico
College and the literacy
program.
And there seems to be an a name
change going on, and I just
wanted to see Mr Chairman and
secretary of if this is accurate
instead of calling it adult
basic education. It's being
called adult education. Is that
an official change? Mr. Chair
Representative? Yes, it is an
official change. Okay, Thank
you.
Thank you. Um and then, um,
next, Madam chair. Madam
Secretary. I did want to ask
about the veterans scholarships.
Um, we see some of that
information on Page seven.
Under student financial aid
programs, and so
We know that the anti donation
clause of our state constitution
does not allow certain uses of
money, but the veterans
scholarships are twice listed as
exceptions to that anti donation
clause.
So I don't hear much about the
veterans scholarships, and I
just thought maybe you could
tell us how many veterans are
availing themselves. These
scholarships.
There's the vet Vietnam Veterans
Scholarship in the wartime
Veterans scholarship and just
see if there's any information
on that chair.
Yeah. Mr Chair. Yes, I do. Have
that information for you. Let me
find it right now.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Hey, guys suffered
Okay?
Mr. Chair representative. I'm
actually looking at the NASA Gap
report, which is the statewide
financial aid report that we run
every single year in partnership
with our foundations. Um, I
don't have the number of
students who received the award,
so I apologize, but I'll get
that for you today. I do have
the amount of money that we
spent. So we received $288,000
for military War vet
scholarship. We expended
$181,900 last year as far as the
Vietnam veterans. We were
Received 48,000 We expended
14,272. The reason being, there
are less Vietnam veterans who
are enrolling in school. The
other thing to also consider why
those numbers are lower compared
to other scholarships is either
receiving the opportunity
scholarship, which is really
fantastic and exciting, but also
be a lot of them received the G
I bill so once they've done
their service, they get that
federal scholarship to go
towards their education.
Chairman. Thank you very much.
That is very good information I
was thinking of theirs Lottery.
There's opportunity. There are
the ones for the Vietnam or the
wartime vets. And there's of
course, the GI Bill so I would
take it that, um and I'm
guessing And you can answer if
this is correct, Madam Chair,
Madam Secretary.
Is, um, student is awarded
lottery opportunity and the
veterans Scholarship is the
veteran scholarship.
For living expenses, then could
it be used in that fashion with
the with Mr Chair
representatives with the way the
scholarship is written now the
wartime scholarship in the other
scholarship are actually applied
first because it is a state
scholarship program, and then
it's the opportunity
scholarship. However, if they're
receiving, let's say lottery,
they got their high school
equivalency. They served in the
military than they are eligible
for lottery within a certain
amount of time.
They would get lottery first and
then the wartime vets that could
potentially be applied to cost
of living. Okay, Very good.
Thank you very much, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much represented
Brown. Next, we're gonna go to
represent Herndon and then
represented Alison.
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you, presenters and Madam
Secretary. I am drawing your
attention to page 12 of the
different seats.
And I'm specifically looking at
line 66.
And I see the program there the
B A M D program and it says
zero, So could you please tell
us what has happened there, Mr.
Chair representative. Thank you
for that question. If I would
have saw $0, I would have gotten
mad, too. So no worries. The BMD
program was actually rolled into
instruction in general funds or
the funding formula based on the
guidance that came out of the
higher Education Department in
partnership with our agency,
Department of Finance and
Administration and the
Legislative Finance Committee,
so there's still receive.
Giving that money It's just
rolled into their funding
formula rather than research and
public service projects.
Thank you, Madam Secretary That
is really good news and Mr
Chair. Uh and Madam Secretary,
Then let me draw your attention
to line 63 on page 12 also, And
so I'm looking at the office of
Diversity, Equity and inclusion
in the University of New Mexico
Health Sciences Center and one
of the things that they were
highly responsible for was a
Was an incredibly
Successful program called
communities to Careers. So is
that program drawn? Is that
somewhere else? That's a zero
also, and I'm concerned about
that. And perhaps you could
provide an explanation. Mr.
Chair representative, I'm
unsure about communities to
careers. I need to look into it.
But as far as that appropriation
that is also wrapped into the
funding formula, rather than
research and public service
projects, so they'll still
receive the funding. It just
won't be from this direct fund.
So thank you, Madam. Mr Secret,
Mr. Chair, Madam Secretary
Because there is a bill pending
that will absolutely make sure
that there's additional funding
for the next fiscal year. And if
it's not there, hopefully, uh,
that will be there still because
that's an incredible be
incredibly important program
Then Mr Tear and Madam
Secretary. This is just for a
purpose for my own information,
And I think lots of others. So
if I turned the page six of the
document
And if I look specifically at
healthcare workforce, and I'm
looking at the difference
between the executive wreck in
the LFC wreck there and are you
seeing where I'm referring to
line 37 on Page six, And so my
question is, there's been a lot
of concern and conversation
about the pay that the medical
Interns are receiving and that
they're not receiving pay that
is equal to those and
surrounding states. And so it
does this line, including
increase for them in that area.
Can you clarify that Mr Chair,
Madam Secretary?
Mr Chair and representative. It
does not.
This, Um what you're looking at
for the increase on the LFC
side.
It's generally going to be for
nursing programs.
And you can see those in the
detail sheet. A number of them
are at the University of New
Mexico.
And secretary, Mr Chair. Connor
is right. That is not included
in that That's for our nursing
expansion programs under the
research and public service
projects. We have a process at
the higher Education Department,
the Department of Finance and
Administration in the fall for
institutions to submit what we
call special appropriations.
That was not a special
appropriation that was brought
forward by the university for
its medical residents. However,
they have identified that as a
priority I actually heard the
president
To speak to that today, so I
know that they are working with
the chairs of the committees and
also you so you the
representatives to see if that
is something that can be
incorporated later in the
budget, But it is not in either
of our recommendations at this
time. Thank you, Mr Chair, and
thank you, madam Secretary for
seeing the important need for
that.
Thank you very much for upset
Herndon. Next we'll go to
represent Alison.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
Madam secretary. I want to
direct your attention to Page
eight and I will ask you online
24 doing credit.
It seems like every time you put
you do a presentation.
I'm also I'm always asking
questions on dual credits.
You will credit helps a lot of
our tribal colleges and I was
just informed just the other day
that one of the local tribal
institution had a significant
increase in enrollment.
And at the time the dual credit
amount that was allocated to
them was not enough to cover the
increase Enrollment so
I guess my question to Connor
would be what's the chance of
negotiating with what the
Executive.
Recommend it. And then we only
took 25% of what was
recommended.
Mr Chair.
Mr Chairman. Uh,
Representative, So I think
Dual credit comes in two places
in this recommendation.
What you're referring to on Page
eight line 24. That's um dual
credit to go to institutions
statewide. There's also another
dual credit.
Ah!
Program line, You'll see it.
It's a recurring item. Page
seven line eight.
That is dual credit funding
specifically for tribal
colleges, and it's housed within
the higher Education Department.
Okay. Thanks for that, Connor
and, uh, the reason why I'm
asking.
For an increase in dual credit
is because there is a community
college in my district that
really benefits from them and
the students that are currently
taking dual credits are really
benefiting from that, so I would
if we can negotiate and
increasing dual credit
allocations. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you.
Um, Madam Secretary.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Representative Allyson.
Uh, Next five represent Garcia,
please. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Secretary, I think represent
around national question on the
veteran scholarship.
And you said that $48,000 and
then expanded
What? How much is that
Scholarship total. Do you know?
Mr Chair. I believe that the
minimum or the maximum is 1500
for that scholarship, and then
it can go to think the minimum
is 1500. The maximum is 2500.
But I will get that information
and give it to you because our
director of financial aid is not
here today, but I'll get it to
you tonight.
And madam Mr Chairman, Madam
Secretary, uh, another
scholarships and the steed. What
are the range from when a non
veteran from
The least to the most.
Mr Chair. Can you repeat that
question, Representative Garcia?
You know, you said on on the
veterans scholarship they get it
can raise from 1500.
To 5000.
Okay. On your Upton the
scholarship. What is? What are
those ranges and those
scholarships?
Mr Chair. Thank you. For that
clarification. The range depends
on the institution. But it
covers all tuition and fees of
that institution.
And Mr Chairman, secretary. What
I'm getting to
A real the same level for
veterans as anybody else.
Mr Chair representative.
Veterans can receive the
opportunity and lottery
scholarships and then they can
receive additional scholarship
money from our veterans
scholarships for the cost of
attendance.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. One more
last question. Do you have any
outreach for veterans to make
them aware of this, uh,
Early to rural New Mexico is one
of our biggest targets right
now, but I think you bring up
something very important and
that is outreach to our
veterans. We did receive a
$250,000 killer grant so that we
can do better outreach in our
rural communities and those that
are the most vulnerable. It may
not have opportunities for
higher education. So Deputy
Secretary Patricia through hell
that is going to be added to
your list for the Kellogg Grant
money that we have right now.
We'll work on that.
Uh, Mr Chairman and Secretary,
Thanks for asking. You know, my
district is not rule its
frontier.
And you know these people out
there have no clue of what's
available. I'm not saying not
all of them don't know. But
There's a lot of
That spots out to the people are
not aware of what's available to
them. And that's why I'm asking
about our reach is very, very
important.
For these people out there, and
another thing is you mentioned
Madam ticket team to cheer. Uh,
you know, most of these are very
nonveterans rehab in the
original. I'm a Vietnam better
and I'm 75 years old.
So we really really need to push
the issue not just for the
Vietnam veteran for the newer
veterans that are coming out.
And with that, madam to Mr
Secretary Chairman. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Sam Garcia.
Next we're gonna go to represent
Figueroa.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you Panelists for the
presentation. I have a question.
From this first regarding the
fiber quested positions and as
far as I can tell, LFC approved
three. Can you clarify to Okay?
Can you clarify what to proved
or what's included in the LFC
budget and what is not
Thank you, Mr Chair and
representatives so
On the LFC recommendation.
You're looking at a $630,000
increase for personnel at the
department.
Um
FTE positions used to be
included in the General
Appropriation Act.
Um, there are no longer included
in the general appropriation.
Um
Be because of this. The the
thinking was when they were
pulled out of the G A.
Probably about 10 years ago now.
Um, the thinking was
The agencies should have the
budget authority to fill the
positions. If they do, um
Work through on the executive
side to authorized and fill
those positions. So I think
There's there's two points that
you're bringing up and and one
is the actual FTE count. The LFC
recommends two additional lefty.
but again, there's not a line in
the General Appropriation Act
that will say to Ft that that
line is not there. What there
is, um in the G A will be from
the LFC wreck.
Will be the $630,000 increase
for the
Policy Development and
institutional oversight program.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you, Connor. Um
And Connor. Just 630.
To your mind it quite to five
positions. Is that essentially
the same?
Um
Mr Charron representative that
will depend on the on the types
of employees that are hired. It
will also depend on the amount
of vacancy savings or personnel
surplus currently in the
department.
Um, I know that number is has
gone down as the vacancy rate
has gone down.
Um, ultimately, that's uh
That's needs to be determined at
the time that the positions are
identified to be hired.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Conor. Then, Mr Chairman.
My next question probably goes
to the secretary about what
positions? Um
Are you requesting that you were
not thinking or going to be
funded as the proposal stands
right now.
That's her.
Mr Chair. The positions that we
will be hiring will be two
positions and institutional
finance because of the increase
in funding directly to our
higher education institutions,
particularly general Junior bill
appropriations have been
something very interesting that
we've been navigating and also,
um federal appropriations from
the pandemic relief money. The
other two will be going to the
financial aid division. As
representative Garcia had
mentioned. What is your outrage?
What are you doing? Are you out
in the community? We can
definitely do more. We have done
a ton. I hope you've seen
billboards. I hope you've gone
to the
Movies and seed advertising for
the opportunity and lottery
scholarships, but definitely
more can be done for rural
frontier veterans.
Things of that nature and then
one FTE for the Indian Education
Division. We have a loan officer
of one in Indian education, but
with the increase of money going
to our tribal nations and the
tribal education, technical
assistance centers, we
definitely want to provide more
support to our tribal colleges
are indigenous students and our
tribal communities.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you, Madam Secretary. I
think Mr Chairman if we are
asking for more financial
oversight, we might have to
revisit the necessary staff to
flow through and do the
oversight on those funds. My
other question pertains to page
12, Mr Chairman, And do you want
that postponed to later Or
should I ask now, uh,
I think Let's get it feel free
to ask it now we're going to
invite the again.
representatives from the
institutions themselves up here
shortly, but I think it's good
to have it out now, Mr Chairman,
then I will ask about lines 71
on page 12, that is a
substantial difference. 25%.
Um, of of the request is in the
LFC Budget for physician
assistant program and that's one
of our healthcare workforce
shortages. So I wonder if that
was just moved somewhere else in
this budget.
Mr Chair representative.
Good. I Yeah, it was so if you
take a look at
Page 13 lines 74, You'll see a
$3.2 million increase.
Um
Um Mhsc essentially asked
For the physician assistants and
graduate nursing programs to be
separated so that we're just
going to have a physician
assistant on in one line in its
own line and graduate nursing in
another, and so the funding
needed to match that, So that's
that's what happened there.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Connor. And, um, if I might
Representative page 19 shows the
actual difference sheets for the
higher Ed department. I'm sorry
I should have mentioned that
earlier.
Thank thank you very much.
representing Figueroa and the
new member, But the attention to
detail is a and a pro and this
committee appreciate that. I
don't see any other questions. I
Madam Secretary and analysts.
I'm going to ask a couple of
quick questions and I know we
have We want to go to our
institutions first. Madam
Secretary do we have retention?
Data, So we saw the grass
through 21 showed sort of a
divergence our attention
worsening.
Ah, we've seen since then, of
course increase in enrollments.
What's happening on retention?
Mr Chair? I actually have the
data in front of me relating to
retention so we did see a
significant decrease in
retention during the covid 19
pandemic. So for 20 academic
year, 2019 to 2020 20. It was
67% in the four year sector,
However, in academic year 2021
It decreased to 61%. So by 6%
points, however, the following
year we did see an increase in
that to 65%. So we're starting
to rebound and as far as the
community college sector same
thing we're at 49%. However,
they saw an increase after Covid
of 50%, and they saw another
increase in a post pandemic
environment of 53% and Mr Chair
If you would like that data, I'm
more than happy to share that
with you tonight. Thank you,
madam, sir.
Terry, Please share it with the
committee and when the
institutions come up, I think
it'd be great to hear sort of
overall trends.
But so safe to say, Madam
secretary that we're looking at
the on our packet. We're sort of
seeing down in the trough the
and there's you're saying that
there's been a rebound and an
increase anything to add, Mr
Jorgensen.
Um, Mr Chairman on the LFC
packet.
What we're also seeing as the,
um
Is the national right? Ah, so
for the most current year, the
national average first year
retention rate at a four year
school, I think is 81%.
And thank you, Mr Jorgensen. And
so this is Are you the data
you're working with goes through
21. Madam Secretary. Your data
goes through when Mr Chair 22.
Okay, Okay. But appreciate that
point from Mr Jorgensen. Um
okay. I think many other areas
have been covered. Madam
Secretary.
Uh, briefly anything that you
want to share with regard to the
higher education Trust.
Mr Chair. Not at this time. I
still need to discuss with the
executive and we have not seen a
copy of the bill. Thank you and
men Secretary Mr Jorgensen with
the higher ed trust, knowing
that there continued details,
Ah, from the perspective of the
committee endorsed legislation
that can you give us sort of a
rough disbursement at that 4.5%.
What this could do to support.
Um if we have the full 959
million
Mr Chair. Yes. So
Essentially the that bill will
wind up spinning off in round
numbers about $50 million per
year.
Um
That's gonna put the higher
education institutions the
Legislature in a pretty good
Pretty good shape for the next
several years.
There's a couple things going on
in the out years that are sort
of risks to that.
So the first thing is a couple
of years ago, the Legislature
appropriated $130 million for
the legislative lottery
scholarship.
That was done because lottery
revenue generally comes in
around $40 million a year, But
the program expenses to fully
funded around $60 million a
year. So you got a gap of about
$25 million per year.
So the Legislature uh, several
years ago, said
Will add a big slug of money and
pay for this problem for several
years into the future.
Um
Right now. We anticipate that
that funding is going to carry
through about fy 28 once it runs
out.
There's going to be, um, again
about a $30 million increased
need one year to the next that
needs to get absorbed somewhere,
So that's kind of issue. One is
that we know this is coming. We
have 50 million. We know we have
about a gap of another 15
million on the opportunity sides
or at 45 million.
So we're kind of in the
ballpark.
Um
But the big issue
That's coming up is
What is that program Growth
gonna actually look like and I
think the there's two questions
there. One is enrollment
increases, which they've been
positive, but they've also been
relatively small. They've been
coming in.
At, you know, around 2% per
year. Um, we also are in a spot
with our demographics. Um,
there's just fewer graduating
seniors.
And that shrinking class size is
gonna persist into the future.
as as, and it follows K 12
populations.
So in the out years, we might
have less pressure.
The thing the state can't
control, though, is tuition.
Uh um, Tuition is set at the
individual institutions by the
boards of regions so if tuition
increases, um at a at a pretty
good clip, and we detail this in
in your volume three
If tuition increases
Then we're going to have less
wherewithal for this fund. So
what does this all mean?
Um right now we've run some
preliminary projections and
With about a 1% average annual
growth rate, which essentially
Means very, very minimal if any
tuition increases, um and 1% on
enrollment increases the
Trust fund program will be able
to
Hey, all of the costs through
Probably 2032.
Um
If that tuition instead of being
1% is 3.5%
That program will be able to pay
100% of the costs through 2028,
so it's significantly shortens
that window.
I think that's where again the
tuition is very important, but
it's also really important to
keep in mind where we might be
in terms of overall enrollment.
Those are the big threats to,
uh, higher interest fund.
Thank. Thank you very much for
that, Mr Jorgensen and gets a
great segue to go to now to our,
um, leaders of the various
institutions.
Or the associations that
represent our institutions will
ask you all to stay up there.
I'm sure there may be additional
questions from members that may
include you all. And with that,
thank you very much for the
presentation. Thank you for
answering the committee's
questions.
Madam secretary. As we trade
out, we'll ask. See Dr Torres
there in front. We'll ask Dr
Rally.
And Dr Shepherd to come on up.
Mr Chair. I do have a minute
introduction into this that just
breaks down the total budget
Total. I n g in total R P S P s.
I think the presentation you
just received should suffice.
But do you still want me to
break that down?
Um
I think we're probably in a good
spot, but any any materials that
Yeah, I think we're in a good
spot. I just wanted to check Mr
Chair. Thank you. Thank you,
madam Secretary.
Okay. Um, thank you much very
much for for being up here. I I
don't know if there's an order
that folks want to go in with
cup doctor separate. If you want
to start us off, we'll go from
there. Thank you, Mr Chair. I
appreciate that. Thank you to
each of the members, um, for
being here listening to us as we
present, uh,
Joint
Um, proposal to you want to
start off? Of course, where we
always start off with this
thinking my colleague,
presidents and, uh, with us in
the audience. Eastern New Mexico
University President James
Johnston, Mexico Highlands
University, Sam Minner Mexican
Institute of Mining and
Technology. Uh Dan Lopez, Mexico
State University.
J Gouache northern New Mexico
College, Hector Balderas and the
University of New Mexico is, um
Garnett. Stokes also Mr
Cheerful, indulge me. We have
some regions as well as trustees
for the community colleges if
they would not mind standing
just real quick, so you can see
who they are and and be
recognized.
Stand up and thank you all for
making the trip. It's great to
see folks here today. I know we
have a mix of student regions
and others. So thank you all
very much for making the trip.
Let's give everybody a hand
to hold.
You left your next
Thank you, Mr Chair. My name is
Becky Rally. I'm chair of the
enemy CC and President Santa Fe
Community College. And I'd like
to begin by introducing our
presidents to from, uh, Central
New Mexico College, Tracy
Hartzler and representing Tracy
today is Olivia Padilla,
Jackson.
Um, from Clovis Community
College, Robin Jones from Luna
Community College, Edward
Martinez at Mesa Lands Community
College, Alan Moss at New Mexico
Junior College, Derek more at
New Mexico Military Institute
Jerry Grizzle at Northern New
Mexico College, Hector Balderas
at San Juan College, Tony
Pendergrass.
At Southeast New Mexico College,
Kevin Beardmore and at Western
Joe Shepherd.
And from the branch community
colleges I'd like to introduce
from enemy Roswell, Sean Powell
in EMU Ryudo. So, Ryan Trosper,
uh, infamous you Alamogordo Mark
Cow. MSU grants Marlene Chavez,
Toy van and, um, Gallup.
Sabrina is l your animal is
almost Mike Holdsclaw, Taus,
Mary Guterres. And you an
ambulance. You're Sam Sumo?
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. What we're looking
at, of course, is this
particular um
Um, powerfully presentation and
we turn the page three. You'll
see what's already been
articulated. I won't go into too
much detail on that. But what it
does is it gives you calling by
calling the differences between
the G D executive in the LFC. It
also gives you the base of where
each started prior to here.
As you look down through this,
of course, One of the things to
note is we're very pleased,
obviously, with HD in the in the
5% increase that they have
proposed. However, we do believe
strongly in the compensation
piece as well. Moving across,
uh, on the lfc side were very,
very appreciative that you
listened to to us in the sense
of the need for the students
support and the faculty
compensation, So thank you for
that.
With that. Turn it to my
colleague.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um so you
can see that All of the higher
education recommendations are
very close. They all support
teaching and learning student
success initiatives really, and
also as well as workforce
development and prioritizing our
students and the goals of the
state.
So that we suggest taking lfc
recommendation as a starting
point. A couple of things that I
want to highlight is the 1.5%
increase in the formula targeted
3 million for students services
targeted $7 million for faculty
compensation is it probably be
particularly in demand faculty
where we have a very difficult
time finding faculty, a total of
4% and employee compensation.
Um and then also 0.4% increase
in support for benefits, which
is something that we are
increasingly struggling with as
all of our insurance increases
go up almost annually.
Um 32.5 million for building
renewal and replacement by point
million for equipment renewal
and then $80 million over. Um
I think it's for over four years
for workforce training
initiatives. This would include
funding for non credit targeted
workforce certificates so only
certificates that lead directly
to a job or that are developed
at the request of an employer
Not just you know something that
we've decided to come up with,
but they would be highly
regulated.
Um And so those are the
highlights of that of that
piece, Monica
I'd like to talk about some of
the things that we like either
special consideration or
reconsideration of while we're
grateful for all of the things
on there, there there there have
been recommended and proposed.
There are some things that are
really critical that that we'd
like to talk about. 21 of them
is public safety funding. We
live in a time, both in thinking
about both public safety and
cyber security. Um, we live in a
time where we have to be extra
careful. We have to take those
extra steps.
So it remains a critical issue
for for not just the faculty
staff and students, but the
communities we we live in. It's
important to note that this was
a collaboration between the U
and M and the N MSU police
chief. Some of the work that's
been that's been done on this.
Um and there are two areas that
really they were recommending to
to take a look at one is access
control. That access would be by
credential by by key cards.
Um And it would. It would be a
way of securing our buildings
efficiently and effectively.
Second one is lighting and those
areas that really are meant to
be used at night. We would want
to make sure that they're
they're well lighted so so that
people feel secure as they're
using them. The second thing I'd
like to talk about is cyber
security funding.
Hi. I want to bring up a an
example. Um, I think
representative setting on it.
You were You brought this. You
brought this up, You know higher
Ed, as has jumped to the top of
the list in terms of potential
ransomware attacks and
unfortunately and so it has
become even even more important
in the last in the last year or
so again. This is a
collaboration, not just among
institutions across the state,
but also with with do it as a as
a matter of fact.
Um again. We're trying to not
only increase the security or
security posture for each of our
individual institutions, but the
state statewide network network
as well. So so those are two
areas with we'd like a second
look at in addition to that
we're we're obviously supportive
of the Technology Enhancement
fund. We We believe that, uh,
dollars Increasing the amount
allocated to this will will
really allow us to further
support innovative applied
research at at the research
institutions in the state.
Um And finally we are supportive
of opportunity, Scholarship and
and fully funding that we know
that it's made a difference in
terms of enrollment, but and and
numbers are important, but one
of the things that's important
to remember is that numbers are
people, too. And so on the
ground we can we can actually
hear people tell stories about
the difference that opportunity
scholarship has made for them,
particularly students who are
nontraditional students.
Not right out of high school
students who can come part time.
So those are the those are the
things we'd like to point out
where we're happy to stand for
questions.
And so, Mr Chair and whoops.
Sorry about that. Mr Chairman,
members of the committee. We
just want to take a moment to
thank you because we do believe
that you are advancing higher
education in the right direction
In terms of accountability and
and so forth. Yes, we have work
to do. We have a lot of work to
do. Earlier we heard from
representative Vodka. Absolutely
correct. We need to tie in a
streamlined process between our
secondary in particular
particular when it comes to
biotech and into the community
colleges and um and, uh, the
Universities like mine that have
those programs. Um, but I
believe very strongly that we
are moving in the right
direction, and I want to give a
special shout out to the higher
Education Department. Mr Chair
because I think they're also
helping us, Uh, call released
together to make it better for
all students. Thank thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you, Uh, Dr
Shepherd. Dr. Rally, Dr Torres.
Thank you very much. I'm gonna
look first to my left and see
represents Sardinia.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank
you for your presentation, so I
want to jump right to
cybersecurity. So I was looking
at what makes a good, um cyber
good, strong cyber system, and
they said firewalls antivirus
software, user education and
training. Um, patch management
here. Raja say that all the time
and I will take acid
authentication and collaborating
with
Cybersecurity experts. How
closely do you work with do it?
All universities, do they or do
they?
Um, Mr Chair, Representative. I
can talk about this just a
little bit. I know that.
Oh, great. Thank you. Um, I do
know that that, um, are the
consortium across the state
works regularly with do it. In
fact, I know that there was just
a meeting either earlier today
or yesterday. And if I could
introduce the man behind me
marks a major he was in he was
involved in those meetings.
Yes. Thank you. Mr Chairman
members, the committee
representative Ariana marks
together with the council
University. Presidents of Thank
you, President Torres.
So we have checks, which is our
consortium of higher Ed Future
systems collaboration, which
includes all universities, four
years community colleges,
including independence Branch
kids and our tribal colleges. We
collaborate very closely with
the higher department and their
I T director and secretary along
with Rogen do it when it comes
to subject QWERTY that's
actually brought us even closer
and working with duet.
Um And so right now we have a
request for $11.5 Million for
cybersecurity for higher ed for
remediation, um, and dealing
with ransomware and malware.
That's that's a high rise number
one target in the country and
we're asking for that money. Go
through. Do it in Section seven,
therefore, do it then would
oversee that and make sure that
we do collaborate with do it
with the larger picture in your
legislation. Is that our ideas
for Cyber Security's in New
Mexico, Mr Chairman Members
Committee, and I hope that's
helpful.
Yes. So as far as you asked for
11.5
I guess I should ask Conor. So
in this area do we take? I mean,
we need Microsoft updates right
every year, Right and all these
things. How much do we take into
account in our funding for all
those those things that
cybersecurity needs those
people?
Uh, Mr Sharon representatives,
So I believe this was a C two.
Request.
Um, there's a separate committee
that reviews those proposals.
Um, and that you'll see it in
Our recommendations are in
Section seven. I personally do
not handle the I T analysis
requests.
Okay?
Can you add onto that chair and
rips Indiana so checks and do it
met with Michaela Fischer? Guys
oversee that. And thank you,
Conor for that recommendation,
So that was mean. We had this
morning with everybody and we
went on and met with other
folks, including yourself to
make sure we're on the same
page. Um so therefore, Mr
Chairman, So did we get enough
for what we needed Or how does
it look as far as funding for
this for a higher ed education?
Since they are being hit. Go. Go
ahead and Miss Macias, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Yes, Mr
Terror representatives, Ariana,
So within the executive
recommendation we included about
$7 million for cybersecurity and
non recurrent appropriations.
There's also about $7 million
worth, Um, recommended for the
checks Program for, um, the C
two program on the executive.
And I'll just leave it up.
That and getting backed
Uh, thank you. Mr Chairman
represents Ternana. So we we did
meet with, um, with Mark and
folks from higher this morning
on that, you know that the
section seven or C to process is
typically used for database
requests.
Ah, Cyber Security isn't
necessarily a database request.
And so it's something that, um,
that we're looking at for, uh,
an HFC scenario likely be as as
you said in in a Section five.
Thank you.
All right, Mr Chairman. So, um,
he said 7 million non recurring,
So a lot of these things like
Microsoft updates or licensing
are recurring, right? Don't they
Come in? So how does how are we
going to fit that in or what are
we gonna do?
Mr. Chair, Representative,
Santayana, Um, those requests
that are typically like
licensing fees and you know,
just the day to day I T items
those fall out the
responsibility of the
institution to cover if its
cyber security in particular
right, that's an above and
beyond expense. That the exactly
the
Institutions possibly have to
cover through their
institutional funds, right, But
the executive made the
recommendation that $7 million
in general funding and non
recurring to help assist in, um
Eating those cybersecurity
projects.
Okay, Mr Chairman. So, you said
above and beyond so
What does that mean? So
How important is it to our
state when our universities are
attacked, where it's not
considered a recurring, It's
just
Something up there.
Um, Mr Chair, Representative,
Um, for those cybersecurity
items, right if they haven't
attacked that funding is there
it's also there so that they can
try to plan and prevent any
cybersecurity attacks. And again
that, um all of that funding
will go through higher Ed
department and they will develop
all of the
Requests for proposals for those
programs and those fundings and
so the criteria will lay upon
the department to lay that out
for the institutions so that
they can apply for that funding.
Clarifies your questions, Mr
Chairman. So you said, um, to to
prevent. What about how what
happens if they get attacked and
they and they and they get
broken into do they have money
to pay for, um, coming back up?
Really quickly do they have
that?
And do we fund that?
And should we fund that?
Mr Chair representative in in
the event of an actual attack. A
lot of time we typically have
Pretty expensive cybersecurity
insurance policies and so those
would kick in and pay for a lot
of the recovery of forensic
investigation. Um, I say this
because I've had to be part of
this twice. Um, so these kinds
of things, Uh, you know, we do
have them covered through
insurance but part of the
expense to us, too.
Especially for medium and
smaller sized institutions is to
pay for, um, a security officer,
And that is a really highly
skilled, um, probably at the
very top of our pay scale,
certainly in it, but maybe
across the board, but but part
of the the difficulty for all of
us is even finding anyone that
actually has those credentials.
Who can guide us through what we
need to do to make our
institutions as secure as we
possibly can. But But I just
wanted you to know that if an
attack occurs the resources we
do generally have the resources
to, um to get where we need to
be. Okay, Mr Chairman, because I
read that, um they usually give
the interests like about a
million
Maybe that's not true. But how
much
Can you see how much it costs to
bring up one of yours after it's
been attacked?
Is that I don't know if you can
say how much. I don't think I
could give you an accurate
number and I think it was, it's
going to vary dramatically
across institutions due to the
size and also depends upon what
what kind of attack. It was.
What sorts of systems were
attacked? Um, it oftentimes did
not everything. It might just be
a particular part. You know,
like our students system or
something, and all of that would
factor into the cost.
Okay. Thank you. I guess my Mr
Chairman. Biggest fear is with a
I coming and all the things that
can happen, and education is
important, but having what we
need
To prevent it and then to fix it
After it happens. We need right
away. And, um I just want to
make sure you have what you need
to get back up quickly when you
need it. So thank you. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. Thank thank
you very much for that Indiana
in. We're I think we're very
well served by your focus on
this area and also the focus on
making sure that do it has a
central role.
In supporting supporting all
parts of our state.
Okay, We're gonna go to
representative Luhan than to
represent Montoya. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you. Omar.
Educators. Presidents. Um so I'm
just gonna go back to, um
I think this is the time to talk
to you guys. Would Mexico State
University and I just wanted to
bring up again? Uh, paid What?
Right. This is all of our
So, um, again, back to Page
eight.
I'm looking at line item 41. But
also there was another special
request and the operations for
maintenance and reforestation
Center. Think information is
always changing. So I received
information also that we are
already there's already a
Funding or they're in the RFP.
For the final design, spending
the previous amount of money, so
I think we need to get back. We
need to have a
Discussion about that, Mr Chair,
because if they're already in
that place, having used the
prior years of funding, then I
think we need to support not
just the operational but then
the other other appropriation
we're looking at
Uh, for the reforestation, Um
And I just want to say it's it's
We heard other testimony from
other members, and I have to say
I support this as well. I mean,
we had over 900,000 acres.
Burned, Um
On our stage, and this is
something
That we really have to take hold
of. And, uh, now is the best
time to do that Mr. Chair, so I
just wanted to focus on that
piece. Um and also, um
I see that the geothermal Mr
Chair is in there. One question
line 50 here.
The Bureau of Geology, Aquifer,
Mapping, and there's a note
there. Uh, in parenthesis. It
says that there are funding is
up because it's supposed to be
paid that they're supposed to
have used the arbor funding.
For the $9 million. Mr Chair
representative. That was the
executives proposal for the ARPA
funding to utilize 9 million to
the Bureau of Geology for
Aquifer Mapping, and that was
the DARPA funding that you know
that we have available.
Currently, um appropriated.
Inappropriate, Mr Chair, Okay, I
would like to maybe talk a
little bit off on on that
because I'm not sure.
We've had other discussions
about Arpaio, and I'm not sure
what you're asking of. For us to
implement from the from the
state.
Side of things. Um
And then also, okay, so that
this isn't here, Mr Chair. Thank
you. Um, lfc. I just want to say
I'm on the next page in line.
56 for the suicide prevention
training program at Santa Fe
Community College.
Thank you that that's that's a
really important measure there
and funding measure there. Thank
you for putting that in there,
and I think
I just have one question about
northern New Mexico and they're
asking for $100,000.
Water systems and fire safety,
emergency repairs. I don't think
that
That's a lot of money. And I was
just wondering why that wasn't
in the budget. Mr Chair. There's
a lot of repairs, Mr Chair
specifically and on that campus
that I've visited multiple
times, um, and seeing the
disrepair and things so I don't
think $100,000 is a lot, Mr
Chair.
Uh, Mr Chair and representative,
You're You're absolutely right.
I think
Back. Concern. Um
Was addressed on the on the LFC
recommendation. You'll see a on
page eight line 20 to
32,500,000 for building renewal
and replacement. These are funds
that are going to get
Distributed to higher education
institutions statewide, and
that's gonna help with a lot of
those, um types of maintenance
projects really appreciate that
kind of I knew you would have a
good answer for me. Thank you,
Mr Chair. That is all I have.
Thank you very much.
Representative Rowhani,
representative. Uh Montoya? Yes,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um and
thank you all for being here
today. Uh,
Connor, you you mentioned
something earlier. That's been a
concern for me as a legislator.
Ah throughout the years, and
that is, um
In particular, since we've had
the governor's, um, opportunity
scholarship go forward, which
helps with tuition concern, and
I have expressed it, um
To a few of you about
Escalating tuition.
And that and and I believe
Connor you mentioned that's just
something we don't have any
control over.
Um, I guess the question is
Uh huh.
How far in advance
As institutions. Do you have an
idea that there's going to be a
tuition increase? And is that
ever communicated?
To the administration
communicated to lfc.
In advance, or, um,
The reason I ask that in the
past it it appears as if we're
pretty much caught off guard.
By that, and
It tends to lead towards some
Uh,
Either distrust from some
members of the Legislature or
Just a feeling that through the
through the new scholarship
program, it gives license for
increases, and I don't know who
wants to. That's a That's a
Pandora's box. I'm not sure who
wants to jump into it.
I'll go ahead and take a take a
stab at that.
So our tuition
For most of us is typically
figured after the session, and
the reason for that is is we
never know what will be granted
to the university in terms of I
n G.
Keep in mind that for every 1%
of I n G increases equal to a 3%
tuition increase, So if our
needs in our any unfunded
mandates, let's say those needs
an unfunded mandates.
Equals. Let's say 5%.
Then yet you only got a 1%
increase. That means you're
gonna be raising your tuition by
the other 2%.
And so
The difficulty with that is both
entities but the Legislature as
well as the institutions.
Um, have a challenge because as
far as the Legislature goes,
you're creating a budget trying
to figure out how much money to
give an institution like mine
raises its tuition that has an
impact on that budget that you
already passed. And I think it
would be wise for all of us to
come together and figure out a
way to to remedy that.
In a fair and honest way, with
both parties working together,
But that's that's you'd ask the
question about the win.
Typically, it's after the
session, and that's because of
the budget and what's given to
the institution. I appreciate
that. Answer, Mr Chair.
Um, that is something that we're
gonna
We need to. We need to have a
better process.
Because, like I said it, there
tends to be some frustration
after the fact.
Um
In particular, Mr Chair.
Um And and maybe I misunderstood
you and your presentation
earlier. Um, but the
We have an increasing budget
size, but
I believe what I heard. And I'm
not sure if it was you or who
who stated that. But that
Um, we have decreasing
enrollment.
Uh, in our institutions. Is that
correct is that that's
incorrect. We have increasing
enrollment. The higher Education
department was presenting that
earlier.
Thank you. So, um, does
increasing enrollment Does that
help?
Offset some costs.
It can. Mr. Chair Mr
Representative. It can help, but
it depends. It depends on the
capacity that you have. So for
example, if that enrollment goes
up greater than the capacity you
have
Then you have additional costs
that that you don't have covered
for by the tuition by way, of
example, simplify it down to a
math class math class has 20
people and I have one faculty
member who can teach 30 right
and I pick up an extra 10
students.
I don't have an increase. I have
an increase of revenue. However,
if that math class increased to
the point where I need to
instructors now I have that that
that additional cost. So the
answer depends in terms of that
If I replicate that out
throughout the institution those
are up to sizable amounts of
money greater than the tuition
itself.
So thank you, mr Chair. So with
that, the, um increase at the
institutions
What do you have an idea of a
percentage of increase that
we're seeing across the board.
Mr. Chair, Mr Representative. I
do not. That's probably an
institution by institution in
terms of capacity.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, I have
a have a question for the
secretary. Is this appropriate
time for that?
Madam Secretary, if you wouldn't
mind coming on up
Thanks so much.
Including. Thank You, Um Mr
Chair and Madam Secretary.
Um, you mentioned earlier. Uh,
anti
Hazing measure is that a is that
a bill that we're going to see?
come through, or is that just
something that is going to be
implemented? Mr. Chair
represented? Sorry, Mr Chair
Representative. It will be a
build bill that will be
introduced. It was jacketed
today and it will be introduced
on the House side first.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and Madam
Secretary. Is it necessary to
have a bill to implement anti
high housing program Mr Chair
because of the penalties
associated with hazing that we
want to deploy in the state of
New Mexico? Yes, bill is
necessary. Thank you, Mr Chair.
So, um, Madam Secretary, the
anti hazing measure.
Um, would that cover
Something that
I'm concerned with right now.
It's been in the news quite a
bit across our country. And that
is, uh
Anti Semitic behavior with this
hazing measure cover. Um uh
Occurrences of anti Semitism, Mr
Chair. No, it will not. It will
only address hazing.
So, Mr Chair and Madam
Secretary. This isn't a agency
endorsed Bill.
Mr Chair. Yes, it is.
So, uh, with that, Um, Mr Chair
and Madam Secretary. Um
Uh, policies to
To ensure that, uh
Population.
Of a specific race.
Do we have policies in place
like that?
Now to protect
In case of anti Semitic
behavior.
Mr Chair. There wasn't a, um, a
Senate bill that was actually
approved by the Legislature. I
don't know if it's last year,
the year before it's the Civil
Rights Act of sponsored by
Senator Hamlin. There are some
provisions in there that I
believe would address that.
Thank you. So, Mr Chair and
Madam Secretary and
And university presidents,
community colleges.
You're all here today and I just
I just I think without any
further legislation, there is a
couple of, uh, memorials out
there that I believe there.
In the process, both in the
House and the Senate.
Um, addressing this issue.
Um
But, uh, I believe it's very
important that all of our
students are able to go and
Have a experience of learning.
Without fear.
Without fear of
Bodily harm threat.
Um
And
As we've seen across the country
have seen those instances rise.
And so I did have this
conversation with a couple of
our university presidents. Not
with all
Um, but I would hope
That it would be understood.
That this body wants to make
sure that
In particular when we're
investing these kind of dollars
into your institutions.
That we really expect for
Um, our Children.
And that's what they are. They
may be of a certain age, but
anybody who has
1819 20 year old.
I have 37 year old and he's my
child.
Um so anybody who has their
Children, your institutions.
Um, we expect that they feel
safe.
And so I don't have another
opportunity to talk to you all
together, and I just wanted to
make sure that that is
communicated. I believe
everybody on this side of the
table wants to make sure that
That it's communicated.
To your staff to the students to
people who enter
That are not students or staff.
But come on your properties.
That the expectation is that
Um, everyone
Will have
For what they're going there for
is a productive learning
opportunity. So thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you very much for
presenting Montoya. Next, we're
going to go to represent figured
a lot. Thank you, Mr Chairman
and with
Sincere apologies to the current
panel. I think this question
probably should have gone to the
prior panel, but anyone can
throw their answer out pertains
to Page eight. Mr Chairman.
Line 19. There's a substantial
difference in the two proposals
for teacher loan repayment
programs. It's my understanding
that current funding this year
was 5 Million totally expanded
And my question Mr. Chair is
then do we have
Three times that many applicants
that we had to turn away for
insufficient funding last time,
and is that why the request is
so large? And then to Connor?
Why is the LFC proposal so
different?
Mr Carroll. Answer the first
part. Yes, we had so many
applications that we weren't
able to fully fund everybody
that applied to the program of
$5 million doesn't go as far as
we would like when it comes to
supporting our teachers and
educators. We did have one for
$10 million the previous year,
and we were able to award over
1000 teachers and not one
teacher got turned away.
And Mr Chair representative. So
The current fund balance, I
think is around 9.5 million 9.6
million. Um
And there's another 5 million in
authority included in the in the
General Appropriation Act.
Um, for this year.
Mr Chair. If I can you have to
legislatively appropriate from
the fund for me to expend if
there is an increase of
educators in our program
Mr. Chairman, Do I take that to
mean there is a legislative step
a statutory step that needs to
happen in order for this to be
spent.
Uh, thank you for staying
Figueroa and thank you. I think
Madam Secretary. We think you're
telling us that we need to
ensure that the funds are
appropriated directly for this
purpose, so there's definitely
an appropriations component to
the process, not necessarily any
other legislative changes.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you, Madam Secretary And
does that also pertain to our
grow your own fund? I don't want
structures we have created that
are bearing fruit for New Mexico
to get lost in the shuffle.
Excellent.
Thank. Thank you very much.
Representative figure out really
well stated, um
And, uh, Mr Jorgensen.
Some of these components are
included in the the Grow in the
expendable trust, Correct.
Uh, Mr Chairman, That is
correct. And you can see those
ones specifically on pages eight
and nine. If it's designated, um
If it's designated as Section
nine item.
Um, that is an expendable trust.
So, for example, there's on Page
eight line 49 Geothermal
Resources Development $2
million. That is an expendable
trust item. Thank you, Mr
Jorgensen. And I think the point
stands that we want to make sure
that that we don't lose anything
in the shuffle. As you said,
representing figure or
There's shared commitment to
these. We want to make sure that
That the money is there, Madam
Secretary for you to invest in a
program that's working.
Okay. I don't see any other
questions from members and have
a few first. I want to go back
to sort of the tuition issue. Um
The
We We? We ended sort of the
previous component just talking
with the department around the
proposed $959 Million Trust fund
that would spin off round
numbers say $50 million a year.
Um
Can you expect? How does that
feel for the institutions?
Mr Chair. We would be very
supportive of that because it
does several things when it
provides again a guarantee.
Of an income stream of some
kind, Um, depending on your
investment rate.
Um, but I do believe still that
there there should be a
conversation involving the
higher education Department
about tuition increases. Um
Because I do believe that you
are If you don't have the
conversation. We don't
understand how we're going to
Regulate that in some form or
fashion, even as a university
president can clearly
understand.
How the disconnect can create a
drain on that $50 million if we
are not careful.
Thank. Thank you very much for
that, Dr Shepherd. Um yeah.
Second question as we were sort
of working across a number of
different areas, really all
areas, the, UM non credit
bearing workplace certificates,
which this committee has been
really supportive of that are
very connected to jobs.
That folks have we want to
support them in their education.
I want to speak briefly about
the graduate student component.
Um graduate students are some
bringing innovative ideas doing
some of the most advanced
research spinning off. Perhaps
what are some of the most
valuable not only dollars and
cents companies but work within
our communities facing stuff
from some of our challenges,
Toughest challenges.
Do you see a role for looking to
expand our support for graduate
students within the state?
Mr Chair? Absolutely. In fact, I
would submit to you that are
graduate programs that are
research institutions primarily
and even at the comprehensive
who have the Masters level to do
some level of research.
That we are at a strategic
disadvantage when it comes to
other states, poaching our best
and brightest to them, and so
anything we can do to help them
out as in stipends as in tuition
opportunities.
I think would be wisely looked
upon.
Great. Thank you very much for
that, Dr Shepherd. Um And
finally I want to ask briefly,
You know, there is, um There's a
number of different components
The students supports in the B,
R and R the building, renewable
and replacement. Uh, students
supports that's been sort of
something that has been
highlighted again and again.
Um, do you see within these
budgets? I think we see it sort
of specifically the $3 million
in the LFC. Budget Specific
focus on student those rats
essentially as students come in
the door that there are
resources attention focus right
from the moment they set foot on
campus or enroll online.
Will that help us in the
retention area? How important
are the students supports Mr
Chair? Extremely important. Um
So what would you know? When a
student comes on on board when
they onboard with the
university we often times think
about how they register for
classes and get their financial
aid and so forth.
But as we're seeing across the
country
Mental health is paramount in
terms of a wraparound service.
appropriate housing. You just
heard a statistic about how many
students were living out of the
well. We're homeless or living
out of the car from University
of New Mexico.
If a student does not have
The ability to focus on their
academics. They will drop out
and so the better we are at
providing those wraparound
services, particularly as it
comes to the mental health needs
of our of our communities. And
when I say communities are
universities and community
colleges
The higher likelihood we will
have to get them across that
finish line of a degree.
Mr Change if I could also
respond? Absolutely. As Dr
Shepherd said it, It's
absolutely critical. It's really
alarming when you hear the kind
of numbers that the basic needs
survey presented in terms of the
students are housing, insecure
food insecure. It's just
downright alarming. And our
folks see that every day as
they're working with students. I
think one of the things to think
about in terms of how the
funding how the funding actually
works out is to actually is for
us to take a look at the end of
the year and say, What did this
funding actually buy and I'm
gonna I'm gonna put it crudely.
Crudely there because the
funding buys different things at
different institutions and
different levels so so depending
on how it's distributed some
institutions, um are going to
benefit and be able to buy more
than than other institutions.
And so one of the things I would
I would ask us to look at is.
How do how do those funds get
distributed? And, um
Can we do the things we want to
do with the amount of actual
dollars that each of us get?
Well, said Dr Shepherd Wrap up
quickly, so be happy to again
Another compliment to the higher
Education Department and to this
body last year, you gave some
funding that was administered to
the higher education Department,
of which
Of which I as a Western Nebraska
University, for example,
received funding for food
security.
Um, again. Just last week we had
over £4000 of food, go out to
students beyond what they get in
the cafeteria and so forth. This
is critical for their well being
and for their continuation, and
so I want to thank you and your
colleagues along with the higher
Education Department for making
that happen in allowing us to do
that.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much. Doctor Shephard.
Okay. Um, thank you, all
members. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. Thank you to your
staff. Thank you to the D F a
course to the L. C. Doctor. Mr.
Jorgensen Deputy Director
Courtney, Um, for all everybody
who's here from a higher
education. Thank you will have
public comment. After this. You
need not public. You need not
make comment, But you're, of
course. Welcome to
I think we've had a very
thorough hearing you and we're
gonna go members. I'm gonna
point after we take the
recommendations, a small
subcommittee to focus directly
on higher education. Uh and
we'll be continuing our work
with that members. As you
remember. We're gonna go back to
Agency 950 for higher Education
Department.
Um
We're going to ask for the lfc
recommendation on that, and then
we'll go to our higher education
institutions.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move the LFC recommendation for
agency 950.
Okay. It's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon second by repressive
Sanjana. Is there any opposition
to that motion seeing none.
Okay?
Set that down gently now for our
higher education institutions,
agency codes, 952 through 976.
We'll go ahead and ask for the
LSC on that as well. Thank you,
Mr Chair. I would move the LFC
recommendation for agencies
9522976.
There's a motion from vice Chair
Dixon saying from
representatives Narayana Garcia
was AH, Is there any opposition
to adopting that motion?
Okay, Tsing? None. That motion
is adopted. Thank you all very
much. Um, okay.
Are you okay? Being on the
subcommittee for believe me.
Okay, as we clear the room
first we're going to go to if
there's any public comments
again, we try to limit it to two
minutes. Uh, to 15 minutes
total.
Please go ahead if anybody wants
to make public comments, raise
your hand or line up at the
microphone.
I see a few folks in the back.
Yes. Please come on in. And
please clear. Uh
yeah,
Thanks. Okay. Now for well ask,
uh
Continue to do and obviously
what you need to do.
Ah for the folks who are here
for public comment.
Um, thank you all for coming on
up. You can come up one at a
time. And please tell us your
names and then about two
minutes.
Okay. And would you mind turning
the microphone on? Sorry about
that Mr Chair and members of the
community. My name is Dr Cardura
man, and I'm a family medicine
resident at the U. N mm Santa Fe
program and a proud member of
the committee of Interns and
residents. I'm here to
respectfully asked the committee
to amend House Bill two to
include
A special one time money for
resident physician salaries that
you and M you'll hear about the
resident physician crisis from
my colleague, but I wanted to
share more about what it's like
to be a resident position As a
resident. I'm the first doctor
that the patient sees when they
come to you and M when someone's
in a motor vehicle collision and
they're brought to you and M the
doctors in the emergency
department or resident.
If pregnant patient needs to see
section the doctors performing
the operation or resident
physicians if a child breaks an
arm when they come to the E D,
the doctor reading the images
and also plays in the Castro
resident positions.
I do love my job, but it's hard
being as resident on average. I
work about 60 to 80 hours a week
and oftentimes I'm awake for
more than 24 hours at a time.
The hours are made more
difficult by the financial
stress that comes with being a
resident. On average residents
have about $250,000 in student
loans, which you're not back in
my payment.
We often worry about having to
afford rent and food and for
parents, childcare often eats up
the majority of the paycheck, if
not all of it.
This is unfair to less
considering the hours that we
work, and it's unfair to our
patients who deserve doctors
that are not worried about
money.
Um residents are among the
lowest pain in the southwest.
Uh, the Association of American
Medical colleges released its
annual report on salaries and,
um, is currently more than 10%
behind other programs in the
region. Depending on the
measure. The report puts us
about 14 to 31% behind. We're
excited about the 5% raise that
we were able
To come to agreement with the
hospital. However, there's still
more work to be done.
Other programs will continue to
receive raises. And if we fall
further behind you, Mexico will
lose great doctors to other
programs. At the December, uh,
legislative finance meeting
hearing, Dr C. Dhoni is
requested $3.4 million to help
Residents. Salaries reach the
50th percentile, and we are
hopeful that the legislator will
grant this special request him
and hospital to and to increase
the compensation that can
finally be comparable to
neighboring programs. Thank you
very much. Absolutely.
Okay, Come on up, please. And
again. We're gonna focus on
around two minutes. Sure. Um,
So, Mr Chair. Remember the
committee? My name is Dr
Kilpatrick. And I am also see IR
member in resident at U. N. M.
I'm a family medicine physician.
But you and M. In particular it
employs about 97% of the
residents in the state.
I'm also here to respectfully
asked
Grant the request for this one
time $3.4 million for this
resident salaries.
This summer is based on the
calculations from the
Association of American Medical
Colleges and Places Um residents
more than 10% behind the mean
salary for the region and its
one time money. Um
Along with our recent tentative
agreement, like, um Dr Carneiro
mentioned and it would put us at
the media in the 50th
percentile. Um, and if you are
here in support of this item for
house, Bill two, please raise
your hand. Doctor Carneiro spoke
about how far behind are pay is
from that of other neighboring
states. And I want to stress
that this is a possible reason
for the physician crisis in New
Mexico. I'm sure you've
experienced since yourself as
you try to get in with your
doctor even noticed that the
wait times are dangerously long.
Is a primary care provider. I
can tell you, my patients wait
at least six months to get into
see almost any specialists, and
this is especially dangerous for
my patients who have complex
medical problems there so long
these wait times because New
Mexico has the second highest
physician shortage in the
country, and it's getting going
to get worse. 37% of the state's
positions are set to retire by
2030.
We're already in a shortage, and
I don't want to know what that
feels like.
To get even further behind as a
resident are low salaries are
one explanation for this crisis.
we just finished interviewing
are most our upcoming class of
resident positions and they
always ask you to pay, and
that's always a really difficult
conversation to have, because as
much as we love working here in
New Mexico
It is really difficult to live
in our salaries. Some of my co
residents have had their cars
broken down on their way home
from work, and they've had to
have it impounded because they
couldn't pay to fix it. Others
work for uber on top of their 80
hour work weeks just to support
their family of five and many,
many others are just waiting to
start families into their late
thirties because they can't
afford childcare.
Our hours are already difficult
in our lives shouldn't be that
difficult. And just as I
mentioned, um are
Agreement with U N M is a step
in the right direction. But it's
not enough. We do need that
additional 3.4 million. The
doctor doctors is Donna's right
requested at the LSE hearing in
December to get our pay to the
media, and so we respectfully
ask the committee to amend
hospital to to include the
special one time money, the
resident physician sirens
salaries that, um this is for
our well being and to ensure
that great doctors continue to
work here in New Mexico. Thank
you. Thank you so much for your
time. Absolutely. Thank you very
much.
Thank you. I'll time it too.
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Hi. Thank you for
seeing me. My name is Dominic
Oto. I'm a graduate student at
the University of New Mexico.
And I'm here with the Graduate
Workers Union for the University
of New Mexico. But also we
worked very closely with the
MSU and I'm here today to ask
for an increase to graduate
worker compensation. Um, Mr
Chairman. Your comments earlier
about how graduate workers are
at the cutting edge of both
research are true and companies
But we also teach a substantial
portion of classes at U. N. M
and M s U and other colleges in
the, um in the state. And so,
um, that or that work is worth a
lot and we worked really hard at
what we do. Um, And that is
despite the fact that we're paid
on average, more than $2000
below the federal poverty line.
And that is including the fact
that many of us nearly 80% of us
are also supporting someone with
the meager salaries that we
have.
So my request for you today is
as follows. We're requesting
about $10 million in total, and
that is to include graduate
workers as part of the I n g
funding, which, to my knowledge
has not been done before or to
have, um, graduate worker
compensation be its own light
item as an allocation. This make
a huge difference.
To the 3400 contracting graduate
workers across the state of New
Mexico. Um and it would really
just be a start to making our
compensation fair and equitable.
Thank you so much. Thank you
very much. Okay. I think that
does it for our in person.
Public comment. We have a few
folks online.
Steve Bassett.
We're going to start with Steve
Bassett.
Steve Bassett for two minutes,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. My name is
Steve Bassett, director of
conservation programs for the
Nature Conservancy and resident
of Santa Fe.
I'm hopeful that you'll
reconsider the executive request
for a special appropriation for
the reforestation center and I
want to echo the concerns voiced
earlier by representatives
Sanchez, Chatfield and Luhan.
Forests are critical for New
Mexico, and they provide so many
benefits. As noted high
severity. Wildfires have reduced
large swaths of our forests to
ash, helping these forests and
watersheds bounce back. Bounce
back is critical for future
generations of new Mexicans.
This special appropriation for
the reforestation center will
allow us to bounce back faster
waiting for federal funding will
produce long lasting ripple
effects through forests and
communities. Time is of the
essence. My organization
attempted to order 20,000
seedlings to plant in high
severity burned areas next field
season, but the New Mexico State
University nursery only had
capacity for 5000 trees.
So we'll plant those trees out.
but that 15,000 missing trees
that we won't be able to plant
or just one example of the need
for investing in the
reforestation center. So thank
you again.
Thank you very much, Mr. Asset
read, Okay, We're gonna go now
to Kent Read, please.
I can't read for two minutes.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Members
of the committee. Um I am logged
on this afternoon. Express my
strong support for the New
In addition to the obvious
environmental benefits that tree
planting brains
Uh, tree planting and play an
important part in the
restoration economy of New
Mexico.
Uh, providing jobs for people
who would rather work outside
than change sheets or wash
dishes.
Uh, so again, I'm in strong
support of funding than US
Coronavirus Station, Sir. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. Thank you very
much, Mr Reid.
Time.
Okay, Now we're gonna go to
forest a ton.
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is Aton,
Crystal Lipsky and with the
Forest, Stewart's Guild Forest
Conservation nonprofit, um and
speaking and strong support of
investing in the reforestation
center.
Um, as you just heard the
reforestation center at a at its
current capacity is insufficient
for New Mexico's needs by an
order of magnitude, So it's
really important that we have a
new up to date and, um, high
capacity reforestation center.
Um and
Um, an addition to what you was
previously mentioned. Um, but
the reforestation center will
have a significant workforce
need, which is going to be
critical in the San Miguel Maura
Colfax County areas, And so it's
going to be a have important
economic impacts as well. Thank
you.
Thank you very much. Okay. We
have two more. Let's do it.
We're about to run out of time.
We're gonna go to
Uh, these, uh sir. Now we're
trying to, um, you
We can come back if it's not
working.
Why don't we go to? Uh we
Hughes? Okay, Um
Let's go to Lee Hughes and we'll
come back to Visa. Lee Hughes.
Go ahead. Yes. Thank you
Appreciate your attention. I'm
the director of conservation at
Philmont Scout Ranch in
Cimarron, New Mexico, up in
Colfax County. We got about
140,000 acres owned by the Boy
Scouts. It's that pinnacle of
high adventure activity for the
boy Scouts. So we've lost about
what? We've had 30,000 acres.
Burned and catastrophic wildfire
in the last five years or so,
and the current Jonty Harrington
Forestry Research Center in
Highlands, and some others got
to cast Crest Grant under
studying how to reforest
following catastrophic
wildfires and of those 30,000
acres.
Currently scarred by fired. We
need about 4 million trees just
for that, And I know we are not
the only forest in the state
that needs that kind of support,
so we strongly support full
funding for forestry
reforestation center.
Sort of we can continue to be an
economic driver reported
northwest or northeast part of
the state. And Morty can, too,
So I appreciate your attention
with this very much.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr
Hughes. We're going to conclude
with Vecernje.
Can you hear me now? Yes, ma'am,
Please go ahead. Thank you. This
is Veronica Cern. I'm county
Commissioner here in Moore
County. And I want to thank you
all for giving us this time. I
want to thank representative
Sanchez, representative Luhan
and
Chatfield for supporting this or
speaking up in favor of this
reforestation, um, project. It
is imperative. Now, more than
ever that we support this
program because of the
devastation that we have
experienced without the
reforestation program, and
Maura.
And in New Mexico. I cannot see
how we can, uh, recover and get
the trees that we need in all
the force that are that are
leaving those trees. I believe
at this point we only have about
300,000 seedlings, and we will
need probably over 500 file. I'm
sorry. Over 5 million trees. So,
um
I beg that you all support this
project and fund this program
sooner than later. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Uh, Miss
Sarna. We really appreciate it.
Thanks to everybody. Great
public comment today. We really
appreciate you being here. Okay,
members, we're gonna go sort of
lightning round. Um, first for
our subcommittee on higher
education. We're going to ask
representative Chatfield ranking
member Armstrong, representative
Sanchez.
Represent Herndon and
represented Figueroa.
To work on that.
And, uh, Amanda will follow up
will make sure that I'll go
pretty fast. There's gonna be a
lot of fall. Uh, if you miss it,
it's okay. We'll make sure and
follow up. So we're gonna work
through that. Also, members
we've received and shared the
policy working groups that
members want to announce those
briefly.
Um
First. This is broadly with
education from the working
group. We have representative
Saturn Yana represent Garrett.
Represent Alison representative
vodka and represented Chatfield.
With regards to health,
behavioral, health and child.
Well being. We have ranking
member Armstrong Substantive had
a meal representative Herndon,
Sam Dixon, vice chair. Dixon
represent Brown and
representative Sanchez.
Natural resources. We have
myself observe certain. Yana
representative Sanchez.
Mm. Representative Luhan.
Represented. Uh
yeah. Hmm. And also we have
represented Garcia. Ah.
We are on economic development,
Vice chair Dixon Sam Garcia
represent figures represent
Pettigrew ramping ranking member
Armstrong comes to housing We
have Vice chair Garrett
Excuse me, Vice Chair Dixon, Sam
Garrett from seven Delacruz,
representing Brown and represent
Montoya and then when it with
chords and public safety
Seven. Dela Cruz representative
Herndon, Alison Baca and
represented in ranking member
Armstrong. Okay, that's just a
quick rundown.
These working groups. You all
will have been and will continue
to receive materials working
through on a number of areas as
we sort of do a lot of the Ah,
not quite ketchup cleanup but
bringing recommendations closer
bringing the committee's
concerns that we've heard
Concerns from the public
concerns from agencies forward
as we continue to work, it'll be
a busy rest of the week, but
that wraps us up for today.
Please keep an eye with
communications from Amanda. Um,
as we sort of work through these
pieces in any questions, all
circle back offline with folks.
Sure we had a working group on
veterans. Where is that at?
Thank you very much for Sam
Garcia. Um we have, uh, let me
circle back with you offline,
but that's we've asked the
agencies to come back to us
there and Wall Street will
circle back. Absolutely. Thank
you very much. Represent Garcia,
Okay, members. Let's wrap up for
now, Um, to everybody who
attended today. Thank you very
much.
Great public comment, Uh and we
