Children used in families
Department.
Okay I'm we have a quorum and
okay yes Representative Crowder
please.
Thank you Mr chairman of Senate
the there's a typo on their
agenda I think it's actually
agent agency number six ninety
four of children youth and
families okay.
Thank.
Thank you Mr thank you for
catching that.
We'll make sure that that's
corrected and the official
committee notes and
we will thank you for catching
that.
Thank you.
Okay great so we're gonna move
ahead then and we're gonna have
our state treasurer first we're
going to go as we've been doing
this week at first with our LFC
analysts then go to the DFA and
west so ask Miss Bobby on to
kick this off with agency code
three nine four for the state
treasurer's office just five PM
please.
Representative thank you for
having us here if you haven't
met me yet many Jennifer Stewart
and I'm a new economist LFC took
over state treasurer is analyst
position from Ismael Torres
we're here today with of course
our state treasurer Tim
Eichenberg we have Sam Collins
deputy state treasurer I'm David
do our chief financial officer
Claudia are me ho who is the
work and save executive director
and Lynn Hoffman also joined
joining us here today is Simon
Miller used to DFA analyst for
the state treasurer's office so
I will kick us off again we're
doing to try to office that's
agency code three nine four.
You can find some additional
resources and some of our
volumes by one it's on page one
ninety three that's a special
appropriation and then we have
our agency requests LFC
narrative in the LFC wreck on
page one thirty four in volume
two so I'll get started just
going over the different sheets
so both the LFC and exec
recommend forty nine thousand or
one point five percent increase
for personal services employee
benefits primarily to retain and
hire good staff the LFC
recommends a sixty thousand or
nine point one percent increase
for other uses over the FY
twenty two operating budget
that's for I. T. expenditures
primarily to prevent cyber
attacks into kind of beef up
that I. T. services
state treasures office
executive recommends a hundred
twenty five thousand dollars for
other sources that's a nineteen
point one percent increase over
the FY twenty two operating
budget.
Lastly the LFC recommends a flat
budget for contractual services
well executive recommends the
seven point five thousand or one
point eight percent increase
over the fiscal year twenty two
operating budget I just wanted
to note that because the fiscal
year twenty two request for the
work in safe program which is
mostly these contractual
services mostly nonrecurring
start up to Oregon state program
also has a bunch.
into flight twenty five
so healthy recommends a four
hundred thousand dollar.
Special appropriation to cover
these costs we won't get into
too much detail there but wanted
to note that.
The over to Simon Miller for
additional comments.
Thanks good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Simon Miller and I'm an
analyst with DFA
so Jennifer pretty much covered
everything there these
recommendations are fairly
similar the executive
recommendation just provides
slightly more funding for
I. T. equipment servers software
subscriptions to improve
cybersecurity but other than
that they are very similar so
with that I'll turn it over to
our state treasure Mr I convert.
Thank you Mr Miller Mr treasure
thank you so much for being here
today we're excited to hear from
you and also want to invite you
to introduce.
Here are any of your team
members as well.
It's.
And that's on me it.
I'm.
Thank you back on mute.
Now can you help me out thank
you.
I see Simon and Jennifer as well
but thank you Mr chair the
opportunity before you today I'm
I appreciate the opportunity to
talk to the committee as well
and want to thank you for the
opportunity to do this remotely
after yesterday's headline in
the Albuquerque journal where we
were ranked fourth in destin
United States in the last week
you Mr concern next Mr Collins
myself as to how many people we
wanted to take this.
So thank you for this
opportunity.
I know that safety is important
years Rhodes's Strossen and so
that's what makes the state for
all of us I'm I do have on the
call with us today has jammed
mention some of my staff
I wish I could just give us
leads to every one of them
especially on this last year
years it's been very difficult
for all state employees all of
New Mexicans because of this
call comment pandemic thank I
think we're handling and working
through it quite well.
I'm slide to kind of give you a
breakdown of some of my
employees there Sam Collins by
deputy treasurer I'm headed that
the district chief of staff I'm
Steve more Sicko I'm Steve
senator cash manager he joined
us on in early September because
of the retirement of Charmaine
cook.
So he's had a couple of months
under his belt but he also came
from Wells Fargo bank and those
are stopped quite well.
David chief financial officer
Vicki Vicki help address is our
chief investment officer I'm
cloudy on heroes are working
safe executive director Kathy W.
appropriations and I think I
skipped over heather Bennett the
discussions the chief of staff
and also my able and financial
literacy officer.
Slide three kind of goes into
the themes of of what we do the
state treasurer's office and
yes I try to keep up on two
different kind of
I've got I've had a telephone
going.
We all have that other phone
that rings all the time besides
we talked about the act the
assets that we currently have
which is exceeds over nine
billion dollars states money
we're handling those state
finances I think extremely
professional
and as my deputy director Sam
Collins always says no news is
good.
And I'm able is portion we are
under the direction of have
advantages we have over a
thousand accounts now is my
understanding that we finally
reach that.
I know that on Monday we were
very close I'm.
We that this thing was able and
one of the reasons why we have
we struggle with this yes you
how is it was an unfunded
mandate renewal was given to the
state treasurer's office so we
try to do it was by funds we
currently have but what's
frustrating about it is what's
disappointing to me personally
is that we think there's over
thirty thousand people that are
eligible for hi.
For the able act and yet we've
only got one thousand signed.
Our highlights are also there.
We
We're pretty much covered all of
that
yes go to slide for
the audit which is very
important to me there's no
findings I get and so much
credit goes to David who do with
that and I'm I can't tell you
how much we rely on his
expertise and hard work R. L. G.
I. P. as providing the state's
tractive alternative for local
governments and tribes and that
now has increased by over twenty
percentage exceeds one point two
billion dollars that we invest
for others and I'm are working
safe implementation is underway
I'm we will get into that a
little bit more as we get into
the house discussion here.
We continue to maintain the
highest stability rating of
triple eight with our L. G. I.
T. and
we are.
We don't see that ever going I'm
so we're always work that I'm
I'd like to thank our sponsors
and that goes into our next
slide R. and.
Are working state program hi
this is something that took
quite some time to get off the
ground but we have that are
great smiling faces of all the
legislators and former
Representative Tomasz this year
there get.
Got this program through and as
you can see by the vote there
the house to sixty to one the
Senate passed forty to zero so
we're excited to continue going
forward I'm are working state
board of directors.
Hopping Mr chair I got to know
listen when she was on the state
investment council yeah just a
hard working professional
individual yes how all of our
board members are going to each
one of them.
But I'm just a great working
group of people and I should
call my board it's really the
state's forward they don't work
for the treasurer's office they
are incredibly important as a
matter of fact the state
treasurer's office.
I'm.
As we need to run slide.
Seven.
I would just like to talk a
little bit about the increases
that we're asking for and
I merrily and provide cost
associated with working state
involvement Tatian I'm and the
extort goal I appropriations
fiscal twenty three request I'm.
When we make these requests.
We ask to what we think we're
going to need as we go forward
that are reversion this last
year was almost three just over
three hundred thousand dollars
because of COVID we can't always
do what we had hoped to do.
We couldn't spend the money that
we wanted in financial literacy
programs
and because of COVID vacancies
so there's a lot of salary
statements here it's difficult
to fill positions right now.
We have twenty seven physicians
bill we have thirty five FTEs
we appreciate.
Analysts looking at that then
pointing that out to the there
we also need more money in order
to protect the employees that we
have to maintain and.
keep them but also in hiring new
employees I'm.
As we get into rock slide eight.
We talk a little bit more about
why we want the additional
funding for working safe and
that's the administration and
the implementation of that and
it talks about the program
consultation and marketing the
outreach investment consultation
that legal that we need what we
have found this is that and I
have difficulty maintaining on
returning treasures office we
just lost our last contract
attorney to the governor's
office that was Martin Chavis
that would work to be these are
over on some of the hard
money's.
And so we're now back in the
process of trying to
hire a new attorney but again if
we try to do it on contractors
certain things that GSD once a
once and it just slows that
process down considerably but
what we found most importantly
there is that having my attorney
advised the board working states
doesn't necessarily work and so
that's one of the reasons why we
have to legal consultation in
their especially around
Christmas.
We have sixty thousand as a gem
Jennifer pointed out is for.
Acquisition for new service
software subscriptions and
hardware Margie's we we use
risk sense we have an annual
cyber security audit they
provide an I think we're one of
the highest rating agencies and
state and reassured me with over
nine billion dollars and in our
bank accounts.
One of the other things that we
initiated in our office I'm in a
lot of this is due to R. G.
staff but that's just the
training.
Training the employees not to
click on something that they're
not from.
And so we do that annually as
well so we're proud of our staff
will proud of our cyber security
we do need to sixty thousand
dollars
initiative reported that were
generally flat.
When we get into our.
Yeah and I'll just take
questions on it more than
anything else that just a few
things about work and save and
why it's so important Johnson
right we've kind of highlighted
here is because we think this is
the future of New Mexico if we
can take over four hundred
thousand employees to put them
into a program that allows them
to states and we want to we are
saying this is for savings for
their retirement.
If you can start at the age of
eighteen or twenty twenty two
when you get out of school and
you save you know vigorously for
eight to ten years home purchase
finally comes up short in a
savings account ensuring the
long term savings program yes it
is one step closer to obtaining
house as well because that shows
a bank or a lender you are safer
so with that Mr chair all just
take any questions that you
might have I don't mean to this
is something you re tune read.
We change.
You do this return and high.
And just here for a few minutes
so thank you for your time this
morning Mr chair.
That Mr chair thank you so much
for an excellent presentation.
You are so familiar and and the
expertise of you and your team
in these very.
Complex intends and and
obviously as you pointed out
just with very large funds over
nine billion dollars that you
all are doing this every day but
you do an incredibly smoothly
and professionally so thank you
let's go and thank you to the
analysts I want to go now to
questions from the committee
we're gonna start with
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
treasure I can Berg you guys are
doing fantastic work and I'm
particularly impressed with the
work and save program I'm really
pleased to see that coming
together one question I had is
why.
Why your office are feels it's
necessary for those to be rid
recurring funds
as opposed to one time start up
funds which is what the LFC has
recommended.
Thank you Representative for
that that call.
Naturally we want to prepare you
that this might only be the
beginning if we get started this
year with this amount of money
and we need to continue and
carried over we just set up a
partnership with the state of
Colorado and it's more for the
economy of scale that they have
already started and
initiated their program so this
is that there need that we need
today for we don't know what
we're gonna need next year and
so we're just trying to let you
all know that this is going to
be long term and especially
depending on the amount of
Ripley's that we can bring on
you know with over fifteen
thousand businesses in over four
hundred thousand employees out
there that don't have any time
savings program for their
employees we don't know what
tomorrow is going to be so
that's what we're preparing you
for.
Thank you very much thank you Mr
chair that was my only question.
Thank you Representative Dixon
next Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll miss
a greater good to see you today
thanks for the presentation of
Richard Nixon kind of drop my
questions away from me.
But the when I was wondering why
the reoccurring for number one
another's work and save all your
partnering up with the state of
Colorado can you of
give me a little bit of
background on that Sir.
I'm.
Probably not as well as some.
Cloudy army ho who actually runs
my program.
We're ready discussion started
receptive treasures level
without treasurer young from
from Colorado and myself I'm.
We needed the economy of scale
this is here there's only twelve
states are doing this right now
across the country and Oregon
which is one of the bigger ones
and with literally hundreds of
millions of dollars invested in
their work and state program
Colorado was just starting out
like we were and so and their
neighbors so that made it also
nice for us so what we tried to
do there and and staff is the
one that put it all together
Representative Garcia which was
just to talk about how we can
help each other and how we can
grow together and what is some
of that.
All the students from blocks or.
Speed bumps to Colorado's going
through and so by partnering
with them we have a leader that
has been there are one step
ahead of us and that's what
we're trying to do I'm New
Mexico is a small state I'm
small economics I mean the
average employee only makes
nineteen thousand dollars that
doesn't have a
hang over three hundred thousand
of those workers and that fall
in that category compared to
fifty seven thousand dollars
with the income for employers.
Sponsored plan.
That's the difference in average
and so those are these are
coming out you know national
statistics credit unions these
are specific to New Mexico and
so I'm I'm kind of getting off
track what your question is that
John.
That's why we partnered with
with Colorado.
We're allowing them to be kind
of Big Brother to us as we walk
through this program we hope to.
Once we launch this I'm not sure
we will be on our own thank to
have an independent investment
firm if we've only got a hundred
thousand why do they want to
talk to us go someplace else and
so by partnering with Colorado
we will always have that
assistance no matter how small
we are as long as we're gonna
catch.
Thank you Mr treasure a
Mr chairman all.
The mandatory thing for any
state employee to join my
direct.
I'm not sure.
our our current state employees
react public employees
retirement association defer cop
we've already work work project
I'm but yes we're asking that
this now become a requirement in
New Mexico we have found that on
a
voluntary they usually it's it's
right around one percent and the
statistics came out of our.
Two studies that they work in
state program get money out of
Boston and the other out of
bureau which Jeff Mitchell I'm
god rest his soul he pastor
Gerry UNM that they found that
that kind of a program will only
initiate about one percent
we're.
You.
Do fifty percent and that's what
we're hoping for would like to
see fifty percent of our
employees get into this.
Thank you Mr Mr Chairman you
know this is kind of new to me.
Is there any match from the
state what employees put in the
car for one K. plans it really
some of places have all you put
in so the dollar would put
incentive for is there any kind
of back from the state for these
employees are trying to do this
or will try to do this.
No Representative Garcia that's
not something that we proposed
Richard correct my son works for
HSD they match up to nine
percent of the state's
the that's not something we do
here in in New Mexico.
It's something if you would like
to introduce that we would love
to see it I'm as an incentive
for more employees to state I'm
I know that we've got a lot of
federal money right now but what
we're just trying to do is just
get started on that no there is
no match what we're offering
employers is a three hundred
dollar.
Tax credit that they can change
and we think that that just.
I don't.
Personally because I've got a
wife that has ten employees I've
run and payroll in what it cost
her to do that monthly I'm with
the three hundred dollars and
certainly reimburse our business
I'm for doing for setting up
this program I'm we don't think
it would exceed three hundred
dollars a year that's what we've
asked the state to pick up right
yes the employer benefits.
And for the employee
are on match because people like
to work for a company that has a
savings program that has
retirement program and so that
gives us more incentive to our
on to our businesses.
Thank you Mr.
Mr Chairman I was gonna ask you
why would anybody want to join.
This but you're proposing if
they do have a four one K. but
not all companies have all
offered for one game my correct
that's correct Representative
this is just this is for the
beginner this is for
Lawyers that have I.
Just employers that have five or
more employees so if you're
single and get out just I
started a business and I'm the
only employee you don't have to
drive
that for five or more and we
think we just think it's going
to be a great program for them
to recruit employees they can
offer a retirement program.
Production the time program.
Mr treasure Mr chairman.
I would support that because a
lot of people are you know
smaller port don't offer
anything that would be a good to
a good start for a lot of our
people are my last question Mr
chairman and Mr pressure.
What the
This can be a hard question okay
what makes you think that was
working for Colorado worked in
New Mexico.
Mark Ruffalo Representative
Garcia by and almost seventy
years in New Mexico and I we
have that all that is and I'm
sorry I was quoted correctly but
they always said anything that
that works east of the
Mississippi doesn't work in New
Mexico.
But I'm Colorado being our
neighbor.
Being.
More.
It gives us an opportunity to
grow because the economy of
scale their population is higher
the employees that they
currently have in their program
and their programs required
program so they've already
launched they now I'm working as
a matter of money that we set up
this
Originally many years ago when
we just the enabling legislation
prior to and the workstation
we've been into it was worried
that that was helping us thank
Oregon has taken off and has
grown so big that.
They're just.
Our lead right now in my opinion
they're still offering to help
at any time that that's why we
think partnering with Colorado
was our best concerned neighbor
and economy of scale test or
larger thank they will help us
and and that's more.
Person to person Representative
it's always good to work with
people that you know they care
about our state.
And
These are state operator
patients.
Mr treasure Mr chairman the
reason I even asked that
question that we is because you
know I'm a businessman had been
to business for forty years and
a lot of time partnerships will
still.
And you know that's the only
reason I asked that question
because I'm pretty sure this is
a business decision and as far
as the states concerned to
partner up with somebody and you
know a lot of times partnership
digital still and I have a
question I have sure go ahead
I'm sorry.
No you're you're correct
Representative and that's why
staff needs to watch this and
and our board needs to watch it
thank currently it.
Gap that we need so desperately
and research I'm just and just
getting this started and so I'm
I certainly don't disagree with
you to your cell that we might
not be partnering with them we
might have gone to such a level
we might want to partner with
somebody else like orange but or
beasts all by ourselves but
again it depends on the
commitment of the Legislature
gaps to our program.
Thank but Mr chairman Mr
I lost my train of thought.
Thank you Representative for
giving me the opportunity to
talk about our program.
Thank you for presented to me is
sure as a win win.
For years that there are
interested in this role thank
you for doing that Mr chairman
thank you.
Absolutely thank you very much
Representative Garcia we're
gonna go to now representative
Armstrong and then close this
out with Representative Crowder
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for the presentation did I
hear correctly that this is a
mandatory for employers.
Up over five.
Yes Representative where we're
at what we found in the studies
that were done by deeper as
follows on the institute in
Boston why is that less than one
percent of our employers will
actually sign up for this
so what we're asking is is this
be required for employees
employers at over five employees
from.
Yeah we're trying to take away
the Montauk
or the single person.
We think that that's what's
going to work that's what's
worked in the other states how
to make this go forward.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you treasure but you know I I
care this legislation I'm I was
one of the people that first got
it passed and then it got
amended last year to be
mandatory and I would have never
carried this legislation to
mandate something on small
businesses and so I just need
the committee to note that
that's very upsetting to me
I ate I saw that when it was
being amended did not sign on to
the bill.
But I am I was promised.
When I carried the legislation
that would not be mandatory I am
a small business owner my
husband and I own five or six
different businesses across the
state some small some large and
I just want the committee to
note that I am not in favor of
this being mandatory thank you
Mr chairman.
All.
Thank you very much
Representative Armstrong in next
we're gonna go to Representative
Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
the thanks for your presentation
treasure I convert
I had to step away for a little
bit so I I didn't have an
opportunity to hear what you I'm
sure it's all people as as what
happens with the interest earned
on these monies as they come
into the treasury how is that
allocated as a go back to the
the person that put the money in
is our administration fee
charged for handling the money
can you just speak about the
interest earned administrative
fees and anything to do with
that please.
The interest or missed is there
much it's not the state yes they
are.
We're hoping to get to a point
where the economy of scale this
is that they won't be charged
very much right any investment
whether you have a for a whiner
your stocks your bonds we see
you are I still pay at the for
our investment brokers we with
the state's being solved and
with that state board and state
employees the state of New
Mexico is perhaps for the
majority of the staff now as you
already know I'm and that those
savings go directly to the
employee I'm.
We're hoping to if they continue
to make good returns on their
investment I'm state of New
Mexico and and just in some of
the employees I've talked to
that are involved in the parent
and the deferred compensation
program that job parent has for
state employees some of them are
better than ten percent interest
return just last year so we
would like to see that happen
for all employers and employees
that would like to work and save
SA SA go towards your
retirement.
Thank you for that are present
and I do hope that the every
year is just like the past year
it was a great year for
everybody but I'm sort of Mr
treasure Mr chairman I I didn't
hear what the he wasn't curious
what is the the that is being
charged for administrating the
program right now are what is
the cost.
well we haven't started the
program yet Representative
Crowder so I can't answer that
question I don't think it's
going to be
yeah I just I'm not I guess.
I wish I could
Graham looking kind of that
statute here thank inter we
actually start the program and
who is going to carry that kind
of program I'm we'll have to
bring that back to the
legislature next year as to what
those fees would cost upwards.
I appreciate that and Mr
Chairman and Mr.
Once the the board just decided
you know what they will have to
charge what the administrative
costs would be if you could
share that with the LFC Alice
and they'll get on now to us I
just be real curious what that
is and I can tell you
representative there will be no
cost to the employer.
Okay okay cost to the employer.
Now when I say no cost naturally
When I presented this to my wife
who has a small business Templar
used she talked payroll person
and I think it was gonna be two
dollars a month for the
additional deduction because it
suggestion all transfer of funds
which would be good monies that
would be savings and then there
would be the initial set up cost
and she got that was like forty
dollars Sir do you have those
two together you know it's gonna
be less than seventy five box
for for my flights.
Shop her employees.
Yeah we're the most thank you
Representative.
Is your I know we we do have a
very full agenda this morning
this is important to delve
deeply into but I want to remind
us that we do have very full
agenda.
Mr chairman I think yeah I I
just I guess because of the
COVID I I just want to make sure
that that the folks that are
putting their money into this
understand the present value of
money and and what interest
would do less fees and make sure
this is a good deal for them we
don't inflation to eat this
alive.
In order I have a concern there
so that's all thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Representative Crowder
very much and thank you also for
the request add to LFC staff I
second that and we will look
forward to seeing the follow up
that you requested from LFC
staff.
With that seeing no further
questions I'll go to
Representative speak.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr treasure good to see you that
I move the LFC recommendation.
Okay there's a motion is there a
second.
Make sure that we get the second
in their I was in the thank
thank you so much.
Representative other it's been
moved and seconded is there any
opposition to the motion yes
Representative during the motion
for the L. at the restaurant in
the I'm opposed okay at thank
you in the Dixon excuse me thank
you representative Armstrong for
noting opposition.
Them.
LFC motion.
Okay I excellent okay so we we
do have chairman if I could also
be an no votes thank you thank
you Representative and so we're
gonna go to Mr Jack please for a
to go through the committee
briefly on a roll call vote just
so that we make sure.
Yes please Representative
Allison yes
Representative Phelps Anderson
no.
Representative Gail Armstrong
no.
Representative Catherine brown.
No.
Representative Bros Cristiano.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Crowder.
Your mute Representative
Crowder.
No.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Garcia.
Yes
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative.
Lane all.
Now.
Representative Raymundo Lara.
All.
Incentive.
Santillana yes.
Representative Sweetser.
Yes.
Representative Trujillo yes.
Representative vice chair small.
All.
Yes all.
It is eight yes in the
affirmative and six in the next
two.
Thank you very much this project
so by voted eight in the
affirmative six in the negative
the LFC recommendation is for
the state treasurer HSD three
line or is it up.
Thank you now we're gonna go to
HSD code six ninety this is the
children youth and families
department.
We're gonna ask Mr chair NEA to
start us off with the LFC
presentation followed by miss
Mary Beth tends bar and then
we'll go to secretary B. hill.
Mr chair anything.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee.
My name again is Eric Shenyang
and it again with us here today
we have executive analyst Mary
Beth does more and I see on the
phone to we have secretary
Barbara B. hill as with agencies
six ninety CYFD.
I just wanted to before we get
going I wanted to point out a
few things
on the second page you'll see
these listed there are you can
find LFC policy narrative I am
volume one on page twenty two.
Within that narrative there's a
table on the right hand side bar
on page twenty seven that it
gives you a little bit of
information on historical
general fund appropriations to
the department and the
sort of upward trajectory the
departments received from the
legislature over the past few
years.
Volume two you'll find on page
three thirty five LFC is budget
recommendations for the
department.
At in volume three on page
ninety six and page ninety seven
you'll find juvenile justice
caseloads which you'll see is
actually been trending down
since about two thousand twelve
there's about a hundred
A client stand JJ facilities
right now and then you also see
the foster case loads faster
caseloads are trending downward.
Over time.
Well with that what I want to do
is come back to page one I'm
gonna go over the high level
different she looks like this hi
you know except for my notes
that I have on here.
I wanted to go over just how to
read it real quick you'll see
that there's on the right side
there's three columns with
numbers in it there's the agency
requests the executive
recommendation and then the LFC
recommendation then you'll see
just for example in each
program.
I like on line to for example
you'll see last year's operated
or you know the current year
fiscal year twenty two is
operating budget and then you'll
see additions below that numbers
below that that are either
adding or subtracting from last
year the come to the full
recommendation the either the
executive or the LFC.
Just making.
And so just to just to start off
on line three you'll see one
difference there the executive
recommended three point two
million.
to fill.
Positions and the LESC didn't
recommend increasing
person services this time around
because there's about two point
six million and funded vacancies
in FY twenty two within the
department.
And this program also referred
it about seven point two million
dollars in FY twenty one back to
the general fund and so that we
don't see any reason to kind of
increase that line.
But you'll see the LFC.
Supported the department's
request for intensive case
management services for the
Kevin asked lawsuit settlement I
think the secretary will
probably talk a little bit about
that later but how important
that one is.
But online I do children's
behavioral health LFC supported
More money for that.
LFC also supported more money
another nine hundred thousand
for multi systemic therapy.
And then the LFC also
included three million dollars
for domestic violence increase
and then we also have and that's
just from general fund we also
have an additional one million
dollars from the early childhood
education fund and that's
contingent on legislation
passing over the.
Over the session.
That on the line eleven we'll
see that the executive
basically the way we see is that
the executive replaced federal
revenue with general fund
revenue I'll go back into that
in a little more detail in a
minute here.
Moving down to the juvenile
justice services starting online
fifteen.
Again that population has been
decreasing over the years it's
been you know that the budget
both executive director and the
LFC recommended.
you know basically flat with a
little bit of inflationary
costs we included both of us
included five hundred fifty
thousand to make nurse pay in
those facilities a little more
competitive you've probably
heard about you know do you H.
few years ago increased under
salaries
And then you know of course in
the private sector nurse
salaries are are are going up so
we're trying to make those a
little more competitive so
that's that's what that we is
there online nineteen.
But moving on to the protective
services program line twenty
four.
LFC and and the the executive
this is like twenty six
recommended a pretty similar
about for reducing vacancies
this is one program that they
probably do need a little more
funding in there to reduce
vacancies so both both analysts
are both a the executive and and
the LFC included that.
You'll see on line twenty nine
thirty.
LFC included
re purposed faster spending
because of those decrease
caseloads again you look at that
point three table for foster
care that's trending downward
since so we're wanting to move
money from those back in
services some of those back in
services that might not be great
for children moving up the front
end so that we can prevent kids
from going into the fosters
please.
at this point I did want to
mentioned you'll see their
online thirty one again.
Laced federal revenue with
general fund revenue.
I wanted to mention that
This this this kind of came up
we had another hearing Senate
finance yesterday we kind of had
some discussion about this and I
wanted to bring up that you know
that the executive believe
that.
LFC is overstating the amount of
federal revenue coming into the
department.
but recently in August there was
a seven and a half million
dollar bar that came in budget
adjustment request came in to
bring.
Seven point five million dollars
this is kind of a common thing
with agencies around this time
of year when we're working on
budget requests and things like
that Bill understate how much
federal revenue they're
expecting and then later on in
the year they may end up
you know budgeting bringing in
more federal revenue is so
that's one thing I wanted to
point out they did do that this
year I went back a couple years
and each year they've done
they've brought in extra federal
revenue sites that's one thing I
wanted to just point out for you
on this
program support not much to
bring up
LFC recommended one point five
percent and the executive
recommended eighteen percent I
just wanted to mention on that
one.
The department reverted out of
this program five point four
million dollars and so that's
why LFC and see a reason for a
big increase on that.
and overall going back to
reversions I just wanted to
mention that the overall
reversion was fourteen point
three million there so that's
that's a.
something madam there too one
other thing I wanted to mention
you'll hear a little more about
this tomorrow
in the nonrecurring
recommendation for nonrecurring
general fund revenue and and
that are but money that we got
that broken rescue plan money.
LFC did include
about fifty million dollars to
improve
social worker
endowments at higher education
institutions so you know to
improve the workforce bring in
more social workers and really
ramp up social workers in the
department we also included
another twenty million to HSD to
work with CYFD to for Mashable
funds for title for or for
Medicaid and again that's more
workforce development stuff
trying to bring in more money
for us social workers it's a
long term strategy
for social workers
And I think with that Mr chair
that's about all I had on this
I'll pass it over to the
executive for further comment
thank you Mr the a distance one.
Thank you Mr chair thanks Aaron
are good morning everyone I'm
very about tons more The impetus
to DFA analyst for I CYFD and
Eric you are pretty good
overview of most of the stuff
that's in
the differences in the
recommendation just a couple
things I wanted to call to your
attention just for clarity
thirty purposes Eric mentioned
not five hundred fifty thousand
dollars in juvenile justice for
the nurse and medical salaries
to be more competitive just
wanted to make sure everyone's
aware that is also supported in
the executive
another thing that that Eric
mentioned was the multi systemic
therapy is six nine hundred
thousand dollars that was
requested on that is actually in
the executive so there was just
at the just a misunderstanding
with the funding in there but
but that is also supported on
this side
the last thing I just wanted to
mention right now is again I
think Erica pointed out the the
decrease in the juvenile justice
funding on the executive side so
I just wanted to to share the
the thought process behind that
for you all
the it is USD has not
historically spent the contracts
I'm to the I appropriated level
in that in that P. code so the
executive just pull that back to
to match FY twenty one actuals a
little closer but the executive
recommends language to allow the
agency to increase using bars up
to two million dollars for those
programs throughout the year so
if they do you have needs that
and up surpassing that amount.
In the in the recommendation
they would have plenty of
flexibility to operate those
programs fully.
So I think that that's probably
the sorry just thought of
there's one more difference I
don't know where to be touched
on this but just again to be
clear I think when you're
looking you'll see a large
difference in FTE in the two
recommendations so the HSD had
requested to move ninety three
positions out of juvenile
justice they were they requested
to move thirty of them into
protective services the
remaining sixty three into
behavioral health
so the executive has that
request supported thirty
positions wanted to protective
services sixty branch behavioral
health on the legislative
finance committee side they did
take the ninety three out of
juvenile justice they put the
thirty inch protective services
but they did not put sixty three
into behavioral health services
so you're going to see a
difference of sixty three F. T.
E. in that program and that's
that's the reasoning for that
That's about all I have I'm just
point out the rest some
differences here on the
executive side so with that if
it's okay Mister chair I'd like
to turn it over to the secretary
for your presentation.
Thank you so much at madam
secretary and and madam Chief
Justice please we're very
pleased that you're able to join
us today please go ahead thank
you.
Thank you Mr chair for the
opportunity to present today to
you and thank you all for all of
your work on behalf of the state
of New Mexico this is this is
very very important and I
appreciate the opportunity to be
here with you this morning I'd
like to begin if I may with a
read why presentation just to
give you an overview what is
important in my mind in reading
the department
we have are you able to see the
I presentation starting with our
mission.
Is that yes yes to okay okay
okay thank you I just want to
start with a general description
of what children youth and
families is responsible for
doing because I think it's
important that
even though we have maybe have
fewer cases or fewer children in
foster care it it it's important
to understand that the cases are
very very difficult and the
children and the families that
we serve are generally increases
and it's important to fund a
child welfare system with that
vision and that type of support
so when we start with our
mission we are required to
develop services for children
youth and families that
strengthen client help
proficiency and emphasized
prevention without jeopardizing
essential treatment and early
intervention services and so
it's important for us to focus
on prevention and early
intervention but it's also
important for us to serve those
kids those families that if they
are in crisis how do we make
them whole all we must be an
advocate for services for kids
and family.
As an enduring priority of New
Mexico I must say that
cutting our budget or leaving it
flat or giving us a nominal
increase will not enable us to
be an advocate for kids and that
should be under the state law
your law and then during
priority in New Mexico and
finally we must provide
leadership to other agencies
that we work and we do Mr chair
members of the committee we work
very closely and collaboratively
with our sister agencies
all those agencies that serve
children youth and families
including HSD department of
health of the child early
childhood
Education and Care Department we
work very closely with our
sister agencies to ensure that
we have a coordinated and
integrated system of care and
services for our families so
moving on to the next slide
please.
We are divided into
primarily for general areas
protective services which is our
core
our core division has served
fourteen thousand families and
FY twenty one and we have twenty
six kids offices of protective
services is our largest division
we also operate juvenile justice
services we serve two thousand
nine hundred and twenty nine
clients last year we are proud
of the fact that we have fewer
cases and I think that speaks to
a lot of the work that
communities are doing to keep
kids on the right track before
they touch the system the
juvenile justice system we have
thirty probation offices and to
secure facilities
one is the J. Paul Taylor of
facility down in Los crucis and
then of course our use of
development and diagnostic
center in Albuquerque and then
we have three re integration
partners that we operate the
third of.
Largest division is of course
our behavioral health services
division where we serve a last
year twenty one thousand three
hundred and eight in New Mexico
and finally last but not least I
must emphasize programs support
and the program support really
support all of these divisions
including the office of the
secretary and then programs
support we have some major
operational activities that
support the agency including the
newly created office of
children's rights and able to
kids who have complaints against
the department to pursue those
complaints and investigations to
be conducted
so it's an important aspect of
our operations and that and I'd
like to bring that point up
later as we as I present this
morning it's also
at houses are tribal affairs
division and you office in the
Y. F. P. as well as well as our
performance and accountability
which oversees all of our data
work and of course our human
resources and our administrative
services division and our I. T.
department so moving on to the
next slide please I think it's
very important for the
legislature to understand that
we are subject to a federal
the settlement agreement it's
called being we call it the
Kevin just litigation and the
Kevin litigation filed on
September twenty second and
twenty eighteen on behalf of
fourteen individual plaintiffs
it was settled on March twenty
six twenty twenty and it is
essentially requires that.
to do some very important and
see things in improving the care
of children in New Mexico but
more importantly the Kevin no
settlement agreement provides a
platform for C. Y. FTE to make
long lasting and fundamental
improvements in the way we
operate the way we serve
children and families it
requires us to keep qualitative
and quantitative data to
demonstrate our progress and it
requires us to collect and
analyze this data on an ongoing
basis to ensure that what we are
doing is working well and that
we made certain commitments
Kevin asked commitment fall in
four general areas that you can
see on the line the first is we
must create an intensive trauma
responsive system of care and
what that means is that we must
treat our kids.
Sensitive.
To be sensitive to the trauma
they've experienced coming into
the system and having contact
with CYFD but also equally
important we must recognize and
appreciate the trauma once they
are in the system how do we
minimize of the trauma that they
may be experienced by being
subject to a child welfare
system
takes a great deal of training
intensive
oversight to ensure that we're
trauma responsive at all levels
we must
also develop a more appropriate
placement options for our kids
and reduce congregate care
increased kinship care and
guardianships in New Mexico we
must be very very careful about
any child that we want to place
in the congregate care setting
and we are prohibited from
placing kids out of date unless
it is supported as being
medically necessary or subject
to extraordinary circumstances
so very very important now we
must also be very comission of
our tribal partners and work in
in partnership with our tribal
communities comply with the
federal Indian child welfare act
in just to say it we are
supporting very strongly the the
enactment of the State Indian
child welfare act for New Mexico
because we are concerned about
whether the federal act will
will be long lasting and we
believe that even if it is or
isn't that New Mexico owes the
native communities as state
Indian child welfare act and
we're working closely with
Representative Georgene Louis
and secretary mentioned CEO to
reach out to our tribal partners
to get support for what we
believe is an important piece of
legislation and finally under
Kevin asked
we must expand the access to
behavioral health services and
build a workforce we are
required
matter Mr chair and members of
the committee we must build our
workforce.
regardless of the level
and so that's going to the point
the LFC the recommendation is
not enabling us to build our
workforce under Kevin and.
and as as MaryBeth mentioned the
positions that we wanted to move
out of behavioral health
services and and placed into
I'm sorry out and do not justice
and and placed into
protective services that would
allow but we weren't able to
build up the behavioral health
services position by
transferring those over
according to the recommendation
that in front of you from Alan
LFC staff.
I'm looking at our budget the
next slide please are you can
see that our budget is is very
modest a relatively speaking
when you look at it over the
last seven years.
Our a portion of that decrease
the was as a result of the
carving out of the
the the early childhood care and
education department but be that
as it may you can see that our
request this year with only two
hundred and fifty four hundred
fifty five million that's that's
comparable to what it was in
twenty eighteen and yet we are
committed to continuing to
improve the department and do
everything we can to propellers
under Kevin gas
Moving on to the next slide this
is just the very general wide
that addresses the Kevin ask
budget request for behavioral
health services and protective
services
you can see that there are
specific items in our budget
that we're asking
be approved in order to me of
the Kevin asked commitments and
of course
that includes the ability to
transfer some of the positions
that were in juvenile justice
over not only to protective
services to but also to
behavioral health.
Next slide please.
I want to make sure Mr chair
that you can still hear me.
We can madam secretary okay
thank you
it's a bit awkward to do all the
talking here and on that thank
you Sir moving on to the general
fund recommendations by program
you can see
essentially the executive is
allowing us supporting our
increase of about thirteen
percent the LFC is only allowing
an increase of about seven
percent and I must say that
if you look at programs support
and that essentially the office
of the secretary as well as the
other programs that I mentioned
the office the children why are
HSD H. R. and also are.
Affirmative and accountability
office
the LFC and is only giving up
one point five percent over only
two hundred thousand ladies and
gentlemen I cannot
of Bill the obligations that I
must in that program support
with with.
Essentially not much of an
increase I have to get the the
team together the experts
together to build the
publications under Kevin at so I
urge you to please.
For the executive recommendation
which is eighteen percent
so that we can of Bill the the
work in and do the work is to
really strengthen our child
welfare system all the you you
see the juvenile justice
services I'm modest level there
by both the executive and and
the LFC and then protective
services again protective
services to all of our employees
who go out in the middle of the
night
to a family who is in crisis or
protect children who are
allegedly being abused or
neglected these are such
dedicated employees all of our
employees are dedicated and and
committed this is the work that
that of the heart it is not work
that is easy by any means and
it's so critical that we
recognize that in order to
attract good employees in the
state of New Mexico we must
increase compensation we must
compensate them at their level
and certainly support any
increase in compensation that we
can find are these very
dedicated employee and then
behavioral health.
Again we urge you on the on the
cabin at.
if you look at our system of
care in New Mexico we must
expand our behavioral health
services throughout the state of
New Mexico to and able kids who
are in crisis to be able to not
only get the services they need
in their communities and and
close to home that's going to
require investment in investment
in people and in programs and so
we urge you to please support
the executive increase at three
thirty two point five percent
our behavioral health services
so we can get the people on the
front lines.
To be able to serve our kids in
our community next slide please.
Mr chair please tell me if if
the time is in it I can move
through the air I really quickly
maybe but I doubt it it's going.
I think maybe we could if if you
could wrap up quickly and then
we'll go to aspen expect what
will be if they're okay will do
I'm just if I could ask Michael
regular for our budget our
budget direct you to please
speak very quickly on each of
the program each of the
divisions and the differences
between the LFC and exec if you
would please Michael takeover at
this point of course secretary
good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Michael records but budget
federal grants director for the
children youth and families
department it's good to be with
everybody this morning this is
kind of the difference between
them the recommendations the LFC
and exec no money and not a new
appropriations of the that have
been recommended
Mr chair name mentioned the
concern that came up yesterday
and Senate finance federal funds
we we do anticipate and just
something for the committee to
understand the the amount of
general fund that we requested
in the amount of federal funds
question we're tied together as
we get off on federal match on
our four forty revenue that
would drop down and so the LFC
recommendation of concern was
that the cut the general fund
but he didn't cut the federal
funds rate yes that that at the
requested level and again those
are proportional so on we are
concerned that with the LFC
recommendations we anticipate we
may have around six million of
federal funds from the
appropriation side as well as
those federal funds what
transpired Mr she also mentioned
that there was a far on this
process earlier in the year
services for seven million that
is true but a lot of this money
is is nonrecurring it's it's
kind of requests that are one
time monies and we also do have
a when that whenever the public
health emergencies over the
pandemic ends we will have a
decrease in our and stuff map as
well so we we anticipate our
federal funds will decrease so
the executive recommendation
that.
She put the general fund and
federal funds proportionately
and so we are again it's a
concern for us and we requested
to fill ninety positions within
protective services both
recommendation support increased
and and salaries and benefits
and we are grateful for that as
our workforce in protective
services directly affects all of
our youth in custody and bullet
number two here Mr chair members
of the committee kind that
outlines on the way that those
kids in custody are are affected
so that's kind of the refer
protective services and I will
move on unless the secretary has
a further comment on protected
service what it go through it
quickly okay secretary and Mr
regular okay Sir if I just may
Michael interrupt if you don't
mind if you have some time here
I think the biggest concerned
about the recommendation the
biggest difference in that
remaining
recommendations that you see in
front of you and we want to
transfer some positions
from JJ and over to behavioral
health services and to
protective services to build out
those divisions
and we we were not funded for
that in the LFC of
recommendations so that the
biggest one of the biggest
concerns I have with respect to
the proposals in front of you I
would urge you to please adopt
the executive recommendation as
far as that goes because we must
build out PED's eight these
division to be able to meet the
covenant commitments and to be
able to serve the communities
these these difficult cases so
just wanted to mention that we
can we can go ahead and move on
if I if I can just also mention
the next slide on programs
support.
programs support requires that
like the the administrative part
of our work and we have to build
out our tribal division of
tribal affairs division we must
build out our our internal
investigations we must build out
our office of children's rights
and the proposals that you have
in front of you really show the
difference in the funding
that mean I I I would hope that
our programs support that you
would consider the executive
level only because I can not
you know expand this work under
the LFC proposal and I would
essentially be flat that would
be business as usual not able to
have the resources necessary to
really bring in good people to
to to execute on these
requirements that we have under
Kevin at and so forth just
wanted to point that out search
and we can stand for questions
now.
Thank you very much madam
secretary you Mr Reagan burger
in your entire team we're gonna
go to questions and we're start
with Representative Dixon.
I thank you Mr chair and thank
you madam secretary and justice
for all of the work that you
have put in our to this agency
I've been really impressed and I
am.
Please check that your in this
position because I I really see
a positive movement.
I'm.
I do what I wanted to do is talk
a little bit about their two
areas that I am
Interested in discussing more
and the first is staffing
because I am concerned that.
You know I the.
We know that there are not
enough
skilled.
Workforce
to to meet the needs that CYFD
has as well as other agencies
and so.
The first question that I have
is.
What efforts is your department
making to recruit new
Behavioral health care workers
social workers what are the
efforts that you guys are
undertaking to recruit and
retain a skilled workforce.
Thank you Mr chair and
Representative Dixon this is an
excellent question
under the Kevin and Madam we
must of bill a workforce
development plan and we have
presented that plan to the COVID
neutral who are monitoring our
progress under that settlement
agreement and there is work to
be done in
getting out into our communities
and really of developing and
strengthening and ongoing
pipeline if you will from our
universities of our school of
social work.
So for example we've had a
relationship with highlands
university for I've got to be
over close to two decades I
would imagine
whereby CYFD goes to the school
of social work and you know
reaches out to young students to
to it you know explain to them
the work the social work degree
and also have the type in that
they help pay for is so that
they would consider coming and
work for you working for
statewide do in some of our most
outstanding social workers
across New Mexico and joins the
why at the under that program
and we had the same relationship
with other universities in New
Mexico we intend to continue
that but not only continue it
but strength in it so we have
ambassadors from CYFD our social
work in bath figures that will
go out to universities and meet
with their the dean of social
work and and really start to and
I a young students who are
interested in and community
service and public service.
To consider not only a career in
social work but specifically it
will be here with children youth
and families department of New
Mexico we also.
Go ahead Sir
I know we have a number of folks
who want to ask questions we
want to get to all of what
is yes and I'm happy justice
said Mr chair I'm happy
Representative did share with
you our our workforce
development plan in more.
Provide you more than that the
city on what we intend to do to
get better training
compensation opportunities to
our existing employee thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and madam
secretary I appreciate that and
I would really like to see that
I feel like the LFC.
Recommendation has some really
solid proposals for
strengthening that pipeline and
bringing more folks in I think
that's one of the you know I'm
very proud of the work that
the team has done on that
and I think it takes it a step
beyond what I'm hearing you know
you guys have proposed so I just
want to flag that I think the
LFC recommendation has us.
A pathway to bringing in more
skilled workforce because I'm
concerned this leads to the
unfunded vacancies and sort of
the the request for additional
personnel
in the agency and executive
budget because one of my
concerns is.
There are a lot of requests for
these very important positions
but we still do not have
skilled workers or even service
providers that are able to
absorb some of these additional
requests and so I don't know if
you have a response to that
particular aspect.
Mr chair and representative you
bring up a very very valid point
and that is we have to start the
pipeline much earlier we've got
to start the recruitment the
development of the job of
professionals much earlier and
we can't just sit back and wait
and expect that people will come
out of university and and want
to come and work for CYFD is an
ongoing investment early on in
in a young person's life and
you're absolutely right we have
a high day can see right and
there's a lot of work that needs
to be done to lower that they
can see right and really makes
FY the the premier Agency if you
will in New Mexico for young
social work candidates so a lot
of yes absolutely I couldn't
agree with you more that we need
to do more work but I urge you
to consider resources at a level
that we're unable to do that
thank you I'm thank you I Mr
chair madam secretary one last
question because I know there
are others who are very
interested in
Us other areas as you know I
Kerry legislation last year on
the Kevin just settlement and I
am really pleased with the
progress that the Department
under your leadership is making
to fulfill some of those
commitments I have not seen you
know in the LFC reports
you know what specific efforts
The department is making to
implement some of the early
intervention and differential
response programs so if you
could address that and then Mr
chair that would be my last
question thank you.
Thank you Representative Mr
chair of very quickly yes I have
more information than then I
presented here today do you
regarding that differential
response early intervention we
did have a pilot thank you very
much legislature for funding an
initial I let that was in I
believe about four five counties
we we issued a report in August
on that pilot program and we are
requesting additional resources
to expand that work
prevention and intervention at
early prevention work is
critical to us improving the the
state child welfare system and
Representative we are working on
that differential response I
didn't in the detail here
present that but we are happy to
provide you with the report that
we issued in August of our
progress as well as
give you further updates on how
we're doing today.
Thank you madam secretary thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Dixon next we're
gonna go to represent these out
and Representative Trujillo.
Representative is out.
Mr chairman thank you very much
good morning.
just to stay here you may not
want to talk to me and if you
don't you can state so right now
because you know I'm not happy.
And those are the two that I
want to talk to both.
You're not have.
Mr chairman of justice thank you
all you know the problems that
we have that down in our area so
the first thing I'm going to
bring up.
training for protective service
bill officers is falling short
it seems like.
Whenever we have.
Very young children remove from
the family and then put back
because of the federal law and I
want I would like for you Mr
chairman and Justice the help to
explain what that particular law
is that right that requires your
protective field officers to
return that very young child to
those families within a certain
time frame.
Mr chair representative the doll
let me just say there is not a
federal law that requires.
why to return a child to the
family
there is no obligation on the
part of children youth and
families to work towards
reunification and your family in
need
you know making progress in the
treatment plan and
demonstrating ability then yes
our obligation is to reunite of
children with their families but
there's nothing that requires us
to do that it's an ongoing
process the very would process
we strive at all levels to
ensure that our policies and
procedures are carried out and
that if you need the judge
decides that the family has made
sufficient progress in dealing
with the causes and conditions
that lead to the removal of that
child then we are obligated to
to fulfill that judge's order
and and and return the child to
the family.
Mr chairman justice Vigil thank
you very much evidently that was
explained to me a little bit
different from one of your
protective service failed
officers.
Something they stated to me that
was called the family rights
whenever there is a family that
has been
Had a child removed or Senator
tail children remained for that.
There are.
The bad behavior.
Still has continued whenever
there is testing by the
department showing that they are
using illicit drugs and that the
children are.
Exposed to these to the point
that children do die.
If the children are returned
back into the home what's wrong
with this picture Mr chairman.
Thank you.
I'm gonna leave it at that I am
not happy with the way things
are going down in our particular
district.
Mr chairman and Justice B. hill
whenever you're talking about
children trial complaint.
They make the complaints do is
there an agency attorney they
can talk to how do they go
about.
Making these complaints against
your agency.
Yes Mr chair representative the
doll yes we have an office of
children's rights that is been
recently created that enable
children teenagers who have
complaints against the
department to seek recourse.
Against the department for the
complaint and and that office
again is part of programs
support that we urge you to
please enable us to expand
we need additional attorneys in
that office that would represent
the you in the complaint but yes
we do have that process.
RT because of that we must have
the meaningful grievance process
for you and we have that in
place and I'm happy to send you
of further information about
that of for your for your
constituents you need to know
about.
Thank you Mr chairman of.
Unfortunately babies cannot make
these complaints with the death
of three babies in my area
because they were returned to
the home and it breaks my heart
Mr Chairman yes this bill there
is a problem are you doing any
work with not just our costs a
program in Chavis county but are
you doing any work with the
other costs of partnerships that
are they have been on the ground
and they are aware of these
problems.
Mr chair and representative the
doll.
Let me just say there's nothing
that keeps me awake more at
night.
Then learning about a child how
would be that
in in a key where see why the
may have had some contact with
the family at some point in time
that is the most difficult part
of this job I must say but let
me just say that.
We hate trial patella these
extremely seriously and with
every trial patella the we have
an internal a protocol that we
review everything that happened
in that case.
And I must state it's not always
they were appalled by any means
but that's not enough and as a
result of the recent childhood
how the I have a routine a
national firm to come in and
investigate and.
childhood how the cases in value
eight our system of care and to
issue a report to us about how
we can minimize this risk of
happening
can we can it be
entirely foolproof no our system
of childcare cannot be entirely
full proof but it can be
improved and it will
it will enable us to with this
outside expertise coming in
looking at our system and coming
forth with recommendations I can
assure you that we are going to
look deep and hard at our
operation and do everything we
can to minimise this from
happening to any family.
Mr Chairman just to say hello I
appreciate that explanation I
understand your empathy I do
hope that you.
Clean house.
I am tired of seeing these kids
going back into a household
where they're continually abused
or even.
Mr Chairman I'm gonna stop right
there thank you very much
especially.
Just.
Thank you entities out next
we're gonna go to Representative
Trujillo.
Thank you very much for the
presentation I sat through Mr
chairman I sat through many many
meetings this interim with the
health and Human Services the
interim committee because I was
the chair and this issue was
significant and I know I think
Representative Armstrong and I
remember who else was on the
committee but we heard so many
concerns from advocates and from
community members and from folks
who are very very concerned
about Kevin just and about the
fact that we needed to figure
out a way to address the issues
I you know I I've been doing
this for ten years on this
committee Mr chairman and I know
that we have a process where we
endorse that we move the LFC
recommendation and and then work
toward reconciliation with
somehow the executive.
Recommendation at the end of of
all these committee meetings but
this is one particular of.
HSD that I believe really needs
up front funding now and clearly
there are concerns about
mismanagement there's there are
concerns about a variety of
things that happened prior to
justice I'm sorry secretary be
hills tenure as the as the
cabinet level secretary but
there are issues of concern that
need to be addressed now.
I don't think that that we can
Procrastinate or I think the
money is there the the there's
clarity and put it is that we
need I recognize that she's
still running to play catch up
there were some requests we made
for for responses to questions
we asked about.
In the it during the interim
that we did not get but like
the tiles the tally.
Issues of the the numbers we'd
like to see them I I think
Representative ECL Mehta
meritorious requests for that in
and I and we haven't gotten
those
responses are secretary day hell
but but overall.
In the big scheme of things this
is a budget that absolutely
needs the funding now we need to
fill those vacancies and
regardless of whether they there
were of vacancy
Overruns or I can't remember how
but Eric how're Rick's stated it
but and and she had and his
concerns have merit but I
believe that this is one agency
that truly needs the support
immediate because our kids are
struggling in the state Mr
chairman and the secretary be
help and I hope that all of you
will work with with the
secretary.
To move the request forward
that's all I have I don't have
questions for us secretary Vigil
other than getting a schools
patella the reports as soon as
possible thank you Mr chairman
thank you very Representative
and and thank you very much for
your points next we're gonna go
to Representative Crowder and
then we have Representative
Gleim Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
secretary meal for your
presentation.
I'll try to be as brief as
possible I know that.
CYFD has chosen to.
Merger integrate your a
comprehensive child welfare
information system in with Human
Services Department.
And I know that is creating some
complications you now are
required to file Senator a
federal the forms and and a lot
of requirements on the federal
side now so can you give me a
very brief and quick update
where are you on on the.
Finalization of that merger and
and having that system up and
running.
Thank you Mr chair and
Representative Crowder we are.
We are in the process of
developing our a request for
proposal for a comprehensive
child welfare information system
and we made some decision early
on in my tenure to
back away from almost what was
considered almost like a full
force.
Wait and to go out on a request
for proposal and we are well
positions we're working hard on
that it's complex but we are
organized and focused on issuing
the RFP that will go out
then we will you know receive
those proposals and so on and so
forth and I anticipate that I
hope that we can have
of selected vendor hopefully by
the end of this calendar year
that takes time but the process
is is what nine three we are
working this this system it's
not
We integrated with HSD but it
there is connected components to
it
so our Medicaid reimbursement
and and that kind of work are
title forty is all coordinated
with the
The HSD and department of health
systems as well so there is some
connectedness and I'm I'm sorry
I'm not more knowledgeable about
this but there is some
connectedness between our sister
agency but the child welfare
system the comprehensive child
welfare system is independent
for the most part and we are
well positioned we are working
hard we have a team we have
you know looking at our
processes and procedures to to
put into that are being it will
go out I I'm hopeful that we'll
go out within the next six to
eight months.
Mr Chairman the secretary of
thank you for that someone is is
propped up with slide that kind
of addresses the issue it looks
like it it sounds like that
you're just coming out of the
gate you're trying to get
started here it's still on the
RFP faces at the end of this
project time line it shows a B.
about December twenty twenty
four before project completion
so we're about three years away
is that correct from having this
wired together all right I don't
know.
So I I I think somebody for for
doing that.
madam secretary might my second
comment I guess.
As I look through the
Evaluations the progress reports
report card look whatever you
wanna call it I noticed that in
FY nineteen that your agency
received a failing grade it was
considered rant in FY twenty and
had a failing grade is rated in
red.
And then this year on all your
program evaluations.
Nine out of fifteen or rated
red.
And and that's that's troubling
to see an agency with that many
red dots on their valuations for
nine out of fifteen or read I am
encouraged a little bit because
this is the first one I've seen
it actually turns yellow for
twenty twenty one so it it
appears that under your
leadership or or some.
Time recently there has been a
little bit of a turnaround in in
a little bit of a positive trend
actually five out of the fifteen
are are on I'm sorry.
Six of the fifteen are a right
green right now so I'm a little
bit encouraged by that.
This is one of the one of the
three agencies with our state
that I'm of the opinion and and
this is my opinion only that.
This is one of the three
agencies I believe that is
beginning to have structural
problems of foundation is not
strong enough to support the
system and it pre dates are you
becoming sept secretary predates
this current administration it
goes way back.
But I I do believe this agency
like a couple of others needs to
have outside auditors come in in
in just do a thorough.
Crawl through this agency and
and look and see what is going
on and why is this agency
continually rated red in
struggling and having failures
That it just troubles me want to
read the performance reports.
My final comments Mr chair in.
Madam secretary if you will
respond that's fine I just
gentleman.
Quickly.
We could madam secretary I
think.
This was just a comment please
Representative Crowder continue
on and we do have at least
another question madam secretary
I do want to make sure and give
you an opportunity before we
take action to have any closing
comments okay thank thank you
thank you Mr chairman not my
final line of comments I guess
is.
Like everything we we look
through all of our books and and
I when I got to the.
Transfers of personals Services
white budget and in reversions I
found two things and by the way
that's on volume three page two
or not I would encourage my
colleagues to go look at this.
But I understand why FTE you're
actually reverted a hundred and
twenty one million eight hundred
thirty four thousand dollars
Did not FY twenty one.
Which which sends a message to
us that you have so much money
that you just simply couldn't
spend it yet four hundred and
twenty one vacancies in your
agency.
Which means it's very very
difficult to go hire people even
though you had a tremendous
amount of money yet you had
enough to are you transfer two
hundred forty thousand dollars
which is very small compared
your overall payroll but you did
transfer addy personal services
employee benefits to.
What really caught my attention
on this one.
This is for the benefit of Mr
chairman of our colleagues at
the bottom of page two oh nine
where you see the grand total of
seventy two million that was
reverted.
I had a hard time understanding
that when I look at the CYFD had
a hundred and twenty one million
on its own.
So how come there's only seventy
two million one of found out is
all the great big numbers a
little Astrid Backstrom.
Those are included in the total.
I'm assuming a little that was
COVID money or something like
that our actual reversions was
five hundred and thirty three
million dollars our agencies
have so much money they can't
possibly spend it.
And and that.
I wonder if we increase all the
budgets and and we have this
function within agencies.
I'm I'm scratching my head as to
why we're doing some of what
we're doing so Mr Chairman thank
you for allowing me time to.
Make some comments I appreciate
very much madam secretary I
place no fault on you work for
any of this I I believe with all
my heart this predate you coming
and I did try to make it clear
that it appears that there is a
little bit of a turnaround under
your leadership or or in recent
time frame on put it that way
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank thank you very much
Representative Crowder next
we're gonna go to Representative
lane.
Thank you Mr chair of my
question Mr chair is is for Eric
I believe in and I'm I'd like to
get a coming from the secretary
but out of out of volume to a
notice on page three hundred
thirty seven there's a paragraph
in there about juvenile justice
facilities and and what we're
told are volume as I was
reading.
Prepare for days that CYFD may
have been growing fund balances
without specific legislative
authority to do so.
That's that language is very
unusual for us to have in these
kind of volumes and its its
truck she's been struggling to
me but I wonder stand is is this
something where.
Of.
These are monies that should
reverted but but didn't revert
and continue to grow or or what
what is going on here.
Mr chair and I you know honestly
it's it's probably gonna take
more research but
my understanding of the issue
from going through their their
financials and.
Really kind of drilling down on
this is that the department
brings in a certain amount of
money every year you know into
their operating budget than what
what happens is some of that
operating budget funding gets
transferred over to this to the
fund balances in the these two
funds I'm looking for the
balance sheet that I have on
this but there's around ten
million sitting in the state
funds I think maybe eight
million sitting in these two
funds
it that they've kind of
accumulated over the past you
know I went back to at least
twenty eighteen you know so it's
probably accumulated before that
but that was about as far back
as we can go and so.
You know whether they have
authority or not there is a.
There is money sitting there
that could be used for other
things they've been bringing in
more than they can spend into
those funds and so that's that's
where that came from.
Thank you Mr chairman and I do
hope Madame Chief Justice that
your partner will work with LFC
to to try to figure out what is
going on here
because like I said this kind of
language is very unusual to be
in our volumes than it and it
stood out to me and did for some
of my colleagues as well so if
we could get some more details
on that Eric I would greatly
appreciate that thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Mr chairman I.
Please that concludes the
questions that we have from
committee.
I'll be brief and thank you very
much for pointing out the
various issues that you've
raised
first in response to
Representative give Trujillo we
will get any information with
respect to topicality out to the
committee we did respond last
fall to a letter that was issued
regarding our data and and
thought we clarified that in it
went every member but we
certainly will follow up with
any information with respect to
childhood allergies second of
all with respect to
Representative Crowder we look
very carefully at outcomes and
performance measures we use our
performance measures report
every month the top leadership
looked at our numbers and what
we're doing I am committed to
changing the outcome of this
department so that we
a green mark on all fifteen and
data points
but it takes time it takes
resources building up the team
that in that carries the same
vision also the cabin Act
mitigation requires that have a
data validation plan we've been
working very diligently with
the HSD and with the home
neutral on that data validation
plan and we what we are being
measured by our performance and
will continue to be measured by
our performance so I'm very
committed to data outcomes and
how we can show whether what we
are doing is working or not and
finally I agree that the
reversion are we must do better
to minimize reversion in our
budget I can't speak to the
reason why those reversions
occur.
and before my time on the job
but I can assure you that with
the resource that resources we
are given we will do everything
in our power to ensure that we
expend those resources in an
appropriate manner manner and
that we you know to serve our
families and and our kids in New
Mexico so I will keep a close
eye on that and finally get used
to state I'm very familiar with
the fund balances I can explain
exactly.
We are very have come to the and
I know it's true.
Over technology we've come I
think to where we need to
conclude this sharing their pin
number of issues raised
especially regarding many of the
very important details separate
from funding levels but details
where there are significant
differences in approach between
the LFC between the legislature
and the executive for that
reason I want to appoint
Representative Dixon
Representative lane and
Representative Trujillo to
address those differences in to
bring more information back to
the committee.
With that I want to go now to
Representative Sweetser for our
motion.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam secretary I move the LFC
recommendation.
The motion for the LFC
recommendation is there a
second.
Great it's been moved and
seconded by Representative
Satine Jana is there any
opposition to adopting the LFC
recommendation.
Seeing no opposition we're gonna
adopt the LFC recommendation and
look forward to the report back
to our committee madam secretary
thank you truly I apologize
projecting a few times but I
think we covered a great deal
and look forward to more follow
up.
Next we're going to go.
Excellent thank you Mr chairman
thank you everyone for your for
your consideration thanks thank
you madam secretary okay we're
gonna go back to
the tour we're going to go to
the tourism department this is
agency code for eighteen.
Amanda Dick Peddie is going to
start us off.
And then had that off to Mr
Diego in minutes Amanda please
start us off.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee can everyone hear
me okay.
Yes okay great again my name is
Amanda Dick Peddie fiscal
analyst with the legislative
finance committee we are joined
from DFA by I believe Meredith
Dennis Moore is our insurance
breast today so welcome MaryBeth
we have from the department
secretary Jan Schrier and I will
let her introduce her fantastic
team after we go over some of
the differences for
recommendations.
So I'm gonna go ahead and get
started independent MaryBeth and
I will go program by program I
do want to point out for members
just a couple things so we will
be working at least somewhat or
you know it's good for members
to have it readily available the
tourism high level DFA has seen
this so it's just a really great
way to kind of see differences
side by side.
I will go ahead and start with
the overview of the department.
So for the tourism department
over all the LFC recommends a
general fund increase of
fourteen point eight percent
well the executive
recommendation increases general
fund revenue by seventy three
point three percent.
Now that's a very big difference
obviously percentage wise but
both recommendations hit some of
the top agency priorities so
both recommendations
significantly increase general
fund revenue for national
marketing campaign the LFC
recommendation includes one
point eight million and the
operating budget for marketing
and that is in addition to the
fifteen million dollars
appropriated during the special
session for marketing.
The executive includes ten point
eight million for marketing us
so that's a big part of that
difference you're gonna see and
we'll see that later on in the
programs for performance analyst
reached consensus on all
performance measures and targets
so unless MaryBeth has anything
to add up for the overview I can
let her go ahead overview of our
first program.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee hello again my
name's private fenced more as
Amanda said I am contributing
for Diego Jimenez so please bear
with me.
I'm gonna take you through the
next program which I believe is
New Mexico magazine P. five for
sex
this program does not have any
general fund there is just a
little bit of a difference the
LFC recommendation includes one
hundred and seven thousand more
it's in other revenues and this
is for the magazine over the
executive and this is due to
additional projected revenues
the LFC looks like they're
they're projecting and it's in
the personal services employee
benefits categories where that's
placed on the analyst reach
consensus on the performance
measures and targets so without
I'm gonna turn it back to Amanda
to discuss our program support.
Okay great moving on to page
number for the differentiate for
program support.
So this was a little funky but
I'll go over kind of what's
going on in this one.
So for revenue the executive
recommendation includes a thirty
one point seven percent increase
well Ellis the include a
nineteen percent increase in
general fund revenue.
Both with the LFC and Executive
recommendations transfer three
FTE from the marketing and
promotion program.
The LFC recommendation includes
us slightly less funding in the
personal services employee
benefits category I'll go over
that in just a second.
it's worth noting for committee
members that the LFC
recommendation a relatively
decreases at the in the program
should be committee adopt the
LFC recommendation staff does
recommend adding extra FTE it
was not the LFC intention to
reduce FTE from FY twenty four.
For performance analyst agreed
on all performance measures and
targets so it just very quickly
but the committee members I know
US secretary striving for team
can give you more detail when
the LFC and does it's
recommendation per person we
used to be asked how which I
know members are all familiar
with and yes health is in your
packet on page twelve.
So our PS calc showed
significant funded vacancies and
tourism department when it the
LFC recommendation was published
we work very closely with
secretary Schardin her team to
kind of figure out what was
going on there to the LFC
recommendation does decrease
person in an attempt to
prioritize funding for marketing
the by a lead against secretary
try her team detail what's going
on there because the agency
relies on borrowing money in and
out of programs some of that
person funding is a little
inaccurate and the yes how can
we can go more to either members
would like to hear.
Do you have anything to add on
that.
No I don't think so ma'am thank
you.
Okay I think we are now on a
tourism development so let me
just take you through this one
quickly
So for this program LFC
recommendation that keeps our
Revenue slacks FY twenty two the
executive provides eight
nineteen point five percent
increase so this this includes
two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars on the executive side is
for beautification grants to
local communities
the other difference to note in
here is the LFC recommendation
slightly reduces personal
funding in the program I'm sure
if the man that wants to
elaborate on that a little bit
welcome to how does not the
consensus was reached on
performance measures and targets
as well for this Amanda the
state right.
I will make a very very quick
note that's actually miss the
LFC does not reduce person in
this program that the table in
my part that was for the last
program.
The previous.
Okay.
For.
We can move on to marketing and
promotion.
So again this is probably where
the biggest difference in the
recommendations are the
executive recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by eleven point six million or
eighty one percent well the LFC
recommendation increases general
fund revenue by two point two
million or fifteen percent.
So again you're seeing
significant increases
significant investments in
marketing for both
recommendations
the.
Recommendation from the
executive is just much higher
for that marketing money and
that's again partially because
the legislature did address
fifteen million dollars worth of
marketing for the department and
the special session.
Both recommendations also
increased the contractual
services category for top agency
priorities such as event
production and E. commerce for
performance analysts reach
consensus on all performance
measures and targets did you
have anything for that one.
No I don't so if you're done and
and if Mr chair is all right
with that I think we can pass it
over to the secretary please
thank you very much Secretary
shire thanks for being here
please introduce your team very
quick we're.
A little behind so if you could
introduce your team but we are
excited to have you here today.
Right thank you so much Mr chair
good morning members of the
committee can everyone hear me.
Yes excellent thank you for the
opportunity per two percent
today the tourism department has
realized significant achievement
in the last year and we're very
excited to present the executive
budget
first and foremost my team
that's here today is research
director Victoria great deputy
director Allison Martinez and R.
W. a S. D. director Isabel Lopez
Last year about this time we
introduced our recovery
investment strategy which really
focused on a holistic approach
of how to bring the tourism
industry back from just the
devastating effects of the
pandemic and it's really about
driving demand which is that
marketing component of
advertising in out of state and
inviting visitors to New Mexico
but also stabilizing the
industry
and that really required the
tourism department to take
alternative strategies and be
very innovative with a lot of
partners for example we partner
with the PRC to really support
some of the policy that oversees
our tour operators these are
small New Mexico businesses and
so that is the work we've done
we work with TRD there is for
the online market place there's
been some challenges between the
online marketplace statute and
how that plays out with our
online travel agents like
Expedia travel.
In order to workforce we have
labor shortages which is been
very concerning and has held
back the industry a little bit
from that standpoint of I'm just
not getting those folks back
some people left the industry so
people let the state to work in
the hospitality sector.
I'm also at PED they used to
really focus on a program called
prostart which supports high
school students and learning
trade with in the service sector
for restaurants and hotels so we
really want to see that come
back we also completed an
infrastructure study working
with the costs throughout the
state to make sure that tourism
related infrastructure projects
that are shovel ready our
energies and considered for
capital outlay because we know
that's may help increase
visitation is going to help
enhance the visitor experience
and return visits people want to
have a great time and experience
wonderful tourism assets here in
New Mexico that we know we can
deliver.
Sh so one of the examples of the
strategic partners is we work
with SPDC and I want to
specifically talk about this
because they do have a budget
request within the executive and
it's so important that this
particular group
get continue to be funded these
we forged a partnership with
them at the beginning of the
pandemic to really provide
additional specified consulting
to the tourism sector and we are
so proud of that we should ban
this partnership we've been able
to save nearly two thousand jobs
and we've also been able to
support over fifty million
dollars of financial aid and so
to stabilize the industry to
continue this momentum that I
show you in a second this
particular organization needs to
be I.
So a little update on our
recovery this just makes my
heart sing up because this
industry has had so many
challenges because of the
pandemic however it is just
resilience and the amount of
grit and perseverance that this
particular secretary has
demonstrated and how it's
bounced back and at relatively
short amount of time is great a
lot of that is because we have a
proven recovery model and we
have proven evidence based
programs that will talk about a
little bit in a second but you
could also see that New Mexico
is outperforming the United
States average in visitor
spending we have surpassed or
two thousand nineteen levels for
hotel occupancy rate occupancy
rates and hotel demand and
eighty are statewide visitor
spending increased three percent
in November compared to November
two thousand nineteen so we're
past pre pandemic levels and
this is a real tribute to just
that that the investment that
both our governor and the
legislators decided to put into
this industry with that special
appropriation last year of seven
million dollars and the tourism
department really taking a
disciplined approach to how we
re entered into the market in
may of two thousand and twenty
one
there was a lot of interest
around the Albuquerque seven
point at our LFC hearing so just
really quickly I wanted to talk
about at the center court it's
just incredible how well this is
bounced back as well because
this particular airport was on
the top ten list of most
affected airports during the
pandemic I'm eighty percent of
nonstop flights to returned and
are currently operational
including new flights to Burbank
LA Austin and Minneapolis daily
flights to Burbank flights have
increased a hundred.
Fourteen percent from may twenty
twenty two December twenty
twenty one and that really shows
the power of the New Mexico New
Mexico true campaign and how is
delivering results for New
Mexico year over year increase
of deployments was to increase
was two hundred and nine percent
year to date increase in
deployment is a hundred and
ninety six percent so we're very
thrilled of of the progress that
our partners have made over at
the Albuquerque seven point and
we want to continue to see that
momentum.
There is a lot of conversation
about evidence based and
programs and how they work and
when we decided to enter into
the market again in may of
twenty twenty one a lot of the
consumer behavior that we knew
to be true had involved quite a
bit because of the pandemic so
we took a very disciplined
approach to make sure that we
made these public dollars
stretch as far as possible so we
took a look at our fly markets
and I'm gonna turn it over to
Victoria great who is a research
director who's gonna share a
little bit of our secret sauce
because I want to show the path
that we take every single time
we decide to do a campaign and
advertised in a specific
location so Victoria if you
would take it from here is
because we're gonna specifically
talk about the Los Angeles
market because this is a new one
for the state of New Mexico
Victoria.
Thank you Secretary good morning
members of the committee Mr
chair I do want to talk about
some exciting research that
we've done in the past year back
in spring of twenty twenty one
twenty five to re enter the
market we opted not to just
assume that things have changed
because we knew things were
massively disrupted in the wake
of COVID nineteen including
travel behavior so we took some
time to reevaluate our fly
markets and what we found in
doing FY market study that
looked at things like potential
ROI increases potential of
visitation increases potential
mobility among travelers we look
at the study and it actually
reinforced a lot of our current
market.
The surprising in it as well we
found that the Los Angeles
market actually show the most
potential for R. Y. for
incremental visitation and they
actually matched our target
psychographic of the venturesome
traveler really well so we used
to really discipline model to
look at travel or mobility and
travel style are they driving
are they flying we look at
household income and spending
how much money do they have to
spend when they come to New
Mexico we looked at ease of
access and that's where those
direct flights from Los Angeles
because some poor really came in
handy we look at awareness of
New Mexico where do we have some
potential to really integrate a
market and raise awareness we
look at the potential return on
investment and we look at the
size of the market as a whole
we're the most travelers going
to be and so doing all that we
really honed in on Los Angeles
as a potential market that have
a lot of return on investment
potential.
You can go to the next slide
please secretary.
While we were in market in Los
Angeles we watch that
As it was happening and we could
see as you can see on this chart
here arrivals from California
increased considerably compared
to twenty nineteen so we're not
looking at pandemic level we're
looking at pre pandemic level
travel for example travel during
the weeks of June twenty eighth
and November fifteenth from
California doubled according to
our rival just data so we were
watching this as it happened but
that wasn't enough we want to
see what the actual return on
this investment what this.
So we did our I study with one
of our partners and we do our
ally studies we're not just
looking at the number of people
who came from a market we're
looking at the number of trips
are advertising actually
influenced so we're taking out
people who were unaware of our
advertising we're taking out
people who would have come to
New Mexico anyway we're just
looking at that subset of people
who were influenced by our
advertising in the market and so
as a direct result of our New
Mexico through advertising in
Los Angeles we were able to get
close to eighty thousand
additional leisure trips during
that time frame that we were
advertising those visitors
hundred and seven million
dollars in our New Mexico
economy that they would not
otherwise spent so for every
dollar that we spent on the
twenty twenty one leisure travel
advertising campaign visitors
spent fifty six dollars in New
Mexico.
Place to approximately a five to
one Hackspace R. Y. so I dollars
are coming right back into local
and state taxes overall
visitation in LA.
Point with.
So fifty percent of people are
going to come anyway we managed
to bump that up to seven percent
of people traveling from Los
Angeles.
During the pandemic in a brand
new market so we're very pleased
with those results the study
also validated the venture's
some traveler psychographics so
that's we really target we found
that recall among venture some
travelers was much higher than
we call of our ads outside of
interesting target so that more
that better reinforces what
we've already seen in other
markets and it just confirms for
us that LA was the right move at
the right time.
Thank you Victoria we're really
pleased with these results of
course we're always trying to
deliver strong results for New
Mexico so thank you Victoria for
composite in state and reviewing
that with us as a committee
knows this is a very competitive
industry all of us probably have
that list of places we want to
go four extrication or at least
a dream vacation that we some
they want to go on our job is to
get on that list the hearts and
minds of people throughout the
United States and we have to
compete with other state and so
during this time of the pandemic
with all the different
additional are money there's
been a lot of investment and
tourism a lot and these are just
a few of the states that have
invested significant money into
the tourism sector and so we
need to continue to be
competitive but not only to to
invite people here but really
reached the potential that
tourism has for New Mexico's
economy
and I'm really grateful that the
legislature did appropriate
fifteen million dollars we had a
supplemental in our agency
budget because we needed fifteen
million dollars we knew that for
for this spring campaign for us
to really make sure that we
capitalize on summer travel
specifically we needed this
fifteen million dollars we
needed it now so I want to say
thank you but I also want to
just start with a little caution
here that we're using these
dollars this spring to drive
demand for tourism and then the
and then I I preface that as we
go into the budget comparison
between the LFC and to the
executive request that this
money will be spent during this
fiscal year so with that
Talking a little bit about
it's one thing to look at it by
program in your in your packets
that you have there but I want
to make sure it's very clear
what I can and what I can't do
with each budget so
Moving forward so Amanda had
talked a little bit about the
accounting alignment we've asked
for several years to have our
R. F. T. E.'s in the right key
code of that we don't have to
bar as much and this will make
us more efficient internally if
we could get that full alignment
done with our FTP said I know
that was the intent of the LFC
budget so it's almost there but
there was a little bit of a
kerfuffle with the the program
I have pulling in the data and
everything so we're really
hopeful that the LFC will
achieve that this year
thank you both the LFC and the
executive supported to programs
that we wanted to expand on that
was the event accelerator
programs and our online
marketplace for the New Mexico
true certified program which is
really exciting it's going to
support a lot of artists and and
our small businesses and makers
throughout the state.
Well budgets we can address the
media inflation that we're
starting to realize our
estimates right now or sixty
eight percent increase in the
media cost when we buy
advertising so that means we
have to adjust how we're
spending our dollars to make
sure that we're getting a high
frequency of those brand
Russians in the locations we
want them so thank you both did
that with the four hundred
increases in the four hundred is
the marketing increase at the
LFC provided that will help that
account for that.
funding existing positions so we
have several unfunded positions
and for years dating back to the
previous administration money
was barred from the marketing
budget to fund positions and
this is been going on for a very
long time we would like to see
this resolved so we don't have
to do that bar so the executive
budget has this mostly result
but it also took an account of
just Bacon seat savings that
happens for vacancy rates that
just happened prevent natural
flow of people coming and going
so we're asking for that to be
resolved this year of funding
our person
and I think just I don't want to
belabor the point but I I think
everyone knows like the the
state government is competing
over over a limited workforce
and the tourism department
specifically hires a lot of
people from private sector that
you know it they don't come to
work for the TIRS department
because we pay really well they
come because they have a huge
passion for the brands that we
Stewart both the New Mexico
magazine and The New Mexico true
branch and what we do for the
industry it's just a lot of
mission minded people that work
for our agency and I gotta keep
I want to retain all of this
talent that we've been able to
recruit here for the state of
New Mexico.
The differences come into play
so for when we talk about
campaign seasonality like when
we're able to have the campaigns
go and for how long and and
where so with the LFC base
budget
we're able to do six fly market
so we would be able to keep LA
and we would go back to a spring
winter campaigns that means we
only do two a year.
New Mexico can deliver a four
season campaign we have
incredible assets all year long
of people coming here and we're
seeing it now because we did
invest so much this fiscal year
and we're gonna continue to do a
four season with that fifteen
million dollars appropriation
from our providing
the executive is aggressive it
is a large increase as then is
that it's in our marketing
budget because we want to do a
seven fly Market spring winter
campaign and a four season for
select markets and we want to
keep LA it is proven that it is
a really dynamic market for us
the other significant difference
is our cooperative marketing
program historically it's been
around the six hundred thousand
dollar budget mark providing a
one to one match this last year
due to having some extra funding
we decided to scale and really
expand it as part of our
recovery efforts it was just
over three million and we did
for that the communities that
had the biggest economic loss we
did a two to one match.
And so for this year are planned
with the executive budget is to
do a two to one match for
everyone it was it's been such a
success and so well received by
our communities it's allowed the
entire industry to alliance
local and state funding towards
the United strategy a really
providing additional capacity a
lot of these communities how to
scale back their workforce and
so the tourism department has
been able to step in and provide
additional capacity through this
program so our plan with the
executive budget is to it is to
go to five point five million
dollars and that's with the
same demand level as this fiscal
year but doing it to one match
for everyone.
lastly the special
appropriations are slightly
different the LFC and did find a
special appropriation for the
Special Olympics branded
partnership thank you this is
been a really important program
for our special needs population
especially during the pandemic
so thank you for that and the
executive has a twenty million
dollar a special appropriation
that we're gonna use for one
event sponsorship program we've
had here the department a an
event sponsorship program that's
gone on funded since the last
administration and we would like
to bring it back of these events
even this year have to be able
to come back a hundred percent
we want to provide that support
to get them off the ground there
usually ran by little nonprofit
and you know this is part of our
traditions and that we want to
continue here in New Mexico
throughout the states credible
and finally it allow us to do
eight markets all four seasons
and ideally that's what we want
to do because one of the things
that you traded not go over
today is that study that we did
back in I believe it was may
twenty twenty one before we
enter back into the market the
mobility study showed that not
only LA was a really strong
market for us the bay area and I
know that's something that the
the previous secretary was
really trying to get off the
ground and it it's it's all the
data is pointing to that
providing it really strong
return for us as well.
So.
Wooed by saying thank you for
your ongoing support thank you
for that fifteen million dollars
special appropriation that we're
gonna use this fiscal year
instead of getting a
supplemental three session
that's proven to be very helpful
as we do our strategic planning
and I just respectfully request
that the committee consider the
executive budget as you know as
as the LFC has talked quite a
bit about evidence based
strategies I think the tourism
department has excelled at
demonstrating through data
through different studies that
we have conducted that we are
going to deliver a return for
New Mexico every single time sh
so with that I conclude Mr chair
thank you for the time.
Thank you very much madam
secretary thank you to you and
your team really exciting to
hear that we of.
Recovered to above pre pandemic
levels.
Okay we're gonna do now go to
questions from the committee I
don't see any questions I'm
going to ask one question and
that is madam secretary the
fifteen million so you
anticipate.
Expanding the entirety of that
fifteen million by June.
Yes Mr chair.
And madam secretary is that all
going to go into marketing so
that'll be one season marketing
basically.
Mr chair and members of the
committee the fifteen million
dollars will front load our
spring into summer campaign.
And that will generate demand
through summer and early fall.
Okay.
Okay that that's helpful thank
you.
Mr Chairman Representative
Anderson real quick one question
madam secretary appreciate your.
Presentation and we're we're
anxious to move on with our
agenda however I did have a
follow up question on that
cooperating what we call it of
cooperation.
What.
How did you derive to a two to
one match and would not.
One and a half to one spread
that money out more to what
extent was the six hundred
thousand dollar over asked in
the last of brown question.
Mr chair members of the
committee Representative
I'm not sure I understand your
question but the six hundred
thousand dollar budget is what
we had typically up until this
fiscal year this particular
fiscal year in FY twenty two we
had a budget of over three
million that we partner with
local communities some
communities got a one to one
match if they did not realize
significant economic impact the
ones are lost due to the
pandemic an example that read
also did not have as much of
economic losses other places in
place and places like
Albuquerque has significant
economic loss and so they got
that to one match what we
realized through the process of
this year is that what we were
able to match it to one we were
able to scale and actually drive
down the the cost of media for
our partners making those local
dollars in state dollars go
further and so therefore we
would like to
to take this program to the next
level of due to a one
for everyone.
Thank you so the information
shows a two to one I believe in
the hand out in you're
contemplating two and a half to
one for the full six million is
that correct.
So for the executive budget it
would be a two to one match.
And it would be five point five
million dollars as a budget for
the cooperative marketing
program and just real quick why
did I get two and a half to one
in my head.
I Mr Chairman as members of the
committee Representative I'm not
sure all thank you I'm just I
and then I didn't hear you
correctly madam secretary good
good job keep it up and thank
you very much that's it Mr
chairman thank you
Representative next
Representative Ezzell.
Mister chair Mister chairman
thank you very much Secretary
shire I appreciate your
presentation today whenever you
were talking earlier about rid
us experiencing no loss do you
know what we can attribute that
to.
I will give you an answer for
that because that you don't ask
a question list already know the
answer and that is due to our
racing and what the horse racing
industry does bring into our
state coffers is in excess of
eight hundred million dollars
that's a huge number right
there.
Yes start thinking about New
Mexico true whenever they do
have the special New Mexico for
sale and rent them so because
people come from all over the
world to attend that particular
sale it's you Mr chairman.
Secretary Schardin you know I'm
an advocate of horse racing and
everything that it does for our
state.
But whenever you're also talking
about the lead to leisure and
hospitality industry.
I'm not quite sure where you're
getting your numbers from or if
they are even correct the reason
I'm saying that is the other
evening.
I live Santa Fe I was running
at.
Get some odds and ends.
In every convenience store.
That I tried to go into they
were close they closing at six
o'clock now because they don't
have the help you go to a
restaurant they are only open
certain days now instead of
being up in at least six days
because they can't get the help
of motels hotels are
experiencing the same problem
whatever they can't get help as
Bellman as cleaning person the
list goes on and on so how can
you substantiate the members
that you did give us.
Absolutely Mr chair members of
the committee and representative
thanks for the question because
it is very complex
We are still down ten percent of
the workforce for this
particular and these numbers in
Victoria can can chime in if if
needed but that these workforce
numbers are coming from
workforce solutions and
what is very interesting is that
when you're going into a lot of
our applications right now.
The workforce is also affected
by COVID people are saying you
cannot.
To work they need to fourteen
and so what we're seeing right
now because of this particular
search is that establishments
don't have to state open at
their regular capacity and we're
seeing that not only the leisure
and hospitality sector we're
seeing that in our schools.
And so I think it's important to
know that.
While it has our experience is
not going to feel like two
thousand nineteen for a while
because.
Mr chairman I appreciate that.
The explanation there.
But we also have to keep in mind
especially the restaurant
industry that they cannot work
their staff to death if there
staff is so exhausted they can't
show up to work they do have to
make changes there and so I'm
I'm very concerned about the
numbers I do hope that we get
to.
Pre pandemic status real soon I
would also.
Ask if I might have a copy of
the new latest New Mexico
magazine thank you very much Mr
chairman thank you Secretary
shire.
Thank you Representative Ezzell.
Okay we're gonna now go to
Representative Sweetser plates.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
secretaries try you're always
good to see you Mr chair I would
move the LFC recommendation with
the notation made by analyst
Amanda Dick Peddie on the
addition of the one F. T. E. and
program support.
Thank you that's an excellent
okay I see madam chair
madam chair.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
I had a quick answer because I
missed a presentation I'd like
to ask the cabinet secretary
what we're gonna do a ceremonial
this year now that budget
finally laid out and with the
separation is between the
departments portion and the
nonprofit's portion.
Thank you madam chair Mister
chair members of the committee
Representative Lundstrom we had
a very productive conversation
with the nonprofit we came to a
agreements help to do the
schedule for the event so the
first weekend well actually
starting on the Thursday ICO the
state office will be leading a
parade with up with the
different tribal participants
from around the world and then
also produced a budget on
Saturday from excuse me Friday
night and Saturday and then from
there the association will we'll
start there are events on Sunday
with not only the traitor the
art show and the rodeo and so
and then the ICO will continue
of the state organizational
continue by doing the Paget
and so we came together with the
a very nice schedule that I
believe everyone's happy with we
did have our ICO hearing earlier
this week and to the committee
accepted the LFC budget which
has the increased to the base
budget reoccurring as well as a
I believe the special so
as soon as we know what the
budget is we're going to sit
down again with the nonprofit so
we can talk about hello to
collaborate on the funding side.
I would like to request is that
you put this in writing for me
I'd like to see that out I want
to see what those sections are
of each one of the
responsibilities and how much
money is tied to it thank you Mr
chairman thank you madam chair.
I we will now go back to
Representative Sweetser.
Can you please make your motion
one more time and then we'll go
to the committee for a second.
Thank you Mr chair my motion is
to accept the LFC
recommendations with the
addition of the one FTE and
program support that was noted
by our our LFC analysts as being
inadvertently omitted.
Thank you Representative
Sweetser is a motion.
Is there a second sent Santo
chair Mister chairman great spin
move by Representative Sweetser
second by Representative
Castellano is their opposition
to this motion.
Okay seeing no opposition madam
secretary thank you for the an
excellent presentation in your
incredibly
inspiring work and we will look
for to visit with you again
soon.
We're gonna go now to the next
agency this is going to be
agency for nineteen the Economic
Development Department Amanda
please start us off again if you
would.
Okay great thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee again
Amanda Dick Peddie fiscal
analyst for the legislative
finance committee we are joined
by Simon Miller from the
executive
and we are joined by secretary
Alicia keys R. I. C. W.
secretary John Clark and I will
let them introduce their team
after we go over the different
shades.
So again I'd like to point
committees attention to the high
level it should be this first
orange paper in your document
Simon help me correct some of
the things in the executive
recommendation so this is a good
resource again side by side
going on and recommendations.
For the economic development
department so great resources in
volume three a lot of questions
members might have could
probably be addressed by those
charts and that's going to be
pages twenty three through
twenty nine that addresses
leader awards J. table awards
job growth by sector so lots of
good stuff in there members
would like to take a look at
that.
All right so over all the
department.
The executive recommendation
increases general fund by about
thirty five percent well the LFC
recommends about and nine point
four percent increase in general
fund.
Both recommendations include top
agency priorities including
additional regional
representatives increased
business incubator grants and
the justice equity diversion and
inclusion program manager.
Key differences of the executive
recommendation includes a one
million dollars in recurring
general fund for J. to the job
training incentive program.
And that's a big part of the
difference that the one million
dollars the LFC recommendations
support stated in a one time
special appropriation.
For expansions the department
requested a total of nine
expansions the LFC fully or
partially funds for these
expansions while the exact Foley
or partially by his six
expansions and we'll see that in
the individual programs.
So it's Simon is there anything
you'd like to add an overall if
not I can go ahead and just
continue on to the programs.
Sure yes good afternoon or I
guess this morning
Mr chair members of the
committee again my name is Simon
Miller naman analyst with DFA I
just got a high level the
executive recommendation is
about three million dollars
higher than the LFC
recommendation and that can
really just be broken down into
four items so first the
executive is one million higher
in J. to funding the executive
has seven million for need to in
the recurring budget where is
the LFC has six million and then
both the executive and the LESC
have some money in nonrecurring
project as well.
the second thing is our the
executive has one point one five
million for that of the justice
equity diversity and inclusion
minority business office and out
one million of that is for
financing options for minority
owned small businesses in New
Mexico.
The third difference is that the
executive recommendation has
four hundred and fifty thousand
for grants to minority
filmmakers and then lastly the
executive recommendation has a
five hundred thousand dollar
increase to attract foreign
direct investment to New Mexico
and establish export markets for
New Mexico businesses so those
are the that high level
differences there and and those
for differences make up
Pretty much the entirety of of
that three million dollar
difference so with that I will.
Handed back to Amanda.
Okay great thanks so much I will
go ahead and start with a
program code of five twelve
economic development.
So the executive recommendation
includes two point five million
or twenty seven percent more
general fund revenue then the
LFC recommendation.
the LFC recommendation it does
also include two hundred
thousand more in federal revenue
within the executive and that's
just to sort of account for
grants that the agency might
receive.
The base the executive
recommendation again includes
that one million dollars in
recurring J. tip funding that's
in this program and then five
hundred thousand dollars for
international trade that is not
included in the LFC
recommendation.
For performance analyst reached
consensus on all performance
measures and targets and then
for expansions both
recommendations partially
support the agency requests for
additional economic development
regional representative and that
is to expand Department outreach
across the state the LFC
recommendation includes about
two hundred thousand dollars in
two more FTE for retail
Representative is that the
executive.
Both recommendations support
expansion for a justice equity
diversity and inclusion or jet I
program manager but the
executive again is Simon just
said it includes an additional
one point one million dollars or
that is grant funding and for
additional off the staff and the
LESC.
The executive recommendation
also includes eighty one
thousand dollars and one F. T.
E. for a healthy food financing
specialist as part of the
governor's initiative on hunger
Simon anything I'm.
No Mr chair then that you keep
on chugging along at.
All right so for P. code five
fourteen on your next page.
More revenue the executive
increases general fund this is
the film program sorry the
executive increases general fund
revenue to the film program by
five hundred and thirty one
thousand or eighty three percent
of the LFC recommendation keeps
all revenue to that amendment
program latch with FY twenty
two.
In the base of the executive
finds a vacant position and
includes that four hundred fifty
thousand dollars for minority
film grant programs.
For expansions it be executive
recommendation and support a
hundred and fifty two thousand
and two FTE for a business
community outreach coordinator
and a production coordinator the
LFC does not include any
expansion analysts came to
consensus on all performance
measures and targets.
Thank
you keep keep our yep you're
doing great.
Interjected.
Court program support of G. code
five twenty six.
The LFC recommendation provided
an overall fifteen percent
increase in general fund you
are.
Yeah.
Well the executive provides a
thirteen percent general fund
increase east.
Both recommendations support
increased grants to the states
as certified it business
incubator programs to encourage
entrepreneurship and business
development in the state the
executive includes a hundred
thousand more for these requests
then the LFC recommendation and
the LESC recommendation includes
a hundred thousand more for the
New Mexico partnership in the
executive.
For expansions the LFC
recommendation includesd seventy
six thousand and one FTE for an
investment manager that would
help the department award lots
of these EDA federal grants that
are coming and they need some
help getting those and getting
out so that's what that
expansion is four the executive
does not include any expansions.
All right our last program is
the outdoor recreation program
at the code seven zero eight.
The LFC recommendation includes
a hundred thousand more general
fund revenue in this program
than the executive.
In the base of the LFC
recommendation includes a
hundred thousand in recurring
funding or outdoor grant award.
For expansions of both
recommendations support an
expansion for a trails planner.
Sign in if you have anything to
add or closing remarks you can
go ahead if not I will take it
to the agency.
madam chair nothing to add so we
can hand it over to secretary
keys.
Excellent.
Madam secretary so glad you're
here and yet with your
incredible team please feel free
and reduce and then take it away
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and thank you to
Simon and Amanda for all the
collaboration so this morning I
have with me deputy secretary
John Clark
director of economic development
mark Roper director of outdoor
recreation axing office and
director of the New Mexico Film
Office amber Johnson.
So we want to start by thanking
you all and recognizing that the
proposed LESC budget for our
department Representative as
Amanda said an increase of over
nine percent and this is perhaps
our largest recurring general
fund expansion and more than a
decade and we're super grateful
and we recognize this is a
significant effort to promote
economic growth in many of the
legislators and see on this call
right now work hand in hand with
us on a daily basis to try to
help their communities so thank
you
normal here that would be
sufficient and I think that
there would be little
conversation or debate but this
really isn't a normal here and
these are not ordinary times our
our budget request in the
executive budget recommendations
for fiscal year twenty twenty
three reflects this the governor
support for economic development
flows in part from our just
completed twenty year strategic
plan for the state it's called
empower collaborate New Mexico's
economic path forward and the I
think deputy secretary John
Clark is just a number slides
right now but the plan page
a clear picture of where we were
with the pandemic late last year
and where we are today those
with professional jobs and
health care and economic
security are doing much better
than those without.
There has been and cruel
physical toll on everybody but
the under served and left behind
communities are very a larger
share of this economic cost the
renters service and frontline
workers those jobs without
benefits or health care and
those without savings for what
we would consider and Economic
mastic so the strategic plan
really calls on the state to
make economic investments that
will not just get New Mexico
back to where it was before the
pandemic but to really entertain
a long term transformation into
a more diversified resilient and
inclusive economy so today we're
asking you to come along with us
and our economic development
partners across the state to
help set and if you haven't
already read that then you can
download it on our website let
John John I know and you can see
that you're you're directly.
So I want to go through the
first a little bit of our slides
so we can highlight a few
accomplishments by EDD to scare
I promise I'll make this brief
and then we'll go through our
agency requests and that W.
secretary John Clark will do
that so John what would you mind
going up there we go perfect so
really economic development had
a record setting year with over
five thousand jobs
in terms of just the beginning
of this administration we've
actually created over ten
thousand jobs with our lead and
need to programs this year we
had seventy four companies
supported by J. to as you all
know it is a much loved program
and we're really excited to say
that in twenty twenty one the
the average salary was ninety
thousand dollars this is almost
double than what it was before
and this is really the thing to
focus on because as we noticed
in our strategic plan wage rates
are not trending with the rest
of the states in New Mexico and
this is one of the big issues so
whenever we evaluate a leader
project we always look at the
wage rate the wage rate in that
area and also whether or not the
companies providing benefits so
twenty one one more second John
I'm getting a little long winded
twenty one lead up projects
with an economic impact over too
over ten years of nineteen
billion dollars all right here
we go next slide.
This is just showing you the job
creation right since twenty ten
and what we're at this year the
next slide John.
We're gonna go there if you the
yield obviously some of you
already heard about the some of
you are involved in them
Intel expansion received a lot
of process this is fantastic for
us this is a three point five
billion dollar investment into
that Rio Rancho facility with an
additional seven hundred
permanent jobs one thousand
construction jobs and over five
hundred fifty million dollars in
construction next slide.
So this is a company that's
coming to Albuquerque it's in
the defence States the average
salary of a hundred and five
thousand dollars private
investment of sixty million and
a ten year economic impact of
three point two billion with
sixty four jobs next slide.
NTS group this is two hundred
fifty jobs they work in the data
space with an average salary of
ninety to one hundred and
seventy five thousand dollars
that and economic impact.
Fifty four point six million
dollars next slide Greenstreet
viruses and tastic to go down
south and standing this is a
facility that was under utilized
assets and now we have twenty
three new jobs private
investment seven million and
economic impact of thirty three
million of the ten years next
slide I love this was because
this is the old alpo job factory
food dog food factory this
chamber right now we love doing
our rural deals obviously
they're just a little bit more
difficult to put together but
that doesn't that doesn't give
us any hesitation so it was nice
to go into this beautifully
this beautiful building that is
in a very rural area of New
Mexico and know that we're going
to have three hundred and
fifteen new jobs in the private
investment of twenty two point
one five million dollars next
slide.
This is a deal that we actually
just announced the other day
this is a call to cold warehouse
will be in Los crucis creating
sixty new jobs private
investment thirty million
dollars and the ten year
economic impact of one hundred
seventy point nine million
so this is just a slide which
shows you the impact of Leda our
most recent deals in rural
communities
like I said it you know
sometimes when it's not near
major airports and one of the
more rural areas these are
difficult yield to put together
but I have to say our rural reps
have been doing a fantastic job
along with our economic
development division and really
scouring the area for these
extensions and also companies
that want to move into these
more rural areas next slide.
Okay I'm gonna ask deputy
secretary John Clark to walk you
through a little bit of our
budget John I thank you
secretary keys and thank you Mr
chairman committee members of
first off apologize that I'm
getting over being sick so I
start to get our release my
force yes what's going on.
Again I'd like to echo
securities in thanking LESC for
their base budget
recommendations for us as you
mentioned you both the executive
and LESC recommendations really
provide for investment and
growth.
That's really important because
as you can see here on the first
four point after account for
inflation as well as J. took
another designated uses of funds
the money that we actually have
to run the department is two
point nine million dollars last
this year than in FY ten
reduction of more than thirty
percent even if you take out
inflation we still have less
dollars today to operate the
department that we did a decade
ago we also have fifty two
authorized FTE versus seventy in
FY to and yet you saw the
incredible here that we had in
FY twenty one for job creation
so our staff really are doing an
incredible job it's an amazing
team but they really are at Max
capacity so we are looking
forward to getting some
additional FTE.
And you can see here just very
quickly a graph of F. T. over
the last thirteen years.
So moving on the initiatives I
know that Amanda and Simon
covered some of the differences
by division so I'm just gonna
highlight some items for each
one first off is P. five twelve
the economic development
division what the numbers you
see here might not quite aligned
with what you're seeing on the
different she's because we're
highlighting just the general
fund recommendations which
doesn't include an additional
two hundred thousand at all she
has to in the are a wreck for
from federal funds but one thing
that we really want to highlight
here's the executive
recommendation at eight FTEs
versus I in the LFC wrecked
again that's really important
for us as we try to have more
boots on the ground especially
to provide better outreach to
rural communities world
businesses the one thing that we
really have strive to to achieve
is a very low vacancy rate when
we came in with a thirty three
percent vacancy rate and as of
one week from today we will have
a six percent vacancy rate
leaving us with just three
vacant positions in the whole
department and we're working on
filling those three I know the
traditionally HSC takes the
lower recommendation will go
with LFC I asked it if that is
the decision that you consider
at least giving us the FTE out
of the executive recommendation
for the economic development
division and for the phone
division again that flexibility
is really important.
The analysts already covered the
executive recommendation
increases need to funding the
base budget
and executive recommendation
adds nearly one point three
million dollars in funding for
new minority business office
that's really important to
provide better outreach to under
historically underserved
communities historically
underserved businesses and then
finally the executive
recommendation at five hundred
thousand for international trade
and now is the most important
time to invest in this because
we see a lot of reshoring
happening from Asia as companies
decide to come back to the
United States and it really
makes sense for us to go after
and target those businesses that
don't consider coming to New
Mexico.
The film division had a record
setting year as well with over
six hundred twenty six million
dollars in production spending
and almost a hundred twenty
three million dollars in total
wages to New Mexicans and you
can see here again much higher
wages than average wages across
the state at nearly sixty
thousand dollars.
You're the focal Division budget
is really mostly FTE the
executive recommendation fully
funds existing FTE are we here
in the in the process of filling
the last because uniformed
division that position it will
be filled as of a week from
today and so the executive
recommendation fully funds those
positions and then adds two new
ones and it's important to note
that these two new positions
part of their work would be to
help businesses and residents in
New Mexico do more work with
foam industry and provide better
outreach across the state the
help from reductions consider
filming in rural areas of New
Mexico and in addition the
executive recommendation adds
four hundred fifty thousand for
minority filmmakers so if you
haven't noticed yet we have a
roll a strong theme in our
budget request of really trying
to focus on rural communities
rural businesses and
historically underserved
business owners.
Program support in addition to
working with all the other
divisions in our department we
also work with border Authority
spaceport authority and military
base planning.
The recommendations are very
similar here so I know since
we're short on time just gonna
skip past that yeah outdoor
recreation division by far
newest division of but director
action this is done a great job
so far and it's important to
point out just what an impact
this industry has on the state
with two point four billion
dollars contributed to state GDP
and one point two billion
dollars in income covered in the
direction pretty similar so I'm
going to skip past that I know
you have this table in your
books one final thing I want to
point out though is that in
addition to the recommendations
you see here there's also two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
in the executive recommendation
for DFA that would be allocated
DVD for setting up a healthy
food financing initiative this
is part of the governor's whole
hunger and healthy food strategy
so we also ask the support that.
And then finally we just wanted
to point out the Executive
recommendations for special
appropriations and capital
outlay we did get matching
recommendations from LFC for ten
million dollars for main street
capital outlay and that is
phenomenal we are just
absolutely thrilled to see the
strong level support in both
recommendations for that ended
seven million dollars for need
to both recommendations however
we we didn't see recommendations
for a lot of these others
including for leader in the
photo gallery we did notice this
morning that in table I volume
one from LFC there is an
appropriation of forty million
dollars to Lita but it's not for
traditionally to projects and
it's not for the other item that
you see here which is for rural
community on business and
industrial park infrastructure
instead thirty million dollars
is for speculative business
space development and ten
million dollars is for research
and development we're not sure
exactly
what the desire was to have this
funds in there we would love to
have a discussion as it stands
today I'm not sure what legal
authority we would have to spend
money out of Lita on those two
items because currently they're
not allowed under leader so
we're just a little confused
would love to have discussions
moving forward about how we can
Fund of those items that you're
wanting to Rita are
traditionally to projects as
well as some of these other
initiatives and without I'm
happy either turn it back over
to a securities for final
comments or turn it over to the
committee for questions.
Secretary I may I'm just gonna
say one thing
I would like to point everyone
to our website and our resource
wrap up this is an email that
goes out every week with
resources from your concern for
your constituents in your
communities we now reach over
six thousand people per week
sixteen thousand people per week
with that email also doing
webinars and finance stairs on
and we're reaching over three
thousand people and we have a
recovery team that is doing a
fantastic job really handholding
businesses doing personal one on
one consultations if you have
any businesses within your
community that do need help
please reach out to us Mr chair
members of the committee thank
you very much we stand for
questions thank you secretary
and deputy secretary let's go
first to representative
Armstrong for questions that are
going to go to Representative
Crowder.
And our mission.
Thank you Mr chair and and thank
you for the presentation I have
a question is there I think it
could go to to our W. secretary
Clark on page sixteen how you
talked about
rural New Mexico and jumping in
rural New Mexico is there any
additional roll film tax credit.
That's given to rural New Mexico
coming in rural New Mexico.
Mr chair and representative yes
there's an additional five
percent rural up lift in the
film tax credit.
And thank you for that Mr chair
and and W. secretary and.
Can you tell me is there a map
and where
How what your what's considered
rule.
Mr chair representative
Armstrong I will turn the
question over to our from office
director amber dots.
Thank you thank you thank you
for the question Representative
Armstrong yes indeed there is a
map and I can put that link in
the chat or email it to you it
is essentially based on a sixty
mile radius outside of the state
Albuquerque and Santa Fe County
borders so you we we can
actually type in a location and
see if it falls in it within
that up with some or not using
this interactive map.
Okay thank you for that
ma'am and Mr chair I just want
to bring to everyone's attention
that Sapporo and mentally not do
not fall under that additional
rural tax credit and why I can't
think of a more rural place in
Magdalena New Mexico and so
Roswell falls under it Los
crucis falls under it but
actually that doesn't and I
really would encourage you to
take a second look at that I
have a director in my that's one
of my constituents and you know
it it's really harmful to him
and he is a small our director
in the area trying to utilize
rural New Mexico facilities and
and I think that's a mistake
that that needs to be fixed I
just wanted to bring it to your
attention thank you so much for
listening thank you so much for
what you do for New Mexico I
appreciate it and I look forward
to hearing from someone if that
gets fixed thank you thank you
very much representative
Armstrong next we have
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
have a in the interest of time a
brief request of a then.
Regarding the new program
manager for justice equity
diversity inclusion.
I don't have a clue how to go
home and explain my constituents
what that is or how it functions
or anything else so could you
give me a copy of the job
description the scope of work
performance guidelines all that
anything data wise you have on
that position so I can educate
myself on totally ignorant of
what that means so I would
appreciate any help you can give
thank you thank you Mr chairman.
Chairman representative will get
back to this afternoon thank you
very much Representative Crowder
thank you Amanda I have a two
quick questions and I know madam
chair also those as well I
believe
so that.
And madam secretary deputy
secretary
We've heard in many different
places that what the point you
emphasized which is that the
lowest wage workers in New
Mexico as well as across the
country continue to fare the
worst during and now coming out
of in during this time
do you it can you just really go
quickly again through how your
budget seeks to specifically
address this very.
Challenging and important.
Phenomenons.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'll go ahead and
start and then John if you want
to add in but has said W.
secretary pointed out one of the
most important elements of this
budget is increasing our roll
wraps because we just don't have
enough boots on the ground to
help people in those rural areas
you know for instance we got a
fantastic call from
Representative Garcia whose are
announced that recently about
the storage facility inside you
know let's do this here let's do
this in my area how can we make
this happen and we really can
make this happen by getting more
people out there becoming more
acquainted with your community
what assets you have so I would
definitely say the regional
wraps focus on that and also
really the general office and we
have never had anything like
this in economic development we
have always traditionally done
deals with a lot of the people
that you know the rich are
getting richer and the poor are
getting poorer and a lot of it
has to do with just people's
knowledge of our programs and
how we can how we can reach them
how we can market them to have a
we let them know so I would say
definitely the general office
and so we are pushing film out
into all of the rural areas and
while some people see a lot of
the production happening in
Santa Fe and Albuquerque
absolutely hundred percent true
but we are really seeing Los
crucis come up here and we would
love to get those students for
menace you plugged into these
programs and making sounds and a
lot of that has to do with the
Film Office getting out there
and making sure that your
communities are highlighted on
our websites because that brings
a ton of outside money into your
community that would be here
otherwise so thank you so much
for the the.
Thank you madam secretary so the
it seems like the combination
they they they work together I
look forward to understanding
more as we go how
yeah in that area.
At the five hundred thousand for
international trade
I would I look forward offline
to learning more there in what
the.
Specific outcomes that the
department foresees
acknowledging and really
appreciating the really
substantial jump in on showing
that we've seen across the state
and especially down cents at
that just a in other places
along the border
Okay that those are my
questions.
Well I see I apologize want to
go briefly we have
Representative at at a and then
representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman and that
thank you Secretary he's I know
how hard before to reach out to
rural communities I'd like to
echo Representative Armstrong is
comment about that sixty mile
radius from Santa Fe so advocate
which is a pretty rural district
area is forty five miles just to
kind of give you the rest of the
legislators
kind of a reality check with
what that sixty mile radius
means so so if we could work on
that I'd be happy to help you
work on that and just.
I would just like to remind
everybody that without broadband
internet services in rural in
rural New Mexico it's going to
be hard to attract businesses
and I know the secretary works
with that too and again regional
eyes water water systems of if
we don't have water and you
don't have internet it's hard to
build this it's difficult to
build a business I just want to
say we you know we have a twenty
three million dollar grant and
from Rio Arriba Santa Fe and
Espanola and broadband and and
and hopefully that'll come
through so we can get people the
services they need in these
remote areas of our of my
district and and working on
regional as water plants because
without those things you can't
build a business today so now I
I do appreciate the secretaries
work I'd call their office the
number of times she's been very
helpful all of your staff has
and I to and
eight two would support the
addition of rural staff to that
work in the district that no
people I I think that's what we
need more boots on the ground
thank you that's all I have
that's all I have Mister chair
thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Garcia Mr
chairman I thank you for Madam
speaker Paul I'll make it brief
I did talk to secretary staff
about what's going on in rural
New Mexico and my question to
her was the what am I doing
wrong and I think a lot of
represented Mr chairman and all.
Have the same feeling of why are
we not getting what everybody
else is getting like us just
Santa Fe and Albuquerque it's a
big concern to me thank in the
film industry you know couple
years ago they say Wall Street
for we don't will best of.
Forty mile barrier we did that
better off to make us to make it
fair for everybody in the state
not just of the bigger cities Mr
chairman and the secretary if
you have any comment to that I
would appreciate to hear from
that will briefly.
Mr chair representative Garcia
yeah as as as you said we do
talk with you quite a bit and we
love those calls we love those
comments because it means that
you care and we do need to do a
better job in the rural areas
absolutely we want to look at
that question really for the
film
office and we have a few other
changes and additions that we
would like to just make the
legislation a little bit better
in the sixty day so we look
forward to working with all of
you on that
and I know Representative Phelps
Anderson has been passion about
the film industry also in just
digging into the data so that's
all going to start this year for
the sixty day and you know I
can't say enough it's on the
ground in these rural areas is
going to help everyone that cold
storage deal was locally
generated we often times at EDD
I get a lot of the press and a
lot of that slaps on the back
it's it's the EDS in your areas
they're making a difference.
Thank you for our madam madam
secretary all Mr chairman and I
understand that but I did my
eyes of people last well we're
legal in New Mexico I think the
first opportunities come into
all your offices and not you
know like I would like a
conversation earlier I'm not
pointing fingers at anybody I'm
putting the finger myself
because I should push harder for
my community and maybe we'll
start doing that work a little
bit closer to make sure that
everybody gets a fair
opportunity of this and another
one more thing Mr chairman of
the J. Keyes as you all know the
gist of the state of New Mexico
took over the prison.
In my town and grants to Mexico
it would from CoreCivic to the
state and we're we're Senate
moves like almost half a million
dollars in gross receipts taxes
for the city of requests that's
going to be sitting in this
chair you know maybe within of
well thought out on thank you
are paid for but is there and
it's going to faces and you know
we need help we need help we
gonna go.
That's you know I can a big
annual please do whatever we
want to call that what we really
need to work together okay thank
you Secretary thank you Mr
chairman thank you
representative Garcia now what
was out going to madam chair
madam chair Lundstrom thank you
Mr chairman I have a couple
questions I I have been waiting
for and haven't seen it yet John
the film tax
of impact report.
Sounds to me like you all are
very interested in moving film
out to rural New Mexico there
must be a reason for that.
I know that that report was
something that was supposed to
be done by this year by this
legislative session is it done
and is there any results madam
chair yes it was done and we
presented it this past fall to
the revenue stabilization Tax
Policy Committee I would be
happy to send you a copy of that
results of that report I would
do we did not get any provided
funding for the to do the report
and we did get a budget cut
going from FY twenty one FY
twenty two we were able to
scrape together a little bit of
funds to get a contractor to
help us out doing economic
impact report of but it is not
the it's not a four hundred five
hundred page report it is
relatively simple it takes a
look at the economic impact of
looking at the tax impact would
have been a much longer process
and really would require an
appropriation for us to do that
so the the report is not tied
into that but it does look at
who's a one point three billion
dollar economic impact to the
state over the two years of the
study
from just the film industry and
the work that it did show that
well over ninety percent of all
the film activity in New Mexico
can be attributed directly to
the existence of the product.
The problem with that John is at
the fact that well first it was
never presented to LFC and that
LFC is wanted as you know puts
together budget recommendations
not taxed revenue stabilization
the other issue for me as it
said if I don't understand what
those variables are that create
that generator how do I know
that that's actually going to
work in a place like these
communities and other people
have been raising.
I think part of being able to
generate industry at there's a
basic infrastructure there
whether it's whether it's
broadband as well as was brought
up earlier or whatever those
variables are so I'd be very
interested to have a much better
look at that and I'd like to
have that for HSCs review.
I don't know exactly what that
impact looks like.
Thank the other thing for me is
that
I I recognize that these
regional reps are incredibly
important but that doesn't mean
that Santa Fe based staff isn't
out in the field so I want to
ask you what are your what is
your vacancy right now did you
say that you only have two
people that are are are two
vacant positions and where are
they.
Madam chair the we are in the
process of filling two vacancies
that will be filled a week from
today and with that we will only
have three vacant positions in
the department for six percent
vacancy rate to those positions
are within the economic
development division one it is
the person who does financial
background work for J. typically
to projects so we really
critical position the other one
it would be a team lead for the
regional wraps and then the
other vacant position is.
The executive assistant for the
secretary.
Let me ask you how long is that
team lead for regional rep spend
vacant is that the position that
market.
Madam chair that is the position
that mark had and I would turn
it over to to director mark over
for New Mexico just curious
about that that that's been a
long time.
Mark
Representative.
chair members of the committee.
We are when we replace the when
we created the deputy director
position
we at that point did not feel
the team leader position because
we didn't have they asked you to
do it
what we're what we're doing now
is we're converting a former
director of finance into the
team leader for a regional
reps and we're also moving that
that finance position up under
the community business in rural
development team as a finance
specialist so it's it's only
been vacant for about two
months.
Okay because I always remember
that one time that was your your
title.
And madam chair that is correct
okay is it is its position that
one torrez had that we're
feeling is at the finance
position we're looking at that
is correct who's who's handling
that now.
Currently we have a one of our
economists at as well as one of
our other team members that are
doing
Spreads for all J. W. leader
projects until we get that
position to okay all righty
are you an agency that's also
asking for food money I didn't
hear that did you madam chair we
are not directly but there is
two hundred fifty thousand
dollars in the executive
recommendation for DFA that
would go to EDD to help set up a
healthy financing foods
initiative that would
essentially create a fund that
would leverage state money to
get private capital and federal
funds to help address food does
issues.
And that would be Rick we do
need a staff person for that.
Madam chair yes the executive
recommendation also includes one
FTE for the.
You know much more inclined to
shore up what we already have I
think that that makes more sense
is that we're shoring up and
strengthening those programs
that are already in place I
don't have that spreadsheet in
front of me but I want to ask
LFC staff
we are we recommending another
million dollars to go into J.
two that is reoccurring.
Madam chair in the LFC
recommendation no there is not
an additional one million
recurring date if we do do the
full amount in the current
iteration of the special
appropriation of seven million
okay because my my fear is is a
I don't know why and I think
maybe it was during the time we
had a tight budget times that.
We just don't give them a
reoccurring budget for for that
purpose it just doesn't make
sense to me that is just not in
there at that full amount and I
want to note on that because
that that needs to happen.
I guess friends are secretary I
saw her earlier on this on this
so called I just want to make
sure that we're doing that I
want to take another peek at
what those vacancies look like
this put a note to that I'm all
for getting rural help I mean
obviously the work I do and then
the work that I can see that
needs to be done but I also am
interested in
thank the collaboration with
some of these other groups we're
going to be asked to fund some
recommendations out of the rural
task force been working with
Representative Sweetser and
Herrera and others on that some
of the kinds of things that
they'd like to have done our
basic foundational kinds of
tasks for these rural
communities.
Grant writing strategic planning
those kinds of things but
economic development is such a
big piece of that I want to know
I would like you know they
haven't had a chance to hear
this yet but I'd like to make
sure there is that coordination.
Whatever we do and and that
might be a good way to help fund
some of that and I'm talking to
candy and Susan Ferreira on this
Because we've had lots of
discussions about it but I I do
appreciate the work that's being
done by the department I am I
want to see that film report I
want to understand it and I want
to make sure that it makes sense
that if we would even talk about
expanding it to a place like
stand alone Mexico or wherever
I want to understand that
I want to make sure that there's
coordination between the roll
task force since we're now.
Gonna be rolling out more money
based on what that group is has
been recommending.
And I would also ask regarding
some of the legislation that's
going to be proposed by the LFC
on Monday.
How much of that is going to
have a direct impact on the
economic development department
because it's been they've been
pretty quiet well and I want to
make sure that we're not going
to be over burdening them with
some of the stuff that's coming
forward.
So with that I appreciate it
appreciate the cabinet secretary
particularly for the time she
spent in Gallup
and during the COVID I can tell
you without question that
between the cabinet secretary
and mark Roper I've seen them
more in Gallup and I have
anybody else.
And that is that's so amazing
they have they spent more time
and kind of filled in that
regional Representative role
than than anybody else house so
I think I think that's all thank
you Mr chairman thank you very
much madam chair.
Okay I'm with madam chairs notes
at the eggs and other feedback
now let's go to Representative
Sweetser.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
madam secretary a specially
would like thank you yeah and Mr
Roper and others for coming to
Deming as well and that we're
gonna bring stream farms that
was exciting some sh with that I
would move adoption of the LFC
recommendation are.
We then moved is there a second
second that Mr Chairman okay
it's been moved by
Representative Sweetser second
by Representative Garcia for the
LFC recommendation was extensive
notes and continued follow up is
there any opposition to that
motion.
Okay seeing no opposition.
We move the LFC recommendation
madam secretary Mr Deputy
secretary in your team thank you
and look forward to continuing
to work on a few of these
issues.
Many.
Thanks okay I know committee
thanks again for taking all the
time we need we have one final
agency this is going to be our
corrections Department HSD code
seven seventy this on raven is
going to start us off with the
LFC very agency right.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee as I stated I'm
Alan Rubin LFC fiscal analyst
unfortunately my DFA counterpart
the minutes could not be here
today so Andrew Miner will be
sitting in for him we are also
joined by Alicia to wireless
Serra is the secretary of the
corrections department as well
as members of her staff she she
will introduce during her
presentation.
Thank you to your different she
packets so on page one you'll
see there's a high level general
fund different sheet.
On pages two to three you'll see
the summary different sheets for
the program levels I'm sorry
this is a very different shape
of agency and the program level
different sheets are following
that.
Performance measured results and
consensus targets can be found
on pages twelve through fourteen
of your packet.
And L. C.'s PS count document is
on page fifteen.
I'll also point you to Alice's
volumes for more detail on the
legislative recommendation and
relevant policy information
volume one ages fifty five to
sixty four address policy
concerns age is one thirty four
one thirty seven have the queue
for FY twenty one Q. four
performance report card.
Going into has additional detail
on the recommendation itself
that's on pages three fifty to
three fifty nine.
And volume three pages fifty
seven to sixty two has some
additional graphs and charts you
may find useful we're having
this discussion.
I'll start with the general fund
and sort of briefly go over the
general fund on page one a high
level on page one of your packet
I'll try to keep my comments
Jordan I know the secretaries
always concise since we have.
If you have limited time and now
hi we are standing between you
all and that your last so the
legislative recommendation for
general fund revenue for the
corrections department is seven
point four million dollars less
than the executive
recommendation you'll see that
online sixty three of the high
level.
Overall the LFC recommendation
does represent a one point six
million dollars or half a
percent decrease compared with
the agency's FY twenty two
operating budget you'll see that
reflected online sixty one and
sixty for the high level.
This is because all of these
recommendation does account for
cost savings due to inmate
population reductions and high
vacancies that have realized
over the past two years and are
expected to continue.
The agencies reported reversion
amounts in that you all probably
have in front of your in volumes
three I do include a large
funding sources federal comment
really funds for FY twenty and
FY twenty one so they're
somewhat misleading so I wanted
to make sure to note for you at
the agencies reported actual
expenditures in FY twenty or
three point seven million
dollars lower than its operating
budget and FY twenty one it
reported it spent fifteen point
eight million dollars less than
budget.
In its most recent budget
projections that it provided to
LFC the HSD anticipated a total
budget surplus of twenty point
seven million dollars at the end
of FY twenty two.
These vacant the agency does
generate significant vacancy
savings as previously mentioned
in FY twenty and FY twenty one
each the HSD transfer about five
million dollars out of person.
And LFC CPS Count document on
page fifteen in your packet so
as the agency reported eleven
point nine million dollars
vacancy savings in FY twenty one
that's in column K. and LFC
estimate the agency will have
nineteen million dollars vacancy
savings in FY twenty two that's
in Holland and.
Agencies own budget projection
again the amendment most recent
that they had submitted to us
showed a seventeen point one
million dollars surplus in
person for FY twenty two.
Both the executive and the
legislative recommendations
support the agency's request to
create a new reentry program
you'll see this on page on lines
twenty two three thirty one of
your high level.
This program is made up of the
recidivism reduction division
and I'm sorry recidivism
reduction bureau and the
education bureau which were
previously part of the inmate
Management control program which
will also refer to today as I'm
act.
And it also includes
transitional living services and
community corrections contracts
that were previously part of the
community offender management
program is accounts for some of
the changes you'll see at the
program level for I'm asking
community offender management
but they don't affect the
overall recommendations and the
LFC and exec both supported
these transfers so they don't
affect any of the differences.
Looking at the IMAX budget at
the top of this different sheet.
You'll see the legislative
recommendation for general fund
revenue for this program is
eight point one million dollars
less than the executive that's
online twenty this program has
very high vacancy rates
especially among correctional
officers those average twenty
seven percent in FY twenty one.
LFC projects that this program
specifically will have a fifteen
point seven million dollars in
vacancy savings in FY twenty two
and again that's also in column
and of the PS calc on page
fifteen.
Both recommendations do
recognize the significant
vacancy rates and reduce the
program the programs funded
vacancies you'll see that in
line seventeen legislative
recommendation reduces funding
for vacant positions by a total
of three point eight million
dollars the executive reduction
is a net of one point two but
since it also transfers one
point three million dollars from
vacancy savings in person to
contractual services for
behavioral health contracts it's
really actually accounting for a
two point five million dollar
vacancy savings in this program.
There have been very large
population reductions to New
Mexico's inmate population that
have impacted Department the
prison population has been
falling since September twenty
eighteen and it had dropped over
eight percent by March of twenty
twenty so that's even before the
COVID nineteen pandemic started
impacting educations and early
releases.
In FY twenty one the population
average six thousand fifty one
at eleven point five percent
lower than FY twenty and
eighteen point two percent lower
than the high of seventy four
hundred in FY sixteen this led
to an average of sixteen hundred
and the state prison beds FY
twenty one.
Last year the population
averaged five thousand six
hundred eighty four that's down
six point seven percent from a
year ago and this morning the
agency reported five thousand
five hundred and twenty inmates
in its custody of the taciti of
seven thousand six hundred forty
five so that's two thousand one
hundred and twenty five of the
budget as of this morning.
You'll find more information on
population history on page fifty
nine of volume three if you're
interested.
Because of these large
reductions in population
legislative recommendation also
reduced funding in the
contractual services and other
categories I total of four point
seven million dollars to account
for the savings that's online
sixteen.
And that's what we did in the
I'm back program but you'll see
that the recommendation also
transfers one point six million
dollars of the savings to the
new reentry program to re
investigating some population
reductions into evidence based
recidivism reduction programming
you'll see that reflected online
twenty seven.
Other than that transfer which
is not included in the executive
recommendation there are no
differences between the
recommendations in the new
reentry program you'll see again
at that one point six million
dollars I'm I'm very.
The LFC recommendation does
include recommended language for
this program that directs ten
point seven million dollars of
the general fund appropriations
to be used to implement evidence
based program this reflects
current expenditures on evidence
based programming plus the one
point six million dollars
transfer from I'm activist.
Thirty seven you'll see that
there are also no differences
between the recommendations for
the correction industry program
which does not receive any
general fund revenue agency did
proposed some significant
reductions of this program
basically how to budget in half
and both recommendations to
support that they're interested
in more information on those
changes they are outlined in
more detail on page six of your
packets.
In the community offender
management program there's only
one general fund difference
that's in line forty three
you'll see both recommendations
propose reducing the budget
vacancy rate but also
recommended to be reduced by
five hundred fifty thousand
dollars of the executive
proposed to be reduced by nine
hundred thousand dollars that's
additional money we're giving
because they fill positions this
program really has significantly
improved its vacancy rates in FY
twenty one and it actually
reduce the vacancy rate among
probation and parole officers
I'm twenty five percent and FY
twenty two an average of sixteen
percent and FY twenty one which
is really just a remarkable
improvement.
LFC does recommend language for
this program it specifies the
million dollars of the general
fund appropriation for person is
for the purpose of administering
risk needs assessments to all
offenders under supervision
these funds are part of the
agency's base budget it's not an
increase and the same language
was included last year I see we
updated the recommendation for
language this year to reflect
the governor's veto of the
requirement that the assessments
be administered every two years
in last year's budget.
In program support you'll see in
line fifty seven the legislative
recommendation is five hundred
and sixty nine thousand dollars
lower than the executive is two
reasons for this difference line
fifty one you'll see the
executive supports reducing the
budgeted vacancy rate in this
program by about three hundred
thousand dollars which LFC does
not recommend.
The LFC recommendation also
aligned to the agency's request
for some fixed cost rates with
the posted rates see that in
line fifty five.
Let me also page to your package
just to review a couple
differences in other funding
sources.
you'll see under.
Now the other transfers and the
fund balance line the agency
requests one point four million
dollars in fund balance from its
penitentiary income fund and
that holds nonrecurring revenues
from the land grant permanent
fund and land maintenance.
However the most recent
projections LFC economists
provided show that revenues in
FY twenty three will provide
sufficient funding to make it
unnecessary to use the fund
balance the legislative
recommendation doesn't use fund
balance from this fund instead
it budgets in additional one
point four million dollars in
other transfers.
Finally the legislative
recommendation it has for some
recurring requests that were
included in the agency's request
or the executive recommendation
the agency has received multiple
years in a row and has done
budget adjustment request to put
into its budget this
recommendation would make those
adjustments unnecessary there's
no corresponding reduction in
other funding sources so even if
these grant funds are not
realized in FY twenty three
including them here would not
affect the overall budget.
I've already reviewed as we went
through the LFC is recommended
language all know the executive
does not recommend any language.
We come to consensus on all
performance measures and targets
and again those are outlined on
pages twelve through fourteen of
your pack.
I'll now turn it over to in
different additional comments
from the executive thank you.
Thank you well and good
afternoon Mr chairman and
committee members it's Andrew
Miner here from DFA it's my
pleasure to step in for Diego
for the corrections department
thank you Alan for explaining
the differences very well in the
interest of time I'll just hit a
few of the reiterate you the
more significant items in the
executive recommendation so it
includes one million dollars for
public operation of Guadalupe
County correctional facility and
northeast New Mexico
correctional facility one
million dollars for health
services bureau salary increases
nine hundred thousand to reduce
probation and parole officer
vacancies five hundred thousand
dollars for inmate programming
licenses and five hundred
thousand dollars for supportive
housing it briefly the executive
recommendation prioritizes
appropriate funding and staff
levels for in the management
control and community offender
management programming in mental
health and saying that the new
reentry program secures
successful transition to ensure
those services move for
sustainably so that's all of my
comments and so I will turn it
over to secretary to foil so.
Thank you very much miss raven
and Mr minor good afternoon
madam chair and Mr vice chair
and members it's great to see
you all today even if by screen
and thank you for hearing us
today I'm Lisa to foiling
several cabinet secretary for
the corrections department with
our allocated slots I am
accompanied today by acting
administrative services director
at Smith deputy secretary Karen
can and that with her in her
office there you'll see our
health services administrator Mr
Wenceslas awesome Gardi also
with us today we have our
prisons director Gary Maas yell
and probation and parole
director Melanie Martinez
additional members of our team
are tuning in and are standing
by should you have any questions
specific for them
now the parkway in front of you
includes detail on the executive
and LESC recommendations the you
know it outlines all the major
differences by program provides
additional information for each
each code and I need point to
questions up as I go through and
it certainly is of course a
reference for you but I will not
be following it in order rather
I'll provide you a brief
overview of our operations I'll
share some of our key
accomplishments and then I'll go
through the basics of our asked
are are asked and the
differences between it and the
LESC recommendation with the
goal of leaving plenty of time
for questions.
So The New Mexico corrections
department oversees more than
two thousand six hundred public
and contract staff members
throughout the agency you are
probation and parole division we
supervised nearly fourteen
thousand people in communities
with within five regions are
made up of forty six district
offices and an office of
interstate compact harassment
this year NMC took over
operations at the Guadalupe
County correctional facility in
Santa Rosa and then also in
requests are absolutely that's
now referred to as the western
New Mexico correctional facility
complex usually it was western
and northwestern New Mexico
correctional facility with these
recent takeovers we now operate
eight correctional institutions
and oversee to privately
operated institutions that today
we're operating at a percentage
of seventy one point nine
percent of capacity which means
that five thousand five hundred
and one of our seven thousand
six hundred and forty five
available beds are filled today.
This year to ensure that the
agency will continue to support
reentry and recidivism reduction
efforts now and far into the
future we added a new budget
program code and that is P. five
three five it's the reentry
division now P. five three five
eight joints five thirty one I'm
back which is you need
management control five thirty
four C. O. M. community offender
management five thirty three
corrections industries and five
thirty which is programs support
the executive recommendation and
the general fund is three
hundred thirty five point one
million with the recommendation
from all sources totally three
hundred and sixty three point
six million this general fund
recommendation represents an
increase of one point eight
percent or five point eight
million dollars more than last
year and the LESC recommendation
of three hundred twenty seven
point seven million seven point
four last fall short in
significant areas of need to
create a new budget program code
recidivism reduction we
redirected approximately eight
point five million from I'm back
about twelve million from CEO
and you are handout you'll see
these read directions now we're
making significant changes with
the NCI which of course is for
you mentioned and we're in the
process right now really
breaking it down in order to
build back stronger and make
sure that we tie goods and
services that are developed
within the corrections industry
to trade skills development and
vocational training you'll see
that we're reducing our ask
within this enterprise fund from
ten point nine million to five
point six and of course both the
executive and the legislative
finance committee
recommendations support sizeable
adjustment.
The end the executive
recommendation fully funds our
agency requests for program
support professionals industry
community of management and
reentry programs it supports the
movement of funds and positions
from Iraq to other programs and
it moves one point three million
dollars in vacancy savings to
contracts which would allow us
what we Fund and needs in
behavioral health and medical
services overall the general
fund the increase in the
executive recommendation is five
point eight million items funded
by the executive recommendation
that are not funded by the LFC
include our behavioral health
contract needs now this is a
really incredibly important need
within our agency and while we
are continuously recruiting and
partnering with educational
institutions to increase our
staffing in this area our need
is greater than what the
availability of professionals is
so making contracts services
available in this area would
enable us to attract providers
that might want to work with us
and our populations on part time
basis and in addition to the
regular decisions are also the
executive recommendation six
sports that I caught the medical
services which includes of
course the higher classes and I
do inflation and and then all of
this related services that have
been performed by these medical
providers with respect to
comment and comment response
specific to testing our staff
members and administering our
vaccinations also the increased
cost following the takeover is
primarily in Santa Rosa which is
by far more costly and the
takeover in requests actually
does realize some cost savings
R. T. positions I T. licensing
an upgrade support and the cost
that it will be to increase the
band with in Santa Rosa and
drugs following the takeovers
additionally LFC recommendation
reduces the budget for facility
needs by three point one million
dollars and further reduces this
resource by one point six
million.
Dollars removing this amount
from my mac and placing it into
our do now this is our first
year with this new budget
program code and at this time
the agency does not yet need
this additional support and
certainly not at the steep cost
operational needs and safety and
security being compromised.
With that madam chair and
members we respect we
respectfully request your
support for the executive
recommendation and will stand
for questions thank you.
Thank you very much madam
secretary do you and your team
well we're gonna go first
Representative Anderson and
we're gonna go to representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll try
to be she.
Shortened to the point of and I
appreciate presentation I would
ask Miss to foil Lucero
it's question we we touched on
previously in the LFC and it
goes like this.
Of what percentage fewer
prisoners do we have today what
what circuit of.
Current.
Population.
As a percentage of of capacity.
Madam chair representative
Anderson today were seventy one
percent of our capacity so that
puts us at about twenty nine
percent vacant.
Okay and and we have eight
presents plus two more is that
right.
Madam chair representative that
is correct.
So in my mask that's twenty five
percent more prisons for seventy
one percent of the prison
population I continue to be.
Up confused about the wisdom of
increasing.
The number prisons that the
state operates in face of a
declining prisoner of of
therefore.
If you Sir quick cancel we're
we're the.
We're just not.
Of sending people to prison.
Mexico why isn't that showing up
in reduced presence not more
questions question.
Madam chair and representative
you know I don't know that
there's a quick answer but all
all touched on when I covered in
the legislative finance
committee you know I mean
ultimately right now yes the
population population certainly
is low we do believe that there
will be an increase although
sentencing commission reports to
note that it will be steady and
incremental but not that it will
be some gigantic population
increase but then in addition to
that you know with the takeover
that Saturn was that and
requests a lot of that really
had to do with the fact that
like the geo group in Santa Rosa
was firing us you know they were
leaving this community
essentially destitute and we
have the ability to take it over
and you know we're definitely
struggling with vacancy rates
and things of that nature over
there and we're trying to be
responsible with this the
populations that we do have an
whenever it's possible we
consolidate down to the smallest
area that we can in order to
operate a state institution and
then to minimize the number
staff that are needed in that
institution and you know that's
hopefully where we're able to
realize some of those cost
savings.
Well thank you very much for
that answer and I remain
confused about of of the need
for more prisons you with of you
know I wasn't years ago we were
over capacity and now we're way
under with more prisons I just.
Escapes me the logic on that
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Anderson next we
have Representative Garcia thank
you Mr chairman US secretary of
Lopez and for the presentation
today.
As we spoke earlier today I
asked the question on the gross
receipts taxes the community is
going to be losing that of a
western and requests and you
came up the price of oil by
forty nine five hundred twenty
eight thousand.
my question is.
How much is the least per year
on this present and how much
money is my community Senator
dues every year.
Madam chair and representative
Garcia yes when we spoke earlier
we dug into that found out that
that was the number that was
page gross receipts taxes in
requests last year with that
facility and we will get that
number to you to give you a
guesstimate of what it looks
like in years to come so in the
first year the cost of the lease
will be one point two million
dollars and then in here after
that it will be four million
dollars with a two percent
increase our I believe every two
years so that will be the cost
of these moving forward and as
we discussed you know that
certainly will equal a
difference in what you're making
right now in that area on gross
receipts taxes and you know it's
it's one of those areas that's
not my area and I tapped
directly speak to it but I
certainly can tell you that I
will be happy to reach out to
our DFA taxed that secretaries
to to see what we can figure out
in that community.
Thank you all for Mr chairman
and madam madam secretary all.
If the the leases one point two
million for the first year and.
And we're we had of balance of
five hundred forty nine by
twenty eight that is good but I
don't know eighty ninety percent
drop on revenues record.
Madam chair representative
Garcia I don't know that I want
to speculate to the number quite
yet and so I have it for you but
I do imagine that it would be
quite a bit lower.
And the thank you madam chair
Mister chair madam secretary the
reason I'm I'm I'm going that
route is because that's that's
sufficient that's big number for
a community of one more question
I have secretary and Mr
chairman.
What is your vacancy right now
after the state to go to prison
that was before you over.
In the ground.
Right we are currently looking
at a twenty eight percent
vacancy and you know prior to
the takeover I believe that it
was pretty close I think we had
a fifteen percent at the western
where the women are housed and
at the one that was previously
referred to as northwest we had
it was somewhere in the
neighborhood of twenty eight
percent so combining the two and
joining the roster has resulted
in a twenty eight percent is at
this time.
Thank you madam secretary and Mr
chairman you know it's
concerning to me that.
It didn't change any from the
takeover that's sort of been
recently took over but of.
Having any problem in filling
vacancies that the problem.
Madam chair representative not
necessarily you know we made
ourselves available to do
satellite academies in that area
I think we really just need to
ramp up our our recruitment and
things in that area but for the
most part when we were doing the
take over which just happened in
November of course we were
really trying to focus on making
sure we got all the people that
were working for CoreCivic and
who were transitioning over to
get them trained get them on
board and now the next phase
will come into play where we
start trying to recruit outside
and see what we can do about
bringing other people into the
area and and to look into those
jobs.
Thank you madam secretary and Mr
chairman one more last question.
Many of the people that were
employed.
Reporter civic state working for
the state.
Madam chair representative
Garcia the vast majority of them
I don't have an exact number for
you all certainly send it out to
you after this meeting but there
were a few staff members that
opted to stay with CoreCivic and
move over to the federal
institution that they have in
that area and there were a few
staff that defined the positions
that we offer to them but for
the most part the majority of
the of those folks stayed with
us.
Thank you madam secretary and if
you would give me those numbers
on on the.
Money that we're gonna be dues
in from year to year and
addresses legislative you would
please Mr chairman and madam
secretary thank you let's all of
which is I have.
Thank you very much for a
Representative Garcia as saying
no further questions from the
committee I want to go over to
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you
Mr vice chair and thank you
secretary to the Oilers Serra
it's always good to see you with
that I move the LFC
recommendation.
There's a most for the LFC to
adopt the LFC recommendation
secretary.
It's been second by
Representative Anderson is their
opposition to that motion.
Position we've adopted the LFC
budget recommendations for the
corrections Department HSD code
seven seventy.
Okay members that wraps up this
morning no it's a tight
turnaround before we have the
full committee back at one
thirty please get some lunch and
we'll see everybody again soon.
