A copy of the bill.
Should also have a copy of the
FIR.
And.
Let's see we have these for
everybody bill.
Of these benefited everyone.
This
file or.
Yeah I think this is easier
if you have a high level.
That actually signed.
This bill have a copy of this
that we're going to go ahead get
some copies for the full
committee that we can put the
measures on the table there is
just a little easier to read
they try to go through the whole
bill.
So let's go ahead Senator small
we're gonna have to start
putting this bill on and then
We're going to go to.
Two comments so go ahead.
Madam chair
Yeah.
Let's try it tell me if I'm not
alone.
Madam chair thank you very much
members.
Really excited to present house
bill two here in our special
session.
Chair and members.
We all know the federal on the.
American rescue plan funds
to be appropriated by the New
Mexico legislature and
are the legislative finance
committee with input from a vast
array of sources executive
nonprofit private sector
stakeholders who have been at
madam chair all the meetings you
directed held around the state
this entire year starting in
April here in Santa Fe going
from north to south across New
Mexico in person
we built the priority list that
is reflected in House Bill to to
be clear house bill two includes
the federal again the federal
recovery funds that were
transmitted to the state through
the American rescue plan
governor will happen though
Lujan Grisham has directed that
some of those funds be included
in the specials that session and
again thanks to the work of the
LFC what about you including
stakeholders across New Mexico
we have this level list which I
want to turn to briefly this
goes into four main buckets
really three main buckets Madam
chair and colleagues the first
is economic recovery.
Sliq goes the start at the top
of the
of the document that we have.
Includes madam chair and members
they converted American rescue
plan funds which go into the
general fund because the general
fund and as the LFC has time and
again told us one of the
allowable uses for the American
rescue plan funds is to replace
general fund losses thereby
becoming.
General Fund.
The manager was just making sure
that.
The economic artistic.
So one hundred and forty two
point five million dollars madam
chair that would go to the
transportation department for
major infrastructure projects
including state roads these are
just projects madam chair
committee members that have been
on the state transportation plan
they have been identified
community priorities again in
all transportation districts
across New Mexico it's one of
the quickest economic ways to
get resources out on the ground
in communities and generate
returns through those
communities being able to engage
in commerce travel and other
things more quickly.
Chair Committee the second piece
is ten million dollars for
charging stations that are
statewide plan and design we
know there are significant funds
federal funds that are flowing
to the state we want to make
sure that we are ready to
to build up charging that works
especially in the most rural
parts of our state electric
vehicles are adopted more widely
across the country this is one
of the determines that's going
to allow both tourism and
commerce to grow and thrive in
our state.
in committee.
We
for regional airport upgrades in
planning design there's another
ten million dollars the
transportation department a
priority has been identified for
beautification and litter
control.
Committee the for statewide
broadband projects there is both
twenty six point
twenty six million dollars
from this converted General Fund
and then a hundred and twenty
three point one million dollars
this includes statewide
broadband and potentially
alternative delivery method for
broadband we also note that the
state broadband coordinator.
Has been hired
and it is it is is currently
working who is had there's a
great deal of responsibility
with these priorities.
With the public education
department madam chair and
committee there's ten million
dollars this is for tribal
library planning design and
construction also this expand
access to broadband as the body
knows tribal libraries and
broadband expansion has been a
broad insurance statewide
priority the libraries have been
one of the best methods to get
broadband into rural communities
this will go to the public
education department allow them
to work with sovereign tribal
nations and and move very
quickly.
Madam chair committee we've
heard a lot from the tourism
department about the need to
begin advertising as New Mexico
is now open to make sure that
we're up in advertising and so
this includes a fifteen million
dollars appropriation
specifically for that purpose
as we continue going down madam
chair there is ten million
dollars specifically for water
projects chair committee this
would complete partially funded
projects and help as we look at
in our thirty day session an
additional seventy six million
dollars that will be available.
We're able to both complete all
projects and get a very strong
start on new ones.
Committee in some of our
different meetings especially in
Riyadh also in other parts of
the state rural jobs in the
intersection with natural
resources has been a primary
focus.
Therefore there is a fifty
million dollars for rural jobs
and natural resource
improvements including twenty
million dollars to the Energy
minerals natural resource
department for state parks
ten million dollars to the
outdoor recreation division ten
million dollars for the New
Mexico
Environment Department river
to our program and five million
dollars for game and fish as
well note.
This recently it entered into a
public private partnership to
purchase the pecan ranch down in
the southeast part of our state
that both save it for it avoids
listing for threatened and
endangered species thereby
allowing our energy industry to
continue to move forward as well
as setting aside habitat
creating more opportunity for
recreation including in some
areas for hunting.
You madam chair on the economic
recovery these are all things
that spark job creation across
our state there's three point
five million dollars for orphan
well planning and implementation
there is as you pointed out a
very large amount of federal
money that will be coming that
is available for energy
producing states to plug oil and
gas wells this gets New Mexico
out of the gate fast and first
ready to put as much of that
federal money to work putting
New Mexicans to work and
safeguarding our environment
while allowing our energy
industry to continue moving
forward at historic levels.
so that is the subtotal madam
chair that is the for economic
recovery.
the the will move down here for
the post pandemic workforce
development madam chair and
committee
the priority has been with
nursing you know there is a
nursing shortage not only in New
Mexico but nationwide it's been
further stretched through the
COVID nineteen pandemic
fortunately we have a number of
educational institutions in
higher at that have more demand
for nursing slots than currently
they have capacity this fifteen
million dollars to the higher
education department will
immediately create more capacity
in our higher education
institutions that will mean more
nurses for New Mexicans across
our state.
Going down to
the this is a response.
Directly to COVID nineteen
related costs.
there is twenty million dollars
for housing homeless
individuals transitional housing
and affordable housing currently
this is contingent on a one
hundred percent local matching
funds.
We received
strong support as we know
transitional services support
services in all corners of our
state as we as people face
housing challenges and are on
house is eighteen concern and
this will appropriate
immediately twenty million
dollars to help innovative
programs that work with local
communities to bring additional
housing capacity transitional
and transitional living support
services to deal with the on
house challenges that they face.
We have madam chair there's a
five million dollar
appropriation directly to the
Human Services Department this
is for food banks food banks
continue to be stretched across
our state to the very breaking
point whether it's urban and our
rural this will provide a much
needed an immediate infusion of
money to keep their services
strong during the holiday season
and during some of the the
colder months as we face those
all New Mexicans
And I the continuing down that
list we have the General
Services Department with fifteen
million dollars this is for
employee health care COVID costs
and testing.
COVID tests and related costs of
course are free for all New
Mexicans some of this this is to
back fill costs that have been
paid for by the General Services
Department.
Supporting also local
communities in there they.
People haven't
paid for this in their insurance
they receive that benefit there
for these funds are desperately
needed to shore up the General
Services Department and their
funds.
I think that is.
That is a quick kind of run
through madam chair members
through the high level on this
legislation I would just note
briefly this of course is not
the entirety of the federal
American recovery plan funds
that the state has received in
many of these items including in
areas like rural jobs and
natural resources for instance
there is a framework.
supported unanimously through
the legislative finance
committee for additional
investments in places like the
association of conservation
district so water conservation
district and others so this is
actually less than half of the
American recovery plan
investments but.
A single one of these dollars
can be put to use starting
during this session and and they
need in these these key buckets
of economic recovery post
pandemic workforce development
focus on health care and nursing
and then in the response to
COVID nineteen related costs
with that madam chair I know we
have experts and analysts from
the legislative finance
committee so I stand for
questions and us and any
comments thank you madam chair
go back to all of the comments
about the structure of the bill
and and for those who don't
Senator the legislative finance
committee and and for the
audience house bill two of
course is part of the governor's
call for expenditure of the
American rescue plan dollars.
Why this bill excess as
Representative small had noted
it is a portion of what is
available to us to the state of
New Mexico.
And
it was a specific decision by
the by the LFC that we would not
spend all the money that we
would save a large portion of it
for the thirty day session.
Primarily because we integrate
other funds with these dollars
when you think about projects
you think about how they're
funded in the state of New
Mexico we use things like
general fund nonrecurring the
user STBs we use geo bonds and
in January we will have an
updated of consensus revenue
figure will have all updated
information so we're starting
out
with a brand new calendar year
with all the updated
information.
So what this bill does if you'll
bear with me here in section one
the living federal funds to the
appropriation contingency fund.
From that fund comes the
appropriations process so in the
bill we're now moving that we're
living over a billion dollars
into our appropriations contend
that contingency fund you look
on page two.
That's what expenditure in
fiscal years twenty twenty two
through twenty twenty five thank
gives an awful time to spend but
it also gives us the opportunity
to move money into existing
programs quickly other programs
that we've heard throughout the
rules that have passed for
additional funding and ask for
help.
it also
As for for questions as I say to
be used immediately.
There is
existing programs I mean when I
look at page three there's money
that goes into existing water
projects
goes into housing projects
things like that of agencies
that that could be read leave
receive these dollars.
Well there's a particular
interest here and she just stays
perfect reimbursement costs the
phone right now is almost
insolvent.
And also
Under line thirteen page of for
so we talk about
It's for the excuse me it's line
line or to or getting ready for
federal for the federal action
when we're talking about
electric charging stations we
know that's coming.
The card for that.
there was a change yesterday and
in regard to the field.
So what we thought we were going
to have was the match of the
feed mill dollars for pre trial
up expenditures what is it the
trial services and also for
additional our product our pro
accounting and reporting money
that was removed through
amendment last night by the
house floor so the female looks
different yeah those dollars are
not going to be available we're
going to have to do that in the
thirty day session so that's
what that amendment did last
night it removes that bility to
match this
but with that being said what I
want to do is I want to go to
public comment
I don't know if we've got people
on the zoom or not that is
Representative small says said
we do have our expert staff in
the audience we also have
executive staff in the audience
but I'm going to invite them to
say a few words of first and I'm
gonna start with cabinet
secretary from DFA in the
cabinet secretary from GST and
we're gonna ask DOT to come up
that's who I see in the audience
at worst broadband.
We had that part of the person
was in the audience but anyway
if you would miss Romero come on
up just get given the general
sense of the importance for some
of these things and we're going
to ask Mr Garcia and Mr
Dodge Mr I move to table Dodge
to come up and say a few words
about transportation.
That.
To be brief it's not thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee thank you very much
for the opportunity I just a
couple things I like to mention
I I didn't during the briefing
is some money for administrative
expenses we actually have
The chart that that the
projections of what we think
it's going to cost two things
that are really important to
note is we're gonna have to do
an equity plan that's part of
the requirements for the federal
funding and I don't see funding
in here for that equity plan the
other thing is a cost allocation
plan so any time you use federal
funds agencies should have a
cost allocation plan so that we
know we can actually part of a
dollar administrative expenses
against that particular grant
and so we do need to get and
possibly patience let especially
because so much money is
completely to DFA all of this
money even though it's been
appropriated to the proposed
contingency fund will still have
to track and report on to the
federal government and so we
still have to follow all the
federal requirements so it's not
just the third time through the
become general fund and and
that's the end of it you can see
similar abilities to get this
money will have to include it
and have a FIFA are to be a
special part of their audit and
so I make sure that it but
indispensable there's a thing
that they both felt the sting it
never becomes general fund it
always.
Federal funds are so madam chair
that's basically my concerns and
my comments about the bill so
thank you madam secretary will
ask of Mr Garcia to come out of.
Not sure everybody knows that
you are the new GST of secretary
but I'll let you introduce
yourself thank you madam chair
members the committee my name is
John Garcia secretary designate
General Services Department and
that is my pledge bite at the
apple here so I'm looking
forward to working with you all
and working for the governor
and thank you madam chair for
the opportunity to present I'll
be short and brief.
GSD projects shortfall of twenty
four point six nine million
dollars both deficiency and
supplemental related to comment
in the fund the state of New
Mexico New Mexico benefits plan
must cover the cost of testing
that scenes and treatment best
practice would be to
you don't have enough money in
that fund and and it is a
roughly about thirty eight point
two million is what we expect
the monthly balance in the fund
and we're grateful that you did
show appropriations out of this
money thank you thank you Sir
Mr Ahmed to table please come
up.
For the new members on the
committee
Charges are former vice chairman
of the committee so.
Please introduce yourselves.
Good afternoon chair all star at
in members the committee my name
is Rick video executive director
for how we appropriations and to
go to.
madam chair just one more time
for old times sake move to table
mat.
Thank you.
George Dodge local governments
director and I I work for DOT
now agreed agency and I work
very closely with local
government cities counties
and up and such political
subdivisions so thank you for
having us here Georgian got some
competition now with ice cream
Representative Lane also onset
ice cream business and yep
provided that for us during the
interim.
And George dot Jones is a dairy
queen you madam chair we would
of I have spoken with the
Representative lane during the
thirty day session and we're
gonna have an ice cream freeze
off like.
Go ahead Sir if you'd like to go
ahead thank you thank you madam
chair we certainly appreciate
the funding that we see in in
house bill two of the two
million dollars for charging
stations as you all know this
very important we're moving in
that direction and we've been
brainstorming of exactly how
we're going to push that money
out looks like we're going to
ultimately conduct a study and
into a we're going to place
those and where and and we can
really
that's one of the things that
we're really looking to I know
we can go to the private sector
but you know of state buildings
the state offices in are in some
of our campuses will definitely
see some of those.
We also have two million dollars
for airports motion Mr rel was
here he's actually no C. with
that is that is will needed the
ten million dollars for cleanup
I mean I can't say it enough but
as you all drive around the
state as you all came to Santa
Fe that are on the road is a
huge deal and we just cannot
keep up with that it is an issue
of we spent about five million
dollars annually and you can see
it it it barely makes a dent so
we're looking really looking
forward to that we have a
contract in place so we can
bring a contractor to help us
out we have some other resources
we can utilize so we're just
that this was we're just going
to push that money out and get
some boots on the ground and and
hopefully just make a difference
as soon as possible and of
course madam chair the hundred
forty two of million in four to
five on the list of projects
there is you know they are very
important to us we look forward
to those we're very excited to
see those come to fruition so
that madam chair well we will
stand for questions I know
Representative Dodge of those
and talk a little bit about PPF
it given that.
Chair thank you madam chair
members the committee one of the
things I do want to spend a lot
of time on is working with the
local governments on TPF.
I.
The transportation project fund
okay and I'm gonna say that
started in beginning two
thousand nineteen with the first
fifty million dollars and ended
with a hundred forty that up
actually the hundred sixty it's
the hundred twenty plus the
forty on the excise tax those
two of the biggest programs it
and and most port programs that
I've seen come out here in
relations to local governments
it's been nothing but positive
all fifty million dollars has
been allocated for two thousand
nineteen and the twenty twenty
one money has already been
allocated also it's all being
spent right now all the
contracts have been I've been
signed so local governments have
really jumped on this and local
governments now they have
learned to have two or three
projects on the shelf so that
any money that comes they're
ready to go and and their their
their projects and their product
there shovel ready and a lot of
the planning and the design is
been done on also so.
We thank you for that local
governments thank you for that
and
Hopefully more combat.
Thank you madam chair thank
thanks very much DOTA right we
want you to stick around in case
of committee has any questions
but we'll let me see I thought
Representative small you said we
have someone here from the broad
deal do it office is there
someone here.
I was gonna speak to the
broadband pace.
Okay well that's okay I mean
this was.
I thought we would have someone
here what I'd like to do also
now is to take some public
testimony after let LFC make a
few comments about this David
would you like to just make some
general comments particularly in
light of how we do Fund
integration.
You have to come up here so
people can hear you.
Madam chair I think the main
point is to emphasize what you
first talked about earlier the
interrelation between the
funding in these projects and
the money that's available that
is in the order of two and a
half million so in general.
Piece budgeting isn't a great
idea because you may double fund
you may under fund it's a
problem of coordination we all
know the urgency to get this
money to work for some reasons I
don't need to get into some I
think this bill is.
Is a nice mix of getting started
on things but yet preserving the
the ability to address the LFC
recommendation which was adopted
yesterday morning with almost
all those present voting for it
and not be released on January
sixth you'll find in addition to
this four hundred million to
fund recommendations for a more
than six hundred million more of
funds some of it is very
important like for example
something like I could I think I
can say in a general way if you
go back to last session amount
for the lottery was detail from
opera funding you can guess that
that will be back and that is a
good benefit of providing
certainty to answer starting
kids in college the they know
they can be assured of the
hundred percent funding for the
next five years the rather than
worry about it being up and down
there's many hundreds of
millions more for the for the
important road projects so
without be laboring and I just
think.
Emphasize the importance of of
stepping in to get started but
also preserving the ability of
the full Legislature to consider
all the needs and there may be
other things of course that the
issue of said many times LESC
current market is the beginning
of the budget making process
point the legislature there
pretending to to more current
information.
Estimates that may change and
improve the LFC star thank you
madam chair thank you Mr Abbey
but I'd like to do now is to ask
in the audience do we have
anyone that would like to make a
comment if you would I'm gonna
have you all line up and try to
stay six feet apart if that's
possible.
And then if you just speak for a
couple of minutes right into
that Mike that
Representative small just go
ahead and please enter the chair
so welcome thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Allison Smith I'm a
registered lobbyist for The New
Mexico restaurant association as
well as the New Mexico
association of food banks both
organizations appreciate the
funding that's appropriate in
this bill but I just take a
moment to to do some of the
challenges that both of these
organizations are facing due to
the pandemic for instance in the
sixty five percent decrease in
federal court but remain folded
and are seeing increased funding
for costs.
Replaces and not be able to feed
hungry New Mexicans the tourism
industry has lost approximately
four point three billion in
visitor spending.
Four thousand workers in twenty
twenty the food banks are asking
for the fifteen million dollars
and is asked to replace federal
funds that have gone away
entirely.
This is critical to the supply
chain challenges and increased
costs but also takes from the
food has to be paid for it takes
three months before that food
can actually be delivered most
of our food banks will end up
finding themselves out of money
by February at the rate that
this is going.
Strong institutions of losses if
the tourism industry has faced.
To allocate twenty five million
to the tourism department to.
For promotional needs.
The study million to Canadian
tourism and hospitality
workforce development strategy
which would include but not
limited to training recruiting
employees and upskilling current
tourism and hospitality workers
we need to consider these
issues.
Action to help the tourism
industry.
Please federal funding for the
food banks that provide.
For so many New Mexicans time.
Forest up way up one quick
question.
And I wrote this down did you
say that by February many of the
food banks would be out of food
I.
Funding for that yes ma'am.
Extra was with the food bank
will be making some comments V.
as in and she can address those
members accurately than I can
thank you very much.
Come on out ma'am please
introduce yourself.
Good morning.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is seaport NFF
and I am the registered lobbyist
for New Mexico thrives the state
nonprofit association and I
thank you for the funding in
this bill for feeding the food
insecure and for the people
experiencing homelessness but
there are many many more
nonprofit organizations that
need assistance.
Is when the pandemic hit they
didn't hesitate they pivoted
they adapted and they delivered
and they continue to deliver and
nonprofits are struggling.
I am asking you to take this
opportunity with part of funds
to set aside forty million
dollars from a nonprofit only
grant Fund.
My understanding is arpa funds
are not subject to the anti
donation clause my question is
if they are transferred to the
contingency fund or they've been
subject to the anti donation
clause.
Thank okay thank you very much
we'll have the LFC staff
responded that after when we get
to the questions go ahead to
Linda.
Thank you madam this year thank
you madam chair members of the
committee Linda Siegel
representing New Mexico nurses
association nurse practitioner
council owners midwives and
school nurses so you all
probably know nursing is the
single largest health care
profession in the country and we
have a nursing crisis here in
New Mexico it's not unusual
there's a nursing crisis all
over but one of the ways to help
address this crisis is to expand
our schools of nursing and we
have in in this bill a fifteen
million dollar request to go to
the program enhancement fund
which was actually created
during the Richardson
administration but that fund
would allow our schools of
nursing to apply and increase
the number of faculty and staff
and therefore increase the
number of nurses that they
graduate now the LFC actually
did a report about this back in
two thousand twenty where they
said this would be a great way
to do it but at that point no
one was able to fund it so we
know that this fifteen million
is just a drop in the bucket
it's a start it will take the
schools time to get up but
within three three years
sometimes to various for the
associate degree programs at the
community college we can be
graduating an additional fifteen
fifteen hundred nurses that will
only start we have according to
health resources in the work
force our report we have at
least sixty six hundred shortage
of nurses today.
In in in our state and we don't
really know how many nurses are
here so because of the compact
to nurses who work here don't
have to
sign up they don't have to
register with the board of
nursing and we also now have
hundreds of travelers in the
state so I strongly support
encourage you all to support
this thank you already thank you
very much.
During the market down in.
The first recipient of directly
funded grant
To support request your support
and thank you for your continued
support of that fund
Changing fund.
The.
Age is just in the in the county
it's a CLS crucis.
Out of investment
It was
maybe that's.
The.
And and.
And then for the first.
Only about the village's history
but about.
S. history is in southern New
Mexico if used to knowledge and
and ask ourselves what secular
as an.
The New Mexico but we have none
that inside New Mexico and
highlighted four affect our
historical identities in
southern New Mexico and at
getting used to ask those
questions so it's a it's an
incredible grant that is the
ability can.
The personal ability to connect
with you but I grew up.
And and show them that they can
as they can be provided as they
can be they can just help their
community and so we're we're
working on plenty of outdoor
activities in the community it
sits on a historic at national
community trail which goes from
Mexico City to Santa Fe but the
southern accents was washed away
when American expansion happened
and it was built.
No there's not oil and no seven
access to one of the oldest
villages in southern New Mexico
why things like that happen and
part of the outdoor equity means
teaching each other what that
history is and understanding
what we can do to help those you
to grow up in that community and
feel heard and may not have the
ability to come to these rooms
and speak to you directly so
thank you so much I I encourage
fund thank you Sir thanks.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
chance to speak today my name is
Leslie Allison I represent the
western landowners alliance
based here in Santa Fe New
Mexico where I grew up
I'm here let you know that we
really appreciate encourage your
support of an investment in our
working lands and rural
communities in the state's land
and water natural resources on
that hugely important the state
of New Mexico we have no future
without those resources in we
also want to let you know that
we do support the additional
investments are being discussion
LFC framework encourage you
particularly you know the
investments in the soil and
water conservation district and
the working lands those are key
partners if we're going to have
healthy food a good agricultural
economy clean water the rural
way of life of New Mexico all of
those things are super important
and one thing I do want to
underscore to all I really
appreciate hearing the multi
here thinking this man's way of
course like to see a longer term
commitment as well in in your
thinking and because when you're
doing watershed project cost
different jurisdictions bill for
service private state it takes a
lot of parts it takes a lot of
time to plan these things and
bring everybody together get the
money together and yet have the
capacity in the state agencies
in the song Water districts this
second to replace and then you
nonprofit partners and your
contractors on the ground we're
actually doing the work that
takes a long time to build that
capacity and build those
watershed project is not done in
one or two years and so it's
something that stable that lets
us work toward those projects in
New Mexico really needs but for
right now we're really happy to
see to start and I appreciate
your consideration of that thank
you so much thank you very much.
Madam chair members thank you so
much my name is Pam Roy
executive director for the table
where the lobbyist for New
Mexico Food Network culture
Policy Council in rocky mountain
farmers union and we really
appreciate the work around the
arpa and all the work you are
doing we see this is an
integrated approach to some as
my colleague Leslie just said
Wilson comprehensive work that
you are doing along with
agencies and organizations
across the state to really
secure our food system that's
food hunger in agriculture as
integrated system we need the
infrastructure to do that our
roads and we also need the
emergency assistance for food
that is in this bill as well but
it will building will help us
build this more coordinated and
equitable food system across our
state the water quality
infrastructure for water water
projects again really provide
for food security and
agriculture and keep those
dollars in the state and jobs as
well thank you very much thank
you Matt.
This yeah the question of.
Madam chair.
The.
It's going to Representative.
What the farmers and ranchers
trade association.
we're here I'm here thank you
for for the good thing and and
at it's just that.
The this is fun for a lot of
different projects and the
Transocean.
That we.
Then that support especially all
the.
Shin dollars that of tennis.
We are that this is just a drop
in the bucket of the that's the
that's the.
What are we certainly support.
especially the conservation
districts.
Mexico and and I I hope that
that there's going forward for
them also
but we just us just come.
Support for this year thank you
thank you Sir.
Go ahead madam chair and
committee.
Without being repetitive
service.
Her head is professional with
your well as we can yes Sir okay
madam chair committee thank you
for having me
The cap on the senior policy
adviser for Rocky Mount farmers
you I'll try not to be
repetitive the rural communities
are really counting on major
investments for conservation
practices.
Water projects and and soul
Health are probably at the top
of that list for us without
water most of our rural
communities will continue to be
abandoned.
This investment in conservation
is essential for rural New
Mexico.
Certainly supports everything
that's in this bill but I just
want to stand up and emphasize
the need for water and soil
health projects thank you very
much for all of our features to
thank you Sir.
Madam chair members the
committee Charles good marker in
here today on behalf of New
Mexico voices for children and
to participate just thank you
for S. beginning with a very
smart overall approach want to
commend you for this
we support.
The proposed funding increases
for native American libraries
the outdoor recreation the
outdoor equity fund the
broadband affordable housing and
food banks all of that so
valuable and greatly needed we
also support the concept service
to your this afternoon by New
Mexico thrives about supporting
the state's nonprofit sector we
believe that's important
worthwhile you're looking into.
the fifteen million dollar
support for nursing expansion
absolutely critical to help new
more New Mexicans getting in
that profession in final finally
like to thank you also for
including three point five
million for the capping of Orson
Welles like the broadband it's
very important to get that
process going so that the state
of New Mexico is ready for the
bigger project coming ahead with
more money from the federal
government as well as hopefully
a future here so thank you all
right Charles.
Charlie.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm here on behalf of
New Mexico health care
association.
My name is Charlie workers
inside of.
And I'm also here for the New
Mexico Center for assisted
living.
We have made a request of prior
to this from the governor's
office of a hundred and thirty
six million dollars based on
what other states had received.
We have modified the and
understanding.
The many inmates that are coming
out of the opera Fund.
Right now just for fifty million
and that's because of all the
things that we've undergone of
we had great losses and and life
in excess of six hundred of
residence.
Passed during this this comment
period and I I'm not sure of the
number of employees but there
was a number of them and they've
been at high risk ever since the
beginning of this additional
cost that we're looking to
hopefully reimbursed and also
the cost of nursing.
At increased costs and that
would be spread across a hundred
and seventy facilities.
So anyway that's a plea that
we've made and we've talked to a
number of you about this.
I'm also here on behalf of the
New Mexico Chile Association.
They were granted five million
dollars of to harvest green
chili what was left out of that
was a red chili.
We asked that that be extended
to use that five million.
Into a January time frame that's
been closed off and therefore
not allowed to process the red
chili.
So we're only asking that it be
reopened and extended to the end
of January date.
Thank you very much.
That's unbelievable this.
Charley before you sit down we
have a member that would like to
know why there wouldn't of
allowed for red chili for
goodness sakes.
The program was put together
rather quickly.
And all those things were taken
into account I'm sorry madam
chair representative all those
things were taken into account
when they design the program.
So we asked for them to review
that and the the just ended the
program instead.
Madam chair for my.
I I might add following the
lawsuit there's been two point
eight million dollars there's
been our understanding based
upon the LFC those committed by
the executive following the
supreme court's decision the
remaining two point two million
dollars was then unavailable two
was no longer able to be put out
to producers so that follows the
supreme court's decision.
On that one that doesn't sound
right to me Chiles chili find
out hi and this is our next
presenters right.
This.
But
you can hear me
The end.
Yes this is Amish.
I had a client that on the other
basements I gave chairman
Francis came chat on that
mission again naked and the
just like you about sixteen my
these conditions I should check
with a that's not misled
it is Mr chairman Francisco
insha moments then for instance
where I move New Mexican people
plan for the tiring as people
plan and an internal grandfather
this of the committee passed
people plan that is how I
introduce myself as the to them
I'm here today on behalf of
indigenous.
Brothers and sisters known by
family to ask for your support
in this bill.
To provide the economic
development department three
million dollars for the outdoor
equity grant program fund and
seven million dollars for
outdoor recreation grants this
combined funded ten million
dollars is transformational for
function.
On the great outdoors to
reconnect and learn about our
ancestors and heal from the
trauma I hope you will stand
with ensuring a diverse
communities to close the gap in
outdoor equity along the chance
for indigenous youth.
Using conservation and land
management thank you so much
thank you very much next.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name to set of this
month in Mexico health
association New Mexico Center
for said assisted living and is
I'm the executive director
as
because of this just previously
mentioned we did make a we're
making a fifty million dollar
ask for our money I just like to
emphasize is a problem though
there's no industry have hit the
nursing home and long term care
industry
we have over six hundred deaths
in our long term care facilities
of residence.
We have lost since twenty
nineteen to twenty just over a
thousand health care workers in
our facilities.
We have a incurred over a
hundred forty million dollars in
lost revenue and combine
expenses.
And our.
Stay in our ability to generate
revenue which is used to care
for residents we went from say
occupancy rate of over seventy
seven percent at the beginning
of a at the end of twenty
nineteen to now hovering.
Down seventy percent since June.
Occupancy as the revenue
generator that allows us to.
Generate revenue to care for
residents in the stagnant
on top of that we are also
facing mandates from the state
which is which are reasonable
but they do cost so for example
on it we will be having to
report on a daily basis
were available budget in order
to offset in rural hospitals of
the overcrowding.
As much as it sounds of course
it is reasonable however it is
difficult to take time away.
To report those bets two of the
state of New Mexico.
We are now also being asked to
take an additional residents to
offset those pressures that
hospitals are building with with
the with no with the mobility
to.
I market health care workers so
for example although facility
may have the capacity to take in
more residents.
Limited based on the ability to
hire workers which is stagnant
right now so we just urge that
you consider the quest about
fifty million dollars thank you.
Thank you come on up.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee is good to be back
in front of you I'll keep this
brief last John Thompson
registered lobbyists
conservation voters to to think
the committee for their
investments in water state parks
and outdoor recreation Mr
transformational funds that will
make an immediate difference
madam chairman we think the
committee in the body and wish
you all the best the session
thank you thank you and we have
anyone Michael those and that
wants to speak madam chair yes
we'll do it there are a eleven
hands up will do chair if it's
maybe a one minute time limit
let's give about a minute okay
thank you madam chair we're
going to go first and this is
gonna be to Ryan Regalado.
Ryan you should be on and when
you start thinking of the for a
one minute time.
We've heard that there might be
a little bit of a delay.
And the web Mr Regalado.
I Mr Regalado.
And if they don't answer right
away we come back let's okay
will come back to to Ryan Max
were is L. Francisco.
At.
Hello Francisco.
Here's.
Yes.
Okay so we're let's go back in
history a lot of Ryan you have
one minute for public comment on
house bill two.
The.
At university New Mexico.
The building interest since
this.
And this past session this past
year.
This was a proposed to go.
S. and W. two S..
This was hoping.
Students that
we always.
Indefinite.
Percent.
Just to be able to send.
S. U. N. M. D. P. I thank you
thank you thank you very much
throughout.
Max go to.
Francisco.
Yes go ahead.
That's good in requests in the
New Mexico.
This.
Your health to.
Economic Development Department.
What.
It's.
That's what recreation.
Of ten million dollars.
Thank you.
Communities but.
As well.
Position.
It is.
You.
It's spending time.
Increases in this.
Five seconds Mr Francisco.
The.
The.
Yeah a pet.
The state plan what.
Correct and meet the demands for
this building.
Six.
Thank you.
Mr Francisco.
At that.
Thank you and we're gonna go to
Nicole Martinez.
Just.
Paul to see.
The increase.
In support of.
And twenty million four
thousand.
I was
To make a.
Through these funds.
And I hope that the committee.
That the funds can be used.
To to fix.
The taste dressing Coolisys.
In the state of New Mexico.
We would like to see some
it's part of services.
Yes that we seek to accessing
housing for people experiencing
homelessness.
Hopefully some.
And it's.
Reduction in some
communities
We're really excited again and
are supportive to see housing at
the forefront of.
Experiencing homelessness in our
communities thank you thank you
very much.
amex's Britney Fallon.
Yes.
C. director New Mexico.
Thank you so.
And with this.
Yes.
Committees.
Yes.
New Mexicans.
And.
New Mexico.
Need to create.
Yes.
Industry.
Eight.
Thank you.
Staff.
Thank you very much Max is
Mr Peters Greg Peters.
The committee on.
Because the conservation voters
New Mexico.
The work.
Confirmation of.
Including critical conservation
funding.
Just wanted to wait.
Agencies departments to be used
for.
Attacked.
Areas.
The state needs our public
lands.
Yes Representative landscapes.
Needed to counter recreation
economy.
The conservation work would be
one of the most immediate.
Basis money State Street and.
New Mexico.
Thank you
for your support putting.
Something that thank.
And.
Thank you very much
Next is
micellar.
Of to Risso.
So.
Thank you madam at Rio.
Okay
Right so right.
Yes.
Yes.
Members of the committee.
The proposed location to housing
supports to address.
This.
Our system.
Granted that there is clear.
Existing harmless systems.
Care to investments made into
this system have a system.
Existing barriers.
After the emergency response is
depleted.
Request for the continuum of
care which is facilitated by the
New Mexico coalition to end
homelessness.
For this funding.
Impact to address barriers and
gaps in the existing homeless
response system for example.
School people to address their
needs directly and barriers to
walking through multiple
systems.
Request.
Just be reduced communities are
communities that struggle to
this.
Recipients.
I just need for assistance to
help better access to these
funds thank you thank you very
much.
okay and now.
The we have a.
Camilla I remember.
Yes.
Thank you.
The committee.
Acting.
Some.
Including thirty seven point.
And it.
Chapter thirty five members.
The state we use up to three
point.
Equities.
It's.
Eighty four yards.
Years and twenty million
dollars.
The police.
Two people.
Just take.
Those places.
Steve.
Businesses.
Yes.
Opportunities.
Communities are special places
at the Mexicos meant.
Thank you for your doing for our
state.
Thank you very much as I am and.
now is it make Strittmatter.
Thank you so much for this
opportunity.
President CEO Roadrunner.
Most of
the.
The board of directors The New
Mexico's.
The question
with respect to it.
Thanks.
Budgets for food purchases for
expenses and fuel for the.
The projects that we will find
ourselves in such.
Right.
Increases because of.
Yes increases from.
Steve they're ready to.
For expenses.
In.
We could not imagine that the
employees participate.
These.
Thanks for.
She just she's across the state
forty three counties.
Thanks to food.
S. and
into the community.
The state thank you for your
support and to this time to
speak thank you very much Mr
about our next we have
and in that bush
Miss Mister Rogers I apologize.
Committee members.
Yes County.
the same funds.
Secretary of housing.
Department this is.
Consumers increased to percent
this is
a list of sixty households.
As a result of the situation.
The tax.
Health services in our
community.
Many members of this committee
came up here.
Health crisis.
Mexico.
The needs and PTA's in
particular.
School.
Support services to this family
travel.
Yes.
Units supported housing.
Into possible.
The kind of financial support
including.
Transformative and I'm grateful
thank you.
Thank you very much you Mr brush
next is as part of our state of
the state that have two more is
that what's on
This.
Mexico association thank you.
Mexico.
First was.
Previous.
Conservation.
Stricter.
Impacted.
Communities this is.
Support.
So.
Please.
As of the state.
Twenty two.
Six years.
In
order to.
The state.
The consideration of the
committee.
To the particular.
To clean this.
This.
To the committee.
Thank you for.
Thank you for your service thank
you very much is Garcia next is
Tiffany Rivera.
Please.
Transportation.
You can
you.
To be.
This.
District.
Thank you very much impact we
have for the Mr.
The issue
is.
from members of the committee.
State university of New Mexico
also issued in student
government.
City.
This
does that was previously issued
to the reception that is within
the.
Mr.
This is extremely vital to every
single student not just for
students but for the entire
state of New Mexico
high school students to pursue
further education with our state
I think this is a huge.
This is.
To see the money that was
previously allocated which is a
hundred million dollars and.
Resources
Mentioned earlier.
Dancing with them.
As
with any questions comments or
to work with us.
Because.
Do.
Thank you so much for your.
Please.
Because the series.
It's close.
Madam chair we're getting we've
got them well worn out yes back
in the next madam chair we
Terry tour.
Madam chair members of the
committee to work from.
And the dean of the school.
Engineering and.
To
support.
To especially prevent us from
nursing education.
Absolutely used to increase the
nurses.
In the state so our state.
You can use this to improve
stimulation.
It's to do training.
Stimulation twenty.
I think that this question.
The cement.
Our nursing students as.
Thank you.
He
stay
with us we're gonna have a hard
time and
I.
We're doing.
Rachel Biggs
Miss Biggs.
Please go ahead.
This is.
Six.
Yes access.
As quickly as possible.
Thanks.
Here is.
Thank you thank you very much
next and we have time for
roughly five more commentaries
and less you keep your comments
less than a minute next is
Patricia current on on.
Strong committee members.
Good afternoon my name is
Patricia.
Work with
Mexico thank you for including
forty seven point five million
for investment into New Mexico.
This investment is important to
keeping.
Important jobs in New Mexico.
The important cultural cultural
as well as.
State character of rural
communities.
Mexico continue as in the desert
and this keeps us on our way to
keep.
Vote by providing food
sustenance.
Sustenance.
Opportunities and services for
residents and visitors thank you
for your service to New Mexico
thank you very much for done
that we have Mr Dustin
Members.
Service.
Mexico.
Opportunities.
That
The.
Includes.
The
state's best natural resources.
Which has.
Thank you very much Mr Burke
Max's Mr Jason Weaks.
Thank.
Thank Representative small for
bringing this piece of
legislation.
The hospitality association a
registered lobbyist for them as
an industry throughout the
pandemic we appreciate.
To tourism for marketing and
promotion.
The tourism department to
continue to do winter market
which is critical to the tourism
industry in Mexico.
Workforce training
and recruitment.
To the industry so we can
address some of the research is
gonna be an issue for us but
this is a fantastic start think
the committee for that fifty
million appropriation as.
Dollars to the generals and
natural resources for
infrastructure state parks thank
you so much thank you very much
for three weeks we have two more
committee with us too hot most.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair and the rest of
the committee
news student at the university
of New Mexico.
Director of governmental affairs
issue and you.
With students and that.
The previous included hundred
million dollars in this bill is
not included it is meant to be
allocated to the lottery
scholarship.
The importance of scholarship to
students seeking education
opportunities.
Two thousand students across the
state in the last year received
a scholarship this is to twenty
percent of students in the state
to.
Is the stability of this through
the previously included provide
students feel secure education
funding.
Given the pandemic if you.
Those are the offices of the
president and vice president
who's.
Please reach out to you and need
you.
I thank you for your time thank
you very much we have a roll up
roll up all the.
And one more minute for public
comment.
We need.
Mexico.
We.
This.
Used to be safe and.
Thank you so much.
Thank you very much Mr Paul that
missed all this back include
public comment thank you all
very much.
Ready thank you of
Representative small and for
adding the the zoom process of
public comment I just want to
remind everyone particularly the
committee any time and and we
were pretty happy about the fact
that appropriation of federal
dollars would include the New
Mexico legislature know what the
legislature appropriation
process starts that's what
directly brings in the public
and the public that has an
opportunity to help with the
process that is one of the
reasons it was important that
what that we saw the results
that we did and that's what
brings the public in and I just
think I think that's important
for everybody to remember so I
appreciate the public for being
here today and those that cared
enough to tune in you know this
is an important process it's
over four hundred and sixty
million dollars we're talking
about here and it's new money
and you know it's for everybody
it's not it's not HSCs is for
the people of New Mexico so with
that being said let's go to the
committee of the start with
representative Armstrong for
questions and if you have
someone that you'd like to
answer that's fine we can call
them up the the staff thank you
madam chair and thank you for
the presentation of all of the
comments I would one question
that I have madam chair is up on
page three
section G. the five million
dollars for department of game
and fish property
For them to purchase property is
their specific property that
they want to to buy and so that
language be included let's get
the LFC staff up but they're
also with small and we can.
And they're all out the audience
that controls.
Madam chair thank you
representative Armstrong Madam
chair representative Armstrong
The most recent purchases I
talked about in the pit can
ranch down in southeast New
Mexico done to avoid with thing
listing for the lesser prairie
chicken allow the energy
industry to continue the been
other priorities including
within
the truck traditional cultural
property around the now Taylor
are you up for potential
property that's there but this
language gives the department
the flexibility to
to to make that
That choice so.
Madam chair no no we've not
taken action today
we can the connect with the
department to determine whether
and what that specific language
is appropriate to ensure that
the priority is not and and then
have a more clear answer madam
chair thank you so much yeah I
would I would really appreciate
that madam chair because a I
know there's some stuff in my
community that they're wanting
to purchase and I just want to
make sure all the faces are
covered there thank you for that
answer the other thing I wanted
to I got the answer about the
not competing really with
private industry on the
charging stations that's correct
it's going to be for the state
owned vehicles is that correct
madam chair yeah I'm here I'm
seeing head shaking yes okay
that's good enough for me and
then I really wanted to
encourage us to take a look at
the chili Association of that
situation is a is not good in a
lot of my communities and really
would like to support food banks
some more other than that that's
all my questions thank you madam
chair.
Going to have staff take a note
on the especially that chilly
situation I didn't even make
sense okay let's go to
Representative Crowder thank you
madam chair.
This is a follow up on a energy
at the top of page three madam
chair and.
Mr vice chair on the act
property purchase I understand
that they're going to just
continue to allow oil and gas
exploration like on the fifth
generation so those things but
they're not going to allow
grazing on those lands and and
you're gonna need cattle grazing
there I think in order to have
the wells continued to provide
the water for the pre check into
things so if you're gonna choir
asked him about the grazing
component of that as well I
think that's that's a pretty
important piece.
And so I just want us to follow
up question I have just a couple
of questions about the guard
rails of the boundaries and and
guidelines that are are going to
be a tax cities and I looked at
the F. and in H. and E. their
seven million dollars
because the Economic Development
I prefer outdoor recreation
grants.
Other guidelines attached to
that so that there's no
geographic diversity is some of
the small communities can use it
is not a problem up in one big
community the staff to answer
that go ahead.
Yes Representative Crowder
these this is an existing grant
program The Department
administered a little over half
a million dollars of this grant
this last year and more than
half of those were for rural
communities these requests
really are targeted towards
rural communities because that's
what benefits the most and there
is a fifty percent match
requirement for those requests
as well okay madam chair and and
I appreciate that I I just want
to make sure that I didn't know
that this is being added to an
existing program and so that's
good information on item after
the ten million dollars to the
environment department I'm
assuming of armor Department
made a request for those dollars
and that they have a plan for
where they're going to expand
those dollars on certain
waterways or or rivers or
something
it would be possible for us to
look at that I I'm not opposed
to what they're doing I would
just like to understand it so
someone else that can answer.
Madam chair representative
Crowder thank you and I was in
touch with the Environment
Department earlier and they are
working on contributing to the
FIR and also just giving the LFC
staff of planning for expending
these funds but as you know this
is an existing program so these
are ongoing projects that they
have planned that their staff
work on but they're going to get
us some more specifics about
this appropriation I'll share
that with you when I receive it
thank you for that percent we're
much my final question is in the
section eighty the twenty
million dollars for up to
provide housing there again I'm
just curious other existing
guidelines is that I don't know
of an existing program but can
we make sure that there is
geographic diversity in that in
that the the small communities a
rural communities have an
opportunity to order not all
backed up by.
Representative you're someone
else is there a plan for how
that money will be expended yeah
begin in on this.
Representative Crowder it's
really important to note that
the federal government does
exactly want us to look at
equity throughout the state so
underserved communities are
major mark for us so when I
talked a little bit about the
equity plan that's what we're
going to have to report on is
how do we distribute dispense
and did we do it equitably.
Okay and.
Hope that the term equity
includes geographic diversity so
thank you madam chair I
understand that we may have a a
typographical issue on this
housing begins is that not
correct and we.
The LFC staff explain.
We had
on this housing face the
Provision endorsed for a hundred
percent match and I think
there's already been a fair
amount of feedback I heard from
several previous on that issue
today so and I'm sure issue
continue looking at this bill
that match I think there's a
America to have a match but of
the some of the thinking is
perhaps to provide for DFA to
sets gifts DFA some guidelines
to set up the appropriate match
recognizing fiscal conditions so
that there's also we want to
have it separated out as what
part goes to homeless at Fargo's
to MFA whatever we need to have
that broke out okay this test to
clarify I think the intent was
ten million each and that the
did I do would be to clarify
that exactly okay sec.
anything else Representative
Crowder all right let's go to
Representative Sweetser thank
you madam chair and and the
thank you Representative for the
field my questions are on
section for lower with the broad
band
allocations so when I look
between a and B. there's you
know less than a quarter of the
money would be going to
broadband infrastructure and
then a hundred million to
alternative broadband
infrastructure and I wondered.
What the designation
differentiation is for I mean
why why are we giving a hundred
million I'll turn it is and I
would even separating those out.
Okay.
Six.
The distinction Madam chair
representative Sweetser is
between traditional broadband
has been delivered by fiber
underground I even to residences
and you know of technology is
advancing so rapidly we clearly
have satellites that are
providing this at a greater cost
but we could expect that to come
down there there's New Mexico
investments and sky which is
promising another alternative so
I think that's the distinction
that is been quite there.
Thank you madam chair and
director Avid I understand the
distinction but I don't know is
why I guess because if we have
with that with our new broadband
And if we just had the general
funds I think that they could
determine which is the better
use of the money you know I was
one of the sponsors of house
bill ten we specifically chose
to be tech neutral so that we
allow the flexibility because
some parts of the state
obviously you're gonna lend
themselves to different
broadband.
Technology accesses and I just
think that the separation there
is puzzling to me so two points.
When asked the new broadband
director to give input on your
question that's it's a good one
but there's a lot of money for
conventional broadband already.
hundreds of millions in both
state funds at the last session
federal funds coming in so I
think B. was intended to try to
promote technical.
Remote solutions that are
promising kind of in a positive
way and there maybe maybe that
amount isn't right but there is
a desirability of investing in
advanced technologies just
opposed to the conventional
technology which Madam said
sense suggests that's not the
wave of the future of delivering
broadband twenty or thirty years
from now so that so thinking but
we were reserves that with the
new to new director and see if
any adjustment would be in order
thank you director Avid thank
you madam chair to that point a
lot of that federal money will
require matches that I'm worried
if we can string some of this
specifically for the with the
term alternative in it just
seems to me that we might be
short selling our ability to
Mexico's federal funds so I
appreciate you looking into it
thank you madam chair
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair two
questions one for the department
of transportation by the LFC.
You're you stated that you're
having a hard time all.
Legislation to the state.
My question is have you tried to
get one localities or or
business systems to see if it
makes could assist on that
project cleaning the state of.
Madam chair representative I
apologize I was walking up as
you were saying your question if
you could just please repeat
that I appreciate on you
mentioned earlier that the you
cannot keep up with the trash
collection the state of New
Mexico have you thought of of
keeping up with the prison
systems or local level Mexico
city's to.
You know let me give people
recipe duties so forth have you
thought of those issues to try
to correct the.
Madam chair representative
yes we have in fact we have a an
inmate labor contract we're in
the past we were able to utilize
inmates to essentially pick up
trash in the winter they would
they would help of the state
facilities a shovel snow during
rain events fluids they helped
us feel sent back so we do have
a contract in place however
since the pandemic hit we were
no longer we had no we to logger
had access to that to that labor
but as soon as we climb of the
pandemic we we certainly
want to get back on on track
with the corrections department
to get those inmates back on the
on the roast office so thanks
for this on the question I have
for the highway department and
chairman one more question and
the lady that of which you're
that lobbyist for the food banks
has left my concerns are that
the with the questions you ask
is how many people to this
effect on the funding for she
said there were no February out
of money so how many people are
going to be left for all food it
the end of the day.
Or can we can we will revisit
this five million dollars kids
well that's a lot of money but
you will be well we're going to
do the research and contact her
because I don't know what.
Okay but as research and that's
the last question how many
people are going to be affected
so thank you madam chair okay
Representative Eli.
Thank you madam chair Madam
comments on the.
That individual issues like
asking a parent can choose their
favorite child.
The right to me.
my my first question is really
more of foundational questions
on the trust and the fury so and
some of state and make sure that
I got this correct so minor
Center and frame these are funds
restricted state treasury the
general fund and then we're also
reporting the Feds that the way
we're allocating these funds is
to replace lost funds revenue to
the state as a result of COVID.
Correct and there two budget we
get from that one is it takes
sort of a time crunch so if you
look on page two we haven't
office here two thousand twenty
five the state funds the second
rationale of that it also gives
us is the appropriate stress
about how to how.
That for.
Representative yes.
And madam chair of civic
appropriation though the
question I have is on page
seven.
we're getting a million dollars
LCS through legislative process
and systems here's what is what
is the legislative process.
Chair representative ruling.
The let's Council Service
entered into an eighty thousand
dollar contract with a company
to try to figure out how to use.
Smart technology to aid in bills
drafted right now bill drafting
is a hundred percent manual
process involving lawyers and
the idea of about three or four
states have invested in tools to
facilitate bill drafting and
make it more faster more
efficient like
finding companion parts of
statute that may be relevant to
the proposal or to bring it in
from other states so that the
have.
We're gonna get from results of
this and I'm sure report to the
council the results of that
study with it before the session
but they're excited about it and
they this is not a cheap product
project a million dollars is
really could be a tenth of the
eventual cost it's expensive but
this allows them to go from most
good planning to more like a
feasibility and initial project
development.
Representative like making a
move.
Staff writers to word
processing.
Four.
Okay thank you very much just a
Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair thank you very much.
One one.
That.
I like it is.
Whether they are.
Sure workers throughout the
state now how much money are we
going to have to look into that
employment insurance.
Madam chair we will include in
our budget documents of
projections of the unemployment
trust fund and the six hundred
million that was put in and
there's been a sharp decline in
climates of the fund and an
employment unemployment has
dropped to six and a half
percent so we are watching we
LFC staff for watching those
projections monthly in
coordinating with workforce
solutions and the view is that
fund is in comfortably and
surplus at this point will
revisit for the session.
Thank you.
This.
We're talking.
It also fades to starting.
The news.
Probably not.
You.
Here miss petty can respond to
that.
Because that's what we're saying
this office.
Madam chair representative is
itself so the five hundred
thousand dollars would be for
statewide pretrial services
monitoring there is additional
funding in the preliminary LFC
rack for pre trial services in
individual point and then as the
chair what is mentioned there's
other federal funding being
considered during the session
for more pre trial services and
our mission is it should meet
the need.
I appreciate the response thank
you for that madam chair also
additionally on page two point
six starting care three hundred
million five thousand energy
minister that.
Those the debate in on this and
there are costs that you have
our
mission to the state of the
school so I.
Why are we.
I have services.
Madam chair representative he's
also this appropriation would be
specifically to pre position the
oil conservation division to
obtain a administer large sums
of money that New Mexico is
going to be eligible for from
the infrastructure at investment
and jobs act some of the funding
is available through competitive
grants and the ideas that this
funding can help OCD have the
resources to apply for those
grants they may have to do
different types of analyses like
environmental analyses or prior
year spending analysis and
future projections in order to
apply for those grants and then
come up with plans in advance
for spending the grant money so
that they can hit the ground for
ground running when those
federal funds hopefully become
available to us.
Madam chair representative I
would just add that it's
absolutely right that there are
bonding requirements including
requirements that the
legislature raised back I think
in two thousand and seventeen or
eighteen there are cases of
orphan well is where the the
bonding amounts are insufficient
and our the previous well owners
are
no longer there.
Whether the the amount was
insufficient for other reasons
that there are currently orphan
wells and
this will also madam chair
representative of that.
There is concern if and when an
tight budgetary times the
legislature takes funding from a
fund that's meant for this
orphan well clean up for other
purposes in the oil conservation
division this will reduce the
backlog of orphan wells
hopefully ensuring that we never
use those funds for other than
their intended purpose.
That sure you're exactly right
the functionalities.
I've seen that done through
energy minerals and natural
resources just think wages noted
that particularly therefore I do
have because that has been it is
taken care of by the SCG but now
we're talking about
here.
To sometimes
They have been shut down because
it is producing a minimal
minimal amount of oil that it is
those small producers that are
being shut down the business as
opposed to larger companies that
are able to produce more but
I'll get all that.
Madam chair thank you very much
for your.
Is going to be addressed to the
do you have to.
Question for you thank you very
much for your.
Both the orgy stations.
Statewide.
Any idea where this money going.
Madam chair representative so we
don't just yet I think that's
one of the things we're going to
start with is the study in that
they're going to look at exactly
what our options are as far as
utilizing these funds to be
placed on likely in in state
owned facilities.
State of the facilities so when
a person does go into one of
these charging stations madam
chair
Documented is it.
Sort of.
Part of the state identification
card.
Because.
I'm just really curious out of
that right that's a great
question madam chair and
representative that's a great
question you know we in early
and early discussions and we
know in research a lot of that
looks like individual show up to
one of the stations put their
credit card in and obviously pay
for the service and then on the
back and we would then work with
the company to either retrieve
R. P.'s somehow work at that
that that part of it out we're
just not there yet so I don't
really have a great answer for
you but that's the we we
envision.
Thank you very much for that
were also suggests setting right
here
Thanks for.
The.
Area is with three eighty
leaving Russell going is decided
things that that particular road
issues but school buses mail
delivery.
This.
Well.
Well it gas companies the
renewable energy that's a big
deal right there one of them in
those big BladeCenter in excess
of I think eighty feet long
Plus the agricultural community
that does use that would plus
people that do have to go to
Texas for medical services we
have a problem that what do you
have a story for you.
Madam chair representative you
know we just completed a phase
HB study on three eighty so that
that information is in the hands
of office the district to Mr
Francisco Sanchez nope.
Madam chair representative thank
you I appreciate that he's a
great guy so right now we're
just we're just looking for
funds not to start constructing
the pieces that the study has
identified we have several in
our major investment projects on
their in our our plans I know
Representative Crowder if we
discuss this specifically and I
provided him some information
some projects that I think
around twenty three twenty four
so we're real close we're just
looking for funding.
Thank you for that the chair I
have to not necessarily.
This is the page three.
My question is.
I would like to I would like an
answer of this for us might be
able to do to make this
information.
In the department I want to know
right now how much property all
right now but I would like to
it on the Madam property that
game and fish does right now
because that property is no
longer on the tax rolls.
That has come off of each
district staff from.
I want to know what the size
difference was and I want to
know what the price per acre was
because if they have our.
What are the price of the I have
a problem with that to me that's
a concern.
Madam chair if I'm and thank you
very much for the questions all
work thank you with this it was
staff to get the information
Madam chair representative
the procurement laws that make
sure that that the appraised
prices they have to be publicly
appraised there was a public
private partnership I believe it
and GL Energy specifically with
the pip can rant that was part
of that one other thing madam
chair representative so that I
would point out of the benefit
and other additional piece with
specifically wildlife management
areas is all of it in addition
to the root of recreational
opportunities fishing and others
all of the hunting opportunities
on those those wildlife
management areas are are
available for New Mexico
residents decreasing pressure on
allowing the private land system
I think decreasing pressure on
changing some of that system by
increasing the hunting
opportunities with the wildlife
management areas.
Madam chair representative out
there to do with that we will
discuss.
But I asked my next question in
regards to what came.
This is land also point to be
part of the proposed from the
federal level the state the
thirty five program that is.
Are fully under way in our in
our nation right now.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
Department I don't know to what
extent Department again fish is
part of the
The recommendations there is no
and then as my understand madam
chair representative there's no
federal requirements around the
the thirty by thirty issue in
there are partnerships we talked
about it that's in the framework
the ten million dollars for the
association the for water
conservation district in other
states working lands are
partnering with
their states thirty by thirty
initiative but
Okay I'll get any other further
detail specifically with
department of game and fish and
what their participation in.
Share my concern over this
particular property right here
as the amount of land that is
owned now by game and fish that
was a lot of the tax dollars of
the state of New Mexico if this
thirty about thirty program
thirty.
Thirty percent of all the United
States by the year twenty.
If that was split up equitably
between all fifty states.
What I set up a payment
attention side property in Ann
Arbor Michigan or places back
east.
If they had to economically like
we have to do of this particular
wraps.
So
Just get that information was
the next question.
Madam chair of.
Representative my last question
has to do with.
Start a lot of.
As far as I can I understand
that.
The question is.
Expanding the enrollment in and
graduation from nursing programs
at St Lucian of higher education
is there to do for the nursing
instructors and the nurses that
do come out that.
Calls at.
If nobody can answer the I think
we can because of the signals
here but.
Institutions put in requests to
expand many of their nursing
programs and having sat on the
committee that reviewed them
generally those up there were
investments in faculty pay and
the club and so forth that
didn't lead to increasing slots
for quite a while and so it's
hard to recommend those without
an immediate payoff given budget
constraints so the the nice
thing about this fund is it
provides a start up money
without an expectation of
immediate results we know as
miss testified that later on
will have to come up with
recurring funding.
Absolutely aware of testimony
from universities that.
Need to put us versus with the
best aggression can teach these
programs which is challenging
number one and Charles number
two paying those nurses enough
to make it lucrative to compete
with the the jobs providing
direct services so.
The investment in these funds
and program expansion absolutely
includes the need to address our
supposed faculty that are
problematic.
That response.
That was already Representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair of try the short to the
point on page one of I'm looking
and hi I see that.
Federal funds have been received
to the state treasury.
And they've been held in the
Corona virus state fiscal
recovery fund who created that
I.
The DFA created that's an agency
created fund thank you and how
much is in there before we do
this transfer the balance that
we looked at yesterday was the
one billion sixty nine million.
then what is the balance
currently in the contention
chief contingency fund of the
general fund.
That that's where we put the
billion sixty nine million.
Madam chair representative
that's where it would go there's
a small amount in there right
now I believe but in the
financial summary.
A small about meeting.
The money for disasters I see.
who can take that money out of
the one billion sixty nine who's
authorized to call I suppose the
state treasurers say Hey write a
check for.
Whatever Madam chair
representative based on the
Supreme Court ruling in November
those funds in order to get this
treasury would need to be
appropriated.
Okay the legislature at the
appropriation would designate
for the purpose of
responsibility for that
That I look at it at FIR and
we're talking about
the money to come to New Mexico
nineteen point one billion
dollars worth of money and
services into New Mexico so I
think okay.
That's nineteen.
Point one billion dollars and
we're just moving up billion
sixty nine.
So my question is is there any
other and then there they're all
the sources of this nineteen
point one listed Corona virus
preparedness families first
coronas response Corona virus a
very bleak paycheck protection
Corona virus response in the
last the American rescue plan.
So I guess my question is is
there anywhere in the state
treasury where a lot of this
federal Corona money is that and
I just don't know how to ask the
question which but this is the.
Madam chair Representative
Anderson a lot of that a
nineteen billion went didn't
come through government would
directly to businesses or
individuals like your the checks
that were sent out so big
chairman went off directly to
hospitals money that was flowing
through the treasury
tended to be attached to
existing grant programs that
agencies administered a good
example of that was the a huge
infusion of money for the child
care development block grant
which is administered by the
early childhood
Education and Care Department
there was a a big increase in
the federal matching rates for
Medicaid so we would see that
with the corresponding savings
in general fund
and you did that through the
special session last summer so
there's lots of money coming
through a variety of of
different funding streams and
it's hard to keep track of but
we've been doing it all summer
with the report to the committee
every month.
Thank you Charles I just wanted
to confirm and I find that
there's not some dormant account
with a few extra billion that
we're we're overlooking that
when we transfer billion sixty
nine million that we're getting
all there is and we're putting
it into the general fund no
putting an end to the general
fund in a contingency but to me
if it goes into the general fund
it's in the general fund Madam
chair representative Anderson it
is the appropriation contingency
fund is a sub account within the
broader general fund we thought
that was a good place to put it
to keep its segregated for
reporting purposes the DFA still
gonna have to do
and it would still require an
appropriation from the
legislature it has about forty
five million dollars and right
now my question is concerns that
that this bill no we're.
What's grant told.
Four forty seven million change.
I I don't then there for.
Concluded that the remaining.
Bills many millions hundreds of
millions is still going to lie
in the contingency fund to the
general fund.
Madam chair representative hello
the remainder slowly over six
hundred million will remain in
their.
That money could not be moved
anywhere until the legislature
appropriates money Madam chair
representative yes thank you up
Madam one of my concerns and I
don't know there's an answer
this today but there's part of
this bill that rates a little
bit like capital outlay to me
and I thought well what if we
get back here January the
sentences okay you guys spent
here for forty seven million
will we'll do ours.
And is there any concern madam
chairman in your mind about
subsequent to passage of this
bill another body in this
legislature saying okay now we
get to spend for forty seven I
will happen you know if they if
they're going to get chance to
look at this that's the
legislative process.
But if there is that kind of a
position taken by the Senate
their bill would never get out
of HFC because it would get
scheduled thank you madam.
That's a very.
very realistic right.
Yeah which is also Gadgil very
realistic remedy that I have
considered.
Madam chair of.
On on some of these I just.
I look at them and so many
worthy things but sometimes I
read one and I think now why did
part of that nineteen point one
billion cover that because that
is absolutely clearly Corona
virus related expense in.
And knowing that all the money
has been spent there is no
dormant.
Comment money laying around
really puzzles me why we're
being asked to of appropriate
some of this money for COVID
purposes.
Relative to relative small now
one of these pages it talks
about
Health Care.
Yeah interject on that
Representative yes we have this
money.
How long has it been sitting in
the treasure New Mexico Madam
chair we received earlier this
spring and the legislature
anticipated the receipt of it
when you're in session and
that's why you appropriated it
it has that Representative
Anderson yes so we tried yes yes
ma'am and therefore virtually
all of the work we're looking
at.
Has been previously
appropriated legislated and
vetoed by the fourth floor
that's right okay I think that's
important that that these are
just wishful thinking but there
was one that really troubled me
Madam chairman and it it's just
puzzles me why in the heck given
that get covered by some of this
other money previously and here
we are.
Looking at the as of okay I'm
gonna I'm gonna leave that load
madam chairman idea.
I.
Really kind of.
Toy with whether we ought to do
this that our do this next month
but because of your
sponsorship I am willing to go.
Forward with this but there
there are some questions that I
think in the appropriation
process for example.
I didn't know or I was unaware
we already spent five million
dollars on highway
beautification and now and put
another ten million in for
highway beautification and I
think to myself you know I think
there greater needs for that ten
million dollars that clean up
that's just one man's opinion
but it is a concern I have about
how these priorities were were
stacked in if I could just just
briefly Representative your you
know and LFC we have these let's
just let's just at conversations
where we have the departments
come forward we've been asked to
put a boatload more money into
tourism for marketing and
bringing people into the
community then you start looking
at all these other derivatives
from that do we have the staff
is workforce solutions working
closely with that department to
make sure restaurants are
staffed hotels are staffed do we
want to bring in a bunch of
people when you have at least in
my part of the state all of the
state bridges are graffiti and
was not very nice kinds of
things then and then there's a
literal on the highways you know
we're I think what we're trying
to do is look at this at least
from a comprehensive approach
with existing programs.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm gonna conclude by simply
saying
I have a concern about broadband
and my concern is I swear where
you're throwing more money at
this thing and we don't even
have a plan as I heard it was
and that is a core concern that
I'll have a January when we get
back having already let a lot of
money out it already spent madam
chairman over ten million
dollars and we still have
plenty.
So I think to myself what did
they do with that ten million
dollars but that's one the
second one is on the OCD and
those orphan well so one has to
spots real quick how many orphan
wells we have a New Mexico.
Representative I. H. I'm reading
I will reach out.
Right now it's in my office
there's thousands thousands
thousands that are in there and
at least in that listing.
And so we talked OCD the average
that are worked on a years about
ten.
The plan is this actually came
from a private sector may a good
way to do the job creation is to
start this kind of initiative
for your hiring local people to
get this work done.
and so instead of doing ten a
year we're doing a thousand a
year and just to get the ball
moving but what this department
needs is manpower and technical
assistance so they can apply for
the federal dollars right now we
you know we're a little short on
that.
To concluding comments madam
chairman one I am suspicious of
the the concept of thousands I'm
very comfortable with the
pandemic.
so I think there's a
definitional.
Issue relative to how many
orphan wells we have a New
Mexico secondly I simply want to
reiterate that representative
was else point that.
There's not an unexpected
outcome here if you take the
orphan well fund money and use
it to pay salaries and and and
cars for OCD then there's no
money in the oval orphan well
fund woe is us I'm just saying I
think this body needs to give a
lot of attention to allowing
those funds to be moved to a
different purpose thank you
madam chair thank you let's move
almost go Representative
Ferreira.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members I I just want to follow
up on the trash in the highway
situation I had a public meeting
in advocate about I don't know
three months ago and it was an
hour and a half long that sixty
people showed up I just want to
everybody here to know that
twenty minutes of that meeting
was dedicated to how can we get
these highways free of trash
it's a huge issue in rural New
Mexico and and and and the
graffiti and all of those things
it it's a huge issue for
communities in the north I was
amazed that it took about one
fourth of this meetings time to
talk about that from citizens in
in the avid Q. L. retail area
I'm madam chair I'm trying to
follow up on Representative
Sweetser is comments the that
broadband and
And I know this is new money it
doesn't connect at all to that
what I think about a hundred and
forty million that we passed
last year as part of HB ten so
this is new broadband money
coming in from from our path
You know.
At.
How how long have the agencies
have this information I guess
that's what I would like to ask.
Will this money came in and
marches mistress we partner I
think in terms of the the bill
itself we didn't even started to
we knew what was going to be on
the call that's why the strategy
is is to put money into existing
programs and to try to get it
helps through existing programs
we would have not with me would
not have known that this would
have been on the call until was
released thank you thank you
very much madam chair that's
very helpful so I you know this
is this is a quick quick moving
chip that we're trying to put
together with our our state
agencies and you know we just
had the broad bands are Matt
Schmidt appointed about a month
ago and our new director IDOT
and secretary just came on board
so so I just want to know we had
in in H. B. ten was an important
part of that bill that we had a
New Mexico connect council so
that we could bring you know
various people from throughout
the state and cabinet
secretaries together to do that
plan that you were talking about
Representative Anderson I but
I'm just going to tell you it
wasn't wasn't the intent of our
committee that that would take a
year but it has taken me here
and I am so glad we are and and
and the whole purpose of that
bill was to state technology
neutral because we realised as a
group of legislators that there
was no way we could protect the
technology future and we know
that might be some big ideas
that you'd have to that you
would have to change and and you
know you can't tell when
technologies getting hit in this
in this industry so I guess.
I guess I would like to
reiterate that we kept it
technology neutral because we're
we're very worried that if a big
solution might come up or it
might not come up.
You know it's kind of a gamble
you know when you put and I'm
just worried if we don't make it
neutral and you put a hundred
million out of four hundred
million into one technology boy
that's given that one technology
a huge advantage it might be
something you want to do but I
would just like to remind
everybody we put that council
together as part of that
legislation so that so that
people would certainly more
knowledge than me could could
make a decision on on on how we
allocate monies and and I just
want you know they're they're
writing the FIR at that you know
I do it right now and and I know
that the new
broadband seismic Schmidt is a
little concerned about the
language too so I'm just saying
I hope we have time to kind of
get all the players together so
that we make sure that we're
doing the best thing we can for
our state using the people who
who really understand the impact
of this new technology to help
the guidance thank you madam
chair that's really all I
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr and Representative
thank you for bringing this bill
forward excellent.
Workings of our time here in and
really has a number of
priorities that I think there's
right.
I have three questions
first regarding section to see.
The twenty billion dollars.
Thankfully and infrastructure
for state.
And I'm wondering if there's a
sense of how many jobs this
investment would create.
At.
Very much madam chair
representative we're getting the
exact breakdown from energy and
minerals but not only will this
support the state parks in the
tourism that they generate it
will allow
More folks to in like we live
and work in some of the state
parks hello things like fishing
in eagle nest and others to
continue so we're getting
together the entire jobs picture
I would also note this is only a
portion of the maintenance
backlog that exists with state
parks.
but it's a a significant portion
early on to be able to to begin
investing in.
We have the list of projects and
we'll make that available in
response jobs you know there's a
big going to be contract jobs
lasted for the likes of Google
hard to do but we can name the
project thank you very much okay
my second question in this
probably would be delivered to
us secretary Romero.
Regards section two okay and.
Whether
or
more.
Staff would assist in elaborate.
On.
Capital outlay project.
Budget is funded through the
federal American rescue plan act
twenty twenty one what that that
is the thank you madam chair
Representative this in due to
the action taken on the house
floor last night
it's my understanding that these
funds stop this okay I.
Sorry I apologize that's what
come on and we'll start out to
do the five hundred.
Is to help expedite projects of
all sorts of local government
division we've heard a lot of
testimony is you know they're
thirty six hundred unfinished
projects that funded with state
funds so it's it's almost like
an accomplishment or an expedite
or are ramrod of the five
hundred to date.
The the four thirty five
Was a special appropriation
request to DFA very oriented to
administering the from money and
this is I think if you noted the
FIR there's a technical
suggestion to strike local
government in that program that
was not the intent was one was
overall DFA the four thirty five
of the five hundred was local
project oriented but again the
four thirty I came from a
special request from DFA
received November first I'm sure
Mr Romero secretary Romero could
add to that.
Secretary would you like to make
a comment.
Okay the just just to follow up
on that madam chair and Mr Abbey
Would sort of be able to along
the lines.
Our infrastructure coordinator
of.
If if if so or if not I need to
I think this is moving along the
lines of what you really
strongly advocated last year for
a grants coordination office for
federal funds I viewed when we
started to get with you might
just Madam chair for secretary
Romero to comment that we saw
that request in the in the light
of your request last year and we
had a lot of conversation with
the official religion so we sort
of saw that as a tool for in
terms of addressing their needs
that our media with our pro but
setting the stage for something
longer from all right let's
let's secretary answers.
Representative Dixon so that's
exactly what we need we have
actually we hired that staff
and and helpful purposes to
track and report on the federal
grants for community Mexico but
not only that to help agencies
applied for and received
additional funds now we have a
new investment position we just
had that position that starts on
she started on Monday we see
that that will be integrated
into the process as well having
somebody.
Having the room but then work
with the budget then that will
go a long way in helping us get
more money thing Mexico the
other thing that we would like
to see is hi riders we feel need
both at the agency level and
local governments and so.
By building capacity at the
agency level that will flow down
to the local government level
but in the meantime we'll be
here to assist in helping to do
that we don't have.
That writers that's that's
that make sure that the thing we
keep hearing over and over again
is the need for that record.
Will it be great if we can get
some sort of our report and
maybe just from LFC staff on you
know how all this works.
Be nice to.
Representative finished apple
outlay is you know just a
summary
to see how that.
Has a monthly report of federal
funds and a quarterly report on
capital and this is totally
ongoing work for.
Some madam chairman
Representative if I may the
other thing is I think everybody
is aware that the governor hired
has popped up have somebody on
staff now to work on
infrastructure more Chavis and
he then there were other
individuals that were were
mentioned in the press release
as well and they see that as a
team not only just to work on
the federal funds are committees
they protect and I needs and so
his goal is to get out into the
communities and to work with
legislators and to try to figure
out what the needs are so we can
package federal bills will and
and apply for funds and leverage
as much as we can with state and
federal money.
That's just prior.
Thank you madam chair at my
final question relates to
section to the P..
The
the ten million dollars DOT for
the regional airport.
In my quest.
If we will be ensuring that that
well as we go to the projects
that are either fully funded
will we'll be prioritized FAA
matching funds opportunities
what will be that prioritization
that Madam chair representative
I think you hit the nail right
on the head and that's that's
really what we're looking to do
with the funds.
Passed through actually identify
those projects Mr petrodollars
aviation director he works well
with all the the regional
airports and he has the need so
we will be working with them
fortunately you.
Chair woman I.
All right thank you
Representative Sariñana thank
you Mr chair I just want to be
back on Representative Sweetser
is representative Representative
Ferrary is remarks about
anything specifically we have to
communities all over the state
the one point I had the issue
with the purpose for satellites
that's what the and also in.
The state law.
I don't think so.
This question and in so I can
just focus on that the second
thing is on the nursing
the nursing important.
We're actually win with the
front end to.
The question.
At sixty six thousand kids with
the.
Access so we still need more
money we have so that's going
to.
Really.
Report of a
relational for.
it did their first feasibility
study I think.
And they said we needed ten.
The ability of.
A billion to invest at work and
now we're going to I think we
might have a million but a
couple years ago that seemed
Fund thank of course I sure that
was five billion and five
billion was estimated by doing
underground fiber to every home
that lacked.
That is.
You just think about the future
and what satellites to do that
seems okay to to draw trench put
fiber to every single home and
for world expo and so I think
some of the thinking it's not a
so what we choice of communities
and families students is
currently key also cost
effectiveness and I think in the
long run if we don't want to pay
I I I'm sure we can reach all
homes for less than five that
was part of even by that studies
it knowledge meant they were
assuming it using existing
technology the point is to have
technology that can deliver
those services cheaper and more
convenient with great
reliability side again choice
matters the cost effectiveness
matters to of that study to
questions at this time.
I I understand that but we have
to make sure somebody's
technologies we're looking at
for years and we still not up to
sixty five eighty five thousand
dollars but I initiatives thank
you.
last undersea
I had a bill for a nurse in
every school years ago and
we have so many schools that
don't have to addresses there is
so desperate for this and
because of it what are the
questions that kids were they
have they needed to go talk to
the nurse several times a day it
was it was just their second
stage with this being from the
computers all day and COVID.
More nurses are important but
it's not only world effect APS
and they said they can't hire
nurses either so this training
is absolutely needed and what
their rate when you talk to
there's that side of the schools
they're paid for you know
seventy eighty ninety thousand
we have to be able to be
comparable so so I'm hoping this
is enough money thank you.
Okay thank you representative of
us go to Representative Brown.
You madam chair so I'm on the
same wavelength with many of the
members who spoke about
broadband already I'm very
concerned about it and on
opening bill just about ten
minutes before we well then I
had a call from a constituent
who lives in a remote part of my
district is called queen it's a
beautiful area of other people
out there but we just don't have
solar internet service so it's a
big issue and has a public
safety ramifications so
One of the things that I'm
learning lose the apparently the
New Mexico department of
transportation is now charging
for the easement for a internet
companies to put their bond that
I am mines and so that's even
more of a hurdle now for getting
broadband with we're we need it
so just want to mention madam
chair that maybe there's a way
we can address that without
violating any law in the
process.
And it talks about that is that
true could you all talk about
that I've heard it but never
informed me on it.
Madam chair representative of
that is correct we working on
all rulemaking which is could
identify indeed some sort of of
the and that's really what we're
working on now is to make sure
that you know we're looking
other states to see what they're
doing and just try to be
somewhere in the middle there
but yeah that is the case.
Okay thank you are in rulemaking
mode and in those rural make
enough that process are you
suggesting that a fee we charge
madam chair yes that's correct
how much is it or how what's it
based on.
You madam chair I don't I don't
know if I have the the right
answer for you but I can get
that information for you
alleges me Representative Brown
okay okay yes ma'am go ahead
Representative Brown.
Yes thank you madam chair
So I wanted to also mentioned
that in the fiscal impact report
on page six we have to technical
issues that have been
highlighted and we're going to
see was but again tomorrow but
Canadian let's see what changes
are needed because of the
notices that that'll be
reflected in tomorrow's billed
one has to do with currently
it's not for the state to use
federal replacement revenue to
further federal matching
affirmative and the other one
has to do with call at
mentioning the quote local
government division regarding
and that's on page three
something there so I just want
to put that in the family madam
chair I just kinda want to put a
little photo up there for us.
We're talking about a lot of
money here we're going to be
basically it's a flood of of of
of money.
And I'm concerned about the
workers shortage we have we we
just can't find people to hire
we have agencies that have a
high potency rates and in
addition to that we have a
material shortage or at least
pretty lengthy delays getting
like lumber and concrete and
steel and all those things so
any projects that are dependent
on materials acquisition I
wonder if we're putting money in
areas we really can't spend very
quickly all.
Thank you Madam.
Let's go to Representative
Trujillo.
Thank you madam chair and my
question is really a short one
simply regarding the questions
that were asked by.
By some of our guests.
testifying they some of them
questioned the need for a
supportive nursing homes and I
was wondering if those nurses
that sit our money is going to
address some of those concerns
about how much money would that
would that involve because
I've gotten calls from nursing
homes in my district.
On that we.
A couple advocates.
Propose increased funding to
addressed development
developmentally disabled clients
and others first you run into a
little bit of problems with the
match because we can absolutely
leverage federal funds through
the D. day program at the health
department through Medicaid so
you know we don't spend a
hundred percent general fund
when you can leverage federal
funds so the good news about
that is LESC adopted yesterday a
strong recommendation for the
developmentally disabled waiver
that includes a provider rate
increases that could happen now
because they have enough money
they know that and they just
took four hundred people off the
waiting list and the rec lead to
taking everyone off the waiting
list for FY twenty three if they
can find providers so I think at
the regular session is the right
time to address that was
straight up general fund dollars
rather than the opera money in
that sport coming I believe
madam chair all thank you madam
chair and just that and that and
it will that involve any care
givers that are not net the
dealing with the elderly but not
necessarily special needs.
Disabled population are special
needs so those are the ones that
would be what it from the
provider rate increase that was
requested by the department of
recommended by LFC.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you thank you Representative
Lara.
Thank you madam chair thank you
represent a small I have a
question really a clarifying
question if four DOT on the top
of page five number two it
states in the state road in
order that this and I have a
County is this the expansion of
highway nine specific brand new
construction.
That we're given that we're
looking at Madam.
Madam chair representative this
is going to be a brand new road
on the border Authority is
already he started at the study
and once we're done with that
study then obviously a quarter
will will come of that and they
were looking to fund that okay
thank thank you for madam chair
so this isn't this isn't the
expansion of highway ninety.
Yes well no it's not but it's
going to be it's going to be a
comprehensive look at that whole
area on until the studies done
we really don't have a good
handle exactly what it will
entail but it's going to be some
sort of new road definitely
manager at the.
This this this would be the the
road that's going to going to
connect the the port of entry to
so apostle yes exactly Madam
chair representative on part yes
that's right and and madam chair
do you know off the top of your
head if you have this
information you don't that's
okay how much time is going to
shave off of these vehicle for
these for profit to go till Paso
Madam chair representative of
that something the study will
what will come up with they're
going to look at all the
alternatives and come up with
things specifically to that
question thank you very much
thank you Mr.
All right that concludes.
Questions that we have from the
committee as I said we're not
gonna take action on this today
there's a lot that we've gone
over a lot that's been
discussed.
My intention is to Morrow is a
couple sections here that I'm
gonna point ad hoc group to work
with you on that we need for the
better clarifying language here
months.
Chilly stuff in there but
there's two in particular that
strike struck me as
page three age that housing the
difference between this homeless
and affordable housing stuff you
know.
What's going where in other
words if someone's going to MFA
and where's the rest of it.
Page three K. we're looking out
of this this issue for DFA try
to help
have language
So I've been working on a come
back tomorrow everybody another
chance to think about this is
there anything Burnett in your
mind but still.
To take action on this now so I
thought this is an excellent
hearing they got over thirty
some of people in order to the
committee I appreciate all the
staff for being here today and
how hot will be tomorrow I just
don't know exactly what time so
let me thank all of you for
being here and will adjourned
for the day thank.
Okay.
What.
