Excellent. Thank you very much.
Uh thanks, everybody. We're
gonna dive right in, uh, Mr.
Pedro, great to see you here.
Uh, we'll start with, uh, our
time-honored, uh, Mr. Chavez and
Mr. Semiglia. We're gonna hear
uh agency 264 administrative
Office of the District
attorneys, uh, before we go
through our various district
attorneys across the state.
Great to see everybody here
today. Thank you for making the
trip. With that, we're gonna go
ahead and start with Mr. Chavez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Long time no see you again, um,
good afternoon. I forgot to say,
um, my name is Felix Chavez, LC
analyst and with this Marius
Miglia will be will be behind
tab 2 agency 264. Again, agency
264 and in volume 2 will be,
will be pages 55 and 56 for the
AODA which will I'll be
referring them by that cool
acronym cause it's easier to
say.
But with that, the um, the
differences on the revenue side
for the AODA is on the general
fund for the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by $154.7,000.
And that difference is explained
in the base where the executive
exceeds the LFC recommendation
by $38.5,000 47.7,000 dollars in
personal services and employee
benefits category and in the
other category respectively.
Then let's see a recommendation
keeps both of these categories
flat with FI 25, while the
executive recommendation
provides funding for recruitment
and retention initiatives and
for training and education.
The executive exceeds the LFC
recommendation and contractual
services by $68.5,000 because
the executive funds, um,
maintenance costs for the case
management system housed in the
AODA and the and the LFC on the
LSC side, however, the
recommendation provides funding
to sustain access to that case
management system.
With that, I'll pass it over to
Mario for any of his comments.
Thank you.
Oh, sorry, excuse me, Mr. Chair,
for the presentation style, I
will be presenting the
differences and then having
Mario comment on DFA's behalf.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Chair, committee
members. Thank you, Felix, uh,
for agency 264, the AODA, uh,
they came in with an increase
requested of 49.7% general fund.
So that was obviously something
that LFC and the exec had to
whittle down, um, as Felix said,
the big difference in the
contractual cost was that the
executive rec provides about
$250,000 funding for the case
management system maintenance,
which if we go off what the
agency said would.
get them through a quarter of
the year, um, and we also
provided the special uh for the
remaining quarter of this year,
and theme you'll see a lot with
these agencies is increased cost
for um PSEB costs recruitment,
retention, uh, lots of ways to
try to keep attorneys and people
who work in criminal justice and
RDAs uh keep them interested in
working for these agencies. So
with that, I will pass it on to
director Ted Roe.
Mr. Chair, thank you. Uh,
members of the committee, thank
you. It's always a pleasure to
be before you and to see you
all, especially early enough in
the session where I've been
yelled at by too many, um, but
thank you for your services. We
really appreciate what y'all do
and thank you for this
opportunity to speak to you. Uh,
first, I'd like to thank Mario
and Felix, uh, throughout the
year. They have been there for
the DA's, listened to the DA's.
You know, we really got an
understanding of what the needs
are and, you know, we're very
used to at least along the DAs
have always sort of seeing the
newer analysts and losing them
very quickly, so I'm glad
Mario's still around for us.
But, but they, they've been very
helpful to us, and I'd like to
extend our thanks to both of
them. Um, we have submitted with
you a letter, uh, from the AODA
and I'm sorry, I neglected to
introduce myself. I'm Rick
Tedro, uh.
Used to be the district attorney
up in San Juan County, and now
I've taken over as of January as
the director of the AODA, which
is the administrative office of
the District attorneys. Uh, the,
the key purpose of AODA is to
serve as a service agency for
all the DA's statewide. Um, the
biggest thing and the biggest
changes we've seen over the
years is just the need for
technology for the DA statewide,
whether that's
Internet, uh, you know, the
hardwire, the IT network side of
it and also the management
information side of it, uh, with
reports and and numbers and
everything that just continued
to grow. It's really important
that we continue to grow the
systems, the internet systems.
And so we did submit to you both
electronically and the other day
we did drop off a letter, uh,
that I had prepared for you all
just to look at. I know you'd
like us to keep this brief, and
I will, but I did want to point
out some of the, maybe, I guess
I'll call them deficiencies that
we noticed between the two
recommendations, and simply say
that first and foremost, we
really need to be able to focus
at AODA on the Internet. And by
that I mean we've got a case
management system currently
being built as we speak, we
and it rolls out this year. Um,
And when I say this year, not
calendar year, but this fiscal
year, we're told we're on track
for that. We're excited for
that. We're a little nervous for
it, um, but it's needed. Um, we
did notice some some
deficiencies when, when it comes
to that system, uh, one of the
biggest ones we noticed was
Reoccurring funding that we're
uh funding that we're gonna need
for keeping it running after it
goes. Whether it's, you know,
cloud service, storage,
licensing fees, um, as you all
are aware, when it comes to
commercial software, there's no
such thing as you and your
family can all use it. It is per
license, per user, uh, so one
deficiency that we didn't see in
the recommendation is almost $1
million. It's $998,000 for.
school year 2026, and that is
what that is for. It's the
reoccurring costs that will come
with the licensings and
everything else. Right now,
we've asked for 1000 licenses to
be used statewide, that number
could grow as we add more, uh,
people onto the system, whether
it's a public defenders
accessing it, whether it's state
police, Department of Public
Safety, those licenses could go
all the way up to 2000 by the
time this is done. However, for
the beginning, we're thinking
it's about 1000.
and we didn't see that in a
recommendation, and to put it
bluntly without that, we're
gonna get a car with no gas, no
wheels, no insurance to go
anywhere. So, um, we would ask
that you, uh, please consider
taking a look at that. And of
course, we're, I'm always
available. You guys know that if
you have any questions, I'm more
than happy to meet with you
whenever you want on this stuff.
Uh, another one is cost for the
Office 365 licenses. Um,
The DA statewide have gone to
the team system, the Office 365,
um, so there's additional costs
where if we could assist again
statewide so that they raises in
constant and direct
communication with each other,
it would be helpful, and we were
seeing about a $362,000
deficiency that we did not see
in the requests for that.
Um, also our, our training,
we're statutorily obligated to
provide the continuing ed
classes for the prosecutors
statewide and we lost a lot of
that funding many years ago, and
it's never really been uh put
back in there. That's uh number
4 on my, on my on my letter if
you do have them.
Uh
We did request 250,000 for be
able to provide the statewide
training for everyone in the
DA's office is, uh, I believe
DFA did recommend 1060, uh, but
It needs to be a little more for
us to provide all the COE
training for him.
We do have one position we would
like to get moved from a term
position to a permanent
position. I know DFA recognized
that, um, and funded about 2/3
of it, we would just ask for
that uh that to be recognized
and a full funding on that
position would be really
helpful.
Another major thing that we need
is some bridge funding or
currencyMS system is operating
now. And when I say operating,
I'll I'll use that term loosely,
we're barely getting by with the
system. Um, but we do have a, we
have a deficiency there of about
$250,000 that we need for this
current fiscal year just to get
us basically April through the
end of June till the new system
begins. And I did outline that
in the letter.
Um,
I did want to take just a really
quick moment to mention
You know, as I said, coming in
in January and looking over some
stuff, maybe where we meet some
needs that I saw.
And currently, we do have an
information systems manager
position at AODA, but it's never
really been funded.
Uh, last year we saw a
ransomware attack, uh, the
public defender, public
defenders saw an attack, you
know, numerous agencies saw
attacks, and it really goes to
show the need that we really
need to focus a lot more on
cybersecurity protections. And
so what we would ask is if we
could have that position funded
at midpoint, uh, so we can start
looking for someone in-house to
help us with the cybersecurity
issues. Um, my second one, of
course, would be to be adding a
uh an IT network specialist.
Someone that can get out there
statewide and help with the, the
IT uh positions in the networks
and the systems, whether it's in
the courts, whether it's in the
DA's offices, um,
But just be able to provide
statewide support for them. Uh,
one thing I came across and, and
I remember years ago AODA had a
victim, a witness administrator
position. We haven't had that in
a long time. And the one thing I
noticed is
We're doing a lot of victim
work, and the biggest thing that
I see is whenever someone's
doing probation or parole,
there's a deadline, you know,
within about a 7 day window, the
victims are to be notified that
somebody's being released and
paroled, and some of these could
be people that were in prison
for up to 20 years, finding
those victims and give them the
notice is very burdensome on the
officers. So with a statewide
network and somebody that could
work on a statewide level to
help with them.
Uh, I think that's a position
that probably needs to be
refilled to assist victim
advocates, and when it comes to
a lot of the notifications that
they need to go out there. Um,
one thing I did want to throw
out, and I know I was going to
save this one a little bit more
for the Senate side of it
because I know that uh Senator
Munoz had some
Some, uh, ideas on this, but
over the past several years,
everybody is sort of talked
about how to handle possible
officer involved shootings, and
who should review them, should
they be independent and and
things of that nature, and one
of the ideas that we came up
with was, maybe if you all could
consider a pilot program that's
run out of the AODA, which would
basically go out, do a
procurement, secure uh contract
attorneys that when events like
that come up and occur, the
local districts.
If they wanted to go through
basically the pool of attorneys
we have and get independent, you
know, investigations on big
cases that they just can't
handle because they're too busy
or, you know, get the
investigations that, you know,
everybody likes to see whenever
there's something of that nature
that really just, you know, pops
out there to the public. And so
we just threw that out there as
a possible consider a pilot
program that maybe we could look
at and see how that would help
the state and the prosecutors
statewide.
Um, last thing I would push for
is
The district attorneys all
statewide, everybody needs more
money for recruitment and
retention. They're not, they're
not finding the people, uh, the
people that are doing the work
right now are
Overwhelmed, they, they're way,
their caseloads are insane.
And, um, one thing that we would
ask, at least on a statewide
basis is for you all to consider
a 10% increase in basically
everybody that works for a DA's
office. Uh, the staff is
overworked. Sorry, is that part
of the, is that part of the
executive budget request.
Mr. Chair, thank you. No, no,
sir. In my letter that's what
members have in front of us. I
know we have a few folks on the
list for questions. I appreciate
sort of the context. We do have
new members.
Uh, it, maybe we can stick to
what's in the executive in the
LFC, although if you want to add
things in your role as executive
director, that's fair also, OK,
and absolute, and Mr. Chair, and
with that, I, that was my last
thing, so I'm, I'm free to stand
for questions and thank you.
Great. Thank you very much. I
appreciate that. We're gonna go
first to Representative Little.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Um.
I am taking a look at the um the
Request.
Of the 9,909,800,000 to cover
the
Um
Software. My goodness, I
couldn't get that out, uh, uh,
to give her um to cover those
costs, um, it is not included in
here.
OK, I was trying to read through
this, and I apologize if I
missed it, uh, Mr. Chair, but um
I am wondering what the thought
is behind being able to provide
this, it seems uh to me to be
key uh and uh I'll, I'll start
that with that question, uh,
what's that, um,
How might those costs be?
Um
found paid for.
Want me to go?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Little, thank you. Uh, we, when
we were going through the
budget, we did notice that I
believe it was DFA recommended
about $250,000 towards that
cost, uh, LFC did not have any
recommendation in there for it.
Um, so with the DFA
recommendation, we still be
short and oh my lord, you're
gonna ask me to do math,
650,000,700, something like
that, but um.
So, so there was a
recommendation from DFA and it
is, it's just pretty short of
what we'll need to operate for
the next year on it.
Chair, Representative, um, great
question. Um, as Mario stated in
the beginning, the request was
rather large percentage wise it
was almost 50% increase, so we
were trying to parse out ways to
give them some funding that they
needed for the system and I, I
believe that's why the LC did
not.
Recommended he had to really
whittle it down and we had to
make some decisions on that.
I think you're uh for that, so,
um, my question then, Mr. Chair,
would be directed to you, sir.
Um,
And in that.
Would have of the funding.
Be adequate to continue
operating.
Mr. Chair Representative Little,
uh, honestly, don't, you know,
these are licensing software,
storage softwares, it's not
really negotiable under any
contract. If we were only
receive even half of it, it
means I'm gonna have to turn to
the individual district
attorneys and ask them to find
it in their budgets, or we just
don't run it, you know, those
are really our only two options
because that's really our only
funding basis out of Santafina
legislators.
Thank you um for the response,
uh, Mr. Chair, I'd like to flag
this item for our um
Consideration and further
discussions. Thank you. Thank
you very much, Representative
Little. Next we're gonna go to
some doubt, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for the presentation. Are
you before us in a new role?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Dale, I'm sorry I
didn't hear you. Is this a new
role for you? You're usually
with the district attorney, uh,
as a district attorney.
Uh, Mr. Cherry, Representative
Doll, yes, new role for me.
So I'm enjoying it, so thank
you. Nice, nice to have you
here. um, thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you, Mr. Tedro on, um,
we heard a presentation from Do
It, so I'm just asking folks,
are you collaborating with do
it? Do you know that they
provide cybersecurity.
Um, Mr. Cherry represented
there, yes, actually we did
collaborate, we do it last year
when we had the ransomware.
They, they were very vital in
helping us.
Uh, find.
I, I guess I'll call them the
hunters to go look and see who
may have done it, what got, you
know, what got taken, what got
accessed, um.
But it, but it's come up over
the years of why we're not hard
to do it. And a lot of it comes
down to is what we store and
what is in our systems is stuff
that's very sensitive, and by
sensitive, I mean the criminal
reports.
You know, everything from
photographs and investigations,
and so, and statutorily we're
required to AODA to provide a
case management system. However,
we did work really well last
year we do it when it came to
the ransomware attack, and they
were very helpful with us.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and this
is my last question. You
mentioned the pilot on
contracting for attorneys. Do
you have an idea of what you
would need for that pilot.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Dao, our, our first thought was
like anything else, um, pilots,
you just never know. My first
thought was $500,000. Let's see
how many attorneys possible
investigators and legal
assistants that could assist the
DA statewide when they just get
the cases that they're
overwhelmed with. And that's
very, it's going on. We all know
it is, so it's just, it, it's a
thought we thought we'd throw
out there because over many
years we've always heard from
the legislators the different
ideas for looking into the
different cases.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much,
Representative Dell. Um, the
Vice Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, nice
to see you, um, in this role,
um, although I guess we'll miss
you as we get to um some of our
district specifics, um, I was
just wondering about um the use
of artificial intelligence, uh,
in the.
District attorney's offices writ
large.
Mr. Chair, uh, Vice Chair Dixon,
uh, thank you. I'm enjoying
being back here with y'all. I I
do like being here with you. Um.
AI is new for us as well, um.
We're learning it, I can just
give you an example. A lot of
districts, including AODA is now
signed up with the LexisNexis to
start learning the AI. We're
starting to look into the
trainings on the AI, um, for
lawyers, there's that little bit
of difference, uh, you know,
that just comes with it, so even
if the AI produces something, at
least from a case standpoint,
it's still just has to have
that, that lawyer review on it,
um, making sure everything's
still good on it. I think AI is
gonna fly fast, and I
wouldn't be surprised if next
year I'm sitting here before you
guys saying there's this new AI
thing that we got to get going
statewide. Um, it's going very
fast. So I know a lot of
districts are looking into it,
at least from like a LexisNexis
Westlaw research purpose and and
some writing purposes.
Um, but again, as, as we know,
at least in the legal field, you
always still have to have that
lawyer's eyes on it at the end.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, I'm sorry. Thank you,
Madam Vice Chair. Uh, next we'll
go to Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, so I
have a question for Mr. Tedro
regarding some administrative
support that your office gives
to the Children's Safe House
Network, and I don't recall ever
hearing that discussed before in
this committee, so Mr. Chair, if
Mr. Taylor could just give us a
few, um,
Words about what that program's
all about.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Brown, I'm, I'm gonna have to
dig back in my memory a little
bit on this, but as I recall for
years and years,
The safe house, so that, you
know, whenever we have a rape
case involving children that do
safe house interviews, and those
are specialists and talking with
children about, about everything
that went on, and years ago, I
believe the safe house
interviews fundings got cut.
And the solution at the time
was, was to give AODA money to
basically be a fiduciary to give
to safe houses.
So basically funding through
AODA to fund some of the
statewide uh safe house
interviews in the safe houses
that that are out there. So it's
been going on for
I was DA for 16 years, and that
was going on for 16 years. So,
so it's been a constant, you
know, something goes on. My
thought on always was, I think
the safe houses should get their
own funding, and I know they've
been here before the legislators
many times over many years
trying to get that funding back
to them. It still wasn't there,
so AODA still contracts with the
safe houses to provide those
interviews.
Thank you. Um, so, Mr. Chairman,
Mr. Tedro, I know in my
district, we, we do have at
least, well, one very fine safe
house program.
They could apply to your office
for funding, is that correct?
Mr. Chair
Mr. Chair Representative Brown,
I would have to check on it real
quick. But actually, um,
Would that be Diana's district,
or is that yours? Diana's
district, and I can check with
DA Lose too on it and see which
one it is. But my first thought
is, yes, cause those safe houses
are out there and it was the
statewide program that we were
contracting the money with for,
so.
Thank you very much,
Representative Brown.
OK, I don't see any other
questions. I'm gonna ask a few,
um, uh, director, uh, and,
frankly, Mr. Chavez, Mr.
Semiglia, we're all proposing
increases in funding, there are
no changes in the performance
metrics, they stay the same. Why
no increase in performance
metrics. Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, great question.
Um, me and Mario did meet to
discuss our consensus targets
and.
We both believe that the.
Targets are reasonable.
Mr. Chair, committee members,
yeah, we went with what the
agency requested for these, they
seem to be.
Beating them so.
Right. Uh, thank you both for
that and director, um,
I guess maybe as we look forward
and obviously this will be
together next year, um,
requesting a 47% increase
requesting the same performance
metrics.
Is
I,
as we collectively work to sort
of raise the bar for service to
New Mexicans. Hopefully, we're
sort of raising that performance
metric alongside, you know,
needed in funding investment
increases. So it'd be great to
see that. Uh, number 2,
as it relates to the technology
and the licensing piece.
Um, why shouldn't that funding
go to do it.
And alternatively, why shouldn't
The individual district
attorney's offices be
responsible and asked for in
their budget the appropriate
licensing amount or should that
be, or, yeah, walk me through
that a little bit more,
director.
Of Mr. Chair, thank you. Um,
sort of as I stated earlier,
statutorily were required to
provide the case management
system, um.
And again, a lot of what we keep
in our case management system is
very personal in nature, and by
that I mean, we'll have
everything from photographs of
homicides, we'll have frank
discussions of case reports,
police reports.
Uh, a lot of things that are
very personal in nature. And so
that's always been one of the
arguments of why the DA should
maintain their own so that they
can control what is there and
protected. Um, we also are
responsible for keeping sealed
records, so juvenile cases are
ordered to be sealed.
And sort of in that statute, it
reflects that really.
courts and DAs are the only ones
that should have even their
access to that. So between some
of the sealed records that are
out there and again, you know,
there's really deal with the
juvenile cases. Um, so from that
sense, having it in its own
area, it is a lot better just
for the DA's and and everything
that's out there, also the
ability to provide discovery
that the case management systems
provides discovery tools for the
public defenders for private
attorneys to start
electronically getting the
discovery.
Getting it quicker and getting
it out there. Uh, I think doing
something like that, because
we're so specialized in the
world, the criminal, that
You know, the, the overall broad
sense of it would do it. I don't
know if it would really be a
good fit. Uh, the second thing
is,
The DA's
Their budgets or their budgets,
and when a big ticket item comes
along, like, you know, a million
dollars for licensing and and
storage and everything else.
Number one, it's a statewide
system. So we're, you know, how
would we break it down? Would we
just sit there and say, OK, DA
Bregman, you've got 500 users
you're gonna pay, you know, that
percentage of it. It's hard for
them to budget too, and, and
their licenses fluctuate, you
know, sometimes they may have,
say 50 people.
on a license out of Taos, and
only 40, but then they're higher
and then they got 60, and so it
goes back and forth. I think
it's really hard for an
individual DA's office to budget
it.
It sort of makes sense to us to
put that main budgeting focused
into one pot that's taking care
of all the DA statewide.
Uh, thank you very much,
Director. I appreciate that
answer. Um, for further
information and follow up, I'd
asked Mr. Chavez, Director
Selee, and Deputy Director
Courtney, um, give us a deeper
breakdown on what do it covers,
do they cover sensitive and
juvenile information. Um,
Because it may be the case where
we need to take that out and do
it. If do it is covering that
and that's inappropriate, maybe
that needs to be taken from do
it. On the other hand, yeah,
maybe the uh entity that is
responsible for cybersecurity
for the state needs more
responsibility and more funding
as we obviously delve deeper
into a more online system of.
Life in government, but fair
answers director, and appreciate
your feedback there.
OK, uh, I don't know that
there's any other questions
we're gonna ask for the LFC
right now. It's been noted from
Representative Little, some
other guidance, uh, and, uh,
we'll go forward. Thank you,
Director, and also on a personal
note, it's a pleasure seeing you
back and if I think the uh many
folks have heard really strong
um sort of feedback of your, of
your time in this new role and
so on to personally thank you
for that.
Mr. Chair, thank you. I
appreciate that.
Mr. Chair, I would move the the
committee adopt the LFC
recommendation.
OK, there's a motion for the
LFC. Is there a second? OK, it's
been moved by Vice Chair Dixon,
seconded by ranking member
Chatfield. Any opposition to
that motion?
I don't see any, thank you.
Thank you very much, Director.
Thank you.
OK. Now, members, we're gonna go
through our district attorneys.
Um, similar, of course, to what
we've done with our district
courts. We know sort of, you
know, time is precious,
appreciate everybody making the
trip up.
Uh, for that.
Um
We're gonna, yeah, we're, thanks
to the vice chair for getting
right through our volume 3. Can
we go ahead and ask the 6th, uh,
uh.
The 6th District to come on up.
We're gonna sort of try to go
from uh folks who have had the
farthest trip, um, so that if
people need to hop back on the
road that they're able to do
that and our analysts will
introduce uh the, our district
attorneys, um, uh, as the
district attorneys come up,
please feel free to recognize
staff that are with you at the
table. Also, if there are other
staff who are here, please feel
free to recognize them as well.
And of course, staff will guide
us to the right part of our
packet.
Thank you, Chair, members of the
committee.
Um, to begin for the district
attorneys will be behind tab 2,
I believe, um, when the
district, I think after the
courts are done, there should be
a high level in that packet.
For the district attorneys, um,
I'd like to point your attention
to that because it gives you an
overview between the differences
between the LFC and the
executive in a visual form, and
it gives you all the districts
so you can have a bit of a high
level understanding of it while
we're going in depth into every
district.
Um, with that for, um, in your
volume twos, if you guys would
like to review the, um, the
overall rolled up district
attorney um numbers for their
budgets, it'll be in pages 37 to
38 in volume two, again in
volume 2, it's pages 37 to 38
and in volume 3 on page 42, you
will see the district map for
every the judicial district.
And uh with that, I'll move on
to the 6th District attorney.
Give me 1 2nd. Pa, paper, paper.
So the 6 judicial district
attorney, we will be its agency
code 256 and in volume 2, it'll
be page 46. Again, agency code
256 and in volume two will be
page 46.
With that, the uh differences on
the revenue side are that the
executive recommendation exceeds
the LFC recommendation by
$26.5,000 in general fund. This
difference can be explained in
the base where the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by $18.9,000 in
personal services and employee
benefits in that category, both
recommendations recommend a
senior investigator, however,
the difference stems from the
executive providing more
funding.
for the position because the
executive accounted for lower
vacancies than the LFC.
The executive recommendation
exceeds the LG recommendation in
contractual services by 7.6,000
because the executive funded
audit cost increases. With that,
I'll pass it over to Mario for
his comment. Thank you.
Thank you, Felix, Mr. Chair,
committee members, I have much
to add to the 6th District
includes Hidalgo, Luna, and
Grant Counties, and I'm pleased
to be joined by the newly
elected DA Mr. Norman Wheeler.
Good afternoon.
Good afternoon, everybody, Mr.
Chairman and Representatives, as
you know, uh, or probably no,
this is my first time here.
And I'm here basically on the
tail end of a budget proposed by
my predecessor.
You guys probably don't know me
from Adam or anything about me.
I've been an attorney. I just
started my forty-third year as
an attorney. I've been a
prosecutor for many years. I've
had the fortune of prosecuting
in 4 different districts within
the state of New Mexico, plus
one district in Illinois before
I moved here.
Uh, I've learned some good
things and some bad things in
all of those places. Do, do you
have by any chance, access to
this diagram?
Or is this a diagram? Anyway,
the 6th judicial district is the
very southwestern corner of New
Mexico.
And frankly, if you uh do a
little bit of research, you will
discover that the 6th judicial
district encompasses or is
responsible for approximately
85% of the border between New
Mexico and Mexico.
And with that responsibility
also comes all of those
challenges.
Uh, I was elected because the
people in my district was
looking frankly for somebody who
is willing to protect them.
They believed I would do that
and I'm here asking you to
seriously consider modification
of the budget that has been
presented to you by my
predecessor.
Uh, right now I have some
openings, some attorney
openings, but that's by design.
I have been blessed with.
Uh, attorneys who want to work
for me who are
Frankly, long time.
Uh, uh, you make term them
career prosecutors.
And as you can imagine with
everybody in that kind of a
position, they want to be paid
commensurately.
And I, I listened by, by, uh.
Uh, computer to a presentation
back in November.
And New Mexico is
Uh, it's not a secret, is it to
to hire and maintain prosecutors
is a difficult position.
I asked my CFO, excuse me, Miss
Vanessa Cardenius, who's here
with me today to go in and do an
accounting if I asked her if, if
we were going to pay each of our
employees at at the midpoint
range, which seemed like a uh
legitimate starting point to me.
How would what were receiving
compare to, to it and, and
frankly we're approximately half
a million dollars short in our
budget to do that.
And that's before I start
bringing in uh career
prosecutors.
Three of the people that I've
brought in to date, 2 of them
are in fact not only career
prosecutors, but also served as
as in, as judges in various
forms.
And uh a third one that I hired
was actually recently asked to
be considered appointed as a
district court judge in the
state of Texas. I'm hoping we
can keep him here.
But the point I'm trying to get
to is by not only protecting the
6 judicial district, Grant Le
and Hidalgo Counties, I'm also
protecting the rest of the state
because that is, as you can
imagine, a corridor for example,
drugs.
Drugs, every place I've worked,
drugs have been
I, I believe that drugs are a
significant problem in the cause
of many, many different criminal
uh
Episodes within a community, and
if we can as a group, uh, do
something to help control that,
then we, we can help, uh, the
Overall crime rate within the
communities, but it, it, it also
takes
You know, experienced
prosecutors, experienced staff.
I've been blessed with
Uh, just a a marvelous attitude
of the people within the within
the office where I believe, uh,
developing and have are on our
way to a positive place where
people want to come and work in
the morning where they believe
they're making a difference for
the community.
But I'm asking you, and I
understand this is unusual, you
know, I, I'm not asking, I mean,
obviously, given the two
choices, the DFA or the LFC, we
want the DFA recommendation, but
I'm respectfully submitting to
you that is not sufficient.
Uh, and I'm asking you not to
hold against me, uh, my, my
predecessors.
Uh
Recommend a requests to you.
We
We have a significant backlog,
several 1000 cases, frankly,
that I believe or I'm concerned
were improvidently dismissed.
and, you know, that's one of the
backlogs we're gonna have to go
through. I believe that we are
going to, uh,
Have to take a tremendous more
number of cases to trial, I
think last year in the entire 3
counties, there were 6 district
court trials, 6 felt a
6 felony trials in, in 3
different counties. And when you
have that kind of conduct, the
effect is, you know, I don't
know if any of you have, uh,
Dealt in in any form with any
with any uh
Sort of, of group of individuals
who are, you know, you're
attempting to hold accountable,
but if, if, if people in this
case, defendants are not being
held accountable. They talk to
each other, they know that, they
know that they, you know, they
get arrested, they're, they're
out, they're arrested, they're
out, they're arrested, they're
out. It's not fair to the
community and frankly, the only
way to stop it is we have, you
know, we need to do it through
qualified quality people within
the office and
Uh, we're right now we're in the
process. We've started
partnering, going back, mending
bridges with our law enforcement
agencies. I'm, I'm happy with
how that's going and uh they're
looking forward to, to
partnering with us and uh to
make a difference within the
community. I'm asking for you to
step out of your comfort zone
zone and think a little bit
differently, and I'm, I'm
willing to let you hold me
accountable. I'm asking you for
this and you know,
a year from now or whenever it
is, I come back in front of you
again. You, I'm, I'm inviting
you to say you promised this
before, you either did it or you
didn't do it.
But, uh, you know, where I'm
asking for the half million
dollars.
That so that we can do that. I'm
also asking for, I think you
call it uh uh supplemental
apportionment because frankly,
as I said, I've got 2 to 3
experienced prosecutors standing
there right now that frankly, I
don't have the money to hire
him.
And uh I may ask, I'm asking you
to help me, help the community,
help the state with that. Thank
you.
Thank you very much touring
wheeler. Uh, let me, before we
go to questions, uh, Mr. Chavez,
when we, as we go through these
particularly because we have a
number of new members. If you
can provide the increases for
the different district attorneys
going back to say FY 23, um, I
think.
That'll be helpful for us.
Uh
As we go forward.
Mr. Chair, I have information on
general fund increases since FY
21. Does that work?
Even better. OK. For the um 6th
district attorney.
We, um,
And my papers are all mixed up.
Thank you for and I appreciate,
appreciate this attorney. Thank
you for, it's great to see you
here today. Um, thank you for
coming up. Thank, great to have
your staff here, um.
And uh appreciate your time, Mr.
Chavez, for the 6th judicial
district attorney since it by
21, their general fund
appropriation change has been an
increase of 31.8%. FY21, how
much? 31.8% with an average
annual increase of about
259.3,000.
And how much are we proposing in
this budget?
Um
Mr. Chair, um, great question.
Give me one second.
I believe it is, give me, give
me just give me one second, I
apologize.
For the 6 judicial district we
are the percentage increase is
4.2% for the LFC recommendation.
Got it. OK.
Thank you. Uh, now we're gonna
go to questions. I first have,
uh, ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I'm,
I'm looking at a
Uh, $309,995 transferred out of
personal services and employee
benefits. Can you talk to me a
little bit about what that was.
I would defer to the, the CFO.
I, I
I, I'm new January 1st, but I
actually was there on the first.
A lot of money.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um.
I have been with the agency for
going on 3 years, um, and my
first couple of years we've had
very high vacancy savings rates.
We haven't been able to fill our
attorney positions.
So we've, um, since I've been
there, we kind of upgraded some
of our furniture in the office,
we had furniture that we were.
Being held up by boxes, we
upgraded some of our um fleet to
provide our attorney commuters
with vehicles. It is very hard
to get attorneys in our rural
area, so most of our attorneys
commute from El Paso, Las
Cruces, um, so we wanted to be
able to provide them with a
reliable vehicle.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, Frankie
member cha if I could, if I
could jump in and I apologize
that's what it was, Mr.
Chairman, that's what it was
for, but it's frankly, my goal
and expectation that that we can
prevent provide an environment
where people will in fact live
there to keep
Those, those sorts of
transportation costs now.
Thank you. I, I thank you and I
appreciate that you all are new
and uh, you know, from, from
over here, I've, I've sat right
there a lot.
Long time before I got sent over
here. Uh.
You know what we looked at from
over here is, is a, is a budget
that reflects the vehicles.
Personnel
And it, and then it gets spent
on, on exactly that, and I know
it's hard, but
Thank you.
you
Thank you very much, ranking
member Chatfield. I don't see
any other questions uh we're
gonna ask for the LFC
recommendation. I appreciate
very much the time in the
question.
Go to the motion.
It's been moved by ranking
member Chatfield.
Say by Vice Chair Dixon. Is
there any opposition to that
motion?
Seeing none, thank you.
OK. Uh
We'll go ahead and ask for the
5th judicial district how we did
it for the last one from the
southwest to the southeast.
And members, if we can go ahead
and turn, uh, we'll pull up, um,
Page 60 in our volume 1.
That's gonna help, that'll sort
of go alongside what Mr. Chavez
is going to share with us
regarding sort of that uh a
little bit of a history of, of
state budgets.
And that's just gonna be sort of
for, for everybody.
OK
Uh, please start us off, Mr.
Chavez, Mr. District Attorney,
thank you for being here.
Um, we'll go, uh, yeah, Mr.
Chavez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, for the
5th judicial district attorney,
its agency code 255, agency
coach 155 and in volume 2, it's
page 45.
With that, the differences in
revenue are that the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by $154.7,000 in
general fund.
That difference is in the base
with the executive
recommendation exceeding the LSC
recommendation by $128,000 in
personal services and employee
benefits because the executive
fills existing positions due to
the agency having a shortfall in
the category and also provides
funding for high intensity drug
trafficking grant funded
positions. The LSC
recommendation, however,
provides 3 legal assistance for
each county in the district in
that category.
And the executive, um, exceeds
the LFC recommendation by
$102.5,000 in contractual
services because the executive
funds contractual increases in
audit services, language
interpretation services and
training for their contract
attorneys.
The LFC exceeds the executive in
the other cost category by
$75.8,000 because the LFC fully
funds the agency request for a
digital evidence system.
With that, I'll pass it over to
Mario for his comment. Thank
you.
Is your chair committee members,
thank you, Felix, the 5th
Judicial District Attorney, it's
Chavez Lee and Eddie County. Uh,
we are joined today by the Chief
Deputy to Mr. Ellus is uh Mr.
Patrick Melvin, who's here for
DA Luz, so thank you very much.
I apologize, Mr. Chair, I forgot
to mention the general fund
increases you requested for the
5th DA since FY21, their budget
general fund has increased 33.2%
for an annual average income.
increase of $497.7,000. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
members of the committee.
Uh, I received a call from Miss,
Miss Lus early this morning and
uh she was ill and so I packed
up and headed straight up to
Santa Fe. Um, I will attempt to
keep this brief and um respond
to your questions as best I can.
I, I just have a few comments
and uh would like to share some
information. Our first major
request.
I
That
is for maintenance of the nice
uh justice digital evidence
system and that is at a cost of
$195,000.
What I would say about this is
we do have the initial.
Amount of that covered through a
sentencing commission grant.
And in order to get that grant,
Um, the criminal justice
coordinating council uh in our
district, which is made up of
judges and public defenders in
our office and other members of
the bar and law enforcement
agencies and anyone else who who
wants to join in the public has
to sign off on that.
And every, it has to help the
entire criminal justice system
essentially.
And that's what this does.
Um, it's, we have right now we
have a very clunky, outdated
system of getting um body cams
and all kinds of other digital
evidence. We still use flash
drives or maybe even DVDs, CDs,
uh, we have to copy these things
numerous amounts of time, uh.
For different people, and it's
It creates um a lot of waste.
And redundancy and just so much
manpower time on all these
agencies as well, the public
defender department, um, I
requests that come through.
All of this can be replaced
through this cloud-based uh
digital evidence storage system.
And
So,
Yeah
We believe that this will, this
will help our office, certainly,
uh, the public defender's
office, it will aid them in our,
in our district.
And
The courts and the general
public, uh, through the HIPAA
request, we can just essentially
send a link instead of all these
outdated systems and also
storage space in our local
offices. We have to keep in
order to maintain the sword, we
have to keep upgrading, keep
adding more systems.
And which, which is expensive
and, and uh redundant and very
clunky and slows things down.
Uh, a great deal. And part of
our issue across the board, uh,
in New Mexico is recruitment and
retention.
And
We have been forced to become a
streamlined as possible.
Because we just don't have the
manpower, right? And so,
Uh
This will greatly aid us in
doing that. It it will free up
um some hours of doing all this
copying and uh and being able to
focus on on getting uh victims
protected and on achieving
justice.
And so I would ask that
certainly,
The, uh, Mr. Chair and the
committee to consider that and
And then, uh, recruitment.
He retention challenges.
Uh, as you've heard and probably
will hear from everyone, this
has been
An ongoing issue for a number of
years.
And
It is very, very difficult to
Recruit people and it takes time
because if they uh essentially
have to come from out of state
and uh our area especially is a
rural area, and
Um, it takes time and so there
are vacancy costs and
Uh, I'm sorry, in the uh
vacancies.
And
Which has an effect, uh, to
decrease the budget and so what
we're asking is that our budget.
Um
For our positions be fully
funded so that we can keep um
Working to achieve justice, uh,
keep working to protect victims.
And keep working to protect the
rights.
Uh, of those that we serve as
well.
We have, um,
Always
Uh fought hard for the people of
the 5th and Eddie Chavez and Lee
Counties.
And also fought hard to protect
the rights of the accused.
And
Uh, one of the things I would, I
would also ask uh Mr. Chair and,
and members of the committee to
consider is, is your investment.
In the 5th district in the
security and stability of the
5th district and the
prosecutions of the 5th district
and protecting.
The, um, safety of the citizens.
There is also a direct, not only
for that area.
But is a direct investment.
In New Mexico as a whole.
Uh, there's a great amount of
budget that comes from uh oil
field.
Uh, activities, which we are
Um
Tasked with protecting and and
making sure that that keeps
going as it is, uh, and, and to
protect that as much as
possible because when those go
offline due to due to copper
wire thefts, uh, due to other
issues. That's tax dollars that
New Mexico loses.
So I would just pose this, that
not only is it an investment in
that area of the state in the
safety of the community and the
people.
But also of New Mexico as a
whole.
Because that
Invest look at it as an
investment that will come back,
um, to the coffers of the entire
state.
Um
I, I think you, uh,
Chair and members of the
committee and I will uh stand
for any questions and again, I
will attempt to answer it uh as
well as I can.
Uh, thank you very much and
thank you for being up here on
short notice. Please send our
regards to District Attorney
Luce, um, we'll go straight to
questions, first going to
represent Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Melvin, it's good to see you.
You too. I don't know if you
know this, but I, um.
I um used to live pretty much
close like next door almost to
your wife. She was a little girl
growing up and then yes, she
had, she had mentioned
that number and I, I have fond
memories of her, uh, being out
in the yard with her
grandmother, uh, doing yard, you
know, uh, flowers and things
like that. It was great. Tell
her hello for me, please, uh,
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Melvin, I
have a couple of questions about
the budget, so
Uh, your request is for this
digital evidence system, um,
it's only if I understand
correctly, $75,000. Is that, is
that correct, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Melvin?
Mr. Chair, Representative Brown,
that, that's the difference, um,
the, the executive
recommendation did increase, um,
that other category as well, and
that was the difference between
my ability recommendation and
executive. That's not the cost
of the program. I see that now,
thank you.
And
And uh
Mr. Chair and uh Representative
Brown, uh, the actual cost of
the of the system is $195,000.
OK.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and, uh, fellow
members of the committee, I, um,
I, I, I like this request. I,
um, I really think we need to
make this happen and I would ask
that we flag this to make sure
that um because the overall
total is still less than I think
what you're, you're asking for.
I did want to ask, um, Mr.
Chairman and Mr. Melvin about a
very large transfer out of
personal services and employee
benefits.
In uh fiscal year 24, it was
$300,000 and I'm just curious if
you could explain to us, um,
It's a lot, lot of money, and in
fact there's a trend here. I
have a list of all the district
attorney offices, many of which
Have transferred out of PSEB
300,000, 200,000, uh, some of
the numbers are very large. So
what's going on there, Mr. Chair
and, and Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Brown, if I uh
may defer to our CFO uh Diana
Switzer.
Um,
we actually transferred did a
bar and transferred it out and
then we did a bar and
transferred it back in with
actually more money into
personnel and services to cover
our uh budget on that for last
year.
So we, I don't think that's
noted in there, but we did do a
bar that reversed and actually
took money out of other to make
the personnel changes.
Thank you for that information,
uh, Mr. Chair, um,
So does that mean that you were
able to fill vacant positions.
Is that why the transfer back at
one point? No, there was a um
Rejection budget uh error that
we made and we had to move, we
thought we had more money in
there and so we had to um make
amends to move the money back to
cover our budget for this.
Thank you for that. Um.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, I think I'll
just, I'll just pull up there,
but just say that I, I would
like us to take a look at this
to see if we can, uh,
Provide more of what they
believe they need and have what
they've requested. Thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Brown. Uh,
Next, we're gonna go to Vice
Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you for the presentation. Great
job, uh, filling in, um, I have
a few specific questions. Um,
first, I was pleased to see the
that the LFC recommendation did
fully fund the digital um
software. I think that's uh very
important, um, and so, sort of
uh piggyback on what uh
Representative Brown said. Um,
second, um,
Recruitment money. Um, we've
been talking a little bit about
this, but um it was the 5th
judicial district able to use
any of the recruitment funds
that were made available, um,
Either last session or the
session before, uh, to support,
uh, recruitment and retention of
our public attorneys.
Mr. Chair and uh Madam Vice
Chair.
Um, that is my understanding. I
would defer for more uh
information to our CFO.
Uh, madam, or.
Um, our chairman and vice chair.
Yes, we did use the recruitment
money. We did have some that was
left, but we uh did provide that
to all of our attorneys that met
the qualifications. We had
several attorneys that left and
had to end up repaying that
money back and that we reverted
it back to the, where it came
from, from the PD, the LLPD.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
So would you
Would you consider the program
to have been successful and
useful, or um didn't really
Make much of a difference.
Mr. Chair, in uh Madam Vice
Chair, I, I, I would consider
the program to be useful. One of
the things, um,
Speaking specifically in regards
to retention. If there is that
money that they have been given
and or allotted, and then they
have to keep maintaining the
employment or pay part of that
back. It is an incentive to
maintain employment.
One of the things that would be
Perhaps helpful in that area is
if we could have that go here to
year to year to year to just
kind of maintain that.
Um
And with recruitment and, and
retention too. Just one of the,
as a side note, one of the
Concerns, pitfalls, I, I, I
suppose is.
Because it does take so long to
get staff, uh, professional
attorney staff, oftentimes again
from from other states. One of
the things that happens is
there's this snowball effect,
right? Because we've been, we've
been vacant. We've been without
an attorney. Caseloads are
already very high.
And so every time we lose an
attorney,
Everyone else's caseload
increases dramatically. And
everyone, it works very hard.
And very diligently.
Um, but that pressure, that
stress, it, it, it, it, it makes
that it go up for everyone, and
then that in turn makes people
Um, more inclined to leave.
So if you can stabilize, and
then
And to build on that and, and,
um.
Then it helps and uh so I do
believe that that retention and
recruitment fund would help
because that would help to
maintain that stability.
Um
And also what would help is if
we could just
Uh, in regards to retention.
Um
And how, how they do the budget,
um, with, with that vacancy, we
could always hire that because
if, if we have our blocked for
some reason because money is
taken because there was a
vacancy, then when we finally do
get a person, we can't hire him,
it just.
Makes makes the situation worse.
And so, um, I, I hope that
answered, answered the question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
um, that's, it's very helpful
and um just I think always good
for us to get feedback on, you
know, some of the initiatives
and programs that that we've put
in place to to be supportive.
Um, final question, uh, Mr.
Chair, um, I noticed in the um
summary from uh from our
analysts, uh, that, um,
It says, because the executive
fills existing positions due to
the agency having a shortfall in
the category and funding for
high intensity drug trafficking
grant funded positions. Could I
just get a little bit more
elaboration on exactly what um
is happening there and then I, I
do want to follow up with
specific question about the um
high uh intensity drug
trafficking.
Sure. So, Mr. Chair and Madam
Vice Chair, if I'm, if I'm
understanding, uh, I, I, I think
what that is talking about is uh
and I will also uh after I'm
done, turn it over to the CFO to
help answer that, but is that
there is a difference because
the high is only funded at a
certain amount per the attorney
and what we have to pay the
attorney is higher than that.
And so I believe that is the
shortfall, um, that's there, but
I would uh ask uh Miss Switzer
if she can respond to that.
Mr. Chair and Vice Chair, um,
yes, that is the case. We only
get 28774.
The hide of attorneys and we
have 3 senior trial attorneys
that are funded for out of that
high to grant, and so the
difference of that is what we
have to make up with the general
fund to fully pay them for the
full year.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
um, for that. Um, I have been,
uh, you know, I'm really pleased
to see the coordination with
Haida, um, and, you know, I hope
that at some point in the near
future, the state and uh rectify
the situation that has made it
impossible for the state to
receive funds back to our local
law enforcement agencies who
work with the federal government
on some of these um
Issues, uh, because we are
missing out on, uh, many
millions of dollars that we
really ought to be receiving.
So, thank you for uh using those
grant positions, and I have no
other questions.
Uh, thank you very much, Madam
Vice Chair. Uh, thank you again.
We're gonna ask for the LFC
recommendation right now.
Appreciate the flag on the
technology, uh, old except them.
OK, there's a motion.
OK, it's been signed by
representative Sanchez. Is there
any opposition to adopting the
LSC recommendation.
See any. Thank you very much.
OK, we're gonna ask the 12th
district and district Attorney
Suggs.
And then we'll be going to the
3rd.
Mr. Chair, members of the
community continue? OK.
Um, Mr. Chairman of the
committee, um, we are on the
12th Judicial District attorney,
that is agency code 262, and
your volume 2, it's page 53.
Um, for the differences on the
revenue side, the general fund,
uh, executive recommendation
exceeds the LFC recommendation
by $37.3,000. The differences
are in the base where the
executive recommendation exceeds
the LFC recommendation by
52.3,000 in personnel services
and benefits, the difference
stems from the executive
providing more general fund
revenue to cover expected losses
from the violent Against Women
Act and Victims of Crime Act
grants, the grants
associated with those two and
the LFC exceeds the executive
recommendation in the other
category by 15,000, reducing the
overall difference and that's
because the LFC recommendation
held the category, the other
category flat with FI 25 as
requested by the agency.
And for general fund increases.
The 12th since FY21 as a general
fund increase of 39.3% for an
average annual increase of
365.6,000. With that, I'll pass
it over to Mario for his
comments. Thank you. Thank you,
Felix, um, Mr. Chair, committee
members, the 12th District
Attorney covers Otero and
Lincoln County, agency requested
an 8.4% increase in the
executive recommended a 3.7%
increase, uh, like Felix.
said we, the executive funded
130.5 to replace loss of vagrant
and the expected loss of local
funding with general fund,
you'll notice this trend a lot
with the district attorneys in
terms of trying to backfill
federal money and might take
some new, uh,
No urgency on that. Uh, I'm
joined by Stacy Matson, one of
my favorite CFOs, um, who will
be filling in for her district
attorney, Mr. Suggs.
Good afternoon, Chair, members
of the committee, thank you for
allowing us to be here today.
um, with me, I have our district
office manager, Hannah Burleson,
DA Suggs sends his apologies, he
is currently in trial prep for a
CSP of a minor with 51 counts
that is supposed to start on
Friday morning.
So, um, he is diligently working
towards that.
With that being said, um, as you
have heard over and over again,
um, retention and recruitment,
of course, is a, is a difficult
situation, especially with our
transition that we've seen this
year with a new district
attorney coming in.
We lost not only our district
attorney, but our 22 of our most
senior, um,
Prosecutors with that.
Um, we have been able to
backfill those two senior
prosecutors, but that of course
leaves us with vacancies cause
we promote it from within.
As a result, um, we have been
able to offer one attorney
position so far, and we have
another one that is anticipated
to start 2 weeks from this past
Monday.
Um, we continue to, um, ask for
funding to be able to operate at
a, we would love to see a 5%
vacancy within our office.
We currently are operating at
well over 9%, which is causing
us to carry a caseload of about
365 cases per attorney. We would
love to get that down below 300,
but again, that's, that's
difficult. One of our other
asks, of course, is the gap in
higher funding which um one of
our committee members mentioned
earlier.
We continue to see increase in
um costs of bringing on quality
prosecutors.
And unfortunately our high of
fundings does not increase, um,
in relation to that increasing
cost, causing us to have to pick
up the difference. We're
anticipating about $157,000
shortfall.
And we asked for just a portion
of that in um the recommendation
that you guys see before you.
Um, we didn't ask for the full
157,000.
As Mario mentioned, we also
asked for our last grant funded
victim.
Um, advocate to be moved to our
general fund as well.
The reason behind this, um, I
don't know if you guys have
watched the news. We continue to
have um what we call enumerated
crimes, which is victim related.
And those numbers are going up,
and we want to be sure that we
are able to provide those
services to those victims within
our district and make sure that
they are assisted through the
process because as we all know,
most of us don't understand the
court process until
unfortunately we're inside of
it.
Um
With that being said, I would
ask with.
All of our hearts to take the
executive recommendation and I
stand for questions.
Thank you very much, uh, uh,
CFO, we're gonna go first to
ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm
looking here.
And I see a reversion of
$17,229.
And
A $250,000 transfer from
personal service.
out of personal services and
employee benefits.
You talk to me a little bit
about that.
Mr. Chair, um,
Remember Chatfield, yes, we like
um the 5th also experienced a
misrepresentation or
miscalculation, and so we
actually only had a net decrease
of 165,000 out of our personal
and benefits, um, so we had to
transfer back into that to
cover, um, a portion which left
us with only a version of $500
out of our personnel. Um, we
also had a situation where we
found we had a need for forensic
software.
And uh hardware for processing
the um cell phones and laptops
and digital media of um
defendants within cases in our
agency.
Um, we work diligently with our
local law enforcement, and we
have what is called an MCU or
major crimes unit, and we
utilize.
Um, resources from all of our
agencies to be able to process
those as we see an increase in
digital aspects in
Time.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you very much, ranking
member Chatfield. I don't see
any other questions. Oh, sorry,
I apologize. uh Representative
Vincent, please.
Just one real quick one. So on
that reversion, uh, well, not
really reversing the 250 that
was taken out of personnel, uh,
services and employee benefits.
It, it's almost like it's a
little bit of a pattern, and do
you, do you expect to take any
more out of that, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Vincent, no, actually, I
anticipate that we're going to
have um see an increase in.
the exact opposite where we're
gonna be having to increase in
our 200 category or our personal
and benefits.
And reduce our supplies in those
areas just because I anticipate
that we're going to have an
increase in hiring and trying to
keep quality and um experienced
prosecutors within our agency.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good luck.
Thank you.
Thank you very much,
Representative Vincent. OK, I
don't see any other questions.
We're gonna go ahead and ask for
the LSC recommendation.
Mister Chair, I would move that
the committee adopt the LFC
recommendation at this time.
Thank you. OK, it's been moved
by Vice Chair Dixon, seconded by
ranking member Chatfield, there
any opposition to that motion. I
don't see any. Thank you very
much for that.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
members.
OK, we're gonna invite uh our
new district attorney, District
attorney Macias to come on up.
It's already. Thank you for
being here.
Mm.
Mr. Chavez, uh, once we get the
presentation squared away, you
can kick us off.
OK.
left.
the X next to.
Thank
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, we are on the, not
the 2nd, we are on the 3rd
Judicial District attorney,
agency code 253 and in volume 2,
it's page 43.
Um, from here on out, I'm gonna
explain the general fund
appropriation history in the
beginning, and then I'll go into
the differences, that's OK. Um,
for the general fund
appropriation history for um the
total change since FY21 was
35.7% growth and that equates to
an average annual increase of
$481.4,000.
With that, um, the differences
in revenue, the executive
recommendation exceeds the LSC
recommendation by $401.5,000.
In general fun. This difference
is because the LFC
recommendation holds the
agency's budget flat in all
categories, while the executive
increases um all three
categories with the major
increase being in personnel
where the executive has 3
additional deputy district
attorneys, the LSC
recommendation maintains flat
because that was the request by
Mr. DA Massas' predecessor.
And with that, um, pass it over
to Mario for his comment. Thank
you.
Thank you, Felix. Good
afternoon, committee chair and
members. Uh, we got a unique
situation here in the 3rd
district. We got a flat budget
request, uh, from the outgoing
DA, um, and a flight request
wouldn't have even covered the
uh increases in rates for audits
and dots. So initially I gave
them a $1.5,000 increase, but
thankfully, uh, with about 3
days left for me to publish my
budget, uh, DA Macias reached
out to
my office and worked with me uh
explain the needs that he would
have coming in, um, as a newly
elected district attorney and I
was able, uh the executive
recommendation was able to
provide $400,000 increase in
general fund for Mr. Macias to
have uh the staff that he he
wants and he deserves, so, uh, I
know it's a really kind of
unique situation here with
elected officials changing um
Changing seats halfway through
uh budget year, so I will let um
Mr. Macias kind of speak to that
and
Wow, stand for your
consideration. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Fernando Macias again, the newly
elected district attorney for
the 3rd Judicial District. I've
been in office for 36 days.
And I'm asking you.
To set aside
What has been the historical
underperformance of this office
and looked to see the direction
that we're going in. Let me take
you a little bit through the
presentation that we have in
front of the uh of on your
screen, and I believe that you
have hard copies in December.
We have basically 7.5
prosecutors.
Today, we have 17.
Because the day after the
election,
I started recruiting through the
months of November and December,
not waiting till the first of
January, because I know how
extremely competitive, the
market is to find prosecutors.
So that leaves us with basically
3 positions that still have to
be filled and only because by
the time the first of January
came, there was a slew of issues
that had to be addressed and
addressed immediately.
Let me take you to what I am
indicating is
Page
3 of the presentation. Let me
take you there.
At the very bottom of the page.
What I encountered on the first
of January.
Was 1,271 cases that were being
held in abeyance an almost
limbo-like situation.
These were cases that were
pending to go to grand jury, but
some of them as old as 2 years
waiting in that same status.
Now, I know that you're, you
have to deal with all of these
numbers, but this is a
significant number of cases for
up to this point, we have been
able to identify not having
completed the review of all of
these cases. We have identified
500 cases that now will go
forward to grand jury.
We have nearly 2400 cases in a
warrant status.
And again, without the prior
effort to identify the
individuals, many of them in the
community, but we are doing that
now. So I am anticipating a
substantial number of cases to
come out of a warrant warrant
status into a um active case
status, tremendously increasing
the number of cases that this.
judicial district will be
dealing with. I just want to go
back and in the meantime, we are
radically restructuring the
office. So on the right hand
side, you're going to see what
has the the historical structure
of the organization where you
have staff on one side,
attorneys on the other side,
confusion in terms of who is
responsible for giving the
direction.
Into basically what is on the
left-hand side and basically a
totally integrated between
attorneys and staff, basically
units or cells that are going to
have responsibilities for
different jurisdictions of
cases, basically what I'm doing
is training 5 individuals that
are the leaders of the cells to
beat district attorneys within a
smaller component. So not only
establishing a very
Strong succession plan, but
basically uh coordinating so
that if there are losses within
the cell. We have cross-trained
everyone in terms of the process
of a case to be able to
immediately fill that gap rather
than going through the
traditional, we've lost so many
people, we don't know how to
make, how to cover. So I'm
anticipating a substantial
improvement in the method of
prose.
Execution in the 3rd judicial
district. The
You have some trends. I'll, I'll
let you look at those and not
dwell, but let me tell you that
it is so refreshing,
invigorating.
To walk into a conference room
that is now filled with
attorneys, and I know that some
of you seeing a room filled with
attorneys, that's more like a
nightmare, but what has been a
nightmare is the
underperformance, the, the lack
of credibility in the community.
That is changing, and it's
already changing. So,
Back in
I think it was maybe this
summer.
The governor was holding a
series of public safety
community meetings. She held one
in Las Cruces.
Basically, there were at least
1000 people in attendance.
And even there,
The governor basically said,
And told the incumbent district
attorney, I'm gonna get you 4
more prosecutors.
That very public
Commitment
Was that included in the
proposal that was submitted for
the budget.
No.
When I didn't have an
opportunity to have a lot of
engagement.
After the primary, I tried after
the general election finally
started having a little bit of
contact to find out.
That we are maybe one of two
state agencies to submit a flat
budget.
No input whatsoever.
Because that certainly would not
have been my proposal.
My proposal is before you.
In terms of what I believe is
necessary because those other 2
or 3 positions, attorney
positions or trict attorney
please continue. We have 9
additional district attorneys
following you, um, we'll ask you
to sort of continue through the
presentation, but wrap it up.
Yes sir, almost there.
So, basically, we are asking
for if someone someone were to
have asked me.
What are you going to submit for
your budget request?
It would be 2 attorneys.
To investigators and what I call
a forensic accountant, someone
to really help on white collar
crimes. Someone to work with
businesses in terms of
determining the loss that they
are suffering because that is a
tremendous outcry in Donana
County.
So yes, my ass would have been
larger, and I would have asked
for additional support in the
other category because of the
number of trials that are going
to dramatically increase this
next year. So, Mr. Chairman, I
know the process. I, I had the
honor of serving in the state
senate for 16 years. I
understand that, but I am
appealing to you to consider the
lower request.
is from the DFA.
Not the LFC. The LFC
recommendation.
was compromised.
It really doesn't reflect the
true need within the district.
I'm not casting blame. I'm not
suggesting anything in
inappropriate other than
Either through neglect or
mistake.
Basically, we are being placed
in this position that has no
additional money. And I want,
Mr. Chairman, I do want to take
the opportunity to compliment
both Mario and Felix. As soon as
I found out about the situation,
I went to see them immediately,
and they were accommodating,
insightful, and, and, uh, um,
consider it in terms of
discussing the matter. So I want
to compliment this committee for
having uh the ability to listen.
these two gentlemen, uh, that I
believe are very, very well
informed. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and I'll stand for
whatever questions you'd like to
ask. Great. Thank you very much,
Mr. District Attorney. Great to
see your staff who's here today
who's made the trip up, uh,
we're gonna go first to
represent Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And I know you're doing some
house cleaning right now and I
wish you all the luck. I
appreciate your org chart.
Mm
But I continue to see a pattern
and uh you had $179,749 out of
personnel services and employee
benefits.
Do you know why, Mr. Chair? Oh,
like every other district,
vacancy savings and needing to
spend the money on other, other
almost what you've already been
told already vehicles,
furniture, uh, supplies, other,
other related issues, but
obviously the vacancy savings
has been historically, um,
substantial. Thank you for your
answer, and Mr. Chair, do you
plan on, do you plan on pulling
any more money out.
Of that particular line item.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I know that
we're going to be in a situation
where we can afford all of the
new attorneys that we've had to
bring in. Certainly we've had to
bring them in at much, much more
competitive rates in order to
attract them to come into the
Las Cruces office, so I'm
anticipating that they're
probably still will be some
vacancy savings as we head
toward the end of the year, but
the concern that I'm trying to
voice here is that going into
next fiscal year
you're going to be in a very
difficult situation in order to
maintain the growth that we have
seen and the anticipated growth
between now and the end of the
fiscal year.
Thank you for your answer and
good luck with your, with your
office. Thank you. Thank you for
the time. Thank you very much,
Representative, uh, Vincent,
Vice Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, uh, District attorney. Nice
to, nice to see you, um, I had a
question I wanted to look at the
performance measures, um, and
understanding that you are new
in this position. Um, I just
wanted to sort of draw the
attention to the average
attorney caseload.
Um, and the number of cases in
which the defendant was referred
into a pre-prosecution diversion
program, just to sort of comment
that, you know, with new
leadership. Oh, thank you. Um,
You know, it, I would hope that
we would be in a better position
to get closer to those
performance metric.
Um, yes, ma'am, of course. I
And just a reminder to go
through the chair. Excuse me.
Oh, just a reminder to go
through the chair. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Oh.
I, I, I do, I'm not sure if I, I
may have understood the full
context. I can tell you that as
a former district court judge, I
presided all over, over all of
the drug programs. I, as a
county manager, I promoted uh uh
programs for youth. I'm very
committed to diverting for
there, that that is appropriate
and very committed in terms of
the way that we're structuring
to pursue the worst actors in
the community at a
Completely different level and
certainly one that would be far
more punitive.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um, thank
you for the, that information. I
have no other questions.
Thank you very much, Madam Vice
Chair. Uh, thank you, District
Attorney at um one sort of
publicly I wanna to credit you
and thank you in your previous
role, uh, are, uh, summer
internship program is remarkably
successful in Donana County,
which you just sort of shared
and spoke about uh over 2000
high school kiddos uh are in
kiddos, adolescent, uh,
adolescents are employed in
various businesses all over the
county.
Uh, first with federal funding
and then with state funding. And
I think it's a great model for
all of us to consider, uh, it
helps their communities.
Obviously, it helps them, and
really want to publicly thank
you for that. Um, number 2, I
want to ask a quick question for
Mr. Chavez, uh, going into a
situation where with clearly new
leadership, more fewer vacant
positions, the idea of more of
trials.
Um,
there would be an opportunity
next year to submit a
deficiency.
Or a supplemental budget request
were that uh sort of a, a vastly
increased workload to occur
during this upcoming fiscal
year, or would there not be that
opportunity?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, great question.
Yes, they will have that
opportunity for FY 26 in a in a
um.
Efficiency request. Got it. OK,
thank you, thank you very much,
Mr. Chairman, I supplement that,
however, please going into the
beginning of the year, trying to
make commitments to other
attorneys to come in. I, I mean,
we can't make those commitments
unless we see that they are in
the budget and that we would be
going forward. We would be
fiscally irresponsible to try to
extend offers, hoping that if
we're able to prove, better
prove the outcome and the
result.
that somehow there would be
supplemental funding later,
you're basically delaying the
decisions until
Later in the fiscal year and
district and we want to
encourage folks to obviously
stay within their budgets, uh,
but the sort of the
Potential scenario was given,
there's more trials for various
reasons. Obviously, we never
want a situation where um that
you all in any district attorney
office can't participate
robustly in a trial, and I just
wanted to ask the question to
make sure that there is a
scenario to deal with that.
Thank you.
And acknowledging that this is
unique amongst all of the
budgets that we'll see members
where there's not any uh
increase recommended by LFC due
to what the district attorney is
outlining, which is a very
unique scenario, and we
acknowledge that
that please go ahead forgive me,
I was, uh, negligent in not
introducing our CFO Julia
Jackson, I believe that most of
you know her in our new project,
the special projects coordinary.
coordinator who many of you know
as well, Edward Estrada. Great.
Thank you. Thank you both for
being up here. Great.
Um, so, uh, great. Oh, mister,
sorry, Mr. District attorney,
um, we're, we're, I'm gonna ask
that we adopt the LFC. I think
we've acknowledged, I think the
committee has the opportunity as
we go through the flag, uh,
across a wide array of budgets,
as we've done on some of the
district attorneys areas that
folks want attention. I think
we've sort of discussed that
here, nonetheless to sort of
stay with our clear practice,
I'll I'll go ahead and ask for
the LSC recommendation for the.
the time being.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would
move that the committee adopt
the LFC recommendation for the
time being.
OK, it's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by ranking
member Chatfield, there any
opposition to that motion,
saying no.
We've adopted that.
OK.
We're gonna, uh, in order, we're
gonna ask for the it'll be the
9th, 10th, and 8th. Big thanks
to the vice chair. First, uh,
with, um,
District Attorney Ray.
From the night.
You are.
So like that was,
that was great.
Great to see you, great to see
you back up. Thank you for your
time earlier.
Mr. Chavez started us on.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We are on
the 9th District Attorney Agency
code 259.
And volume 2, it's on page 49,
page 49, and for the 9th
District attorney for the
general fund appropriation
history since FI 21, their
budget has grown 35.2%, which
equates to an average annual
increase of about 311.2,000.
With that, the differences, um,
and revenue, the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by $2013.4,000 in
general funds. This difference
can be explained in the base
where the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by that amount,
but in the, in the personnel
services and employee benefits
because the executive funds
salary increases for mid and
high level attorneys for the
intention.
of recruitment and retention.
The LFC recommendation does not
provide the salary increases for
this recruitment and retention
because the overall LFC budget
framework includes a
compensation package.
With that, I'll hand it over to
Mario for his comments. Thank
you so much.
Madam chair.
Uh, the 9th District Attorney
office covers Curry and
Roosevelt County like Felix
said, the executive
recommendation includes $213,400
to increase in the 200 category
to allow for continued
recruitment and retention of
mid-level, mid and high-level
attorneys as you'll hear over
and over again, that is the huge
issue when it comes to uh
Offices like the public defender
and the district attorneys is
making sure that we can have um
adequate staffing and
recruitment for these, um,
agencies and so in addition to
any compensation package that
the executive also recommends.
We were recommending, um,
additional funding for the
prosecutor's office. So with
that, I will pass it along to
Mr. Quinton Ray, the DA.
Uh, good morning, good
afternoon, committee. Um.
Just cutting real quick to the
chase. I was up here earlier, I
am the vice president of the New
Mexico District Attorneys
Association. That's all our
association. So on behalf of all
of the district attorneys, we
are asking that you support AODA
in their requests, particularly
with their um IT requests as it
relates to the case management
system because all of our
officers rely and run on that
program. Um, as to my budget
requests, as I said, there's
about a $200,000 difference
between the two, and it
Uh, it has to do with salaries.
Uh, I think it's amazing that,
uh, representatives are asking
about these transfers.
Uh, let me kind of walk you
through some things we're doing
in the night.
Um, we started a digital pilot
program to try to do a digital
marketing recruitment campaign.
We, uh, saw quite a bit of money
into that over 6 months, we had
0 applicants. Um, it just stab
to the heart when you try
something and it just fails. Uh,
so we've pivoted that and we're
now going to uh universities,
um, and trying to recruit.
Directly. Um, so we have either
via Zoom or in person, we're
recruiting in Wyoming, UNM,
Texas Tech, ASU, SMU, Washington
University and Saint Louis of
all places, um, and, uh, what's
crazy is once we get out there,
we find these uh younger
attorneys that are looking for
experiences, they're like, well,
I don't know if I want to go out
there. We got this idea a couple
of weeks ago, um, about, you
know, if you we do a paid
internship, we can get them
there and once we get them
there, we can show them the
greatness of our office and the
greatness of our community. Um,
and
So, kind of an interesting idea
that uh one of our judges threw
out is when you pull somebody in
for an internship, where are
they gonna live for the month of
June and July. And so we're
working with eastern New Mexico
University in our district to
see if we can't house them in
the dorms. And I just think
that's a really clever idea that
one of our, uh, our district
judge had, um, and so I want to
share that. Um, what we are
doing that is working is we've
increased salaries. Um, we have
got 2 attorneys out of
Albuquerque, you know, when I
started a long time ago, we
started at 40
000 $0 as attorneys. Now state
police are starting at $80,000.
Um, so we have to increase pri
pri uh what we're paying. So
we're starting salary in my
office is $90,000. Um, and
that's, that's higher than most
other districts. Um, that's how
we were able to get some people
from Albuquerque to come to our
district, um.
There was a, a public defender,
uh, that was recruited for our
area and so like this is a story
from them, but they offered this
public center, hey, if you're
work in Clovis, we'll pay you
$20,000 more than if you work in
Albuquerque.
They went to Albuquerque. Um, so
it's a struggle, um, and I know
people say we can't just throw
money at it, but $20,000 makes a
big difference in the young
attorneys, uh, you know,
recruitment. And so, uh, really
what we're asking for is not
more money to give more raises.
It's to fund the vacancies. We
have uh 3 attorney vacancies,
and I don't know if you'll
remember, but 2 or 3 years ago
we were at 7 or 8 vacancies. And
so we're doing good work. We're
filling the positions. We're
getting people attracted to our
area, um, but right now,
if
If you go with uh the LFC, I
will not have money to hire any
new attorneys. Those 3 attorney
vacancies will just be empty,
um, and then the pre-opt the
question as to any borrowed
money out of our uh was from
vacancy savings and uh we also
use that to pay contract
attorneys. Last year we asked
for money in that contract
category, and we still have
contract attorneys helping. So,
uh, as of this year, we do not
plan to take any money out of
the 200 category. Um, we're
spending it all on employees and
if we take any out, it's
go to help cover the contract
attorneys. Um, and so we're
spending the money you're giving
us on people to try to help our
community. So, uh, I try to do
that really quick, so I'll stand
for any questions you guys have.
Thank you very much District
attorney. Uh, we're gonna go
first to ranking member
chaplain.
So that's a pretty good
explanation right there at the
end, and I appreciate it. How
many funded vacancies do you
have right now?
Unfunded vacancies funded
vacancies. Do you have any
funded vacancies? 0.
If uh we have a, an investigator
position that we may be able to
hire in May, but we have to wait
because we,
we're funded vacancies right
now, right now. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much for bringing
member Chatfield. Next, we'll go
to Representative Lujan, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Ask you something different, um,
Mr. Chair, we're talking mostly
about this.
Those um vacancies and uh RFTs
and all those um personnel
things. I'm looking at your uh
number of cases in which, um,
the defendant was referred to a
prosecution diversion program,
um, and I was, this looks like
it's just for adults, um.
And maybe it's a Christian also
for Eli or for LFC staff, excuse
me, sir, um, in 20 FY 23 you had
82.
Um
Referrals and in FY 24 you had
55.
And we are, you know.
How, how is the program working
for you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, so the whole concept is
really good. So it's called the
pre-prosecution program, and I
like to think of it as, when you
get put on probation in
magistrate court, you have
somebody telling you what not to
do. We actually are
pre-prosecution director is an
old coach, and it's really,
that's the different mindset as
we're coaching you to be
successful in the
pre-prosecution program. And so,
um, we really do utilize that
our pre-prosecution program is
uh very robust, and so we have
some more pushback from defense
attorneys because they're
saying.
Instead of doing the
pre-prosecution program where
you make them do all these
classes and, uh, you know, prove
that they have a job, we just
want to put them on regular
probation. So our number drop is
not because we're not offering
it, it's because
You know, we're trying to make
people successful and some of
that is, hey, you have to have a
job to be in this program. We
want you to go to work. We want
you to, to change your life. Um,
so I, I'm proud of our program.
I really am. I think if we can
get people into it, we can
really make a difference and
reduce, you know, have a real
effect on recidivism, but they
have to do the work to get that,
so.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I, I'd
like to see those numbers go up
too. I will do that. We'll get
that done, Mr. Chair,
just to get a little insight on
how that's working for you
because I, I saw.
A a drop and I would be assuming
by this point that those numbers
should be going up, but we're
still, I mean, we don't have the
numbers for the, the current
fiscal year, but, um, report
back. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you very much,
Representative Lohan. Um, OK,
uh, let me go next to
Representative Dun. Thank you,
sure. Just one quick question.
Um, I'm sure we see all these
revisions and, and uh transfers
and boy that just doesn't fit on
my plate very well.
But it sounded like you're not
going to have any revisions at
all this year. Is that correct?
Not out of the 200 category and
if we, sorry, Mr. Chair, you're
good, Mr. Chair, um,
representative, if we have any
out of the 200 category, it
would just be a small amount to
help cover contract attorneys,
uh, contract prosecutors. But if
we did, it would be very small.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So will
you have any out of any other
category. Um, my CFO is uh uh in
Washington DC at a recruitment
event, um, so I don't know for
sure that we'll have any, but
how it's been explained to me in
this.
Or what it's worth, uh, is that,
you know, we don't have in our
budgets vehicles costs, and we
don't have a new laptops for the
office and new servers budgeted
in, uh, the practice has been,
hey, you have vacancies instead
of asking for money, use your
vacancy savings to fill those
needs when appropriate, and it's
so in one way, I feel like we're
all trying to be very
responsible with the money you
give us and so we're not, you
know, we don't have a line item
for vehicles or uh for new IT
servers, uh, but when we have
the vacancy saving.
that's where we put it into is
back into the program.
Or through our office.
was turn and thank you, uh, DA.
I, I'd almost rather see it that
way, line item for you car, you
want a car, you want a line item
for a new computers, put it in
there that way and, and it won't
be done that way, but uh.
Um, anyway, thank you for that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much, Representative
Duncan. Next we have
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Same question that I was, I've
been asking. I just, what I'm
trying to do is form a little
bit of a pattern, and this is
mainly for LFC. Is it a common
practice?
For agencies to pull out of
another fund if they have
savings there.
Instead of building a new fund
so that whenever we're funding
things, it's coming out of that
particular fund, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Vincent, great question. Um,
The um the district attorneys
are most are just general
funded, so that's the only fund
that they're using. Um, however,
the what, what I can to answer
your question, the, um, a lot of
the DA's offices deal with
chronic recruitment and
retention, which leaves a lot of
personnel funding in there that
uh according to the district
attorney, their um
administration could borrow
money out where they deemed
necessary, but like, like uh how
many days we'll say recruitment
and retention is difficult.
for attorneys, which leaves that
pot of money in there, so it is
a lot of the district attorneys
to use those savings for
purposes for their office.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and also
while we're on that, when they,
when they pull from that fund is
there any oversight, any
approval from anyone or they
just
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, great question.
There is a process, the, um,
every bar, every budget
adjustment request goes through
through DFA which then gets
funneled down to us, where we
read it, look through it,
approve it or disapprove it if
LFC does disapprove it, we can't
really do much, but we will have
a hearing on that disapproved
bar, but there is that um
oversight between the DFA
analyst and myself for the bars
from the district attorneys.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'm
on your side. I'm just trying to
figure out we can't just willy
nilly spend out of different
funds in my opinion, I think
that we need to, we need to make
sure that we're funding you
right.
So that if you, if you, uh,
right here, you had pulled out
340,000 from personnel services
employees, and you, uh, you buy
furniture and fixtures or you
buy a vehicle or whatever it is
that you buy and then that
cracker jack of an attorney
comes along and you don't have
the money in there, now we have
a problem. So I want to make
sure that we're front loading
you the right way and you're not
being able to pull out of that
for that.
Maybe that one that's holding
out on you that you really need
to get hired.
Mr. Chair.
This
I, I, I, I've never liked this
system. It just baffles me that
this is the way it works, but,
uh, I'm, I'm, we're trying to do
the, you know, the, the most
responsible thing we can and and
really try to utilize taxpayers'
money to the best of our benefit
of our district. So thank you
for being honest. I appreciate
that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Vincent, and
thanks to folks for digging in
there.
OK, I don't see anybody else on
the list, um, we're gonna go
ahead and ask for the LFC
recommendation and appreciate
the ability to dive.
Um, again, um, you know, just
noting again.
Again, that, uh, we want to hear
from members is there are areas
of concern, but also areas where
there's recommendation to to
consider uh additional
investments.
Mr. Chair, I move the seat.
OK, it's been moved by Sam
Sanchez, uh, signed by
Representative Garrett. Any
opposition to that motion?
Seeing none. Thank you very
much, district Attorney.
OK, we'll ask District Attorney
Adams.
Already headed up, thank you
very much.
This is the 10th, uh, which
includes quay, Debaca, and
Harding.
I think there's a plurality of
districts that include the
ranking that the ranking members
counties connect with.
Uh, definitely we've got Quy on
there, so.
Uh, and Harding, I'm sure as
well. District attorney, thank
you for being here. Mr. Chavez
started us off and then we'll go
forward. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, we are on the 10th District
attorney, that's agency code
260. Agency code 260 and in
volume two, they are on page 50
for any further budgetary
information.
Um, for, um, for general fund
increases since FR 21 in general
Fund, the 10th year has
increased by 39%, which equates
to an average annual increase of
$152.4,000.
With that, the differences. The,
the differences in the revenue
side is that the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by $21.9000 in
general fund.
This is partially described in
the base where the LFC
recommendation funds a different
needed to fill a deputy district
attorney physician and a
district office manager
position.
The remaining difference is in
the expansions where the
executive recommendation
includes an expansion for an
information technology
administrator, yeah let's see
also funds this position, but
only partially with the
understanding that vacancy
savings can be used to bridge
the difference.
With that, I'll pass it over to
Mario.
Thank you, Felix. Mr. Chair,
committee members, um,
01.
The 10th judicial district, um,
includes
Harding, Quay in Dubbaca County
as it's already been said, um,
we, the executive recommendation
includes an $86.4,000 for a new
FTE for an IT administrator, and
with that I'll pass it on to
District Attorney Heidi Adams.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, Representatives, I
appreciate your time and
attention and your dedication to
our community. Thank you for
doing this year after year. I
know it's difficult being up
here.
Um, ladies and gentlemen, as you
heard, we are asking for an
expansion for an IT position,
everything we do involves
a technology. We appreciate all
of AOD's a support and we ask
that you fund them fully as per
their request, but we're also
asking for this for within our
office. We lost the senior trial
or a senior investigator to a
local law enforcement agency. He
was our
IT guru. He could do everything.
He trained and he worked closely
with AODA. And now we have
nothing and it's very difficult
sometimes getting somebody on
the phone with them covering all
the other district attorney's
offices, um, furthermore, as you
heard some of the underfunded
positions we're asking to make
sure those are funded, um, at
this time, knock on wood, we're
pretty much completely um full
staffed, um, since I took over
in April when.
Mr. Rose now, Judge Rose took
over um at the 10 judicial
district court, who you heard
from him recently. Um, we have
filled two attorney spots and
much thanks to the retention and
recruitment fund we were able
to, unfortunately, we pulled
them from other districts in New
Mexico, um, but we were able to
fill those spots. Um, we've also
had to fill a victim advocate
spot.
Um, as well as that senior
investigator spot. So we're just
asking for that little bit. Um,
I do want to introduce my CFO
Jennifer Emilio, who is present
with me today and for that we
would stand for any questions.
Thank you.
Excellent, thank you very much,
District attorney. Great, thank
you, CFO for being up here. Uh,
I'll look around. I don't know
if there's any questions, uh.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Again,
I'm gonna ask kind of asking the
same question here, number of
cases in which the defendant was
referred into a pre-prosecution
diversion program, you had FYI
237 FY 24, 3, um.
What are you looking? Is that,
is that number gonna go up or
down or what are the issues and
we're seeing those numbers
decline, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
um, Madam Representative, we
hope they will go up.
Unfortunately, our district
involves a lot of repeat
offenders, um, the new offenders
absolutely if their cases merit
it, we look at them hard, um,
our success rate on PPD isn't
the greatest. Unfortunately,
sometimes, so we're a little bit
more cautious on those that we
offer to.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much for
Lohan.
Uh, I don't see any other
questions. Thank you very much,
00, sorry, well we had Duncan,
please. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
You know, there's got to be some
rancher up there that's an IT
guru that's just hiding maybe
even uh ranking member Chatfield
might be that guy for you.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you very much,
Representative Duncan.Ra E
Chatfield, move the LFC.
I
It's been moved by your ranking
member Chatfield saying by
representative Garrett. Is there
any opposition to that motion? I
don't see any. Thank you very
much. Thank you.
OK, uh, we're welcoming up the
8th, uh, and district attorney
Montoya, great, thank you for
being here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Is it OK
to start? OK. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, for the um 8th District
attorney for the general fun
history since FI 21, their
budget has grown 43.5% with an
average annual increase of
$349.1,000.
With that, the differences on
the revenue side, we're the
same. Um, we are both uh
recommendations align. We both
fund the expansion requests,
which include a lead
investigator and a victim
witness coordinator with that,
I'll pass it over to Mario cause
we agree this time.
Even a broken clock is right
twice a day,
um, Mr. Chair, committee
members, uh, Felix said, um,
both recommendations came in at
the same amount here. Uh, we
want to thank the district
attorney for meeting with us and
making sure that we understand
their requests that goes a long
way, especially when you have 36
budgets to sift through, uh,
their staff's always very
responsive and able to answer
any questions and have the data
to back up any claims they're
making. So I'm joined by this
deputy district.
Attorney, chief deputy, uh,
Henry Valdez, who's here for Mr.
Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Henry Valdez, and I used
to be the DA here and used to be
the director of AODA, uh, I've
left those positions and I am
currently serving as the chief
deputy for uh distorney Marcus
Montoya, he sends his regrets as
he is on a recruiting trip, uh,
to try and uh lower more
returnees, uh, not only into the
8 judicial district, but also to
the state of New Mexico. I
here with our CFO Paul Cisneros
and our district office manager,
uh, Victoria Bransford. Uh, it's
a really difficult decision
which
Which recommendation to ask for.
So I'll just leave it up to you
all, um.
And uh I know you guys still
have a bunch more DAs to hear
from. And uh the state police as
well, so I'll stand for
questions, uh, thank you very
much, uh, Mr. Valdez. We're in
uncharted territory, he
remembers. Uh, we'll go to
questions first to represent
Mohan.
Thank you, Mr. uh, Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Valdez and and um.
Uh, I just really appreciate,
um, all the work that you're
doing up there and just, um, I,
I'm aware of the recruiting, um,
issues you've had. I've spoken
with um DA Montoya over the
years, actually, and he really
um, he really works at and
making sure he has a really good
staffing and and goes to those
those extents to to do that, so
even poach somebody from Santa
Fe.
Mr. Chair, um, but all in good
faith, I think that um I just
wanted to say that and thank you
for all your your work and
everything. My question, Mister
Chair, is gonna be remain the
same, um, we're looking at the
case, uh,
Numbers 4 in which a defendant
was referred into a
pre-prosecution diversion
program, I see that your
numbers.
Uh, from FY 23 to 24 have
dropped by sober 50%. I'm just
wondering.
As we're capturing other
legislation, Mister Chair.
What is, what is the, the cause
of that.
Mr. Chairman,
op hy shift in the 8 judicial
district, uh, the 8 judicial
district does view uh
pre-prosecution, diversion as a
very useful tool, um, and really
trying to treat those first time
nonviolent offenders, uh, in a
way which we won't see him
again. Unfortunately, what you
have at times, we can only offer
it.
Um, whether it's accepted or not
or is dependent on any number of
things, and I think sometimes
that has to do with either the
defense bar, having, uh, I know
in in our.
Jurisdiction, uh, one of the
requirements is that you admit
what you have done.
And that if you fail to complete
the program, then that admission
will be used in a further
proceedings in the prosecution,
and there
Don't want their clients to
admit what they've done, uh, and
so then we're forced into, you
know, the, the usual route of
dealing with, with those
offenders.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
I appreciate that.
Thank you very much for Lohan.
Um, let's go ahead and ask for
the executive on this one,
go back to the office.
I get paid
it's been moved by
Representative Brown.
Seconded by uh Representative
Vincent, although close with
Duncan. There's a motion by
Brown saying by uh Vincent. Is
there any opposition to that
motion? I don't see any, thank
you very much and please give
our regards to District Attorney
Montoya as well. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman excellent.
OK, uh, members, we're now on to
the 7th, the 11th, and then
we'll have the 13th.
Or excuse me, the 7th and the
11th and the 11th, uh, there's a
unique feature, so that'll be 3.
Uh, District attorney Wellborn,
great to see you. Thank you.
Absolutely.
Mr. Chavez, please start us up.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We are on
the 7th District attorney, which
is um agency code 257 in volume
2, it's page 47.
Further general fun history, the
7th Judicial District Attorney
since FY21 has grown their
general fund appropriation by
36.2%, which equates to an
average annual increase of
$259,000.
With that for the 7th, um, the
differences are that there
aren't any the both the LSC and
executive recommendation are the
same. Both recommendations fully
fund the agency's request for
funding various personnel rate
increases, audit rate increases,
and other items related to
training NIT with that, I'll
pass it over to Mario.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I don't
have any further comments, so I
will pass it on to Clint, the
DA.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. I'm Clint well
born in the district attorney
for the 7th Judicial District,
which is Katherine Sierra
Socorro in Torrance Counties.
Uh, this is my 25th year as
district attorney. Uh, I have
with me my CFO JB Walden. This
is his 2-ninth year and I have
my uh financial administrator,
Julia Aguilar with us also.
And uh
Both requests, both
recommendations are exactly what
we requested, um.
I just will comment that uh
The program that AODA is asking
to fund for their um
Case management, it's going to
affect all of us, so I would ask
you to look at that very closely
and the funding that they need
because it will affect us, uh,
in our ability to, uh, actively
and uh effectively run our
office and with that, I'll stand
for any questions. Thank you
very much, uh, District Attorney
Weborn. I'm gonna look and see
if there's uh any questions.
Um
I, I don't see any questions
we're gonna have to wait, uh,
and we're going to, we'll ask
the staff to get a cup, make
sure we have sufficient members
here.
Which we at least, we need at
least one more member.
In the office.
So staff needs to get one more
member in here, please.
Great.
All right, uh, great, uh,
ranking member, uh, Chatfield.
Mr. Chair, I moved the LFC, OK,
there's a motion.
It's been signed by
Representative Duncan. Is there
any opposition to that motion? I
don't see any opposition. Thank
you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
OK.
Members we're gonna go ahead uh
with the 11th judicial district.
Uh, we'll start with division
one.
Mhm.
OK.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. We are
on the 11th DA Division One,
that is uh agency code 261 on
page 51 in volume 2.
For the 11th DA Division One for
the General Fund appropriation
history and set by 21, they've
increased by 47%, which equates
to an average annual increase of
$590.6,000.
With that, the differences on
the revenue side, the general
funding general fund executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by $149.1,000.
This difference is described in
the base where the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
by 100 by by that amount in
personal services and employee
benefits. This difference stems
from the executive recommending
funding for personnel
reclassifications to fill vacant
position and to excuse me, let
me repeat that. Different stems
from the executive recommending
funding for personnel
reclassifications, as well as
funding to fill vacant
positions. The LC recommendation
provides funding for health and
liability insurance.
as well as other benefits,
salaries are not included
because again, the LFC
recommendation includes a
compensation package.
And with that I'll pass it over
to Mario for his comment. Thank
you.
Thank you, Felix. Mr. Chair,
committee members, as Felix
said, the executive
recommendation runs $100,000 to
augment contract attorney
funding. We realize how crucial
that is to fill the void when we
can't recruit full-time
attorneys, uh, 224,000 to
convert one temporary position
from to perm uh from term to
perm and to reclassify certain
positions for retention purposes
and some 43,000 for increased
rates in insurance. I will pass
it off to
Chief Deputy District Attorney
Gary Risley, who was in for
District Attorney Jack Fortner.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, uh, Mr.
Fortner sends both his regards
and his regrets. He's uh uh
A member of the regions of the
University of New Mexico, and
they're having some significant
event going on today, so I've
been uh tagged to come and be
present before you all today. We
thank you for the opportunity to
be here.
Uh, with regard to this, uh, as
you know, Mr. Fortner is, uh,
our new district attorney. Uh,
I'm new to the job as well and
actually I'm coming out of civil
practice after 40 years, uh, but
I'm there to help uh hopefully
because I tell, tell people I'm
trying to squeak through uh get
3 or 4 more horsepower out of
this engine, you know, try to
streamline this office and uh
it's because it's very well run
office before we got there,
there's things that can be
worked on and I've been looking
at those critically, but I think
part of this is, you know, the,
the, the change a little bit of
philosophies we're looking
forward to it is uh maybe to
anticipate the representative
Lujan's question is that Mr.
Fortner says we have a lot of
mental health issues that are
causation that people are
involved in the criminal process
and we'd really like to try to
break that cycle by having
people who would voluntarily
give cooperation with their
defense attorneys and programs
that we're working on and
cooperation mental wellness.
San Juan County has, uh,
undertaking a significant mental
health initiative with a uh lack
of a combined mental illness and
wellness center that is
involving uh agencies from both
at the state level and the local
level and we're wanting to
participate that in that to help
break these cycles. And so we
hope to see an increase in both
the pre-prosecution diversions
and other diversion programs we
have for people that, uh, you
know, because I think anybody
here will tell you that.
repeat offenders are the major
problem. If you look at our
county alone, just
The alcohol and drug with no
reference to the other crimes is
25% of the cases we bring.
And if you tie the other cases
to the, you know, burglaries or
uh other circumstances of
aggravated batteries, they
almost all involve drugs or
alcohol, so we can break that
cycle at some point, so that'll
be a very strong initiative that
you'll see from attorney, uh,
district attorney Fortner as we
go forward. You've heard this
song and danced several times, I
won't beat the drum too hard,
but I will beat it, uh,
recruitment and retention is a
tremendous problem. Uh,
Yeah, with the said earlier, you
know, uh, we now are paying uh
rookie uh state troopers
$80,000. I do not begrudge them
that way, but that's what we're
able to pay 3 or 4 year old, 3
to 4-year attorneys in our
office.
is a feeling that to compete in
a market where uh the average
attorney wage coming out of law
school for a first year student
is 77,000 to 155,000 in New
Mexico.
So we're having, we're having a
hard time being able to recruit
them. Now the retention and uh
recruitment fund that was
mentioned earlier has been
helpful for us to retain people,
for example, we had a gentleman
was going to retire at the end
of the year, we managed to use
the retention fund to get him to
stay till at least July 1st.
We've been able to do that in a
few other areas, but the real
issues we really need to have
salaries that we can guarantee
and compete long term in that
particular areas, and so,
And that's the job, but look,
uh, very closely at that aspect
of it. Uh, we have, uh, you
know, increasing case data and
storage cost of uh.
Director Ted Rowe and several
others have spoken to that
issue. The legislature wisely uh
required body cameras on law
enforcement officers several
years ago.
But with that comes huge data
storage.
Our data storage is doubled
every year for the last 3 years.
It's probably will continue to
do so. Right now, we're, we're,
we're, we're having to go out
and get one drives and uh add
that to it and then we're
storing them in different spots.
We're at the point we're either
gonna have to get a true data
software storage uh program, or
we're gonna have to hire a
full-time equivalent to just
manage locating where we store
stuff, try to save space and do
those type of things. That would
be a much higher cost than the
data, uh, storage would be.
Although the program we're
looking at is the 8500 to
$100,000 range, but it would
also give us a lot of labor
hours back because in that we
can now edit the video, we're
not having, uh, if you're
working on something, it's
automatically the originals
automatically saved, you're not
risk losing data, and we have
requirements that we're keeping
highly confidential information.
There's no other eye should be
looking at for 9 to 10 years.
Less huge data requirements as
we go forward in the future, and
that really needs to be funded
both at the state level and at
our local levels and same way
with the CMS software you heard
earlier. Uh, one of our
attorneys described it very
aptly. It is a, uh, it is a
Winnebago body on a Toyota
chassis. It's just, it's been
built in house for a number of
years. It's just, it crashes
periodically, it can't sustain
what we've we're required to do.
And it it pairs both the defense
because we are required to give
discovery to.
then we do it electronically, in
the in the
Clunkiness is all I can and I'm
coming from the outside looking
in. I said, holy cow, this is 20
year old technology. It is very
difficult to learn. I've been
trying to learn it for the last
3 weeks, and it's very, uh, and
it's, we need to advance and
that serves the public as well,
and of course inflation itself
has been a tremendous cost to us
going forward, uh, if you look
at here, we've uh asked for, you
know, a significant increase in
a lot of the funding here, a lot
of that is to help us recruit
and retrain individuals, uh,
into our office.
Uh, you know, just give you a
simple example of workers'
compensation costs have gone up
almost $70,000 in a year.
Our subscription costs for our
software, everybody's switching
to a subscription model, right?
Those have gone up 15 and 20% in
some categories. So it's, you
know, we're, we're trapped in a
vice of high, you know, high
inflationary cost of, of the
things we are central to run the
office again, coming from a
private practice into this, I
think I would simply go out and
say, OK, I'll, I'll, I'll take a
subscription X, Y or Z, we can't
do it.
Uh, in, and we're having
difficulty getting cases
processed because of the
restrictions on software that we
have available to us. So those
are just think if if you want to
stay for public.
But I think we all do. And you
want a fair process. We have to
have the tools to do the job.
And those are all things that
are uh being directly impacted
there. The other thing that we
heard, we talked about how to uh
earlier is
is the cost of that programming
have increased, we have not had
cost the increases in the grant
funding itself. And so what
we're having to do is rob Peter
to pay Paul. We're taking 100,
we have $113,000 114,000 dollars
shortfall there that were
basically funding from by
keeping other positions empty.
We're not filling other
positions, so we can pay for it.
Now that makes it suffering
cause just like everybody else
is doing, we have tremendously
high caseloads. I don't see how
these guys do it. I just, I look
at it.
How do you manage a case load
like that?
And it's just double or triple
what we would normally expect to
be, uh, be highly successful and
be able to administer the
processes that we go through.
So,
We really need assistance in
regard to, uh, you know, again,
helping to fund that particular
position at the level that it is
thus a drug interdiction, uh,
we're like, uh, and something I
learned many years ago, I moved
to San Juan County in 1987 as a
general counsel of Mesa Airlines
please keep going. We have 55
additional I'll wrap up right
quick here. The point is, is
that Sanwa County is a drug hub.
It's amazing the amount of drugs
that flow through our county
that come across the border,
reach our County, and we're the
regional distribution center,
and this, so this drug
interdiction force is very, very
important with regard to that,
but it needs to be fully funded
in that regard with that Mr.
Chairman, I'll be standing for
any questions that you may have.
Thank you, Chief, uh, Chief
Deputy uh Risley, we appreciate
it very much. Uh, we're gonna go
first to questions first to
represent Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, many,
many years ago when uh when I
had dark hair and and uh Mr.
Risley had dark hair. He came in
and asked me to run for office.
So if any of you want to blame
anybody, here's the opportunity
right now. I'm trying to get
funding, Mr. Chairman, I have
retracted.
I have nothing that I feel for
everyone of our days and, and
they need all the money. Thank
you, sir.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative and the, the
quote, the different, uh, the
different automobile parts makes
us think about the one piece at
a time by Johnny Cash. Yes back
kind of thing
we're gonna go next to
representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
again, uh thank you for your
service and uh the, the work
that um that
You guys are, are doing their in
in in Salon County, Mr.
Chairman, um, you know, I, I, I
think, a huge component of, of,
of this increase of caseloads is
just a, a reality that we're,
we're in, in, in the four
corners, you know, we have a, uh
a sovereign government, the
Navajo Nation, uh, the largest
community, uh, Shiprock does not
have a jail. And, and so it's,
it's really hard for, uh, for,
uh, it, it, it and I'm, I'm.
I wouldn't be having more
discussions on that, but I, I
feel like that's flowing over
into your guys' caseloads uh Mr.
Chairman. So, um, what, what,
one question I have, uh, is Mr.
Chairman, uh, do you
Do you, does, does your office
help with looking at uh uh when
it comes to behavioral health,
maybe looking at alternatives
such as traditional healing for
some of these uh um Native
American, um, uh, clients or are
we, uh, that are going through
the, through the process. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman
and uh Representative Hernandez,
the answer to your question is
yes. Uh, it, I'm sure y'all are
aware, uh, you know, we have a
very, very large Native American
population in
We're right across the river
literally from the reservation
and a lot of the people that are
involved in our uh prosecutions
and cases are in fact uh Navajo
and we have a great respect for
their tradition and culture. And
so we have an individual in our
office who's becoming our mental
health wellness liaison in the
hopes of identifying those cases
where it is appropriate for this
type of treatment and then the
treatment that we're looking at
it working will be uh
representative of the needs of
the individual that would be the
the best opportunity for.
success in healing, and with
that, if it, if that's what the
uh Native American would be in
fact with uh, that, you know,
traditional uh processes, uh
there will be some sometimes it
may be we made uh this wide
variety of clinics were working
very hard to bring to our
community and fund.
Like that concludes my
questions.
Excellent, great, great
question, uh, Representative
Hernandez. Uh, I don't see any
other questions, um, just
pointing out, um,
The, there was a relatively high
uh reversion rate.
FY 24.
We're showing $181,000.
Any sort of perspective, I know
it's been brought up in other
times, any perspective on that?
If I might refer the details to,
uh, I'm sorry, Miss Han here,
our CFO, uh, on the details, but
mostly we're using vacancy funds
just like everybody else to
cover things that arise that are
not haven't been budgeted for uh
either through inflation or
otherwise, but I'll give her
give you the specifics that I
made, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, that is correct. It
was mostly vacancy savings. We
were unable to fill a couple of
positions.
OK, good. Thank you, and that's
obviously that's been a, been a
consistent answer and theme.
Thank you for that. OK, we'll go
ahead and ask for the uh LFC
recommendation.
I moved to accept the LFC LFC
recommendation.
Great, it's been moved by
Representative Duncan saying by
Representative Hernandez, any
opposition to that?
Seeing none
We've adopted that. Thank you
very much. Please give our best
to District attorney for.
OK, now we'll ask uh region or
excuse me, Division 2 for uh the
11th district.
Just
Thank you, Mr. Chair. The um
11th District Attorney Division
2, their agency code is 265, so
this should be the last one in
the packet.
And um in volume 2, there are
page 52.
For their general fund history.
They
For the 11th DA Division 2 since
FY21, they've they're the
general fund increase has been
24%, which averages out to an
annual increase of $1169.2,000.
With that, the differences, the
general fund and executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by $65.5,000.
This difference can be explained
in the bases, with the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by the amount
that I just mentioned in the
personnel category because the
LSC recommendation only funds
personnel rates increases and
not salary increases. They'll
see recommendation funds all
compensation increases.
is again through the LFC
compensation package. With that
I'll pass it over to Mario for
his comment. Thank you.
Thank you, Felix, Mr. Chair,
committee members, 11th District
Attorney Division 2.
Um, the executive recommendation
is
Offs $170,000 for rate increases
and salary pieces for the entire
FTE count, going back to
ensuring that we incentivize our
uh prosecutors to hire more
attorneys, um, by kind of
working on the the pay structure
there. Uh, we are joined today
by CFO Bernice Martinez, who's
filling in for uh the district
attorney, um, but he started a
little bit after I did, and
she's been absolutely great to
work with and she's a quick
learner and.
one of the uh best, she teaches
me a few things too, so I'm
happy that she's here with us
today.
Thank you, Ms. Martinez. Go
ahead please.
Good, good afternoon, Mr. Tay
Representatives. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and Representative for
giving me the opportunity to
present our budget.
My name is Bernice Martinez. I'm
the chief financial officer for
the 11 traditional District
Attorney Division 2, my
presentation will be brief.
The Martin can be with us today.
She is attending the National
District Attorney Association,
recruiting event.
Uh, we do not request any
additional funding, uh, at this
time for our fiscal year 2026.
I would also like to add that
our caseload is managed very
well. We continue to have
challenges in hiring full-time
attorneys, but our contract
prosecutors are experienced and
understand the needs of McKinley
County.
The staff are committed and they
are very productive. There,
there were no audit finding in
physicalscal year 2025.
As you will also notice that our
um vacancy rate has been
extremely high throughout the
year. That would also explain
our reversion.
Uh, currently we're operating uh
with
Uh, DA Martin as the attorney
and 3 contract attorneys.
And our contract attorney comes
out of the 300 accounts and
therefore, um, the transfer from
the 2200 count to the 300 count
is needed to pay out the
contractors.
This will be my this, this ends
my presentation. I stand for
questioning.
Great, thank you very much, uh
Mr. Martin, Mr. Chavez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, just
to clarify during the budget
request process, Maria and I did
receive a request to increase
the budget so that it is just to
clear the confusion from that we
did during the process to
receive an increased request.
That's why we're showing that.
OK, great. Thank you. uh,
ranking member Chatfield and
then Rose Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm just
looking at the
A reversion of 865,610, and the
transfer from personal services
of 360,000. Can you guys talk to
me a little bit about that?
Mr. Chair, Representative, um,
are vacancy rate varies from
29 to 30% throughout the year,
and that is where the reversion
is coming from, from the vacant
um positions.
And
um, Mr. Chair, the transfer of
the 360,000. Where did it go?
Where was it transferred to and
I assume it was also from a
vacant position.
Mr. Resentative that funding
went from the 200 count to the
300. Uh, we are having to
utilize 3 contract prosecutors
and the prosecutors are are
getting paid from the 300 count.
So we're having to move from
personnel to contraction to pay
out the contract prosecutors.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much for member
Chatfield's.
Next we're gonna go to
Fernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and um,
uh, I didn't get to attend the
governor's safety safety summit
that took place in the city of
Gallup, but uh I, I, I did hear
a lot of positive response from
from that and, um, and again,
um, I think it's really critical
you guys are, are, are right
there off of I-40, and I
definitely uh understand the
difficulties, uh, your office
spaces and uh, and so just
wanted to um
Mr. Chairman, uh, just mentioned
my, my, my support for, for the
office. Thank you.
Mr. Turmer Representative, thank
you.
Right.
Uh, thank you very much,
Hernandez. Uh, I, they, we
brought, we talked about the
reversions one other just
flagged from FY 24 if I'm told
from staff that there's still a
flag uh on uh the audit.
Over sort of payroll, uh,
controls. Is there anything to
add anything that you want to
add on that topic.
Mr. Tay Representative, uh, the
reason for the audit finding,
um,
was uh there was not um uh
understanding of the RFP request
for proposal.
Therefore, uh, one of the
contract attorneys went over the
threshold of 59,000 and was
supposed to stay under the
59,000. Got it. That was, that
was the auto finding Mr.
Thank you very much, Ms. Marcy,
and it sounds like that will be
correct. We shouldn't expect to
see that for FY 25 once FY 25 is
complete. Representative, it is
um
It is taking care of them and we
have completed request for
proposals on our uh contract
attorneys. Great. OK. Thank you
and thank you for uh going into
that and also for uh
successfully clearing it up. OK,
we're gonna go ahead and ask for
the LFC recommendation, um.
Representative Hernandez please.
Chairman, I ask that we, uh, go
with the LLC recommendation.
OK, it's been moved by
Representative Hernandez, signed
by Representative Duncan. Is
there any opposition to that
motion, seeing none, thank you
very much, Ms. Martin.
Oh
OK
Wow.
OK,
do you, uh, represent Brown,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. This will
just take a minute.
So I, I believe Mr. Chair, that
we have an ethical obligation to
Very adequately fund our
district attorney's offices.
It's part of our justice system.
And what I'm hearing is, um,
Some of the newer DA's were not
really consulted about budget
needs, they know their needs, I
think even better than we do.
And I would just like to know if
we're gonna have a chance during
the public safety, um process uh
subcommittee process.
Take a look at these across the
board, and I would like the
analyst to give us a number.
If we were to um take the
recommendation to fund the
highest.
dollar amount request.
and bundle those snubbers
together, comparing.
You know, just give us the high,
the high one.
How much an aggregate would that
be in terms of an overall budget
increase for the DAs. I'm just
curious to see that number.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Brown. Appreciate
that. Uh, that is one of the
reasons we have a public safety
working group. We'll ask for
that number, uh, following up.
We want to keep going through
our hearing today, and we have
Department of Public Safety
after our uh district attorneys,
but I appreciate the flag and
we'll go ahead and get that
number from staff.
Uh, we're gonna go invite up the
13th district Attorney or uh
yeah, uh district attorney Romo.
Thank you for being here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We're for
the 13th district attorney and
his agency code 263 should be
the one before Division 2. And
um and the in volume 2, it's
page 54.
For the 13th DA's General Fund
history since FY 21, they've
increased by 51.9%, which
equates to an average annual
increase of $764,000.
With that, the differences in
revenue, the general fund and
general fund, uh, the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by $123.2,000.
That difference is solely in
personnel and employee benefits
and um the executive provides
the the difference provides um.
Excuse me, let me, let me
reiterate that long day. I
apologize. Just to restart on
the base, the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by 123.2,000 in
personnel category because the
executive funds pay increases
for attorney staff. Again, LFC
funds all compensation increases
through the LFC compensation
package with that I'll pass it
over to Mario.
Thank you, Felix.
Uh, chair, committee members,
the agency requested a 4.0%
increase in the executive
granted that they're pretty
solid agency to to work with in
terms of budgeting issues, so I
will pass it on to District
Attorney Barbara Romo, thank
you.
Thank you all and thank you, Mr.
Chair and committee members for
the time today, um, I also want
to thank our DFA and LFC
analysts for all their hard work
and their recommendations.
Again, I'm district attorney
Barbara Romo. I represent the
13th Judicial District
Attorney's office, which
includes Sandoval, Valencia, and
Cibala counties. I'm also here
with my CFO Anna Case, who's
here with me at the table, also
present um in support is my
chief deputy just.
Martinez and my district officer
manner
district office manager, Melissa
Howden. Our agency is requesting
the LFC recommendation, which is
a 233,000.
233,203,300 base increase or a
2.6% increase to our personnel.
category, our base increases to
funds to attorney positions.
And FY 24, our agency reverted.
$1,201 which is less than 1%.
For the last 3 years, our agency
has been fiscally responsible
with zero audit findings, and I
think I always mention this, but
I, I just want to emphasize to
the committee that
Fiscal responsibility is
is critically important to me.
It's been drilled into me since
I was in the military, so I work
really hard to make sure that we
make the best use of all of the
funds that you provide to us. So
with that, I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you very much, District
attorney. We're gonna go, I'll
look to my left for questions.
I'll look to my right. I don't
see any, um, just to have clear
observation, really impressive
to see the very low reversion
rate, particularly because it's
been a challenging feature for
uh most of our other district
attorney's offices. Any, I guess
maybe let me ask, anything that
you think sort of you all are
able to do uh extra well that's
allowed that sort of very low
reversion rate even alongside as
we noted with uh Mr. Chavez.
That you've seen as or frankly
even higher increased funding.
Mr. Chair, thank you for the
question. Um, I, I have to give
all the credit to my chief
financial officer, Ms. Cassaus.
But we try very hard for any
extra funds that are provided to
us, um, we've tried very hard
to, to pass those on to our
personnel.
I, I don't need to repeat what
everyone else has said about the
retention and recruitment pro
problem right now our vacancy
rate.
Attorneys, I think we have 14
vacancies, 13 attorneys. We
just, we lost 4 attorneys in the
last.
2 weeks, I think.
Now, some of it, you know, are
things that we can't control
people, I mean, honestly, a
couple of them were let go for a
couple of different reasons, but
um it's not only, it's retention
as well, and we've tried really
hard to make our salaries
competitive.
And just in general, some of our
offices policies, but as far as
the reversion rate, we just try
really hard.
To find every possible way we
can extend all the money in a
legal and
Fiscally appropriate manner, of
course, but that's, that's what
I, that's what we do through my
CFO.
Great. Thank you for, for
allowing to go into that just a
little bit.
Um, OK, I think that does it.
We'll go ahead and ask for the
LSC recommendation. Appreciate,
uh, very much, you all being
here today and very impressed
with the the work.
Thank you, thank you, Chair, Mr.
Chair, I would move that the
committee adopt the LFC
recommendation.
OK, it's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by
Representative Garrett. Is there
any opposition to that motion
saying no we've adopted that
motion. Thank you. Thank you
all.
OK. Uh, we're gonna finish up
now with the 4th, the 2nd, and
the 1st.
Um, again, a big thanks to the
vice chair.
For many things, including that,
uh, the, we'll ask uh District
Attorney Clayton.
Oh
And we're, we're always happy to
see you there.
Mm.
OK, Mr. Chair, we are on the 4th
District Attorney at the agency
254 page 44 on volume 2 for
their um for the general of fun
history since it by 21, they've
grown 37.6% with the average,
excuse me, with an average
annual increase of $334.8,000
and for the differences, there
aren't any both the LFC and
executive recommendation.
fully fund the agency's request
for funding for increases in GSD
premium and health and liability
insurance rates. With that, I'll
pass it over to Mario.
Thank you, Felix, the 4th TA uh
Mr. Chair, committee members, I
almost never forget. I even have
it written here, go through the
chair and I try to point to the
people, uh, the 4th includes San
Miguel, Mora, and Guadalupe
Counties like, uh, Felix said
the increase was $16,300 for
rate increases in employee
benefits. Um, so Mr. Tedro is
here to cover for district
Attorney Clayton. Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, thank you for
this opportunity. Um, DA Clayton
sends his regards. He's actually
in the middle of a homicide
trial at this time, so he could
not get away from that. I think
that's sort of again emphasizes
the need for attorneys statewide
everywhere, he's just like
everybody else in in need of
recruitment and retention and
everything else. He did ask me
to ask you guys to, uh, number
one, root for the Eagles this
Sunday.
And uh
And if you're not rooting for
the Eagles, that wasn't his
idea. That was mine, so don't
punish him.
But uh no number 2, the, the,
uh, LFC and the DFA are very
comparable. He's not asking for
many increases right now. Um, so
he challenges you to go for the
higher one just for fun.
On that, I'll stand for any
questions. I would like to add
that Christina Chavez, the CFO
for the 4th is here also at
there's any questions.
Uh, great, um, thank you very
much. Are there any questions?
For the 4th. Uh, please Bohan.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair, and
this might be more um for
Christina and she probably knows
this, um, and it's the same
thing, the number of cases
depends on the defendant's
defended was referred into a
pre-prosecution diversion
program, um, in FY 23 you saw uh
47.
Cases and then FY 24 we saw 7.
Can you?
Comment on that.
Mr. Chair, and the reason why
I'm bringing this up, Mr. Cha is
because
The pre-prosecution and
diversion programs where they
have them and and really
established because we should be
seeing a cost savings and
We need to bolster these things
up, but that's really the, the
essence of this as we're, and as
we're moving other legislation
that will um affect what is
going on in our counties.
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, uh, members of the
committee at this time we're
looking at um structuring our uh
pre-post at um divisions.
Yeah.
OK, thank you. And also with the
um the
We have, um, the AOC has put
forward their program and their.
There and and launched it. How
was that working for you, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Lujan, I'm sorry, could you
repeat the second part of the
AOC has has put forward the a
program where they were looking
at their, their diversion
program and and working and have
launched in.
In San Miguel and well within
the district.
And I just would like to have
any kind of information feedback
from that, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative Lujan,
um, a lot of the DA's will tell
you that that we understand what
the courts are doing with, with
their diversions, um, but
Honestly, we still like our
pre-prosecution diversion
better. And the reason we say
that is because someone who goes
into the
The PPDs through the DA's
offices are getting 0.
I guess we can say rap sheet.
Um, the case is fully dismissed
if they complete it, it's never
refiled. It didn't happen.
Uh, where a lot of times with
the court programs, there has to
be
You know, the the procedure goes
forward. There's a criminal
complaint, there's criminal
information filed, they go
through the courts, there could
be, as we say, a jacket that
goes along with him later, so in
a lot of ways, the DA is really
like the pre-prosecution
diversion that they can offer
better cause it's a real clean
slate for someone, um, and the
second thing is, is again on
numbers.
I think I've heard it referred
to a couple of times, our
statute limits the DA's on what
they can take, you know, first
time, you know, non-repeat,
nonviolent cases, but in the
end, it's still the defendant
and the defense attorney that
decides, you know, who, if
they're going to go in it or
not. And so sometimes we'll see
those numbers. We may have
people that we would love to
look, and, and we would like to
expand, expand the programs to
maybe be able to look at
different cases. Let's say,
Multiple drug charges. Maybe
it's something we can still look
at, but because of the previous
charges, we really can't look at
PPD, and we would like to expand
those, and we'd also like to
expand what we call
pre-prosecution diversion. You
know, it may be the program or
it may be you'll complete your
GED.
So we would really like to
expand what we call our
performance measures and
everything else to go along with
these. Thank you, Mr. I really
appreciate that that insight.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Luhan,
and it's great to ask that
question and see how it's
working across the state. We'll
go to Representative Sanchez.
Mr. Chair, I move Bey.
OK, it's been moved by
Representative Sanchez, seconded
by Representative Garrett in the
opposition to that motion,
seeing none, that's adopted.
Thank you very much.
Well, uh, invite up District
Attorney Bregman.
Mr. Chair, um, Mario took a
break to use the restroom.
That's why he's not here we'll,
we'll go ahead, um, let's go
ahead, we'll start off, Mr.
Chavez, on your end, uh, with
the, I think, give us some of
the overall numbers and then um
we can, you know, we can go to
district Attorney Bregman and
just keep on tracking. Sounds
good. Thank you, Mr. Chairs, for
the, uh, we're on the 2nd
District attorney, that's agency
252 and in volume 2 they'll be
on.
Pages 41 and 42. Again, in
volume 2, it's pages 41 and 42
for the 2nd district attorney,
their general fund, uh, history
is they've grown since FY 21,
they've grown 39.6% and an
average annual increase of $2.4
million.
With that, the differences on
the revenue side, the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
by $280,000 in general fund.
This can be explained both in
the base and in the expansions
in the base, the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by $1041.8,000 in
personnel services and employee
benefits category, the executive
recommends funding for new
support staff and investigator
and 6 attorneys.
Although the LSC funds the
agency's expansion requests in
which the the executive does
not. There are many differences
that the executive
recommendation exceeds the LC
recommendation by 138.2,000 in
the other cost category because
the executive recommendation
provides more funding for expert
witness and transcription fees.
Again, the difference in the
expansion is that the LFC
recommended the expansion
request for a domestic violence
team in full, and the executive
recommendation.
did not. With that, I handed
over to Mario, who came back
quick.
Thank, thank you, Felix,
if I didn't go to the bathroom
before Sam Brigman, I would
regret it. So, um, committee
chair, uh, committee members,
uh, as Felix said, the
differences are about um
Was it 200,000. The executive
recommends about $2 million
increase in general fund, um,
which is 5.9%, uh, the agency
requested 16.2%, so there was
some uh difficult decisions
being made, um, it's been, you
know, since DAreman's
appointment and re-elect
election has been a very willing
partner to work with in the
executive branch and we
definitely look forward to
hearing his presentation, so
I'll pass it on to.
Just to Sam Bergman, thank you.
Mr. Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, it is honored to
be before all of you.
Recognize many of you friends
with many of you, and it is a
privilege to be here. I want to
make sure I point out our
district manager Andrea Martinez
is right here, um, for any of
the real technical questions,
but I do want to get this
opportunity to first of all,
And I can't
Overstate this. Thank you. You
heard what the budget has
happened in my office in the
last couple of years.
And I will tell you, despite the
fact that everybody is
overwhelmed, I'm sure with crime
bills and crime legislation. It
is my opinion that the one thing
that you can do more to fight
crime than anything else as far
as an immediate impact is fund
district attorney's offices and
you have absolutely answered
that request in the last couple
of years for the 2nd judicial
district District attorney's
office, and I just want to say
I'm grateful because of your
funding of our office. We
haven't, I have, we have
hired 170 people, including 74
new attorneys. That's more
attorneys than any other
business or governmental entity
in this state has hired in that
time frame.
We have an amazing group of
people that work at my office.
And because of your funding and
because of your recognition that
the less caseloads they have,
the more prosecutors in there
working these cases, the better
justice. It's why we've
convicted close to 280 people of
murder in Albuquerque in the
last two years. We've convicted
20 different cases of cold case
rape cases. The huge difference
for people that just as we
thought was forgotten for, but
no, we kept on it and we
been able to do that.
We've raised our pretrial
detention motion success rate
since the year before I got
there in the 50% to 60%, and now
that's running 2 years in a row.
We are making a difference.
Crime is absolutely a real
problem in Albuquerque as it is
in the whole state, and I
understand that, but we are
making a difference in the, the
reason we are making a
difference is because of your
willingness, this legislature's
willingness to fund our office
the way you have.
This is not the time.
To take our foot off the gas.
To the contrary, it's time to
keep pushing on the gas because
overall, I truly believe crime
is getting better, and I've been
very vocal about juvenile crime
and you all know that. But
overall, the big picture right
now, what I see coming across my
desk from the first day I took
this office until today. Things
are starting to move in the
right direction. It's a big
ship. It takes time to turn in
the ocean, but things are
getting better and I can't
emphasize more that I just want
to say thank you because
this legislature and your
funding of our DA's office has
enabled that to happen.
More specifically, um, we have a
10% vacancy rate as if we we as
I say right now, we have 8
people, 8 attorneys we could
hire today, but we run out of
funding, if you will. We want to
be responsible, of course, and
make sure we live within our
means that you all allow for us.
We have, I said, since January
3rd, 2 years ago, we've hired 74
attorneys and 96 support staff.
We are making a supplement
asking for a supplemental
request.
We asked for 1,500,000, the
executive suggested 1 million in
the LFC is suggesting half, um
half a million.
The,
the reason for that is to
continue to recruit and retain
more people. I could hire, like
I said, a lot more attorneys who
want to do good work and we've
done an amazing job of
recruiting and it is an amazing
opportunity for young
prosecutors and career
prosecutors in our office. The
operating budget, um, the
executive, as you know, as um
recommended about 36 million,
the legislative 357, um, we want
to continue to fill
positions that we have, we don't
have the funding to do that. The
city of Albuquerque really came
through and helped fund a DV
team because the domestic
violence rate is, is
unacceptable. I think
everywhere, but certainly in
Albuquerque, we are making a
difference in that. We're
incorporating more of the red
flag laws and that whole
division, um, and that funding
is gonna run out and I'm asking
for, for the state to fund what
I think is an appropriate
funding of that expansion for
the domestic violence.
team.
Um, as many of you know, the
organized crime commission, uh,
that the governors startup has
been doing a lot of good work
and, and as the chairman of
that, I'm very proud of that,
but also the funding for that
has come out of my budget. I
basically helped get that
kickstar. The executive, the
governor has come down and
recommended, I think all of you
all have received a report from
the governor's organized Crime
commission, the work that's been
done has been amazing, and I
know that the executive is
asking for $4.5 million to fund
more people.
the governor's organized crime
commission, I think the LFC is
suggesting 3 million. I want to
just give you a quick snapshot
of why to really fine tune why
it's so important that the
organized crime commission be
able to continue its work and
actually expand it.
Human trafficking, which I know
has been discussed already in
this legislature to a great
extent.
is the most lucrative business
that the cartels have right now.
There is nothing even close,
even fentanyl, not close, when
it comes to the dollars.
That the cartels are making of
this. And let me give you a
specific example.
Recently, you may have heard of
a tunnel that was discovered in
the New Mexico, El Paso area
between the international
borders.
The area function this tunnel
function for a total of about 6
weeks.
It is estimated by law
enforcement involved in the
discovery of this and others.
That over 2000 people came
through that one tunnel being
smuggled or trafficked.
They were charged $10,000 a
head.
That alone, by that contractor
to the cartel. That wasn't just
the cartel, that's a contractor
to the cartel having that
tunnel. That alone was $24
million. They, the cartels.
Received for that six-week
period.
That's the kind of money in the
operations that we as a state
have a duty to fight in every
way, shape, and form, and to do
what we can to stop that and
continue to work on securing the
border, um, the best we can.
So
I just give that as an example
because
And the second page of a handout
that was presented to you all
from our office. I don't think I
need to go through it, but the
bottom half shows just the
202024 successes.
With just two special agents in
the organized crime commission,
and with the help of uh the
executive director of the
Organized Crime Commission is
here, and just a couple other
folks in a great commission that
the governor's appointed that
works really hard on these
issues. I would um really
encourage and ask that you fund
that. Um, I'm happy to answer
questions, um, and if not, my
manager can as well. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you very
much, Mr. District Attorney.
Thank you for having your staff
here today. We'll go to
questions.
starting with Representative
Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Uh, Mr. D. Raymond. Thank you.
Um, I do have a question on the
organized crime commission. So
some of that has been funded out
of your budget.
And some has previously been
funded, but never by the
governor. Can you just explain
that? So that that commission
was formed back in the 70s and
it went dormant in the 90s and
there was really no operation of
the governor's organized crime
commission because we know
there's organized crime going.
Taking place, the governor
reinstituted that commission.
And basically, I house it in,
and, and fund the operation to
the extent that I pay, I
salaries are paid for, um, out
of, out of my office currently.
That's how we've been doing that
to make sure we can get it up
and going. And I think the
success speaks for itself so
far, and we'd like to be able to
expand that and continue that
because I think the results
speak for themselves and the
governor recognized that too. I
think that's why the executive
is, is recommending that what
they are.
OK, thank you for that
clarification. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Garrett, uh, we'll go to
represent her.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And um
Mr. Chair, I want to direct your
attention to uh the difference
worksheet, particularly the
expansions under the domestic
violence team. So that team had
been in place for a while and
then it was disbanded and there
was the request to ask for it
again. So I'm asking the LFC
analyst, why wasn't it funded?
Uh, Mr. Chair,
yeah. I think we go ahead, Mr.
Chavez, Mr. Chair Representative
Herndon, the LFC does include
that in the recommendation, it
is the executive that did not.
Oh, I see. Thank you. You're
ready to bro. That's really good
to see.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Representative Brendan. Great
question. Um, next, we're gonna
go to Vice Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Thank you, District attorney,
for being here. Um, I just wanna
draw everyone's attention to the
performance measures, uh, for
the second judicial district,
which, um, you know, are.
Going in a
You know,
I appreciated the trend, um, for
some of them, the, uh, you
mentioned the pretrial detention
motions granted, that's now 55%,
so really, oh, tired.
Mr. Chair, Mr. District
attorney, higher than that, so
that's wonderful. Um, and then
also, um, I did have a question
about the average time from
filing charges to final
disposition for adults. It looks
like that is a little bit longer
than it had been, but I wasn't
sure why that would be.
Mr. Chairman, um, represented,
the short answer is I don't
know, but I might in 5 seconds
if you can just give me 5.
Um
Thank you, um, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, kind of a simple
straightforward answer. There's
constantly more trials going now
than before in the courtrooms
are busier dockets. We, I can
tell you for an example have
Since I start to now, we're
averaging 2500 to 3000 more
cases a year.
It's a big difference, it's,
it's, it's just, you know.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um, I also, um, just wanted to
Note for our analysts that I
really appreciate the consensus
on um adding the new performance
measures, uh,
Involving juvenile cases
involving a firearm, um, I think
that, you know, we know that
that's a, a serious issue, um,
and so I appreciate that we're
gonna be tracking that. Felix,
yeah. Mr. Chair, um, um, vice
vice chair, um, I would also
like to give credit to the
agency as well as collaboration
to bring that um performance
measure on to here.
Thank you. Um, and then finally,
um, I wanted to highlight, um,
looks like some of the efforts
that you have made, uh, Mr.
Chair District Attorney
regarding uh recruitment and
retention have been successful,
um, bringing attorneys back to
the office and then your
internship program and I.
Just wanted to know if there was
anything you wanted to add on
that.
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
yes, absolutely. We're very
proud of the fact that 21
attorneys that had left their
previous administrations have,
have come back and, and work as
in the, in the internship
program, I'll give you a perfect
example just yesterday, is my
understanding is that 2 law
school students who work through
our prosecution class that we
have and get to practice in
Metro court just uh two
convictions like the second week
they're in class, in
metropolitan ports. So we have a
real training ground and
That's, I mean, it's beneficial
cause obviously we're, we have a
district which we can do those
kind of things, but we have a
real training ground from right
in the law during law school,
and then all the way through,
and oftentimes those people end
up being first-year prosecutors.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you very much, um,
Vier Dixon. Thank you District
attorney. I have a couple of
quick questions. One, with being
able to sort of charge more
effectively in some of the
different performance measures
the vice chair mentioned, uh,
we've heard that evidence
collection, particularly during
the summer, we've heard that
evidence collection can be
challenging. Are there any
partnerships with the city of
Albuquerque. You mentioned that
on the domestic violence side,
anything on the, the evidence
collection sign.
that you've seen that that seems
to be working.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman, let
me, let me suggest to you that
In my 30 years of practicing
law, and much of it in criminal
law, most of it in criminal law.
I have never seen discovery
handled better now than it is
today. I mean, APD and us in the
electronic abilities and the
things that are going on in the
computer matchups, I don't know
all the terminology, but the way
we are able to share discovery
and then ultimately get it to
the defendant and their counsel.
I, I think it's never been
better right now. Um, we always
got a constantly work on that
though, right? And as you heard
earlier, the, the sheer data
collection now is so massive
because every
event now is recorded.
Um, with video, and so just all
of that, um, is a, is a big
chore, but it's something I
think we're taking on and doing
pretty well. That great to hear.
Thank you for that and uh as we
go forward, where swiftness and
certainty are sort of bedrock
cornerstones for the committee.
Um, we're, we're excited to
learn more about that. And I'll
go to Representative Lujan here
and just a quick second for a
couple of other questions. Um,
I do want to know that in FY 24
staff has shared, there was a
budget adjustment request out of
personnel services and employee
benefits, anything, hopefully
that's not, it doesn't sound
like that was an FY 25 thing or
hopefully not in any sort of uh
information to add because we're
seeing you're sharing a lot
stronger retention and
recruitment, that suggests back
in FY 24, sort of, you weren't
able to.
necessarily recruit and retain,
just wanted to ask about that.
Mr. Chair, if I could defer to
our manager, please.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, yes, there was a
budget, a budget adjustment
request in FY 24. We, um,
realized that this is not the
optimal optimal way for us to
manage the budget, so we're
getting smarter and we've
submitted a capital outlay
request this fiscal year, um,
but we are busting at the seams,
so to speak, you know, we're
working with Bernalillo County
to um build an annex because we
don't have sufficient office
space with
all of the uh attorneys and
support staff coming in. So we,
you know, getting smarter.
Um, working harder, submitted to
the capital outlay request of
1.5, so depending on how that,
you know, makes its way through
the session. We, um, are hoping
not to do any budget adjustment
requests and especially because
we need to continue to fill and
retain the existing staff. Got
it. Thank you very much. I
appreciate the detail and also
sort of the um just sharing the
lessons learned and sort of how
you're approaching things, which
is, you know, it's not
never sort of
Uh, wish we had done something
differently. It's to do it
differently and do it better in
the future, which you're
outlining for us. So thank you
for that. Uh, OK, we're gonna go
now to Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just real
briefly, um,
Um, Mr. DA, when did you come
into office with you was it?
I came in in January of 3rd of
2023. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
so, um, one of my questions is,
is kind of going back to uh 2015
and in 2016 under the previous
uh DA and we
We gave the um DA's office back
then, uh, um.
And anywhere from 20 to 25 new
FTEs then for their need for the
backlog and all the things, and
also because of the the case uh
management order that was in
place. Is that, and now,
You're saying that you've hired,
you've been able to hire 74 was
that are those with those
positions that were, you weren't
able to feel from that.
That administration, Mr. Chair.
Um, I can't, I can't, Mr.
Chairman, um, representative, I
can't speak entirely about what
happened in the previous
administration. I certainly
wasn't there and I don't have a
good understanding. I will, I
will tell you that when we, when
we came in, we had 78 lawyers in
the office. We now have 125 and,
um, we've hired a lot of people
in 2 years and we continue to do
hire as many as we can because
as we know, lower caseloads make
a big difference. So, um, we
We want a 0% vacancy rate, we
want an expansion so we can keep
adding. I, I don't know really
how I'll say to your question.
No, that that you're answering
my question, Mr. Chair. I'm just
getting to the point as well as
that the efficiency that comes
along with those, those, those
um those hires and being able to
to keep your staff in intact.
So, um, that was basically my
question. I just trying to get
an understanding of, you know.
Kind of historical how we've
been able to fund you and what
the results are. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Mohan.
OK, we're gonna go to the vice
chair for the motion.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, at
this time, I would move that the
committee adopt the LFC
recommendation, understanding,
of course, that we know public
safety, um, is going to be
discussed in our working group.
OK, it's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by
Representative Little. Any
opposition to that motion. I
don't see any. Thank you very
much, Mr. District Attorney.
Chairman, thank you.
OK, um.
We'll go ahead and uh invite up
the First District.
Get on the list.
Mr. Chair I liked to comment. I
hope his son signs the team so I
can figure out my fantasy
baseball team for later, but
hopefully Alex Bregman signs
soon
It's close to tampering with
Major League Baseball.
Uh, well, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, please, um, last but
certainly not the least, um,
however, that term is said, um,
we're here on the first uh
judicial district attorney. We
are on volume 2, it's pages 39
to 40. The agency code is 251.
And for their general fun
history, um.
Since FY 21 in general Fund,
they've increased by 45.5%,
which equates to an average
annual increase of $689.2,000.
With that, the differences on
the revenue side, the executive
recommendation exceeds the LHG
recommendation by $439.4,000 in
general fund.
Um, the main driver of this
difference is in the personal
services and employee benefits
category, and that is through
the expansion request which I
will get into, and the executive
recommendation exceeds the LSG
recommendation in the other
category by $400 because the
executive provides a slight
increase over the FY 25 budget.
But where the major differences
are earn the expansions and in
that expansion, the LFC
recommendation partially funded
the agency's expansion request
with one.
Case management order, senior
trial attorney, the agency
requested funding also in the
expansion for a juvenile and
young adult diversion program
and the LFC um has recommended
to fund that program partially
through a special appropriation
on the executive side, the
executive recommendation also
partially funds this agency
expansion request, but adds
more, they add a CMO senior, uh,
excuse me, CMO when I say CMO,
that's case management order.
But their expansion request as a
CMO senior legal attorney, a CMO
senior trial attorney, a CMO and
magistrate prosecution
specialist and a magistrates
assistant trial attorney. With
that, I'll pass it over to Mario
for his comments. Thank you so
much.
Mr. Chair, committee members,
given that this is our last um
agency in front of you guys, I'd
be remiss if I didn't thank
Felix for his great partnership
and work, um, when we have one
branch of government working
with the other branch of
government to look after the
third branch of government, you
know, it makes sense that we
work together and I've been
doing this 3 years. Felix is one
of the best and brightest to get
these numbers down. So y'all are
really lucky to have him, um,
and, uh, I have nothing to add
he covered it.
Brilliantly, so I will pass it
on to DA Mary Carmack Alley,
who's also great.
District attorney Carmine Cal,
please thank you for being here.
Feel free to introduce your
staff. Thank you, Mr.
Chairperson, members of the
committee, and I want to thank
Mario for for pointing out my
greatness because I don't think
that's done often enough, um, I
also want to introduce, uh,
people from my office. I have my
chief deputy, uh, Jen Jennifer
Paget Massius. I also have my,
where to go relatively new CFO
Renee Padilla, and my district
office manager, Felisa
Archuleta. I also have
Um, my, uh, computer guru. Um, I
think he goes by a title that
has something to do with
computers, but Tim struck, um,
he is helping us to move into
the 1900s when it comes to our
computer systems, um, we're
hoping actually to get into the
late 2000s at some point, but um
we have been spending the last
few years trying to bring our
computer systems up to
suboptimal uh usage, and I, I
think we've, we've pretty much
gotten there and um I do want to
shout out AODA director Pedro
is, is moving in the right
direction and we're finally
getting to a place where we are
able to upload and, and share um
discovery, which, which really
cuts down on what I would call
kind of nonsense motions between
the defense and prosecution. Um,
That's not what I'm here about
though. Um, I want to
Ask, beg, plead for the
executive recommendation. And
the reason for that is we have
been put on notice by the
Supreme Court that the first
judicial district is the next
judicial district that will be
hit with the case management
order. That's the case
management order that
Albuquerque has been operating
under since 2000, late 2015,
2016, and when that case
management order hit. Nobody in
Albuquerque was, was
ready for it. Nobody was
prepared and they lost in the
1st 6 months, 5000 cases, and in
the next 6 months, between 3 and
another 5000 cases and I believe
that you can draw a direct line
from that time period to the
crime problem that that is
continuing the getting better, I
would agree with DA Bregman in
Albuquerque, and I do not want
to see that happen to the first
judicial district. Um,
When that happened, that was
under even the previous DA and
the very next year, DA Torres
was, was elected. He came up to
you all and he was given 25 new
positions. That helped him to
start reversing that tide of
dismissals, but they were
operating under a deficit under
a backlog, a massive backlog for
about 4 years, and I am, I am
asking you not to put me or my
district or the people of Santa
Fe County, Ripa County and
Los Alamos County's in that same
position. Um, because otherwise
it's gonna hit, and I will be
sitting before you next year
with thousands of cases that
have been dismissed, and I will
be begging you to help me fix
it. Whereas right now, I am
begging you to help me be
proactive so that we don't have
to fix it. Um, we need these new
positions because what this case
management order does is it
takes, um, what a prosecutor
does from the beginning of a
case to the very end of a case,
which is usually
between 6 months and a year,
maybe a bit longer depending on
the complexity of the case, and
it squishes all of our
responsibilities into the 1st 45
days, that's 45 days after a
rest, not after when it's
charged. And if we don't have
everything ready within those 45
days, that again, previously we
had a year. The case gets
dismissed, and then it sits
around and if we can get things
from law enforcement, uh, we can
refile it, sure, but
that person has gotten out of
jail. They can
commit new crimes, maybe they
disappear, maybe witnesses
disappear. And so cases don't
get prosecuted or it makes it
much more difficult to
prosecute. And so that is why we
submitted our request for 13 new
positions. I knew that was pie
in the sky, but the executive,
um, I had Mario come to our
office, um, we extended it to
Felix, but he, he was unable to
come when when we were able to
do it, and I walked him through
the life of a case and what all
goes into it. It's an enormous
amount of
work.
And uh my attorneys are doing it
every day. If we weren't getting
the CMO, I wouldn't be asking
for an expansion budget or maybe
I'd be asking for one position,
but because we are gonna get hit
with us with that, I'm begging
you. Please help us keep Santa
Fe and the first judicial
district in Rio Reba from
becoming the next Albuquerque,
because that's what will happen
if we are hit with this new
unfunded mandate by the Supreme
Court, and we don't have these
positions. Um, and I wanted to
point out a couple of other
things.
Representative Lujan kept asking
about pre-prosecution numbers.
Um, we have in the last 3 years,
vastly expanded our
pre-prosecution numbers, but the
metric that uh is used doesn't
properly capture the way that
we, um, divert cases away. Um,
we don't really like the PPD,
uh, model, and that's, I think,
uh, director Pedro pointed it
out because it is so um it is so
it's restricted.
to first time offenders, maybe
only drugs uh certain types of
cases and so we've just kind of
done it internally. We've made
up our own diversion programs
and um we have people who do
drug counseling, go get Narcan
prescriptions, um, uh, go get a
GED, do tons of community
service, um, but those don't get
caught under those, those
numbers, and so I want to echo
what DH Hedro said about help us
to expand these diversion
programs. I'm not looking to put
more people in jail. I'm looking
to put
The people in jail that deserve
to be there and the ones that we
can divert out and help get them
out of the system. So with that,
I will stand for questions.
Thank you very much. We're gonna
go to questions starting with
Representative Sanchez, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, DA, uh, I
read the New Mexican daily just
mostly to make sure I'm not in
it, but uh.
Knock on wood, I'm not important
enough, but uh that rust case
was in it quite a bit uh
to this to this point, uh, how
much did your office spend on
that? I was just curious, I
believe we, we took that.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. Thank you, Maria. Um,
we spent less about $900,000 on
that. Um, we spent that. We got
a, an emergency funding portion
from the um from the state
finance board, we ended up
sending about half of that back
and then we paid for that out of
my budget. Um, and I, and I, and
I need to remind you that that
was not just for one case, that
was for
3 cases really almost 4 cases,
and that paid for not just
attorneys, but investigators,
um, experts, things like that.
And it was also over a 2.5 year
long period that that that was
um that was spent. Um, at some
point, my office was removed
from the case. And so it was a
special prose
Other than I had control over
that, and, and I will defend it
all day long, but.
We had to do that because my
attorneys have had an average of
about 240 cases and taking on a
case that size, there was
absolutely no way that my office
with 28 attorneys was going to
be able to handle that against a
law firm that has 22,000 around
the world. And so that's why I
got a special prosecutor and um
and I will say it, I think she
did a wonderful job and what
happened was the miscarriage of
justice. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and uh DA uh also today in the
paper was uh there was a
another uh special prosecutor
for a judge that got a DWI how
much was spent on that?
Um, I haven't been billed for
it, but the, the grand total of
the contract was $1000. I think
you asked Mr. Chair, uh, you
answered my question, uh, I know
your budget last year was about
9 million, uh, it sounds like
uh.
That rust case was about
900,000, so I was just curious
if that was coming out of your
budget because that's about 10%
of your total budget for those 4
cases, but, uh, you answered my
question, Mr. Chair, so I, I
just wanted to ask about. Thank
you. Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Sanchez. We're
gonna go next for Lujan, then
down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um.
Thank and thank you um for
giving them a better explanation
than I, I was, um.
Trying to get from from uh
district to and and to, you
know, to his credit, he came
after all this, um, the, the.
The case management order, um,
it was already happening and so
he's done, uh, like you said, in
a really fabulous job of what's
going on and and Berlio County.
So
Do you know how many
At the time when the this see.
CMO that ordered Mr. Chair,
given to Bernelio how many um.
New FTs, they, they were, they
received my understanding was it
was the next year they gave 25
FTEs. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Mr. um DA from uh 2nd District
said that he's hired 74 new, um,
FTUs been able to do that, um,
uh, now since he's been there
since and he and he started in
2023. Um,
You
For your district, Mr. Chair,
you're asking for 13 new
positions, is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, we asked for 13, the
executive recommendation is for
5.2, I believe, um, and, um.
Obviously we would like it to be
more, but that that will help us
to get started, that will help
us to get prepared for this.
Mr. Mr. Chair, I, I feel like
If we don't do our due diligence
and and really do and come to
um.
come to help, um, this district
one.
As we did for distinct 2, then
we are going to see some of the
results with, you know, um.
thousands up to 10,000 cases
because we have, we have a large
amount of large uh load here for
this district, we're going to
see some uh detrimental things
happen to this district, and can
you, um, Mister Chair, can you
add with the CMO it how it how
they progressing with um
integrating that into each
district, Mr. Chair. Um,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Representative Lujan,
um,
It seems to be somewhat, I, I
don't know their formula. They
went from the 2nd, and then they
implemented it in the 8s, and in
the 3rd, um, I know the previous
DA in the 3rd was very unhappy
with it. I know that they got
into a situation where they lost
thousands of cases, um, I think
the, the DA in the 8th was, was
slightly more prepared. They
have a they have a tiny caseload
compared to Santa.
Rio Riba Los Alamos, and then
also Las Cruces, um, but I know
that Las Cruces really suffered
for that. And, um, and, and
Albuquerque, I think they've
finally come out of it, but
we're 10 years later, um, and,
and DA Bregman did also mention
that they're in, they're in
trial every single week, um,
he's got 125 attorneys to handle
that. I've got 28 and uh without
extra attorneys, this I, I will
lose my attorneys because of.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
hear, I hear the dire straits
that you're in and and Mr. Cha,
I just like to.
You know, um, support the idea
that we we look a little bit
closer, a lot closer, actually,
uh, what is happening here, um,
with, with that.
That amount of work to do for
you to all do and really what
that means for these three
counties in this district as
they take this on and as the
workload and, you know, some of
the, the, the bigger cases that
do come to this district. Uh, we
need to take that into account
as well. Um, thank you for your
testimony and for clarifying
that and expanding on this, this
part of the conversation. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you DA for the presentation. And
what about in in the civil case
that is that.
Special prosecutor for back to
Baldwin. Is that going to be
covered by risk management or
who's gonna pay for that?
Uh
That is covered by
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, that is covered
by risk management, um.
I shouldn't say anything further
than that.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and I just, I
I'm really concerned about.
the funding levels that we're
recommending here. So I'm, I, I
don't think I'm on the, on the
public safety sub uh
subcommittee, but I definitely
hope that we give this some real
consideration after what we've
heard today. Otherwise, what's
the purpose of our, our efforts
to address crime.
Thank you, Representative,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Judge. Uh, we had the
privilege of running uh our
campaigns uh simultaneously in
the, uh, in the primary this
year, so, um, I'm very
appreciative and very
knowledgeable about your record
in, in the first judicial
district and, and Mr. Chair, I
would just like to say I, I
really think we should flag
this. I, I, I think it's
important that we really
Get in and, and this would be
true for all that you do, but
for all the judicial districts
we've heard today, but I, I
certainly think first judicial
needs help at the right time and
uh if we can, if we can ward off
the the future damage. That's
what we should be about on this
committee, so I will end with
that. I really have no
questions. I know your record,
uh, uh, we're, we're proud to
have you serve us and uh and
again, we work closely with her
office and
appreciate your entire team.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much, uh,
Representerrera, uh, uh,
district attorney, I have a
couple of questions, um,
one.
I think the uh
Maybe we'll ask, and this would
be it during the summer time,
but certainly Albuquerque and
their experience over say the
last 10 to 15 years is deeply
important for the entire state,
um, as I recall, uh, some
challenges around um recruitment
and retention and police with
their police department and
others preceded much of the case
management order that you cite,
and so I think there may,
there's a
wider part of that story, but
appreciates sort of the focus.
Second, uh, district attorney,
um, what we're shown is uh, I
think of um
transfer out of PS and EB. So
the transfer out of personnel
services and employee benefits
and FY 24, also a reversion in
FY 24, any sort of uh clarity on
what those two were for. Uh.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, yes, the
reversion, um,
was it was contracts that we had
signed with encumbered money
that ended up not getting billed
on. And so I was quite upset
when I saw the size of that
reversion, uh, that will not be
happening again. Um, and with
regard to the transfer, we had
vacancy savings that we
transferred into contracts uh to
pay for special prosecutors,
experts, um, in all sorts of
cases. Um, and so that was, that
was necessary at the time. OK,
thank you, District attorney and
um given
in the sort of, obviously we're
LFC is recommending an increase.
Um, the executive is
recommending a larger increase.
Um
How confident are you that that
that either increase won't
result in more reversions and
certainly uh would not result in
a transfer from personnel
services and employee benefits.
100%.
Um,
I, I've had as a rippers uh
representative Sanchez pointed
out, I've had some, some strains
on my budget that have gone
away, um, and, um, I have like
the second I have several people
lined up to come work for us,
um, but for the, the budget or
the positions. Um, so I, I will
be able to fill those positions.
People love coming to work for
the first judicial district, um,
people love working at my
office. We have no problems with
recruitment. OK.
OK, uh thank you for that. Um,
OK, we're gonna, we'll ask for
the LFC. I think it was very
clear sentiment from many
members regarding the district
attorneys. I'll make a sort of,
we'll have an answer
representative Brown after we
adopt this budget to, to your
question. Um, right now, we'll
go ahead and ask for the LFC
recommendation with clearly uh
uh interest in continuing work
and trying to meet some of the
requests that have been made.
Uh
Madam Vice Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I would
move the committee adopt the LFC
recommendation.
OK, it's been moved by Vice
chair Dixon, seconded by uh
ranking member Chatfield, in the
opposition to that motion, I
don't see any.
Thank you for that.
Uh, members in answer to the
question that represent bound uh
brought, um thanks to Mr.
Mulligan, 1.9 million.
Yeah, $1.912 million in
recurring, which is actually
quite significant given that um
the very limited amount where
we're trying to stay overall at
a 6% or lower budget overall
increase as a state. It's not,
so that's the answer. There is
some space potentially that's
the
Province of this committee,
which is a privilege and a
responsibility to um to sort of
hear and make recommendations.
But that, that'll conclude for
our district attorneys today.
We'll go ahead and invite up um
see the secretary there in the
back.
OK, uh, Mr. Sanchez, Mr.
Jimenez, it's great to see you.
We'll go ahead and have you
start us off and then, uh, Mr.
Secretary and team once we get
there, we'll uh invite you to,
uh, in, um, introduce some of
the leadership who's here and
started from there, Mr. Sanchez,
go ahead.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Scott Sanchez. I'm the
LLC analyst for public safety.
With me today is my counterpart
from DFA Diego Jimenez, Cabinet
Secretary Jason Bowie, Chief
Troy Wheasler of the Mexico
State Police and Deputy
Secretary Sylvia Serna.
We talked about the budget for
the Department of Public Safety
Agency code 790. You want to
look at the detailed LFC budget
recommendation, you can find
that in volume 2, starting on
page 380.
Also, there's some supplemental
charts and graphs in volume 3
starting on page 50.
Um, I'm gonna go to very high
level and dig what I'm gonna
kind of ping pong back through
the programs, um.
Overall, the LLC and executive
recommendations are off by $5.3
million or about 2.8%.
The LFC recommendation adds
approximately $6.6 million or
3.6% in general fund revenue
above last year's budget where
the executive ads $11.9 million
or 6.4%.
Um, we reached consensus on all
performance measures and as we
start getting into the programs,
I'll have a little bit more
detail. Here you go.
Uh, thank you, Scott. Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, as
Scott said, I'm Diego Jimenez,
I'm the uh public safety analyst
for um.
The DFA, um,
First, we're gonna go over the
the program support program
that's a.
P code P 503, um.
The LFC recommendation adds
about 517,000 to the program's
operating budget, um.
I believe all of that is in the
general fund and the intent is
to cover the cost of converting
7 positions from a term status
to to permanent status. Uh, the
executive recommendation does
that as well, but also as an
additional 467,000 to cover um I
believe it's, it's two positions
uh for the department's legal
affairs, as well as including
some funding for um the GST rate
increases.
Moving on to the law enforcement
program that's P code 504 or the
New Mexico State Police. Um, the
LSU recommendation increases
general fund revenue by
approximately 5.3 million for
the executive adds about 6.8
over FY 25.
The LFC recommendation includes
approximately 3.1 million for
high mileage vehicle replacement
and about 2.3 million for fuel
and vehicle maintenance, fleet
equipment and software
maintenance.
The executive excludes funding
for fuel and vehicle
maintenance, but adds $1.6
million for the step increases,
these are salary plan for the
the Mexico State Police, 500,000
in the recurring budget for
aircraft maintenance, which the
LFC currently has the $1.5
million special appropriation
over 3 years, and the executive
ads about $190,000 for the GST
rate increase.
Uh, before I move on to the next
program, just two little
clarifying comments um about the
law enforcement program, the
executive recommendation does
include funding for the vehicle
maintenance, um, but as Mr.
Sanchez mentioned, the, the
funding for, for fuel was not
included in the executive
recommendation.
Um, additionally,
The executive recommendation
does include the 500,000 in the
recurring budget for aircraft
maintenance, but also included a
million dollars special for the
same purpose.
Um
And that I don't think it was
mentioned, but the executive
recommendation also includes a
1.2 million for body cameras,
um, which is a recurring expense
that the department has had to
take on is um the new model for
that is, is a subscription
service rather than.
Buying cameras.
Um
And I don't know, uh, move on to
the statewide law enforcement
support program.
Um
This program has the majority of
the differences between the two
recommendations. The LFC
recommendation adds about
7,003,000 in general fund
revenue over FY 25, whereas the
uh executive recommendation.
It's about 4 million.
The uh LFC recommendation
includes funding to convert.
A deputy chief information
officer position from term to
term and adds funding to cover
the criminal justice information
system contract, which is still
partially funded as a C2
project.
Uh, the executive recommendation
includes both of those items,
but also includes another 3.3
million for other initiatives,
um, including appropriate
placement for staff in the law
enforcement records Bureau and
the IT division.
Uh, the executive.
Also includes funding to
convert.
Several law enforcement records
bureau or LERB positions from
term to perm and includes
funding for a contract with
Infotech, um, which I think
secretary or or certainly can,
can speak to in greater detail,
as well as GST rates, uh, the
executive recommendation also
does include funding for for
labs, which I think is, is
better described as for filling
vacant, um.
Forensic scientists positions
rather than uh describing that
as an appropriate placement.
funding recommendation.
And um
With that unless Mister Sanchez
has anything to add we'll hand
it over to the secretary.
Uh, the only one note that we
would probably had from the LFC
perspective is that while there
is a significant difference if
we look at the high level in
terms of the overall number.
When we factor in the way that
the uh section 8 budget and the
compensation numbers are, you
know, not included in this kind
of top line number the
recommendations are pretty
close. Well there would
obviously be some in the
executive budgets, uh.
Compensation ad as well, you
know, we're not as far off as it
might appear.
Great. Thank you.
Uh, thank you to the analysts.
Uh, thank you, Chief. Thank you,
Deputy Secretary. Thank you
Secretary, uh, we don't have any
other analysts comments, we'll,
uh, go to start with you, Mr.
Secretary.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, and I
really appreciate the
opportunity to introduce
everyone here and staff, um, we,
the three of us sitting up here
often get credit for the agency,
but it's really the people that
are sitting behind me that do
all the good work and as you can
see, we're last today and so
everybody that's here is part of
DPS, uh, they've been waiting
all day and to demonstrate their
support and so we have a lot of
directors, a lot of staff here
that just do a tremendous
professional job for the state
of New Mexico and providing that
statewide law enforcement
support. So, so thank you for
that opportunity presenting with
me today.
as mentioned, uh, Chief Whistler
will probably be relying on him
heavily on some of these
answers, particularly the state
police and Sylvia Cerner
supervised by statewide law
enforcement support, I would
like to recognize my ASD
director for a moment, Sheila
McDonald, um, there you are. Um,
thank you for all the work
putting, uh, all the work you
put into this budget to manage
my budget director, and uh
Roberta Vi Hi my CFO, um, I, I
recognize the directors, but
also all the command staff is
here from every district here
within New Mexico. We'll be here
tomorrow as well.
well, so first of all, I really
appreciate not only them being
here captain's majors, also
deputy chiefs, but uh we have
new legislators here as well,
and I wanted to just offer and
extend and and make you aware
that if you have a need from any
one of your districts, um,
they're here to, to help and to
extend that. So if you need an
introduction from the chief or I
when any of the commanders are
here, um, we, we'd be glad to
make that introduction for
whatever your needs are, uh,
whether it's in district or for
the legislature. Um,
Also, I just want to thank this
committee. This is my 4th year
presenting, and we've, we've
built tremendous partnerships.
We've done great work together,
we've we we felt a tremendous
amount of support uh from
committee in our, in our budget
requests and we really do
appreciate that. And so I don't
want to gloss over that and
again, for those that are new,
um, we look forward to the
partnership as well. Um, as in
uh years past, it will not
follow the PowerPoint verbatim.
Uh, I will just kind of cover
some of our strategic goals
again, understanding that some
people are uh new perhaps and
don't understand every program.
program that we offer DPS if
anytime you need to slow down or
you wanna ask a follow-up
question, be glad to answer
those for you as well.
So starting on slide one, is
really our budget requests, our
priorities, uh, and we focus on
4 primary categories, really all
categories uh prioritized with
an emphasis on reducing crime
within the state of New Mexico,
providing a high-level service,
uh, a public safety services.
And so this is kind of just a
high level overview staff
recruitment and retention is our
priority, public safety overall,
um, technology investments and
IT safeguards, and this is
really just a, a maintenance
year for us. We're not asking.
asking a lot for new
initiatives. This is just us
asking for funding to support
the, the programs that we
currently have, uh, ongoing.
We were on slide 2 and giving
into our specific programs, this
particular one here is for our
law enforcement program, State
Police P 504, uh, New Mexico
State Police, uh, we're really
looking at a lot of data-driven
strategies to reduce violent
crime across New Mexico, uh,
just like you've heard from a
lot of other departments, we
have difficulty of course
recruiting and so as a result of
that, you know, we have to look
at other ways to be effective.
So, uh, again, continuations of
our body-worn camera, in-car
cameras, um, advanced data
analytics and
predictive uh policing. We're
really excited about and we'll
expand on that in just a little
bit, uh, crime software, so
really piloting a lot of
different initiatives uh within
DPS and a lot of these don't are
not just for the domestic state
police, these, a lot of these
are for support to other law
enforcement agencies as well.
We're looking to partner with a
lot of different agencies, so
when you're investing in DPS,
you're not just investing in
state police or DPS you're
investing in state public
safety, uh, overall.
Slide 3, I'll provide you just a
quick overview of the slide uh
layout that you'll be seeing,
uh, on every page for the roll
up pages you'll see your first
table uh depicts our increase to
base request while the second
table then represents uh the
justification for each of those
requests. So, highlighting the
first table, a law enforcement
program, uh, we had a request of
$8.8 million dollar increase to
base, uh, you will see the
executive recommendation was 6.8
million or 4.5% increase in the
LFC.
The recommendation was 5.3, uh,
showing a difference there
between the executive
recommendation and the LLC of
$1.5 million.
It just highlight just for a
minute here on the
justifications here at the
bottom, uh, the officer step
plan starting with that, uh,
there seems to be sometimes some
confusion when people speak with
that about the officer step
plan. These are not raises for
the state police. We're not
asking for races this year,
again, this is a maintenance
year, what this is here is, is
we're asking to make sure that
our step increases within, uh,
each specific rank structures is
funded. This is a program that's
been going on for, I asked the
chief if he had a recollection
how long it been going on, more
than 20 years, and so as we have
If we don't fund that officers
within that rank don't see the
next step as they gain tenure
within the agency. So that's
what that is, they're not uh
targeted races. Uh, I in car
body cameras, uh, we work off of
an annual subscription model, so
it's necessary for us to
annually, of course, uh, pay for
that. And, and as you're all
aware, this is a statutory
obligation to have body-worn
cameras on all of our police
officers, and I will tell you
it's something that we all
support more often than not, it
really helps our police officers
out and uh
hats that are credibility when
they uh testify in court. And
then, uh, comment what you'll
find amongst each P code as I go
through my presentation, uh, are
really the premiums, uh, the
published rates, uh, uh.
Do it and GSD risk premiums are
not funded or recommended by the
LFC. You'll see that deficiency
on every page as well.
Moving on, Mr. Chair, uh, to
page 4, special appropriation
request, uh, I would draw your
attention just to the first
table, section 5 of the
executive in LFC uh editions.
I just say DPS is very much
appreciative uh of these
add-ons, uh, particularly, uh,
there's two add-ons here, one
for 5 million, one for 2
million. These are, uh, Senate
Bill 2 initiative, public health
and safety initiative, um,
sponsors, uh centers uh Shengdo
Munoz and and Gallegos on those,
um, look very much forward to,
to, uh, working on that uh
collaborative.
Uh, moving on to page 5, the
next 5 to 8 slides 5 through 8,
is our statewide law enforcement
support. So it'll be your next 4
slides or P code 786, um.
I just want to just say this for
a minute. We, we get a
tremendous amount of support in
this building, as I mentioned,
particularly I always for the
state police, there are, our
public facing piece, our forward
facing pieces the uniform that
everyone sees. But as the
secretary of DPS, I find it
important that I advocate just
as hard for the other side of,
of the Department of Public
Safety that provides statewide
law enforcement support and so
that's what these, these fort
slides uh represents New Mexico
law enforcement Academy, our
laboratories in Las Cruces,
Hobbs and uh Santa Fe, and then
a law enforcement records.
Bureau, which is 36 + separate
distinct units, information
technologies and so forth, uh,
with that, uh, I wanna turn it
over to my deputy secretary.
She's been working very hard
with staff, um, to, uh, identify
some deficiencies, and so she's
going to cover slides 6 and 7
for me reference to the lab and
um please go ahead.
Thank you, Secretary, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee.
I want to point your attention
to slides 5 and 6. there's a lot
of information here, so I'm
going to sum it up the best that
I can. Um, with, with our
forensic laboratories during uh
the last two fiscal years, we
have um received a general fund
investment of around $2.8
million. Uh, that's for areas
such as expansion positions,
filling our unfunded positions
and most notably the forensic
scientist, uh, salary pay study.
Um, we did implement.
That pay study in January of
2024, and I'm pleased to report
to the committee today that in
the last year, we have hired 12
new forensic scientists and
decreased our vacancy rate in
the DNA forensic scientist unit
by 32%. Uh, I can't really think
of a time in the history of DPS
that we've had such a
significant uh vacancy rate
decrease in, in the period of
just one year, um, that said,
uh, the appropriation last.
was for $350,000 that helped us
get started to implement the
salary study, uh, and we didn't
think that we were going to fill
all of our vacancies, but it
turns out that we are, and that
said, we need another $900,000
to make this whole where this is
concerned, that would support
existing forensic scientists'
salaries, it would also go to
fund um the unfunded vacancies
that we have left, uh, within
the forensic scientist unit.
Um, the that the salary study uh
helped us resolve our first
issue, but we have a secondary
issue that I would like to
explain to you all. Now that we
have um 16 forensic scientists,
uh, 12 that are onboarded and
brand new. It's important for
you all to know that it takes 24
months to train and certify a
forensic scientist. That's 2
years in that time period, uh,
we incur a lot of um uh
increased case load and
backlog, on average, we, we
incur about almost 300 cases a
quarter, uh, that need to be
analyzed in our DNA unit, and
we're only able to complete
approximately 120 of those
cases. And so that leaves us
with another 170 cases every
quarter that uh go on processed
and continue to add to our
backlog.
We have 2900 cases in our DNA
backlog right now that needs to,
that need to be outsourced. Uh,
I want to thank you all for your
generous, um, generous
appropriation for $5.7 million
in a special to help us
outsource at least 2000 of those
cases, and I wanted to just make
sure that it's understood that
that's not just for DPS. This
helps the crime victims'
families, that helps the court
system adjudicate cases, it
helps law enforcement agencies
finished their investigation.
This is a widespread problem in
that $5.7 million is going to
make significant headway in this
area. Uh, that said, uh, it
doesn't help us much if we can't
afford the scientists that we
currently have or to fill the
unfunded vacancies that, that we
are able to, to hire right now.
So with that, I thank you for
your support for the $900,000
base increase request.
Like you, uh, Mr. Chair, um,
draw your attention to uh slide
7. most of you familiar with
this program, this is exact
something we've been very
excited about intelligence led
policing, um, this, we've seen a
tremendous amount of legislative
support for this, and, uh,
again, a lot of these slides are
really just here for your
reference, but this is a law
enforcement investigative tool
we see a significant need, um,
and interest and demand from law
enforcement in New Mexico. This
is a whole and, and this really
is solving the disjointed law
enforcement data across multiple
uh
agencies across the state of New
Mexico. And so here you can kind
of see uh when I came on board
his initial design and build
concepts prototype moving
forward to kind of where we're
at today. And so, as we're
asking for additional funding to
bring additional agencies on
board just kind of shows the
timeline of where we started and
kind of where we're at today
and, and where we're going. Um,
slide 8, I will skip over, uh,
Deputy Secretary Cerna just
covered quite a bit of this.
It's really, um, just our
continued support for uh
Those initiatives and our law
enforcement records bureau.
Moving on to page 9, our SLES
roll-up page and shares that
same format, the top table and,
and the bottom table. The
executive fully funds our
request, um, which is an
increase, uh, request of $4
million or 16% increase. Um,
while the LLC recommendation
supports only uh $700,000
leaving a difference or a
shortfall of 13.3% or $3.3
million.
Um
Again, we're seeing the uh GSD
risk uh premiums and then do
service rates, um, not, um,
recommended by the LLC here is
definitely still a need for the
agency and common amongst all
these requests again, uh, is
just the support for existing
programs or initiatives and uh
Deputy Secretary Ser has been
working very hard on some of
these, and I wanted to just kind
of highlight two of these on
the, on the page here if you
would.
Thank you, Secretary, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee,
our law enforcement records
Bureau is a large bureau with
30+ units. We have over 60 FTE
in that bureau, and, and it
requires a significant amount of
staff to keep it going. We have
a high turnover rate. We're in
the process of doing a complete
reorganization that will require
$192,000 for all of the
reclassifications that are
required to make this happen.
Uh, we would appreciate your
support this area overseas um
very important, um, uh, very.
important matters such as
Nibers, missing persons, uh,
NCIC. We, we, we would really
appreciate funding in this area.
Um, secondly, our IT department
is our fastest growing division.
It has the smallest budget and
it also has historically for the
last 3 years, um, the, the, the
lowest vacancy rate of any
division in our agency. Um, they
are fast growing. They are
leading the efforts for our
intelligence-led policing
program, and they are also um
building and enhancing.
the cybersecurity unit and, and
we really need to fund the
unfunded positions that they
have IT positions are costly.
It's not easy. Um, it's not easy
to fill them, so we would
appreciate your support in this
area. And then as, as, uh, Mr.
Secretary has stated, we have
published rates increased to the
tune of about $1.5 million for
the entire agency. Our general
fund can absorb that. We are
respectfully requesting um a
base increase for those
published rates.
Executive secretary.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, moving on to slide 10
or uh state one law enforce
support specials, um, we're
grateful for the fingerprint,
uh, support, uh, indicated here
on this page. Uh, we're still
seeing a shortfall in the
recommendation from the LFC and
IT upgrades and replacements and
and this committee understands
that this is related to our
criminal justice information
system, uh, data centers. And,
and these serve not only uh law
enforcement but also our
criminal justice partners. So
courts corrections, even our
federal partners, and I would
just emphasize again that
System failure or cyberattack on
criminal justice information
system, uh, would be
catastrophic for the state of
New Mexico. And so I would ask
for your consideration and
support of that as well, and
we'll just raise that to your
attention that this is an area
we simply cannot fail in.
Uh, almost done, I promise you,
Mr. Chair. Uh, slide 11, uh,
program support, and again, I
feel it's my role as a secretary
to have just as much advocacy
for program support as, as all
the other pieces of DPS and so
that would include our, our
grants management bureau, um,
budget a lot of others, uh, DBS
based increase request uh was uh
9 $984,000 the executive
recommendations supported our
request uh or a 14.6% increase.
LFC recommend.
is uh 517,000 or 7.7%, which
just leaves us really with a
short fall in our request of uh
$467,000 or 6%.
One of the things I wanted to
just kind of emphasize here just
for a minute in our request and
where the shortfall sits is our,
our OLA Office of Legal Affair,
Mr. Chair. Um,
We have in DPS 1300, more than
1300 FTEs, an agency that
operates with high liability by
the nature of police work and
and functional operations, high
volume of IPR service that we
provide uh within our uh learn
like concealed carry,
spungements, etc. and we have
one of the smallest, uh,
obviously legal affairs OLA uh
within the, within other state
departments. And so we have uh
currently only 4 attorneys that
handle all of that, uh, business
for DPS. We even currently have
a contract attorney.
That's, that's reviewing
contracts for us, which is
costing us more than it than it
would if we just under the
positions and brought more
attorneys on board. So I
definitely want to advocate uh
for that. And moving on to just
our uh last two slides, slide 12
is uh really just included for
your awareness is our C2 request
and capital outlay. Um, I, I
understand it's not necessarily
the scope per se of this
committee, but wanted to make
sure that you have it in front
of you. And last and final slide
and probably most important is
that I started with this and
I'll end with it.
Really continue uh appreciate
your continued support for all
of the initiatives at DPS and,
and uh
With that, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Thank you, Deputy Secretary.
Thank you, Chief. Thank you to
everybody, the leadership
structure who are here. I'm
gonna ask a few questions, uh,
just to get it started. I know
there'll be some other members
who get on and we also have
ranking member Chatfield who'll
be uh sort of concluding and um
so first, uh, Mr. Secretary, uh,
staff shares that um in FY 24,
there was a reversion of $2.7
million and a
$1.65 million dollar transfer
out of PS and EB are those the
same numbers that you have, and
if so, can you give us a little
bit more context, please.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee in FY 24, we did have
uh, we did have uh money that
was borrowed out of the um 200s
and into the 300s and the 400s.
Uh, we historically every year
we have, we have to move money
for our fuel and maintenance for
the New Mexico State Police, um,
and I think that that issue has
been resolved with the proposed
recommendation from the LFC to
to put that in our base and so,
um, and, and in the other two
areas that we
had significant, um, money that
was moved. It was as a result of
um two contracts that that we
had that have now both been put
into our base budget as of last
uh last legislative session. And
so it's not typical for us to to
move money, we, we, um, we try
to be as fiscally responsible as
we can. Um, however, those,
those, um, those areas,
particularly the fuel and
maintenance were ongoing issues
for us for the last several
years.
Great, OK, thank you, Deputy
Secretary and uh great to see
that in the LFC we've included
that $2 million piece around
fuel, and that seems to you
think that that will sort of
eliminate a great deal of the PS
and EB transfers out.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, yes, we do that, we
thank you very much for that.
We've been asking for years.
Awesome. Thank you. Uh,
secondly, um, I, I'm again also
told by staff, which is a
reminder for us as members, you
know, we rely on our staff as we
rely on the agents, the
executive, um, yeah, and FY 23
audit had 4 findings, 2 of
significant deficiency 3 repeat,
uh, as I understand it, the FY
24 audit.
Will likely be out relatively
soon. Is that the case? And do
you all, do you expect the
Secretary, deputy secretary.
Uh, any thoughts about sort of
what we'll be seeing in that
audit.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. Yes, that's correct.
Uh, the last several years we've
had some repeat findings that
are particularly related to our
grant funding and um we worked
really closely with the federal
government to try to rectify
those issues. Uh, we are
proactive and um uh every year
during autumn season we have a
contractor that comes in to help
us stay in a safe space where
that's concerned. We are well
aware of the issues, and we, we
do have an action plan in place
right now, uh, to, to work hard
towards those repeat.
findings. Got it. OK. And do
you, thank you, uh, Deputy
Secretary, very much appreciate
that. Any sense on when we can
look for that, the FY 24 audit.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, I believe it should
be published sometime very soon,
but we, we don't have word when
that will be. No worries. Thank
you for that. Uh, secondly, I
want to move sort of the um
something that that I've seen uh
locally, which is uh the very
needed increases, uh,
particularly in in the pay
increases that are super
necessary. Um.
I
I'm not I'm curious, although I
won't ask. I would appreciate
sort of insight to understand
how many of your uh chief, your
um officers came from a local
department. Um,
Anecdotally, we hear, and I
think it's sort of this place
where essentially we're trying
to right size, but we hear that
because state police officers
are the, are the most well paid
law enforcement officer in the
state of New Mexico, right?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
So, I appreciate the question
and um I mean, I, I do have some
uh solid numbers that I can give
you, uh, just to kind of give
you a little bit of perspective,
um, and I mean, I, I understand.
I've, I mean, I hear that those
concerns myself from uh the
sheriffs and and chiefs around
the state. I know there's been a
little bit of an arms race.
Everybody's struggling with
recruiting. Um, but as it
relates specifically to
laterals, uh, from other
agencies, um, I mean, in 2024,
we had 8 laterals from other
agencies.
In 2023, we had 8 laterals for
other agencies. So in the last
2+ years, I mean, we've had 16
officers out of the statewide, I
think there's about 4000
officers statewide, so, I mean,
obviously, we have had some
officers from other agencies,
but there's not any sort of
massive displacement or, uh, and
I mean, there's a few agencies
that were the past, whatever, 5
or 6 years that it maybe lost
multiple officers to us, but
that's kind of few and far
between, the vast majority.
agencies have either lost one
officer or I mean, majority of
agencies have not lost any
officers to us. Um, so I would,
I would just offer you those
numbers to kind of put it in
perspective a little bit, sir.
I, I appreciate. Thank, thank
you, Chief. I appreciate that
and uh appreciate you having
those numbers sort of ready, um,
sort of, uh, maybe the last
question or close to last, um,
recruitment and the recruitment
piece size of recruiting
classes. What's that like right
now?
Yes, sir. Um, one second, I'll
give you some actual numbers to
kind of give you a little bit of
a trend. We just started a
New recruit school uh on this
past Sunday.
So for comparison, I'll give you
some numbers for the last 3
years for our spring recruit
school, so the ones starting
right now. Um, so,
I'll give you 3 different sets
of numbers. One's the interest
cards, that's just kind of the
general interest that we are
getting. So the last 33 spring
classes.
2023 was 368.
2024 was 470.
And then this year, the class
just started was 5:37. So you
can see an uptrend there. Um.
uh
Applications, there was a
similar trend and then when it
comes down to the people
actually starting the agency or
starting the recruit school in
the last 3 spring classes, uh,
2023, we started at 13, 2024, we
started 19 and this Sunday we
started at 27 for our spring
class, so.
Gives you a little idea that the
trend is, it's not where we
would love it to be, but it's,
it's headed in the right
direction, so thank you. Thank,
thank you, Chief. That's great.
I appreciate those numbers and
great to see the trend sort of
going up, um.
Yeah, OK, great. We, we, we, I
know it's a pretty late. I'll
just say, I know all members
have deep uh um.
Very strong interest in
continuing this support. 53%
increase overall since 2019 line
of credit, uh, ranking member
Chatfield, who again will be
going last for uh sort of
continuing along with many other
members from both sides of the
aisle to really push forward for
uh Department of Public Safety.
With that, we're gonna go to our
next questions. We'll go to
ranking member Dixon and then we
got representative Vincent and
we'll go from there.
Oh, excuse me, I skipped that.
We'll start with sent down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Secretary for being here.
It's really exciting to have um
record revenues you over here
and see uh the creation of the
early childhood fund that now
has an $800 million budget and
it is getting more money every
year. Um, it's been amazing to
see the development of dozens of
new funds that had a zero
balance and now have
Significant funds are putting
out
Important, uh, annual, uh,
programs. Um,
I think our increase to public
education department, well,
education overall if you count
early childhood and higher ed,
it's about 60% increase over the
last 6 years, as well as I think
about 47% directly to public
education department. I'm so
excited that this year is the
year that we're gonna address
crime and that we're willing to
talk about getting you what you
need, regardless of whether it's
6%, 10%, 12%, whatever that
increase is. If you were
prioritizing where the dollar is
spent. If you don't get
everything you asked for.
Where is it most important that
we align ourselves with your
request first where are our gaps
that are most important to you.
Mr. Chair, Representative Doo, I
appreciate the question. I think
first of all, again, you know,
we have to invest in the people
that we currently have. And so,
um, you know, our request again
for the step increases is then
we recognize we have seen some
significant increases in the
Mexico State police obviously in
the last couple of years, and,
and we didn't want to do the,
some people refer to as the arms
race and and being the highest
speed, we want to make sure that
we, we have good retention
programs in place and then we're
investing in the people that are
here. The same applies for, for,
again, we're working on proper
line within.
the organization and making sure
that we retain staff in every
part of DPS to make sure that we
can
uh
Provide the services for for New
Mexico and and then the chair,
then from there I would say,
again, if we can't get people,
uh, we want to retain people and
we want to get people through
the door, uh, make sure that we
can continue doing the good work
and then supplementing last, I
would say, of course, uh, with
technology where we can't get
the human beings to do the work.
So I think if I had to
prioritize in my mind at the end
of the day, I would always want
to invest in the people that we
have uh with us currently that
have stuck, stood with us and
they're doing all the good work,
and that's both on the uniform
side or on the support side of
DPS, um, from there I would like
to.
get people to the door and then
continue again the maintenance
of our programs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and I
was looking, I it's my eyes are
just so sore. Are we, what did
you ask for in supplemental and
where are we on the request
secretary for your supplemental
request.
Mr. Cha, I'll turn over to my
deputy secretary, the numbers.
Madam Chairman, Mr. Chair
members of the committee, we've
not asked for a supplemental
request.
For which program, ma'am?
Thank you, Mr. Sharon. Thank
you. Just what are you asking
for for specials and where are
we at on it?
So far our law, I'm sorry, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee
for our law enforcement program,
um, we have a, we have a total
request of um
Uh
$960,000 and this
Page 4 reflects um a narrow down
request. Actually, we, we only
listed in this presentation, um,
those line items that the
executive and the LFC either or
recommended, um, and we have a
difference of 13.5 uh in between
the executive and the LFC for
our law enforcement program.
For
Mr. Chair, uh, Madam Chair
Representative Dao. So I just,
I'll just clarify just for the
law enforcement, the state
police portion of that, because
it's a little
I, I think Scott alluded to it.
I think we're close in a lot of
areas, but it was kind of shaped
different. So the specials look
way off just because I think the
LFC recommendation moved a lot
of things into specials that we
had in other places. Um, the
main thing I would draw your
attention to on this LEP portion
of the specials would be just
the vehicle portion.
That got moved out of Capitol
Olay. We had a pretty large
request in there that was based
on a uh uh study that Senator
Munoz had asked us for last year
to kind of give a total cost of
what it would be for our fleet
to get our fleet back where we,
uh, wanted it to be on the
mileage and retiring the units.
And so, we had had a request in
there that was a little over was
over 17 million, uh, and I think
it's 6 now and the specials. So,
uh,
The state police portion, that
would be an area of focus that
if we could maybe
That would be area of focus on
ours, and then I'll turn it back
over to Deputy Secretary Serna
for the, the other programs.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, we, in our statewide
law enforcement support program,
we have a shortfall of $855,000
that was for our IT upgrades and
replacements. Uh, that's to
replace the end of life
essential systems with our
criminal justice information
sharing data center uh related
to cybersecurity and other
service outages, um, and then
lastly, with our program
support.
P 503, we have, we have a uh
shortfall, um,
I'm sorry, we don't have a
shortfall at all, actually, we,
we were funded fully in
specials. Thank you, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you. Thank you guys all for your
presentation. Thank you for your
work.
We've got an $11 billion budget.
There's a lot of people that
are, they are here advocating
for a lot of new programs. I
hope we shore up our essential
services and that the things
that were statutorily uh
mandated to fund, get fully
funded first.
If I have any say in that,
that's what I'll be voting for.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Dow. Next we're
gonna go to Representative
Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
presenters.
I'm trying to figure out your
vehicle situation. So
When you get a brand new
vehicle, and let's just say you
put
You're putting an officer in it.
You're putting a body cam in it,
you're putting it in car camera
in it.
Your putting automated uh
recognition technology, license
plate readers in it. What do you
have in a unit?
per unit.
Um,
well, uh, Mr. Chair, uh, members
of the committee, representative
Vincent.
Uh, so at our earlier slide, we
actually have a slide because
there's so many things in the
unit now. Uh, uh, so the average
cost of a marked unit build
right now is about $90,000. Um,
so I mean, that's gonna include
your light package, all of our
vehicles have a dash cam. The
officer has a body cam. There's
a rear seat cam, so there's 3
cameras. Um, you're gonna have,
uh, connectivity, so you got
your computer, you got your
printer, you have uh uh cellular
connectivity. Uh, we have to
have two.
cards, depending on where you're
gonna stay, Verizon works better
or AT&T works better, and then
now we have certain parts of the
state that we have satellite
radio because otherwise we don't
have radio communication, um,
Talked about license plate
readers. I mean, the, the, the
amount of technology is, uh, in,
in one marked unit is, is pretty
significant. And, and so, as
seen by the increase, I mean, I
think 3 years ago, it was about
$75,000 for a marked bill, so
you can just see the amount of
inflationary and other cost
increase in that. And so, um,
one thing we've been trying to
do the last few years. It's kind
of an issue that compounds
itself every year as we, uh,
are, aren't able, we get a
little further behind every
year. We would like
Replace units between 100 and
115,000 because about 115,000 is
where our maintenance costs
started to drastically increase.
Uh, you know, now we're 150,000
miles plus, um, and so that is
why we had originally done uh
The study, um, to try to
determine what we would need to
try to get the fleet back down
to the lower maintenance costs
and get kind of back to that 100
to 115,000 mile uh time to swap
out units.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Chief. So 115,000 miles that
gets you 3 years, 5 years.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Representative
Vincent, uh, I mean, it's gonna
depend a little bit uh on the
district, but I would say on
average, I would say 30,000 a
year is probably uh a pretty
safe bet. So,
We'll say 3 to 4 years, we're a
marked unit.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Chief.
And how many units do you have
in your whole entire? Um, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
Representative Vincent, uh, so
Mark units, I think we have
about 450 total units of every
shape and size boats,
motorcycles, everything, we have
close to 1000 vehicles.
Thank you for that. I'm just
trying to get my mind wrapped
around whenever you do
replacements you do it 3 at a
time. You just do it when you
get money. How does that work?
Yes, sir. So, um, or Mr. Chair,
members of the committee,
Representative Vincent. So, so
we have a whole uh fleet unit.
We have a, we have a whole fleet
management system, um, that
monitors our fleet vehicle
driving maintenance, uh, so I
mean, it's a pretty high tech
system. So we, we cycle vehicles
out. I mean, based
based on mileage, uh, and we
have mileage standards for mark
units. Uh, we have mileage
standards for unmarked units
because they're, you know,
they're probably better to to
drive longer because they're not
being driven, you know, pursuit
type driving, um, you know,
districts that have interstate
that's harder on units than
districts that don't have an
interstate. Um, and so all those
factors come in, but I mean,
mileage is the number one
determinant um along with all
those other factors.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And last
question on, on that.
So whenever you do retire a
vehicle, does it go up for state
auction, and if you do auction
those off, you pull all your
equipment out, is the equipment
still salvageable or do we need
to start over again and what is
that? What is that surplus look
like whenever you sell the
vehicles are you getting them,
are you getting any kind of
return back on, Mr. Chair.
Uh, mister, Mr. Chair, members
of the committeeresentative
Vincent. So we do have an annual
auction, um, that we do, uh,
sell units that have been
retired, um, we also, uh,
sometimes sell units to other
agencies that we're getting
ready to retire. Um, you, you
are correct though. I mean, we,
everything is stripped out. It's
gonna just depend on the
particular item if it's
something that's, that's
reusable or not, and kind of
vary. But uh last year or this
year, I don't remember the exact
amount. I think
about 700 and
700,000 plus I think is what the
auction brought in.
Good, good. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Appreciate it. Thank you
for the time. Thank you very
much Representative Vincent.
We're gonna go next to Vera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
all for your service and your
presentation, um.
Very informative. I'm curious,
deputy secretary, um, why does
it take 2 years to train a
forensic scientist if if they
come to you and they have the
skills. I mean, I, I understand
you have to, you know, train new
staff, but 2 years seems like a
long time to me.
Yes, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, representative, thank
you for the question. It is a
long period of time and it's
actually quite problematic
because it's very difficult for
us, um, to get even one forensic
scientist trained and able to do
independent analysis on the
bench in any timely fashion,
which is a big contributor to
our backlog. Um, we have a 6
month mandatory FBI uh training
that needs to take place and um
that's a, that's a, that's a
mandate we're we're not able to
bypass that at all, even if the
scientist comes from another
agency and is uh 20 years
experienced and wants to work
for for our laboratories, they
still have to do the mandatory 6
months FBI training, the other
year and a half are a practicum
training that must be completed
in order to receive
certification. Uh, they, they
handle very obviously they
handle very sensitive cases, um,
a very, uh, yeah, uh, the
equipment is high tech and um
There are many other factors
that go into this training.
It's, it's a, it's significant.
Mm
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
And I guess my second question
is, um,
I, you know, when we heard from
the courts, uh, public defenders
and, and, um
District attorneys, the, the
amount of um
A storage it takes to to use
this body camera equipment and
that, and do you synchronize
your systems with um with the
courts and the the district
attorney's office and the court
our court systems in general, so
that everybody is kind of sinked
into the same system. I, I'm
just curious how you work
together, uh, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, uh,
Representative Herrera.
So
Uh, it is not, it is somewhat
fragmented right now. Um, I
think that there's a certain
amount of consolidation that is
going on, um, you know, there
was the one body cameras, uh,
first came out and then when the
law was passed, a lot of
Different people went with
different vendors and different
things. Um, we, uh, we're in the
process now of all of our
digital evidence, body cameras
included, going into one system,
um, it's much easier now for us
to share videos with the DA's
and and getting
I mean, everything is going
cloud-based and getting away
from the thumb drive, CDs,
everything else, you know, now
it's uh email with authorization
and a link, um, and, and so, and
I, I mean, that was a recurring
theme. I think we heard from the
DA's office. Everybody's kind of
in the middle of that transition
right now, getting to a more
seamless uh system and so no,
the, the short answer is no,
we're not all on the exact same
system. Um, but there's a lot of
improvement.
Consolidation that's happening
right now.
Uh thank you, Mr. Chair, and I,
I think until we get there, and
you know, certainly the chores,
all the courts were asking for
more money to, you know, to
update these systems and
especially the smaller ports,
the smaller, uh, areas. So I, I
really think I, I don't, you
know, it's not my job, but if
you can keep working together so
that we can have a system that
works seamlessly.
I mean, that's ultimately what
we all want throughout the
state. I would appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Uh, thank you very much for
Herrera. We're gonna go next to
Representative Hernandez and
then Repent Leon.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is
gonna be real quick, uh, as, as
everybody knows, uh, Mr.
Chairman, uh, public safety and
behavioral health is, is
priority one, and my, my
question to the secretary and,
and to leadership is, what are
you guys doing to ensure that.
Um, we're, we're taking care of,
of all of our officers when it
comes to their behavioral
health. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As chair, members of the
committee, I appreciate the
question. We don't get that very
often and I really appreciate
asking about the health for
officers, um, first of all,
when, when an officer goes
through a critical incident, one
of the first things that we look
at is like a critical instance
stress debriefing for the
officer, we also have post
officers who look after the
officers to make sure that they
have the support they need from
an agency and then we also have
DSPG, um, which is psychological
services um contracted that we
send officers to to get the help
that they need and so this is
something that most law
enforcement.
the state recognizes it as an
issue, uh, you know.
Our officers see potentially
trauma week in, week out, if not
daily. And, and you have to do
so for a lifetime, you know, 20
years or more, you have to
remain robust and, and, and, you
know, push some of that trauma
down in order so you can do your
job. And so we see sometimes
that, that our officers do have
performance issues, and we
sometimes trace that back to um
a culmination of calls for
service or trauma that the
officers experience. So uh it's
something that we definitely
take seriously. Um, when we talk
about those things, I want
people to understand and
recognize as well that while
we're
getting them out, we always
still hold them accountable for
short uh shortcomings in
performance. Uh, it's something
that we always find to be very
important, but we, we very much
always uh look very closely
after our officers to make sure
that their health is taken care
of, so we have a short answer,
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative,
we have, we have programs in
place to ensure the officer's
wellness.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
concludes my question. Thank
you. uh, Representative Lohan
and then Vice Chair Dixon and
then ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
How about.
I just got my 2nd cup of coffee.
Thank you for the presentation
and um I'm just gonna go just
one question, Mr. Chair,
regarding the accountability and
oversight, um, in 2022, we um we
changed things for the law
enforcement academy Board,
creating the the two entities,
the law enforcement standards
and Training Council and the Law
enforcement certification Board,
um, and so the law enforcement
certification board responsible
for other for officer uh
certification.
ci pl in ary actions. I see
that, and I'm happy with that
you've moved and resolved things
from over um over 1000 days to
approximately 300 days. Good,
that's good. That's a, that's a
really good outcome. What is
your, what is the DPS role? How
are you, how do you interact
with with those two,
You, um, boards.
to.
As chair members of the
committee, Representative Lujan.
I really appreciate the
question. I, I came on board in
2021, and I was shocked on the
backlog that we saw at DPS at
2021, we had cases that weren't
adjudicated going as far back as
2016. And so at the time, um, we
made some leadership changes uh
and and deputy secretary at the
time, we worked very hard uh to
become current. This is all
prior to the separation you're
talking about the standards and
training counsel and law for
certification Board. And so we
recognize that the, you know, at
the in orders to hold police
officers accountable.
in the day, uh, we need to be
contemporary, we need to be
swift in the decisions that are
made. You're not sending the
right message naturally if cases
are, are sitting for years on
end, um, before the, before we
make a determination if the
conduct of the officer was
appropriate or not. So, uh,
since then, as you have pointed
out, we've, we've had a
separation previously. It was a
law enforcement academy board
that at the time uh handled the
officer's certifications and
training requirements and since
then that's been parceled out
for everyone else awareness as
well.
Mr. Chair, uh, to the Standards
and Training Council, which now
sets the standards in training
for law enforcement officers and
the law enforcement
certification board. Law
enforcement certification board
specific to your question is
administratively attached to the
Department of Public Safety is
our goal to provide them the
administrative support, um, that
they need. And uh to have a
positive relationship with them,
so to make sure that that they
can function and and and to do
their job. I think the goal at
the end of the day is the same,
is to ensure that we have swift
accountability uh for officer
misconduct to be able to
Correct officers and get right
back on, on the right path again
to return them to work and then
to, to ensure revocation for
those that should not be in law
enforcement, uh, at all, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I,
I appreciate that feedback, um,
I just wanna say thank you, you
know, this is, this is a great
report for me. This is something
that when I was a new um
legislator that I was, um, I
was, um, listening and and
understanding and and just
trying to tie it all back to how
you're performing now. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
OK, we're gonna go to Vice Chair
Dixon and then the ranking
member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Thank you for the presentation.
I want to start with um our LFC
analyst, uh, Mr. Sanchez, uh,
and ask about the specials, um,
I noticed, um.
It seems to me there's a,
there's a good number of
specials um that the LFC has
recommended for uh DPS, is that.
Fair statement.
Mr. Chair, Madam vice chair,
yes, I would say that's a fair
statement. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Scott. Um,
in particular, I was curious if
you don't mind elaborating just
a bit on the DNA backlog.
Um, it's split onto two pages,
so I almost missed it. Um, but,
um.
Yeah, if you don't mind sharing
uh the LFC recommendation, uh
for the forensic case backlog.
Mr. Chairman and vice chair, um,
In conversation with the agency
kind of after the specials
deadline, we talked about some
of the duration of time that it
takes to get these, um, forensic
scientists trained and the fact
that that leaves them with a, in
a challenging position where
they're having to either
contract out for certain cases,
and there's some cases that
can't be contracted out, but
they needed to have something
that kind of closes the gap a
little bit and so we came up
with the number, you know, 5.7
million, and again, special
thanks to Deputy Secretary
startup for helping me kind of
work that out. We figured out
that's the number, that's what
they would need in order to be
able to kind of get over the
hump.
So that by the end of that
special corporation, they'll
have everybody trained,
certified, ready to continue on,
allows them to kind of outsource
the cases that they can focus on
the cases that they can't.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Charon Scott.
That sounds like a, you know, I
appreciate the near term and
long term focus, and I, um, do
you have anything to add, um,
Deputy Secretary Serna, anything
you'd like to comment on that,
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, I
would just like to add that it's
important to note that these
with the $5.7 million and the
work that we'll do on the 2000
cases, um, we won't be fully
clear of the backlog because
of what I mentioned, the, the
number that we incurred during
that time frame. Um, but it's
going to take more than one year
to clear this, this 2000
backlog. I mean, it's going to
take multiple years, we will
likely be asking for a
reauthorization, uh, to continue
to spend the money. Each case is
unique in its own way and
requires um uh many, many
different pieces of evidence in
some cases, you know, evidence
can continue to flow in for
years to come, um, that said,
it's, it's important. I just
want to make sure that the
committee
understands the, the, the $5.7
million will not all be spent in
one year, uh, but it's, it's
certainly uh sends us in the
right direction to clear this
backlog and work on these cases.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Deputy, uh, Deputy. I think
that's, that's really, um,
Thank you for framing it that
way. Um, I expect that LFC, um,
our analyst teams will keep us
posted on the progress, um, you
know, and how the
How that is all working and as
we need to reauthorize and if,
if we need to add additional
funds, um, the last item that I
wanted to bring up, um, which is
one of my favorite subjects is
money that we're leaving on the
table and um secretary, um, I
was wondering if um the
Department of Public Safety, do
you guys coordinate uh with the
federal government on through
the federal equitable sharing
program.
You just work together on those
things. Correct. You used to,
Mr. Chair. Madam Vice Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, secretary,
but you still work on operations
together. You just don't receive
the money or you don't do
anything at all, Madame, that's
correct. I mean, the operations
have never ceased, um, you know,
there was a time when we had
equitable share equitable
sharing opportunities. And so
while that's no longer with the
operations that are ongoing and
so the partnership has remained
strong, um, the, the funding
support has not. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. Do you have an
estimate on how much money the
state of New Mexico
has lost out on over the past
5-10 years.
I'll kick that over Mr. Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, I'll take that
over to Chief Whistler. I can
just tell you that in
anecdotally in, in, in a lot of
uh cases, it takes a tremendous
amount of uh man hours, not only
do the investigation, to do the
subsequent um uh operation to
apprehend an arrest, uh, you
know, there's a tremendous
amount of man hours all the way
through prosecution. And so, um,
Chief, I don't know if you have
some specific numbers.
Um, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, um,
To my recollection, when uh
House Bill 560 passed, not that
I recall the number exactly, but
I believe it's 2015. Um, that
was a little over $4 million a
year that we receive in
equitable sharing, so I mean 10
years, there's $40 million or
so.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, and
thank you, Chief. I think the
number that I saw either last
year or the year before was well
over 45 million, so I'm sure
that it has continued to tick
up, um, and Mr. Chair, I
appreciate your indulgence in
letting me ask this question
because what I'm trying to get
to is the fact that there was a
bipartisan piece of legislation
that passed in 2015 and
inadvertently, New Mexico now no
longer can receive those funds
and probably
$50 million of funds that we
have not been able to access,
although we participate in the
efforts and we spend time and
energy doing that, uh, but yet
at the same time we are not able
to uh receive what would be
considered our equitable share
and so, you know, I, I think
that there is legislation this
year to work on that, and I hope
that it's a bipartisan effort
that we can get through the
legislature this year. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Madam
Vice.
Ranking member Chatfield.
Madam, Madam Vice Chair, we need
to change that law.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
You know, is not lost on me.
The, the secretary's words of
what was most important to him
and that's his officers. And uh
what do you guys want to be a
race or not.
There is a competition going on
out there and it's not
necessarily with our local law
enforcement.
The competition oftentimes is
with our adjoining states.
And I don't wanna leave our good
officers to the adjoining
states. Now, I'm looking at the
budget and I see that uh some
things have been, uh,
You know that
The, the governors is quite a
bit higher, but we've just
talked about the fact that some
of those other things have been
made up for in a specials and
supplementals in a variety of
other ways, but the one thing I
see in there, Mr. Chair, is that
the governor's budget.
is $1.5 million higher in
officer pay.
And I know there's some, some
across the board pay in Section
8.
But
Uh, except the motion from
ranking member Chat.
All right. So the motion is to
adopt the LFC recommendation
with the addition of $1.6
million in general fund revenue.
For Officer step increases in
the 200 categories in the
program code 504.
It's like I'm
Hey, it's just to clarify, Mr.
Chair, we do the, the number
that's in the 1.614.4.
Please.
OK, so $1,614,400.
That's good.
Sounds good to ranking member
Chatfield. It was seconded.
3 different times
by ranking member Dixon, by
Representative Brown, and I know
many others, um.
Uh, and so, uh, that's we've got
that motion, uh, is there uh any
opposition to that motion. I
don't see any opposition. That
motion is adopted, yetanimously.
Uh, so, uh,
With that, thank you very much.
Thank you to all the officers
who are here. Thank you to
ranking member Chatfield, uh,
and all of the members for their
leadership, uh, please stay safe
and thank you for all you do to
keep New Mexico safe. With that,
