Represent.
I am here.
Great. Okay, uh, members. We do
have a quorum. Let me we're
gonna work through a couple of
things really Quick. First
members, we're going to roll.
Ah Committee system. Substitute
for house Bill nine. We will not
be hearing that today, although
stay tuned.
Um
I think that is the main change
to our agenda.
We have
Senate Bill 153. Madam
secretary. Great. Thank you for
being here.
We're gonna ask if I stare,
Dixon can go down enjoying
Kelly.
To put on the bill.
Yeah.
Oh, we're good.
Hey, thank you.
Madam Chair. Great to see you.
Thank you for coming. I know
you're starting up your
committee as well. So thank you
for taking time.
Thank you And I as you as you
know, I was starting my
committee, so I apologize for
being a little late.
Yeah.
Okay. Please go ahead. And
whenever you're ready already,
Thank you.
I'm gonna push this back a
little bit. It feels like it
might be a little loud.
Okay, Um, members of the
committee. I'm here to present
SB 153 Back in 2020 0. We passed
the early childhood Education
and care Trust fund We started
with
$350 million appropriation. The
value today is over $5 billion
today. The trust fund generates
over 200 million a year.
And earned revenue and even with
the increased distribution, the
fan will earn over 3 million per
year in future years.
SB 153.
LSC endorsed Bill increases the
distribution from the trust
fund currently to 155 million to
250 million. The increased
distribution will be invested
for more funds into early
childhood care programs such as
home visits, invent and maternal
health services.
Childcare, increased rates and
incentives for childcare
programs as well as the
expansion of pre came the
unencumbered and unexpected
Alright unexpended funds from
the program.
Will be used to pay for the
services I mentioned they will
revert to the trust fund, if not
used. The effective date of the
increase will be July 1st 2024.
I am so proud to have sponsored
this very p this very important
piece of legislation back in.
2020. I am also very happy to be
sponsoring this as well. So with
that I've got chili clunked
your last name. Um and we stand
for questions. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair. Um
We appreciate that, and it
really is a testament. This is
one of the most impactful funds
ever created in the state. So
okay, um, we don't need an
amendment for this members, so
we're going to go straight to
the public. Is there anybody
here or online who wishes to
speak in opposition to Senate
Bill 153.
I don't see anybody. Anybody
here who would like to speak in
support of Senate Bill 153.
Madam secretary, please.
Picture Mr Chair members of the
committee. It is a great honor
to be with you here today and
with Representative Diego's
sponsor of the original
legislation, and Kelly Clint has
been a great partner and on the
LFC for bringing forward this
bill, the executive also was
supportive of it.
We are, I think maybe the only
state in the nation that is not
on a childcare Cliff, and it's
because of the work that you all
have done. And because we have
this trust fund, so a huge
amount of this increase is going
to go to maintain our expanded
eligibility to invest in high
quality infant toddler slots,
which we know are essential and
also, as both representative
Diego's and Kelly have mentioned
support our maternal and child
health.
Blacked ation and
Doulas through a transfer to HST
to support them and Medicaid
reimbursement rates. So I think
it's truly that prenatal do five
trust fund that can support the
health development, education
and well being of Children and
families. And so we stand in
strong support and hope that you
will as well.
Thank you very much, Madam
Secretary.
Is there anybody online?
Great. Okay, we'll go straight
to the committee for questions.
Sam Garcia. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I don't
have a question. Uh, just a
comment for the secretary. You
know, she's been really helpful
in reaching out to communities.
She's been out of bed up in
town. So start Lake Lake Valley.
Alamo. It's really important to
those people out there that
don't have the resources or the
knowledge of happening and
She even want to unleash your
agency meeting and Red Springs
here a while back, and I just
wanted to thank you, Madam
Secretary. I really appreciate
what you're doing.
Thank you. Thank you very much
from Sam Garcia. Other
questions.
We'll go for the motion, then.
Sorry, represent Pettigrew.
Thank you, Chairman. Um
And thank you, representative
for
Supporting this, can you
Describe real quickly. I'm
trying to get caught up trying
to get my head wrapped around.
What we're about to do.
With the additional
Appropriation.
What are the focal points for
that money?
Thank you, man. Mr Chair and
thank you, Representative. Um,
we are looking at child care
assistance copayment
restructuring Childcare
assistance rate eligibility.
We would be transferring HST
infant and mental health
services, a transfer to HST for
Dulles and lactation support
support.
Program support FT. Home
Visiting pre K update, Um
Poorest program.
Don't take your assets are
tiered quality rating
improvement system. Uh, early
childhood education and care
program F T. Um and last the pre
K expansion.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you.
For that answer. Chairwoman. Um
I'm just kind of going back
through the performance charts,
and I look at some of the areas
that are red and yellow. And it
doesn't seem like what you just
described really addresses.
Those areas.
It's alright. I would ask that.
As we continue through that,
because that will be part of the
four debate for me.
With respect to that, and so I'm
not here to debate
Whether, uh, in the budget or
not just
Those are the things that just
step out to me.
Thank you, And I'm gonna go
ahead and hand it over to my
witness to give you a better
explanation or more thorough
explanation.
In in sharing and I'm sure
woman. We don't have to do that
tonight. We know the money is
there We're going to talk about
this on the floor. We can do it
then.
Thank you very much represented
Pettigrew. Um, we've got
Representative Luhan. Thank you,
Mr Chair. I just wanna say thank
you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank
you. This is really important. I
think this is a great bill. And
and to all the work that you've
done to the sponsor for before
all this, um
For this agency. I just want to
say this is incredible Work and
continue. Continue on. Thank
you, Mr Speaker.
I mean, Mr Chair. Thank you,
representative.
Okay. I don't see any other
questions. Um, again. Just
kudos. Thank you very much, And
it's great to see such
partnership between the
executive, the legislative
branch and the LSC.
Thank you, Mr Chair. And you
know, um, when we first
established this fun, um, this
was all the programs it was
meant to serve, and we're
continuing to bolster and
strengthen those programs and so
very proud to do that. And, um
Grateful for the opportunity to
be able to present this today.
Perfect. Okay, Let's go for a
motion Mr. Chair, I would move
to do pass for Senate Bill 153.
Okay, It's been moved by vice
Chair Dixon. It was seconded by
representative Luhan very close.
Um, Is there any opposition to
that motion?
I don't see any one member
abstaining. Please show
representative had a meo
abstaining.
Okay. Thank you very much. Thank
you.
K members. We're now going to go
to house built to 98.
Uh um.
I don't see represented Alkon
here represent
Okay. Uh, Now we are officially
start. We'll go to you,
Representative Garcia. It's
great to see you on house Bill
298, and we have an amendment
here.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Uh,
First of all we found the
amendment is to to
81 98.1, and this amendment is
just creeping appropriation and
the entirety of Section nine.
Excellent. Thank you for that
members. This is in the grove.
Uh, two years. This is in Rhode.
Dedication. Sorry, sir.
Absolutely. Thank you very much.
For some. Garcia, Can I have a
motion to adopt House
Appropriations and Finance
Committee Amendment? One moved.
Okay. It's been moved by.
Ranking member Armstrong signed
by represent Luhan. Is there any
opposition to this amendment?
Okay?
Representing Can you please
briefly explain the bill? Thank
you, Mr Chairman. Members of the
committee this relate to
veterans, enhancing the service
members and very Suicide
Prevention Act.
Within the Veterans Services
Department Act providing
apartment responsibilities to
raise awareness regarding
suicide within the population of
service members, veterans and
non military veterans families.
Um, increase access to suicide
prevention resources, provided
definitions and making an
appropriation was happening, Mr
Chairman.
Right now. Excuse me right now
in New Mexico is ranked the
second highest in the nation and
suicide.
100 veterans. You know what
we're trying to do. There is
resources out there.
We're just trying to provide
more resources and better out
reach for our veterans because
you know, when you're out of
going to Mexico, you don't have
our reaches a lot of issues
happening, and with that, I'll
stand for questions. Thank you
very much represented. Garcia.
Uh, is there anybody here who
wishes to speak in support or
opposition either in person or
online?
Okay? No, it will go online
entrance.
Great.
Uh, Joan Dickerson, please go
ahead.
Mr Chairman, members of the
committee John Dickerson with
the veterans and Military
Families Caucus.
In the 2023 B a report on
veterans suicide they report
over 6300 net suicides
nationally and in 2021.
Doing the mouth that comes out
to about one person every 80
minutes.
We understand that the
appropriation is stripped and
the money is in the Chiro. We
ask that the remaining bill
contacts be passed and moved on
for consideration by the whole
house. Thank you for your time.
Thank you very much, Mr Curson.
Okay, that concludes the public
comment. We're gonna go to
representative Sanchez.
I'll Second the motion a second.
No questions on the bill.
Great. Okay. Uh, Is there any
opposition to that motion?
Seeing none.
Thank you Represent Garcia and
thank you, Chair Alkon. We
appreciate this very much.
Yeah.
Representing Al Khan is one for
one in house appropriations.
Hey, I'd like to change. Yeah.
Okay, members were on a roll.
We may have to roll house Bill
288, although we may try to come
back to it, Um
Representative Herndon members
were on 288. I've asked if
representative Herndon, who is a
member of the Health Committee
vice chair can step in on 288.
So let's get over to to 88.
We will have a proposed
amendment for this bill, if we
can ask that that be passed out
in one given to the sponsor.
Okay, Um
Sam Herndon. If you could
briefly explain how it's built
to 88, then we'll go to the
amendment, and then we'll go
from there. Thank you, Mr Chair
House, Bill 288 would amend
section 21 through 22, d three b
of the New Mexico civil statues
of 1980 1978, and they help
Professional Loan repayment act
by expanding the definition of
health professional to include
social workers and other
professionals and then L. A
Wide health profession.
As defined in the Allied health
Student Loan for Service Act.
And Mr Um
Mr Chair. We move that is a
summary of the bill. Mr Chair.
We also have an amendment.
And Miss.
Mr. Chair. I move Amendment one
to the, um to the health
professional loan definition.
Bill.
And the two to the two to number
202 number is 228156.1.
That's been moved. Is there a
second? Okay, It's been moved
and seconded. The amendment will
get it here where we've got it.
This strikes the appropriation.
Uh um.
Ah, both on the first page, as
well as the last page.
And, um, any questions on the
amendment represent figured out
Mr Chair. This is an
appropriation to a fund. I
thought we didn't strike.
Hmm. Title making appropriation
if it's to a fund
Oh, my wrong. Ah, Thank you.
Thank you Represent figured out.
That is certainly what we've
been doing. We're gonna check
with our staff and work through
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you,
Representative figure or what?
We're told by what I'm told by
staff is that because this is an
existing fund that we don't that
we can strike the this would be
appropriating the money to that
fund as opposed to that fun
being able
You are welcome. Thank you for
the question. Other questions on
house appropriations of the
HFC Amendment.
Any objection to adopting this
amendment.
Okay?
We have adopted the amendment.
Um
I want to
Ask you, representative Herndon
in our HB two. We've included
significant new funds, including
for social workers in some of
the other folks who are included
in this bill is that accurate?
Correct, Mr Chair. That is
accurate. Okay, there there is
so just to say members that
there is new money that we've
appropriated in HB two for this
these purposes.
Other questions on yes
represented ranking member
Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And
thank you, representative
Herndon. So I see that, um
You've add, you're adding social
worker and professionals in I
wondered what the allied health
profession as defined. Does that
include anyone in the healthcare
any kind of health care
profession?
Just curious. I just want to
make sure that
You have Mr Chair? Um,
representative bomb strong.
That's exactly what it does. We
want to make sure that we are
growing our own and keeping them
here, and this bill will help in
all situations.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you. Thank you. Thank you,
Member. Armstrong. Next we have
represented girl.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
like to ask the sponsors to
check and make sure natural path
thick Doctors are included. If
you can do that, um, it would
appear to but because, anyway,
if you could please check. Thank
you. Thank you Represent
Garrett. I don't see any other
questions. Um, let's move to a
motion for House Bill 288 is
amended.
So moved second. It's been moved
by Vice Chair Dixon seconded by
ranking member Armstrong. Is
there any opposition to a do
pass on house Bill 288 as
amended?
Okay. No opposition. Thank you
Represent Herndon. Thank you, Mr
chair and members.
Representative Duncan. Great to
see you. Thanks for coming over.
Yep. Sorry, Mr Chair.
Please. Great to see you. Please
go ahead.
Thank you. Mr 251 is the Smokey
Bear license plate?
Um, we've taken it back to what
the original bill was. It's a
plate. It's not a sticker, and
so, um out of this, Let me go
through this real quick with you
Original registrations. 50
bucks. Um and then you would
charge and an additional 40,000
or Excuse me $40 for a trophy.
40,000 to be a little bit, uh,
tough for most of us. $12 of
that will go for the making of
the license plate.
Um
The expectations are that it
will cost about 26,600 to start
this process. If at any time
within the next couple of years.
It doesn't go to half of what it
sold the first two years and
plate will no longer be
available.
Great. Okay. Thank you very
much. Representative Duncan. Is
there any course we see. We
don't need an amendment. Um, is
there anybody here who wishes to
speak in support or opposition
to, uh
House rolled roll development,
Land Grants and cultural affairs
Committee substitute for house
Bill 251. Everybody online.
Okay, Committee any questions?
I don't see any
Representative Brown, please.
Oh, and then represent okay,
starting with represent Brown.
Thank you. Mr. Chair. Saw this
bill, I thought, uh
This image, so I'm just for
curiosity. Same. Tell us a
little bit about that.
Anything about quick details.
Thank you. Thank you, madam. Mr
Gerin and representative that
roll out. Maybe a little. Um,
quick. We don't know what that
the feds are gonna say. And how
long that takes to get that
license usage. And so we don't
know that.
So if this bill if we're not
able to get the license and this
bill, probably as soon as we do
get that, then it will
Thank you. Representing Brown
represented a lot. Chris,
please.
Thank you. Mr Chairman was about
to Mr Speaker again.
Thank you, sir. Who doesn't like
Smokey Bear?
Um, Mr German and
representative. I don't know the
answer to that. Other than the
22 senators last year that
killed it
Shots fired,
Mr Chairman. I totally support
Smokey Bear plate and so
Just wanted to say thank you
represented cruise represent
Gareth Gareth Garcia. Thank you,
Mr Chair, Representative Duncan
on deep Page two, it says after
payment for any licensing be
required for the use of the
Smokey bear name or image to. We
know what that feels or who it
goes to
Um, Mr Chair, Madam, We do not
So
Tell me Tell me where you're at
again. D line 16 on page two.
I've got the old bill in front
of me. So tell me that again, if
you would please after the
payment for any licensing fee
required for the use of the
Smokey bear name or image. I'm
wondering who has the rights if
we know how much that money is,
if that's been looked at
Um, Mr Um, Representative. We do
not whatever funds are left over
after that go to the Forest
Service for the, uh um, fire
prevention, So I don't know the
answer to that. Okay. If you can
find out, but not the second.
Thank you. Thank you Represent
McGarrett. Garcia, please. Thank
you. Mr Chairman. Question. How
many
Christian teaching license,
please do we have out there?
Spoken there. There's all kinds
of minors license. How many year
olds do you know? Thank you. Um,
Mr Chairman, representative, I
do not know how many. There are
in the letter that I got from
the governor, she said. We do
not have a warehouse full of
licensed specialty license
plates. They're made as they're
ordered.
You know, The reason I'm asking
is German and I said, I'm trying
to station and we hear a lot of
them coming in. I mean,
Everybody wants a special
license, nothing against poking
the bear by means, you know,
just
Concerns me of how many other
police are out there that are
special place.
Mr Chair and representative, I
sure don't know if you'd like me
to find out I probably can find
out for you.
No, that's not necessary. Just
concerned. Thank you, Mr
President. Garcia, ranking
member, Armstrong.
Mr Chairman. I'm just curious if
this has anything to do with
Lincoln counting feeding US
brisket today. Is there any
Mr Chair and representative?
This was a coordinated effort.
Mr Chairman. Good job also
wanted to let you know that
Smokey Bear was born.
In Catron County.
1950
Mr and and my co sponsor on this
Um, his wife's grandfather was
on that hot shot team, as were
some of the folks in in report
is is area as well. That found
the cub.
X
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Remember, I'm showing of seven
Montoya. Um, thank you, Mr Mr
Chair and representative. I
think to drill down on
representative
Armstrong's question. I think
she wanted to know if because of
the mill today if this is a quid
pro quo
No, it is not Mr Chair and
representative Noh we
coordinated this months ago.
Okay. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you. Robson Montoya,
Representative Herndon. Thank
you, Mr Chair. And this
Representative. It's just not
clear to me. Do we have
permission to use the image from
the owner of the copyright
Mr Chairman, representative.
That's what we will. Once this
bill is approved, and then we
will go forward and get
permission to use this in the
license plate. We do not right
now. Can I? Mr Chair? Can I see
a point on that
Is there any? I was just gonna
ask him who actually owns the
copyright The federal
government.
Mr Speaker. I mean, they had so
I'm sorry to interrupt you. But
there has to be a
Is there an entity in the
federal government?
Do you know where you're going
to get that permission from
Mr Terry can answer them. Go
ahead and reserved Duncan, and
then we'll go to representative
Garrett for Miss Sharon,
representative someone that
works for the state.
Is going to find that out.
Great. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you,
Please. Mr. Chair. The U. S
Force or service owns it, and
they have a branding agency that
works with them.
Things. Thank you,
Representative Garrett. Uh,
that's
Excellent. Good to know.
Mhm.
Kate? Uh, no, it's okay. We're
gonna go now. Any further
questions? Any further comments?
Uh, we'll go for a motion who
would like to make the motion?
Okay, okay, because I enjoyed
the lunch so much today. So, Mr
Chair, I move it Do not pass on
house Bill 251 and as you pass
on house, rural development,
Land grants and cultural affairs
Committee substitute for house
Bill 251. Okay, it's been moved
by represent Brown saying by
represented a la Cruz. Is there
any opposition to that motion?
Saying none.
We've you're also one for one.
Great. Thank you,
Representative. Thank you. Thank
you. Committee.
Okay, I'm gonna turn this over
to Vice chair Dixon, and we'll
keep the
Alright, members. We're gonna
pick up where we left off
yesterday If you did not bring
back your copy of the
substitute. It's being handed
out. Um
As a refresher. We did adopt the
substitute.
Um
So we're discussing the
substitute.
Mr Chair. Did you want to make
any comments before we go to
I think we're back to committee
questions that thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair members.
The only thing I would add is
this year in addition to these
three year projects working with
our executive partners that are
included as part of the fund
from HB 196. We have also that
the grow
Previously known as junior
dedications that went to each
member's district and have been
sort of process. Those came from
this same fund as well, Uh, in
the changes, they're making it
two years instead of one year
and working to add some more, Um
Work on the front end as well as
on the back end to make sure
that they're most effective
possible. But just to also
emphasize that HB 196 in this
fund is the source of each
district's growth funds that
were appropriated this year or
will be appropriated. That's all
that good. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um we will
go ahead and start with ranking
member Armstrong, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Mr Chairman for your
presentation. I just I had a
quick question. Um what? What
does this do? What does this
bill due to the Tax
Stabilization fund?
Thank you, madam Chair and
ranking member. Armstrong. Chief
Economist Torres is here to
correct me or to add, as of
course, is Amanda but Madam
Chair, Madam ranking member.
This, uh
Serves as a intercept if we have
sufficient funds in the tax
Stabilization reserve
Uh, funds would can flow into
this trust, uh, thereby sort of
replenishing and adding a little
bit to it. As long as we have
sufficient funds in our tax
Stabilization reserve.
I believe that That's uh it's
defined as 8%.
Operating reserves. Sorry, the
operating reserve as long as the
operating reserve is 8% of our
total recurring budget, then
this expendable trust serves to
intercept those dollars. Thank
you, Mr Chairman and Madam
chair. And so my one of my
questions is
Um
With the
Volatility of what's going on
and the projections of oil and
gas
To be volatile. Um what
At what point do we stop Putting
into the
Um
Tax stabilization fund, Madam
Chair ranking member Armstrong
think we're gonna monitor it
closely to ensure that we, you
know, take the tax Stabilization
reserve, which is, uh, really
grown quite significantly over
$2 billion now.
Um
One because we're intercepting
all of the excess oil and gas
revenues from FY 26 on those
ghost state to the severance tax
permanent fund.
I think it's fair for us to
expect that there will be sort
of less sorry about that less
coming in into some of these
buckets, so I don't expect it to
be a problem. If it ever got too
large. I think we would come
back legislatively to address
it.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and Madam
Chair. Um
I think I voiced this yesterday
and our analyst
Really went through this bill,
and I'm I'm
Really concerned at
All the changes and and I know
you know that and I voiced it to
you and and I voiced it
yesterday. Um, I'm really
concerned about guardrails. I
understand putting in Section
four
But I'm still really concerned.
Mr Chairman and Madam Chair
that, um, that this bill morphed
into something that wasn't
In my opinion.
The original thought from LFC
when we voted on on
On. There were several bills
that we voted on in LFC to move
forward, and this doesn't look
Ah, much like the bill that we
voted on. So I just want to
raise that concern, Um and and
it and it raises red flags. Mr
Chairman and Madam chair when we
when we received things like
this
And we want to work together. We
want to be open and transparent
and and you've been that to us.
Except for this. This is a big
surprise that that it more so
much, and it's really concerning
to me, Madam Chair and Mr Chair,
But I thank you for your
answers. And I thank you for
your input.
Thank you. Um I don't see any.
Yep. Okay. There we go.
Ah, Representative Brown and
then representative Montoya.
Thank you, madam Chair and
representative, chairman Small.
So as it's just been expressed.
I have some concerns, too, about
the changes in this legislation.
Um I, too am concerned. I don't
see the guardrails that were in
the previous bill I liked. As I
said yesterday, the concept of a
pilot project.
But today I just want to raise
my concern. Madam Chair, Mr
Chair over even calling this a
trust.
Because the trust is something
that the idea is to keep the
corpus there.
And by calling this an
expendable trust.
It's kind of a play on words,
but I don't think it's very
accurate.
So, Madam chair. It's really a
fund. In my opinion, expendable.
It's a fund and not to trust
And so, um
I just think that somehow it's
it's misleading to people what's
actually being proposed here.
And so, um
That's I think that's one of the
reasons I'm really
Really concerned about this. So,
madam chair I just wanted
Thank you, representative
representative Montoya.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you, Mr Chair.
Um
I'm just wondering how this
massive change came about during
the interim.
There was a lot of discussion in
LFC.
All right about
The the the bill.
That came forward that had the
Committee endorsement.
But this is a dramatic change. I
realized the
We're going to lose the
committee endorsement with the
changes that were made to
Since dollars were taken out and
it's not the exact same bill.
But if the dollars would have
been the same, this is dramatic
change.
Um And I'm just wondering how
did this come about it? It
didn't come about with any input
from the members of the of this
committee. Thank thank you
Represent Montoya. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Madam Chair of
absent Montoya. As I explained
yesterday, the foundation and
the sort of the way that this
works.
Very much, largely similar to
how it came from Lfc.
Madam Chair, representative
Montoya. Um, certainly all of
the allocations that are that
have been distributed to
members. Those stayed the same,
including the two changes that
we made in HFC, Madam Chair
representative. The really the
two changes that were made to
this
Substantially are the removal of
much of the, um
Sort of the criteria if you
will, on the front end and Madam
chair represent Montoya. The
inclusion of the commitment to
work on accountability measures
across the entirety of the
accountability in Government Act
and Madam Chair representative
that was after conversation
where
People recognize and largely
praise the unique approach of
this trust.
But they the fact that these
appropriations are going to
agencies that are already
governed by the accountability
in government Act.
There was a sense ultimately
that why not just bring the
accountability in government act
up to date inclusive of this, as
opposed to have sort of a
separate area of accountability
measures for for one specific
part of funding that doesn't
apply to others.
So thank you, Um
Madam Sharon, Mr Chairman.
I believe the big selling point
was that there was going to be
More accountability.
Then what is in the Government
Accountability Act.
The, um We went through.
Um the books or earlier this
year or earlier this session and
going through and and we saw
page after page where all of the
measures
In the Government Accountability
Act that
Those metrics.
In in our in the books that we
have here.
And we had departments like F D
that had everything was marked
red all the way through.
And all we did was give them
more money.
One of the selling points to
this bill as it was introduced
to us in the interim.
Was
That we would have that this
This group.
And the Senate Finance Group,
who will serve on
Lfc would have
To be they'd be able to
Have maybe a little bit more.
Oversight than what exists in
the Government Accountability
Act, and now
It appears we're just going to
go through the through.
A similar
Extra page on these that will
Have the same rating.
And
Metrics, and I'm just not sure
how this does the accountability
portion of what this bill was
meant to do.
They meant chair representing
Montoya. I very much here, sort
of the sentiment. I think the
madam Chair representative
Two points are one bringing the
accountability in government act
to cover the entire budget and
all agencies having the chance
to update that, after no work
has been done on that, or
substantive changes to my
knowledge have been made in 20
years. I would look at as a real
opportunity for this
legislature as we go forward.
That's
After we've seen very
significant budget increases. We
are looking to update, expand
and improve those accounting
measures, so I very much look at
that as a win for us, as in a
positive step for us is a better
way to put it. Secondly, madam
chair reps in Montoya
Um, the
The the additional transparency
and accountability of just being
able to track the appropriations
that go through this fund.
That is fundamentally a big step
forward for us the front end.
Um some of those criteria. I
think it's easy enough to see us
creating together in a
bipartisan fashion. Uh, new
criteria that better govern this
and all other areas of state
government.
Ah!
Into the next session, and we
have not reduced got another way
to think of it. Madam chair
represent Montoya. We have not
reduced any accountability on
the dedications that we've made
in this year's FY 25 budget. Um
In fact, we've added along as
has our Senate colleagues,
additional
Accountability measures for
agencies like C Y F D connected
to these appropriations.
I appreciate that, Mr. Chair,
Madam chair.
Um
Just one question and a comment.
This, uh
Madam chair. This bill only came
to us here at HFC correct.
Uh, man chair represented? Yes.
So that being the case, madam
chair
This is the only opportunity for
this bill to be vetted.
It wasn't better than another.
In another committee.
And generally, uh, I don't
believe it's a solid practice.
Necessarily that we only vote on
whether or not the money is in
the budget.
I'm very concerned about how
this came about quickly without
really any input from the
members of the committee.
Um, based on that, I'm I'm just
not going to be able to support
this today. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, representative, Um
any other questions before I
Ask a few
Yeah.
Oh, Yep. Representative Garrett,
please. Thank thank you, Madam
chair. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Actually, while you've been
talking. I've been reading the
Government Accountability Act,
So I understand what you're
saying.
It's in the Government
Accountability Act.
But we just have to make sure
That we really, really take that
seriously going to start. That's
that's my only observation.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative, Um
Mr Chair. Um
Can you just remind remind us
So even with the changes, um
We are still
The agencies that requested
these projects. They requested
that they be recurring.
Items or items in the recurring
parts of their budget. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair. Yes, These are the
This is the first year for this
expendable trust that much of
the work that was done during
the interim, both with staff and
with lfc members, uh, really
focused on recurring agent Great
to see director slowly here.
Recurring agency requests in
hard to sort of hard to make
progress areas that we look for
an opportunity to pilot really
get money but focus on results
from those investments.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Yeah.
You know, I do believe that one
of the
Core functions of this bill,
although you know there have
been substantial changes, one of
the core functions was to limit
the growth of the recurring
spending by allowing, um, for a
period of time to really assess.
The performance of New
Programs before there.
Before they're fully embedded
into, um agency's budget. Um
I guess this is just more of a
comment because it's not really
a question, but I think what
we've seen in the past is that
it's really difficult to once a
program is funded and recurring.
It's really difficult to
unfunded. Is that correct? Maybe
director silly.
Yes, Even in economic downturns.
It's very difficult.
Thank you, And I know the other
big component that a lot of
members and lfc
And members here. Um we're
really interested in and
appreciated about. Um, this bill
is the accountability, portions.
And And while
You know they are not spelled
out the same way in this
committee substitute.
There is an advantage to having
the time to go through the
accountability in government Act
is that is that correct?
Mhm, Madam Chair, I think
absolutely. And I think that
point our opportunity And this
legislature, uh and through this
interim to reopen and to address
the accountability in government
Act is an exciting opportunity
that comes as we've sort of
reached a new plateau. So
Very important opportunity for
us all together.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I have no
additional questions. So I think
at this point in time, I would
take a motion.
Are you moving? That we, um
Uh huh.
Do not adopt. We do a do not
pass on house Bill 196 and a do
pass on House Appropriations and
finance Committee substitute.
Excellent. Thank you. Okay. Uh,
second
Okay. We've had the motion by
representative dela Cruz, a
second by representative Luhan.
Um
Would can we call the roll?
Probably think.
Yes, Representative Luhan? Yes,
Representative Montoya? No.
No, ma'am, and I'd like to
explain my book.
Yes.
Uh yeah.
Oh, thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair and, um
I just like to mention a couple
of reasons I I'm not comfortable
with the bill as it became
And that is I was really excited
about the pilot project aspect
of this Madam chair, I thought,
finally some innovation instead
of just spending money, putting
it in a base budget of an
agency. We're going to actually
look for something.
That that's going to move the
needle for agent for for
citizens and
And so the fact that that's not
in here now does concern me. Um
it as I said before, man chair
this is not a true trust. It's
really just a fund.
Um, again with the trust. We're
trying to preserve the corpus
and then taking out a little bit
every time to do what? You know
the work that we want to do, so
I think it's misleading.
Um, also, um if the pilot
project parts have been
preserved in the bill
It talked about the guardrails
things like specific activities
to achieve the outcomes. Those
had to be spelled out.
The pilot project had to be
evidence based.
Perhaps based on some additional
research. It was supposed to be
an action plan that was
submitted A Fidelity plan was to
be submitted measurement and
evaluation plan.
Performance measures and things
like that, and those are those
are no longer there and then
also, I do want to mention Madam
Chair that, um, I looked at
Section four of the bill, and I
think this is really a separate
piece of legislation.
All it says, is that there's
going to be an evaluation of the
accountability Accountability in
government Act.
That's a separate
Procedure, I think deserving of
its own legislation, and here it
doesn't really commit.
Anybody to anything except to
say we're going to take a look
at it, and I just don't think it
fits in this bill.
Um so, madam chair For those
reasons, I could not support the
bill. Thank you. Thank you.
representative Brown
Representative Pettigrew and
then representative Chatfield
has also asked
Thank you.
Mr Chair, Madam Vice chair. Um
Mhm.
I am hungry, but I do not
normally like Madam chair having
something forced on me and I
feel like this is what happened
with respect to this. Yes, sir.
Conversations with respect to
This over LSC.
We have conversations about the
section nine beforehand. Um, so
many different aspects of this
as represented Brown talked
about, um, takes away.
Um, guard. Rose takes away our
our capability. And when I look
at
Something like this. This is to
represent a Montoya is point.
This is substantive. I mean,
this is
Not simple changes.
Have this only go through one
committee.
I think is terrible Practice,
not something that we should be
happy with hers.
There's changes all the way
through this, Um
And I, madam Chairman or
chairman and madam chair. I feel
like this is just a budget game
and we're shifting and and
there's a don't look over here.
I got our look over here. I'm
gonna be doing this over here
and I don't want you to see it.
And that's truly how I feel like
this is coming together.
I am.
Disappointed. Um
With respect to this
The way this happened, the
changes that were made
Um, the redirection.
There's so many different
aspects to this.
And Yeah, I've read it.
Read it last night and I and I
was mad and I read it again
today and I still not happy with
this, I think
I think we could be
More open.
With respect to how we do stuff.
More clear.
For the people that were up
here, representing
Thank you. Okay. Represent
Chatfield, please, Mr Jeff, Mr
Chair all summer long I left my
wife. I left my dog, My ranch.
Everything I had, and I went to
lfc because I have a I think
that's the best committee.
Ah by far
And I worked hard, and I served
on that committee and and, uh
Almost never miss that no matter
what's going on in my life.
And we worked hard to create
this. I was a little
Tentative about this.
Expendable trust from the very
beginning, and and you all will
remember that. And so then when
I get to this committee, it's
all changed, You know, and then
I'm and I'm thinking Well, I
didn't change it in this
committee. This is the
Appropriations Committee.
Didn't change it in the
legislative lfc during the
interim
So that leaves me wondering how
it got changed. And so that's
Why didn't support it? Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you
represented Chatfield members.
Thank you for a great day. Thank
you for everybody's work A big
thank you to the staff. It's
great to see everybody will
likely see everybody tomorrow.
We're adjourned.
Everybody go to the
