All right, we're gonna do a
quick introductions of
committees. Start with Reps in a
baka. Thank you, Madam Chairman,
and thank you for being here. My
name is Brian Bacca. I represent
House District 8 in Valencia
County.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
subcommittee A uh members in the
public. My name is Joseph
Franklin Hernandez and I
represent New Mexico's House
district 4 in northwestern New
Mexico, Salon County.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
Joseph Sanchez. I uh represent
District 40, uh, residing in the
beautiful Espanola Valley.
in her?
Oh
Good morning, Madam Chair, and
um committee, I'm a
representative with Susan
Herrera. I represent the North,
um, my district's the size of
about of Massachusetts. It
includes uh Rio Riba, Sandoval.
I go over the way to uh Cuba all
the way to the Colorado border
over Los Pratos past in Taos and
back down into um.
Dixon.
And now I'm in Santa Fe. Good to
be here.
Mhm
Good morning, Madam Chair Jack
Chatfield, House District 67. I
represent Koufax, Curry,
Harding, Quay, San Miguel, and
Union County. That's everything
from raton to protalis, down the
east side of the stage.
Glad to be here. Welcome
everybody.
In a petigrew.
Morning or afternoon, Madam
Chair, uh.
Randall Pettigrew from Lee
County, representing the, the,
you know, the funds that come to
the general fund.
And I am Debbie Serana. I
represent House District 21 in
Berlio County, the Monzano High
School Al area of Albuquerque.
We're gonna begin today with um
446 Board of Medical Examiners,
we're gonna switch it up.
Thank you whenever you're ready.
Thank you. Can I get the, um,
maybe this will be a quick
presentation. We are on agency
code 446.
Um, so there was the medical
board director Monique Parks and
mighty Fake counterpart Sky.
So, um, there's, this is a
non-general fund revenue agency,
all of the revenues for this
agency come from licensing fees.
And there is one difference
that's the difference between
the LFC and the executive
recommendation, and that is
86.5,001 FTE or a public
relations officer that
recommendation was included in
the DFA recommendation and not
in the LFC recommendation.
That's the only difference, and
we have come to consensus on
performance measures. With that,
I will turn it over to my
counterpart for any comment.
Thank you, Kelly, uh, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
I have nothing further to add.
So with that, I'll turn it over.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, if you have any
questions for me?
You don't have anything you want
to go over. I, I don't have
anything specific. OK, all
right.
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Madam Chair, so.
Um, can you tell me
Is this a brand new idea to have
a public relations officer, and
what's happened over the last
several years that.
Um, has made, I'm sure the board
of medical examiners need to
have a public relations. Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
this was actually a
recommendation from the
governor's office specifically
regarding um our office, um,
getting a PIO position, um, I
don't know.
Why specifically, to be honest
with you, I'm really new into
this role, a lot of our top
positions have recently retired,
but this was recommended,
recommended directly from the
governor's office.
Any other comments from LSC or
from the governor's office on
why?
Uh, Mr. Chair or Madam Chair,
I'm so sorry, um, as far as I
know, that was the majority of
the information obviously also
received, but I believe there
was several um
cases that happened at the
medical board that were taking a
lot of length and we're getting
some press, and so they asked.
The governor's office did
recommended the board to get a
PIO was just not included in the
LFC recommendation.
I'm sure, uh, presenters, um,
would this have anything to do
with
The issues with respect to
medical malpractice. Madam
Chair, members of the committee
know it does not.
Thank you.
Any other questions?
the LFC.
Any opposition to, I need a
second.
Mhm
Mr. Buck Representative Bucket.
Yeah, OK. Do we have any
opposition to the motion.
recommendations.
Yeah.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Rachel Mercer Garcia.
I'm the LFC analyst for the
state fair. We're talking about
the state fair commission, its
agency code 460. Uh, and if
you'd like to follow along in
volume 2, it's page 185.
Um, with me at the table is uh
general manager um of the State
Fair, Dan Morning and my uh DFA
counter counterpart Loria Tiaa.
Um, like, uh, the agent you
heard before you, this, the vast
majority of the state fair's
revenue is enterprise revenue.
It's the revenue that the state
fair generates um through the
fair and then spends. State Fair
has historically uh received
some general funds specifically
for the African American
performing.
Arts Center, and that is where
the one key difference between
the LFC recommendation uh and
the DFA recommendation uh is the
overall difference is $15,000
the LFC recommendation holds the
appropriation from the general
fund, um, for the African
American performing arts Center
flat, the executive budget
recommendation increases that
appropriation by $15,000. The
second key difference related to
that appropriation is that the
LFC recommendation includes
transferring 275,000 of that
general fund.
Appropriation to the Department
of Cultural Affairs to oversee
the programmatic elements of the
African American performing Arts
Center, that would be in
alignment with the role that DCA
plays in other areas like the
Hispanic Cultural Center, um,
but that transfer would be
contingent upon enabling
legislation to make that change,
um, otherwise the LFC
recommendation holds the general
fund flat.
Uh, and the executive budget
recommendation would increase it
by $15,000. Um
We also have included for you in
your packets, um, information
only, um, you won't be taking
action on it, but the special
and supplemental recommendations
and I'll let my DFA counterpart
uh speak to that.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um,
first,
Or performance measures which uh
Rachel didn't get to, we did
reach consensus on performance
measures, and as far as the
specials and supplementals go,
the executive does include a
supplemental recommendation of
$1 million for projected
shortfalls in the contractual
services and other category,
which the LFC recommendation
does not include, uh, other than
that, Rachel very succinctly
summarized the differences, and
I will now.
pass it over to general manager
morning for any additional.
Thank you. Appreciate it. Um,
I'll try to be quieter voice is
kind of deep and loud. Um, thank
you, uh, again, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for this opportunity to
address you about the Mexico
State Fair. Uh, this is
categorically the Mexico's
event. And if last year is any
indication of how people feel
about the state fair. There's
518,000 reasons why.
People love it. And, uh, it was
record-breaking not only in
attendance, but it was also
historic in the livestock sale
as well, record numbers of
animals, record numbers of uh
exhibitors and record numbers of
people coming in and providing
almost $744,000 for these kids
in 4H and FFA uh for their
projects. Uh, we're very proud
of that and the increases that
continue. Uh, our rodeo concert
lineup obviously was second to
none with Brad Paisley and
Josh Turner and Cole Swindell
and Becky G, and pretty much
sold out concerts, uh, or PRC
PRCA rodeo, we're one of the top
now rodeos in the country. Uh,
it's televised live during
during the fair, uh, and just
keeps growing and growing, we
appreciate our partner's high
low pro rodeo, uh, Dustin
Murray, who is a local Corrales
boy and uh we're really excited
about the things that uh they
are bringing for the
entertainment for the general
public. Uh, one of the things
that I'm really, really proud.
out of and I want to hit on this
very seriously is our safety
record. Uh, we are officially
the safest state fair in the
United States. And uh out of 11
days and almost 520, but 518,000
people. We had 14 incidents of
misdemeanor arrests, uh, and
most of that did not occur in
the grounds. It was stuff that
happened prior to people even
getting in to the fairgrounds.
Uh, I want to attribute that to
a great partnership of.
Different agencies, not only our
beloved state police, uh, they
do an amazing job as well, but
it's a whole host of
coordination and cooperation
with other entities like Bernalo
County Sheriff's Department, as
well as, uh, APD and then also
our AFR and and Homeland
Security, and there's a whole
host CID construction
industries, making sure that the
propane tanks that
concessionaires use are safe.
Safety has a lot of different
avenues, and I also turn to uh
credit to my staff and my safety
team, uh, to make sure that it's
the greatest experience, uh,
people can have. And uh again,
uh, I think if you talk to
anybody and you look at the
performance measures are, are,
uh, polling in our surveys show
that we are absolutely meeting
that mark for the people of New
Mexico. Um, you know, when I say
that, just a couple, just I want
to brag a little bit if I could,
uh, on our affair, uh,
community, you know, how they
feel about us. Well,
Albuquerque, the magazine.
people voted us as the best
local festival.
And that beats that other little
festival. I'm not sure, you
know, it's balloons go up and
down, whether that's not much of
an event, but that's OK. Uh, we
like them anyway. Uh, I'm
kidding, it's a magnificent, but
to get that recognition by
people I, I think it's very
important. Also, it's important
to know that, um, you know, in
our own industry, uh, again, we
represent, we're one of the top
fairs in the country, uh,
recognized by our industry
association, the International
Association of Affairs and
Expos, uh, we won first place.
owners and so many categories of
not just marketing, but
programming and also cost
effectiveness to the general
public. Uh, we also won Normans
State Fair Awards, uh, for the
Western Fair Association just
recently, again, for the same
type of things, our programming
is unique, it's different than
what other fairs do, and they
want to know what we're doing.
And uh again, when you get your
peers, you know, acknowledging
that the work that you're doing,
I have to attribute that to an
amazing staff, and uh these
people that put this show on.
It's not just corndogs and
concerts we do year round, but
for that show, it's an amazing
event and uh I'm very proud of
the people that work for us and
work for the people of uh New
Mexico. Um.
Even we had a local city council
recently tell PRQE that people
that live around the fair, and
our neighbors, uh,
overwhelmingly love to have the
state fair where it is. They
love it.
And uh it's something that we
try to work with and for the 15
years that I've been there, uh,
you know, we try to build
bridges and not divide ourselves
as a community. And, uh, so
that, that's something that
we're able to do. Uh, also it's
important to understand that
year round, we also do other
significant cultural events as
well. One of the greatest events
that, uh, is in our state is, I
want to thank Derrek Matthews
and his wife Lita and, and
Melanie that put on the
gathering of Nations. This is a
magnificent show that, uh, is
over worldwide, it's
international, uh, but it's
attended by people from all over
the country. Uh, they have
millions of people streaming
live to this event. And if
you've never been to the
gathering nations, I highly
encourage you to come out to
this event and see the beauty
and the magnificence that it
brings, but uh people don't
realize how big that is. We also
had the international chocolate
and coffee festival.
It's international, it's
chocolate, it's coffee. How good
is that? So, I mean, those are
things that we do Rio Grande
Arts and Cresswell, plus we've
really tried to pivot and
transition out of, uh, a lot of
concerts because the competition
is a little bit different. We've
got into combat sports, and uh
we've had multiple, uh, top
ranked boxing, bare knuckle
fighting, uh, you know, UFC
events and recently just a big
huge Muay Thai, which is a mixed
martial arts, uh, type event,
uh, that is really giving us a
lot of success.
the notoriety in New Mexico as
the fight capital of the world
and not in a bad way, and a
positive energy. So, uh, those
are just a few of the things we
do. Um, you know, with the
device, the wide range of things
that we do year round the
different events. People think
that's what we do is just
entertainment, but we are a
vital hub for people that are in
need of assistance when there
are natural disasters. Uh, just
most recently, the floods and
the fires in Rio.
So, uh, because of the work that
Riodoso did with the Downs of
Albuquerque on ourselves. We
were able to host the American
Futurity race, uh, and save that
vital income for New Mexico and
the people of Riodosa would be
able to participate in that as
well on our grounds and, uh, it
was quite uh logistical
nightmare, don't kid yourself,
that's 1500 horses throwing us
within 24 hours. Uh, but our
staff was able to overcome that
and take that. They moved out
two days before the fair, so.
There was a lot of transition.
But that's what we do. We want
to make sure that we're there
for the community. And there's
lots of examples of that, and,
you know, right now, uh, uh, we
are holding the um the ero
County animal shelter had some
issues with their building. They
needed a place they didn't have
facilities and house dogs, so
we're housing about 60 dogs on
our facilities and out in our
junior livestock pavilion. Uh,
so, uh, those are just a few of
the things Road Runner Foodbank,
food distribution, as well as
helping the
Foster families at CYFD, uh, you
know, giving them a free
tickets, not only to the fair,
but access to our winter
wonderland event to give them a
little something more special
than just what they live every
day. It kind of puts things in
perspective for us. And when I
looked at the 2500 cars that
were lined up for Road Runner
Food bank this before Christmas,
looking for that box of food. It
definitely gives you pause, and
it makes you proud of what
you're doing.
And not just the fair.
Fantastic stuff and I highly
recommend that you get to see
how it's done. We're pretty
efficient at it, and these are
wonderful people that need help.
Uh, one of the other things
we're doing long term is a
program that was started in uh
Roswell at the New Mexico
Military Institute was called
the uh Youth Challenge. And what
that things I think you may have
heard of some of this stuff, uh,
with the National Guard, we have
partnered with the graduate
course for that, uh, job
challenge. So the youth
challenge took kids that were at
at risk, not before they get
into the system and
come into that maybe a a
potential bad path. They take
them and put them into a, a
structured uh uh program and get
them the education they need to
survive and go forward and be a
functional part of society.
Well, this is that next step,
and they have partnered with CNM
and some of the local unions,
uh, I'm talking trade unions,
uh, and, and uh they will get a
twelve-week training plan to get
them a certificate to get in
those jobs they're so valuablely
need, but they will be housed in
residents at the state
fairgrounds.
And uh we're very proud of that
program. Um, again,
You know, I, I wanna just
Let you know that the fare is
important to people. And I know
there's been a lot of things
going on about the master
planning stuff. That is a
positive thing. We have to take
a look at our property, and we
have to look at our events and
what does the future hold? And
so we're in the process right
now of that, so I can't really
talk about it, but we're hoping
that will be evaluated in the
next week or so, and uh we'll
have some positive things come
out in the next few weeks about
what the future holds for not
just the state fair events, but
for Expo New Mexico and
understanding, we know the needs
of housing and things that that
are there are, there are ways to
get that done. And, uh, I've
done a lot of research and I'm
looking forward to talking to
the committee and we also have
uh uh former Mayor Martin
Chavez, who's on the team from
the mayor, uh, from the
governor's office to help, uh,
coordinate that effort. So
again, with that, I stand for
any questions you may have.
Great. Thank you for your
presentation. First, we'll have
um representative. Thank you,
madam chair.
Uh
Thank you for being here. Always
enjoy the State Fair. It's a
great place for our 4H kids, or
FFA kids, uh, grown-ups that
like hot dogs, uh, fun, fun
place to see the things from
around New Mexico, always, uh,
I, I don't know if you, I think
you don't have it anymore, but
Bolax used to have quite a
display of the things that were
raised the vegetables and stuff,
raised up in Nappy and uh
I don't know if that's a part of
it anymore or not I haven't been
in a while. It's 375,000 your
total budget, that's what you
put that thing on with uh how's
that work?
I'm sorry, Madam Chair
representative, he's talking
about the state fair event, uh,
state fair event is, uh, money
that we generate year-round, uh,
the 375,000 is for the African
American performing Arts Center.
OK.
Yeah, that's just one building
on our property that houses the
the foundation as well as the
Office of African American
Affairs, and Martin Luther King
Foundation.
What is your total budget?
Uh, 15.
The ears. Yeah, uh, so Mr. Chair
Representative Chatfield, um,
the LFC budget recommendation
totals, um 15.62 million and the
executive budget recommendation
totals 15.64 million.
And of that 375,000 is the
general fund, all of the rest is
the enterprise revenue that they
raise. OK.
And tell me about the, there was
a transfer the, in the LFC.
And then, and then there was a
million dollars, uh,
Uh
So emergency supplementals in
the, in the governors.
Talk to me about that a little
bit. Sure, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative Chatfield, so,
um, the LFC recommendation, uh,
within the operating budget is
the 375,000, um, that is the
general fund for the African
American Performing Arts Center.
The LFC recommendation is to
transfer 275,000 of that to the
Department of Cultural Affairs
to oversee the programming
within the African American
Performing Arts Center, the
buildings located on the state.
fairgrounds in statute, the
state fair is directed to
request funding for that
building and within the building
there are the agencies that Dan
mentioned as well as the African
American performing Arts Center
Foundation. The LFC
recommendation would move the
programmatic piece to be
overseen by DCA because it's
more similar to the way that the
DCA model works with in
buildings like um the, the
Hispanic cultural Center, for
example, while the state fair
would maintain
um, general fund 100,000 in
their operating budget to do the
physical maintenance of the
building, pay the utilities and
things like that. So that's the
LFC recommendation there.
The second, uh, to your second
question, um, within the
non-recurring budget, so this
isn't the piece you all are
taking action on today, but it
is just the informational, um,
the state fair requested a
supplemental appropriation, um,
and the executive budget
includes a million dollars
supplemental appropriation to
address um higher than expected
expenses, particularly related
to events booking, and I'll,
I'll let them speak to that for
the LFC recommendation um did
not include that supplemental
recommendation.
and you all will be having a
hearing specifically focused on
those specials where I imagine
you could talk about that more,
but I'll let that the executive
talk about that.
Oh
Madam Chair Representative
Chatfield, um.
Like Rachel said, the executive
does support the agency's
request for the supplemental due
to um
Unexpected higher costs due to
booking events, um, really
anything more specific than
that, I would have to turn it
over to Dan, um.
But those numbers seem far more
reasonable than what I was
looking at here. Um,
I hear rumors about moving the
state fair.
Tell me, tell me what the
thought is and, and where we're
at on that.
Sure, Madam Chair,
representative. Uh, yes, there's
been a, uh, a call from the
governor to look at the state
fairgrounds and what its future
use might be, including
possibility of relocating the
state fair to another location.
Uh, this is nothing that is
anything that's not new to the
fair. It's been happening for
decades. It is time to take a
hard look at where we are and
what we can do. It doesn't mean
the ferry is moving, but it
could potentially, and they want
to look at locations. Again,
this is what the master plan,
uh, that is.
out will address, uh, in the
near future.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Victor. Thank you,
Representative. Next is
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for your presentation.
I do think that the state fair
is an integral part and part of
our history and part of our
culture and the way we do
things, so I thank you for that.
Um.
Before I get to my questions, I
will publicly say that uh
In my county, there are several
communities that would welcome
the opportunity to be considered
for relocation if it comes to
that. One of the fastest growing
communities in the state.
With the most room to expand, so
just a plug it's a beautiful
shameful plug, but Valenti
County would welcome or uh
consideration. Uh, Madam
Chairman.
Uh, reps in a Chatfield to ask a
question, but, um, my question
is gonna be about the overall um
As far as your facilities are,
the number of the buildings, I,
I know that hearing here tingly
colosseum, which houses many
events.
was in need of some serious
renovations. I know there's a
number of other facilities that
are on the fairgrounds that are
In need of much repair, so could
you speak very briefly to
To those kinds of needs, and if
that may be part of the reason
why we're looking at a possible
relocation that I'm sure.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Baca, thank you for the
questions. Uh, absolutely, these
buildings have to be maintained
in a safe manner. Uh, the chair
project that you're speaking of
right now, we're replacing all
the seating and and tingly. It
was a safety issue. The chairs
were over 20 something years old
and uh we couldn't find parts.
We were manufacturing parts for
these chairs to keep them
maintained for events. So it's
something that's necessary, uh,
as far as, uh, that relocating
because of the facilities, uh,
and I do not believe so.
I mean, we have made great
inroads on those facilities, uh,
but we, they aren't severe dire
need of updating and maybe some
of these places being, uh, some
of these buildings being
replaced, uh, uh, but it's not
as dilapidated as we once were.
Uh, we have made inroads, but
they are not competitive in some
incidences, in some incidents
for in the market, in the
entertainment industry, uh,
ceiling heights, for instance,
and, uh, power needs and things
of that nature, we are haven't
been able to address. But the uh
infrastructure.
needs to be addressed always
whether we stay or go.
Thank you, Madam Chairman, and,
uh, thank you for your answers.
You know, we talked about, and
you've heard me talk in
different situations about
economic development and really
investing in types of activities
that bring our families and
communities together.
So I do think that this is an
important part of it. We spent
lots of money of other things,
but my
My preference is that we look at
how we can stimulate those types
of things for the 48 students
for the FFA for those, you know,
K-12 students that they have an
opportunity to not only
participate, but also um
Visit the uh visit the state
fair. So I definitely, I was
surprised when we heard about
the 375. I didn't know actually
what that was for.
But in future when we come, of
course, I would like to see more
opportunity, more investment,
you know, we talked about being
a part of your culture, but I do
think we need to talk about is
economic development, and what,
you know, I'd like to see at
some point, what is the impact.
That the state fair.
have on the businesses
surrounding that area. Um, Madam
Chair, I do have other
questions, but I will actually
like to talk to you offline.
Thank you, Madam.
Thank you, Representative Nix is
Representative Herrera.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much for your
presentation. You know, we all
love this state there. I mean,
I'm curious, how much is
admission to the state fair
these days for kids and adults.
Um, Madam Chair representative
on the weekend, it's $15 for
adults and it's $10 for
children.
But we also offer during the
week, discounted rates on the
admission. That's one of the
things that we do. So we even
have a dollar a day, $2 days,
and what's great about those
days is that also the midway uh
participates. So we have a $1 a
day, they have $1 rides. So if
you have a $2 admission, it's a
$2 ride. So again, we've tried
to make it affordable for folks,
uh, to get in there and we were
recognized that for that in our
convention, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that because that
is really important and.
I, um, you know, especially I, I
remember when it used to be any
New Mexico student could go to
the fair free.
Uh, I, it was years and years
ago, but uh I, I do remember
that and that was, that's
important for a lot of our
families, uh, in this state, and
I, I think the more we can do
that, you know, I, I, I get it's
a business and you have to, and
you have to uh do a good job,
but if the more we can do that,
I would appreciate that. I'm
also very interested about the
transition to um a new location
and and um and making that
affordable housing. I, I'm, I
really am very.
interested in that. It is a
remarkable asset that the state
has. Um, so,
When you do that, and you may
not have the answer. I, I
recognize you're in the middle
of all this, but how much would
it cost to build a new estate
fair somewhere else, you kind of
have a an idea.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for the comments and
as far as, let me address the,
the children and the students.
Yes, they get to come to free uh
to the fair. All they have to do
is sign up for our school days
program, and they get to come in
with their teachers. It's the
biggest classroom in New Mexico,
so we still do that program. But
as far as cost of moving, uh,
this is why we're hiring, uh,
uh, master planner. They'll do
the research in the current days
market. Uh, first of all, you
have to identify the property,
and we're not sure if that's
going to be state property or it
could be
private property, there's a
number of factors that will
enter into that. So again, I
really don't want to speak on
that at this point in time until
we actually have something more
concrete.
OK. Uh, thank you for that. Uh,
everybody else asks for all my
other questions. Thank you. And
I so appreciate you. I so
appreciate your work and that of
all your staff and all the
temporary staff that goes and
works at the fair. We're really
grateful to all these people
that make a fair happen and um,
you know, just it's just a small
thank you that I'm giving, but
it, it's important and that
safety record is very
impressive, I must say. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative Next
is Representative Fernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
Um, I also want to echo what has
previously been said by my
colleagues, um.
I wanna, uh, take a look at some
of this, um, uh, you mentioned
before about the gathering of
nations.
How.
Uh, what, uh, uh, how much, uh,
does the state fair generate
from, from that event.
Um, Madam Chair, representative,
that's a great question. Uh,
it's about $150,000 contract for
us, um, and this brings a $24
million direct spend impact to
the state of New Mexico this
then alone, uh, again, like I
said, it's, it's magnificent and
we work with the Matthews family
fantastically they're uh they
they're very thorough what they
do, and we're very supportive,
and we actually, uh, helped them
with anything that they need for
that.
And, and, and it's a privately
operated, uh,
How about, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, yes.
Um
Are there any uh community
contributions during that time
when there's a surplus of, of
people from all over the world
coming in to the Native American
population in Albuquerque.
Uh,
Madam Chair Representative,
yeah, that's something that the,
uh, Matthews family does quite
extensively, uh, they're,
they're the, the community is
involved in the planning, as
well as the execution of that
event. Uh, so yes, the, the
native population is very much
involved.
Thank you for, for those
questions. I, I have one last
question that this is on your
the parade, ah, how much does it
cost to, uh, to be in the parade
for I, I, I know there's
different categories, um, uh,
what's, what does that cost look
like? And how many
entries do you guys get each
year, uh, and, and I'm, I'm just
curious on the length, because
uh I like to brag about my
parade, and uh at the Shiprock
Northern Navajo Fair.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, it's 25 bucks, I believe is
what the entry fee is for that.
And uh we have over well over
100 entries and we have to cap
it because it has gotten so
large that uh it takes up, you
know, uh, 3 mile trek down uh uh
1.3 mile track in the middle of,
uh, Central Avenue.
So it's, it's a large fair, uh,
parade. Uh, we do have
approximately 60,000 people that
show up in line that that parade
route. Uh, so it's, it, it, it's
like taking part of the city of
Santa Fe and put it on the
parade route. And again, that's
another one we talk about
safety, I think it's important,
uh, the coordination and the
effort to keep everyone safe
because we all see it every day,
uh, you know, that's my greatest
fear. It's why this hair is
white and not brown anymore. Uh,
you worry about those type of
things happening.
But uh it's a very good phra and
thank you for asking the
question. For clarification, he
said 1.3 miles? Yes, OK, for
clarification, Madam Chair, to
the committee, the Northern
Navajo Fair parade is 3 miles.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Next
is Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the presentation, uh, I
think my first question, Madam
Chair, is gonna relate to the,
the horse track and next to the
fairgrounds. I think they just
extended their contract to 9 to
2042.
If there's a change with venues.
What happens to that?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, they do have a lease and
that is one that has been uh
ratified by both houses, as well
as the governor. So, uh, until
that something happens with
that, they're there.
Until 2047.
I think it's what it is.
Thank you, Madam Chair. 47 or
42?
I'll have to check, but I
believe it was 47. OK. I, I, I
could be wrong. I can have my
numbers wrong. Um, Madam Chair,
um,
With respect to the money that
is, is
LFC has transferred over to the
DCA.
With that 275,000 is there a
percentage of that that the DCA
gets to keep to manage that
money.
Uh, administrative costs.
Oh, sorry. Thanks, Dan. Uh, Mr.
Chair, Representative Pettigrew,
the first thing I'll notice that
change is contingent upon
enabling legislation because in
statute right now it is state
fair that would have to ask for
that money, and so it would
require a bill to to make that
happen. Um, the bill for example
might specify uh the role in
which DCA plays in
administering um that um that
program and money, it's not
specified in the LFC
recommendation or the intention
is that the
75,000 is for the programmatic
components of the African.
Thank you very much.
That being said, there is a
potential that they could keep
up to 10% of that, 275.
And if that's the case, that
would be different than the
15,000 in the separation between
the two different budgets. So I
was just curious about that.
Madam Chair, um,
I think the question was asked
about the cost of admission of
about $15 with
With um days that the costs may
vary.
Um
Madam Chair and presenters,
what's the cost, average cost of
parking.
For a day at the fair.
And is there a separate cost for
attending the rodeo. Uh, Madam
Chair Representative, uh, again,
parking is a $15 fee, uh, on the
weekends as well, and we also
have a park and ride, and if you
have a concert rodeo ticket. It
also includes your admission.
But not parking.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that. So admission gets
you into the fair, does not get
you into.
The concert and does not get you
into the rodeo.
Would that be correct statement?
Madam Chair represented, yes,
and that should get you into the
fair.
Madam Chair and presenters with
respect to that. Let's go
specifically. If I wanted to go
to the concert and I wanted to
go to the rodeo, and I parked as
close as I could.
What would be my average cost?
per person going in per adult
going in.
I'm sorry, Madam Chair
Representative, um, I didn't
quite hear the question again,
Park in the fairgrounds or
around the fairgrounds in or
around, assuming Madam Chair,
uh, $15 as an average cost. Um,
The cost, so we want admission,
concert, rodeo.
Parking
All of that. What's the average
cost for an adult?
But Madam Chair representative
again depends on the concert
that you go on as far as the uh
the price. Again, you're getting
the admission price included,
which is $15. You're getting a
rodeo as well as a full length
concert, uh, National A. So
those tickets run anywhere from
around 100 down to $30. Uh, so
it depends on what kind of
ticket, but if you're looking at
the high end, uh, per adult, uh,
you're looking at 2 adults for
$200 which gives you an extra
15, so you're looking at a
$100 230 dollars for to get into
the fair.
For rodeo concert and admission.
All included. Thank you for
that. I was just trying to get
some kind of correlation, you
know, Lee County, we have a
small fair, um,
We sell about 124 animals, which
I believe Madam chair is more
than state for ourselves.
Our average return to our 4H and
FFA students is uh about 1.2,
1.3 million.
Versus a 744,000 at the state
fair has.
This lower costs with respect to
um entry, um.
And
On the worst day, it costs $10
to go see Kane Brown and see one
of the highest paying rod and
rodeos in the state.
So I was trying to get a
correlation with
What we're doing and what the um
the value is, with respect to
that. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Um, I
think everything's been asked. I
do have, uh, I just want to say
thank you for the job challenge.
job for, I think that's great.
The kids as a former high school
math teacher, I am, anything we
can get kids into to get them
excited about what's out there
is is a great thing. So thank
you. All right, I'm gonna go
ahead and ask my vice chair for
a motion. Madam Chair move the
LSC?
2, do we have any opposition?
OK, rips in a pedigree position.
Hi. Um,
I move I do pass for LFC
recommendation.
Right. Our next committee is the
Whenever you're ready.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Noel Montagno, and I'm
the LFC analyst for the gaming
control board.
Agency code number 465, and
they're located behind tap 4 in
your binders.
To my far left,
Is the DFA analyst for the
gaming control board, Monica
Tapia.
And right next to me is Terry
McGaha, the director of the
gaming.
The executive recommendation
exceeded the LFC's
recommendation by $650.1,000 or
89 8.9%.
The request, uh, the
recommendation fully supports
the agency's request.
For their base uh recommendation
for personnel service and
benefits, they exceeded the LFC
recommendation by 620.7,000 or
11.6%.
Which funds the empty positions
located at the gaming control
board.
The LFC's recommendation only
funds 2 positions, a PR
coordinator and an
administrative services
coordinator.
The executive recommendation for
other costs exceeds the LFC
recommendation by 29.4,000 to
fund in-state training and
travel out of state training and
travel, and IT costs.
The LFC's recommendation funds a
portion of each.
I'll be sending it over to
Monica Tapia for any other
further questions or comments.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee.
as Noah said, my name is Monica
Top gaming control board. I
would like to highlight that the
executive recommendation
includes.
881.6,000 increase to fully fund
the agency's 52 base FTE or
classified in 3 go positions are
currently unfunded.
It also includes 17.8,000 in
contractual services to meet
statutory and regulatory
obligations, including
compliance with the tribal state
class 3 gaming compact, which
mandates an annual meeting
hosted by our state gaming
representative and increased
costs of maintaining the central
monitoring system essential for
real time oversight of gaming
activities statewide.
I will now pass it over.
Thank you, Mara.
Uh, Monica, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, my name is
Terry McGaha.
I'm the acting executive
director for the New Mexico
Gaming Control Board.
And I want to thank you for the
opportunity to address the
committee today regarding New
Mexico gaming control board's
budgetary needs for the upcoming
fiscal year.
And we appreciate the
legislative support and ongoing
support, uh, of our mission to
ensure the integrity and
security of gaming operations
within the state.
According to the American Gaming
Association, which is a
nationwide organization.
Uh, the New Mexico gaming
industry has a substantial
economic impact of $2.47 billion
to the state economy.
This includes gross gaming
revenue, employment,
Operational expenditures.
And tax contributions.
The gaming industry, according
to the American Gaming
Association.
Supports over 22,000 jobs in the
state.
The gaming control board started
fiscal year 24 with almost a 30%
vacancy rate.
Throughout fiscal year 24, we
were able, able to feel.
All but 7 vacancies.
Before the budget constraints,
uh, did not allow us to fill the
remaining vacancies.
The current vacancies.
Assist now of 5 classified
employees.
And 3 go expositions.
We, we reduced the beancy rate.
To 13% before funding gave out.
Now we have a vacancy rate of
15%. We had another person
leave, but that was, that was
recently this fiscal year we had
planned to fill the remaining
vacant positions with the agency
to ensure adequate staffing and
operational efficiency. However,
a fiscal year 25 budget was
essentially flatlined.
It left us without the necessary
funding to address critical
vacancies within the agency. As
a result, we continue to operate
with a reduced workforce.
Which places a significant
strain on our existing staff.
And impacts our ability to
fulfill our regulatory
responsibilities effectively.
To mitigate this shortfall this
year, we have submitted a
supplemental budget request of
$167,000 to help cover essential
operational costs and to
maintain our agencies's
effectiveness for this, this
fiscal year. The DFA, the DFA
has recommended 4 14% budgetary
increase for the gaming control
board, which is the amount we
originally requested.
However, LFCs.
Current recommendation of 4.7%.
would not allow us to fill our
current vacant staffing
positions.
As a regulatory agency with only
52 employees.
Vacancies have a significant
impact on the ability to
effectively oversee gaming
operations.
In forced compliance.
And to maintain public trust in
the industry.
So we strongly urge the
committee to adopt DFA's
recommendation.
To ensure we can recruit and
retain the personnel necessary
to fulfill our statutory
responsibilities.
Additionally, we, we request the
committee.
Committee's approval of a $1
million C2 special
appropriation.
To finish the development and
implementation.
Of a new agency database.
This supplemental request is in
addition to a $1.5 million
initial appropriation which was,
which is anticipated not to be
enough to meet.
Or to finish the project.
Our current system was
originally built in 1998.
It is antiquated and does not
meet modern performance
standards.
It does not meet cybersecurity
standards.
And it's not ADA compliant.
A new system is essential for
improving efficiency.
Ensuring data integrity and
allowing our staff to
effectively manage licensing
compliance and enforcement
activities.
Without this necessary upgrade,
our ability to provide timely
regulatory oversight.
Will continue to be hampered by
outdated technology.
And finally we request $80,000
to replace the agency's
computers.
They've reached their end of
service, their end of life.
And these agent systems are not
only critical for our daily
operations.
And they continued use poses
security and efficiency risk.
Upgrading our technology
infrastructure is essential to
maintaining our ability to carry
out our regulatory duties
effectively.
And we appreciate your
consideration of these requests.
And urge the committee to adopt
the full 14%.
Budgetary increase.
Recommended by DFA.
Approved the $1 million C2
request.
For a new database.
And to allocate the necessary
funds for computer replacements.
These investments are critical.
ensuring the New Mexico Gaming
Control Board has continued, can
continue to uphold his mission
of regulatory integrity.
And public protection and with
that I'll turn it over to our
chief information officer Miguel
Lujan, who will, uh, provide
some more details about the
special appropriations.
Um, good afternoon. Um.
Sure.
Um, members of the committee,
uh, the C2 funding was
originally requested, um.
2023 fiscal year, uh, for the
original 1.5, uh, the CIO at the
time had left and had left
position vacant and had left the
funds.
Um, there for a while, and so we
did request an extension on
that. And in order to fully fund
and.
The project, the additional
million is requested so we can
finish, uh, this calendar year
2025, without having to go for
C2 funding again and waiting an
additional year or putting the
project on hold.
Um, the 80,000 again for the
computers we when I got to the
agency, I started, uh, in May,
uh, and I'm here to stay to
fully see this project to the
end, uh, the current program is
very, very old, it's even the
look of it looks like Windows
95, Windows 98, so we're in dire
need of a new program and.
Every time they go up to to do
it some or other happens with
the CIO and it never gets
completed, so I'm here to see it
through, and the additional
money, uh, I requested and I
don't know if you guys are
familiar with the C2, you can
only request it in July and give
a presentation for it to be
approved, uh, by April to start
using in the summer, so the
additional 1 million should see
us through to finish this
calendar year without having to
wait any further.
And with that, Madam Chair,
we'll open up to any questions.
You're the committee may have.
Do we have any questions?
Um, represent a pedigree.
Thank you.
00
Which one?
Oh, thank you. I think we've
both heard the other person's
name. Um.
Thank you very much for the
presentation. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, my first question.
If I go to page 155, I think
it's volume one, I could be
wrong. Volume 3, in 2023, you
reverted.
North of $900,000.
Back and in 2024, you reverted
1.2 million back unless I'm
reading the wrong line, which is
always possible. Yeah, no, 929,
596,000 reversions in 23.
And 1.16 million in 2024.
But we're asking for
Just under a million dollar
increase from FY 25 right now.
Can you walk me through that,
Madam Chair?
Madam Chair, Representative, I
don't think your numbers are
accurate and you are correct. I
am reading from the wrong one.
No.
Yeah, I am reading from 265 and
23 and 260. These need to be
bigger.
My eyes need magnifiers. So, all
right, so, um, that was my, my
First question, and this Madam
Chair and presenter 650,000
would fund 7 full-time positions
for you guys.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
I'll answer the first question
regarding the the revision.
Last fiscal year, we reverted.
Approximately $265,000.
And I could have used that money
toward the end of the fiscal
year to hire more positions.
However, knowing that our uh
Budget this year was flatlined.
I wouldn't have had the money to
pay him this year.
I could have paid him for a
couple of months of last year,
hired the physicians, but we
didn't have the uh fiscal year
25 appropriations to pay for the
budget, pay for those salaries.
If, if that makes sense to you,
so I could hired him to the end
of the fiscal year, paid them
through the end of the fiscal
year, the new budget kicks in. I
don't have the money to pay
because our budget was
essentially flatlined.
So Madam Chair, um, thank you
for that answer. So with, with
what I understand,
When, when we're looking at the
end of this year finishing out
in June 30th.
Um
There's, there will be no
reversions. You have, you're,
you're all spent all in, all
done.
At this point, we have requested
supplement just to finish this
out for this fiscal year because
our budget was essentially
flatlined last year, my chair.
Thank you very much for that.
So,
Me.
Sir, can you
You were put on a budget hold.
You probably from what the
presentation that I heard is
that you weren't able to do
anymore. You were told not to
hire anymore and you weren't
allowed to go back. I am gonna
assume with that that you
weren't allowed to go back and
ask for a budget adjustment.
Because of of where you were at
on your flat line budget.
Am I making sense with respect
to that? I think so,
Representative, um.
I'll put it this way, if we
hadn't had another individual we
started day one in the red this
fiscal year.
Because our budget was flatlined
due to contractual increases in
cost or center monitoring
system, for example.
Toss the agency upwards of 3/4
of a million dollars a year and
that's substantially increases
each year.
Just the inflationary cost or
Profit making by corporations or
whatever you wanna call it, but
that contract continually goes
up.
When our budget is flatlined for
one year to the next and we're
zeroed out in in the previous
years.
Then that's cost that comes off
the top and then essentially
sends us we have the potential
this year actually going into a
deficit.
We had one individual who left
for a higher paying job.
And that will
Maybe keep us in, in, in the
black at this fiscal year.
However, we did request a
supplement prior to that in
individual leaving and we're
still totally uncertain at this
point in time if uh.
If we'll have the funding to to
stay in the black, the remainder
of the fiscal year.
And that's without hiring any
positions, and these are
positions that have been vacant
some of upwards of a couple of
years when you'd like to get
filled, but just never had the
salaries or the budget to do
that.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair.
It looks like LFC has a
response.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, uh,
the gaming control board did not
receive a flat budget last year.
Uh, their FY 24 actuals totaled
to $6,642,000 and they were
granted an operating budget for
FY 25 of 6.9 million, which is a
$300,000 increase or a 3%
increase.
Madam Chair, sir, would you like
to respond?
We received according to the.
Go ahead.
This is our CO since you take
it.
Can you go to the mic, please?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, we didn't, um.
That's how you save a flat
budget, we did receive budget,
however, um, we did not receive
enough money, I think what what
Mr. McGaha is trying to
clarifies the flat budget is, it
was just to cover enough
positions or a few positions in
our agency, so we did not have
enough funding to move forward
and hiring all the positions, so
when you see the reversions go
out, um, it appears like we had
enough funding to hire, but we
did not. It was the.
some savings at the beginning of
the year while we were trying to
hire throughout the year that
created that excessive the
additional funding, um, had we
used up all that funding to hire
all the positions we wanted to
or that were vacant, we would
have, it would have created a
larger deficit in uh FY 25. So
we did start off in the deficit
in the red day one,
the only reason we are where
we're at now is as Mr. McGaha
stated is that we
have one position left, um, if
without that position leaving,
we definitely would have been in
the red in a deficiency at the
end of the year.
We are currently in the black
just with cutting back
everything, but we're at the
point where we don't have much
left to cut, so if there's
unexpected expenses, hearings,
anything that occur that could
potentially put us in a deficit
at the end of the fiscal year,
so we're still looking at or
requesting to get even some form
of supplement just to to ensure
that it doesn't put us in a
deficit and we realized that if
that doesn't, if we're OK by the
end.
year, all those funds will go
back to the general fund. We
just don't wanna, um, seek a
deficiency next year for this
year when we can, um, you know,
control that if with a
supplement, possibly.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for clarifying. So I
probably sounding like I'm
beating a dead horse, but the
reality is, this will be my 3rd
year on LFC HAFC LFC, whatever,
um.
And I don't understand
everything I know, and I don't
know a whole bunch on top of
that.
So, um, I'm really good with
numbers, so, and
Let's talk about uh 7 vacancies
or 5 vacancies, pick a number.
It doesn't really matter.
From what I understand from the
answers that I've received,
Madam Chair.
Is it for the last couple of
years, you've been trying to
fill vacancies.
Very specifically, if I went
back through these books, all
the vacancies that you've been
trying to fill, were they
funded?
We just unfunded but needed in a
request by the agency. All, all
the positions that filled we had
funding to fill.
So, Madam Chair, and, and, and
sir, I'm
When I ask my question
differently. Um,
All the
Your answer was all the
positions that were filled were
funded. Did you still have
funded vacancies, but you didn't
have the money in the account.
So in other words, I have a book
here that says this is how many
funded and how many unfunded
vacancies you have.
Which one is it?
If I, Madam Chair.
Representative
I understand your question.
We filled the positions.
That her budget allowed us to
fill.
There were vacant positions that
were authorized to fill that we
did not have the money.
In the budget to fill.
And currently we're looking at 5
classified positions.
And 3 give expositions.
That we don't have.
Um
The budget.
Madam Chair before LFC responds
to that. So, I guess my
question, let's go back to 5.
According to if I pulled up the
book from 2 years ago with the
book tell me it was funded or
unfunded, and I'm not talking
about how much money you have in
your account. OK, there's a
difference, right? I can tell
somebody to go hire somebody and
then later they come back and
say, well, you put it in the
budget, but it's not in my.
Center, so I can't do that.
and so I'm trying to get to, to
an understanding of our we, are
we talking something that we say
from an LSC standpoint, Madam
Chair, you're funded.
And then I have the gaming
control board sitting there
saying, hey, I may be funded,
but there's not enough money in
my account to carry me over.
Does that make sense?
I'm not sure that it does to me,
representative, um.
Do you want to try to address
what he's asking
Pettigrew. So the positions that
we hired in 2024 were funded,
um, but not every position is
funded, so we have many
positions. So there were several
positions that were unfunded and
are currently unfunded, so even
going into FY 25, we will have
several positions that are
unfunded. Um, the DSA
recommendation.
obviously would allow us to fund
every single position, including
our go appointees. We've had
many of those positions that
have been vacant for many years,
um, but we do, um, you know, we
wanted to at least try and get
to the very least to to fund our
classified positions, which
means we would love to have all
5 classified positions. Um,
there's obviously no guarantees
when appointees will come in,
how long they stay, um, luckily
we've been pretty steady on the
current.
po s ition s that have been
appointed and so as long as
those have been uh funded when
we submit our budget requests,
at least those capture those for
many years we had many uh gov
expositions that were vacant. So
as budget was reduced, uh,
funding was occurring. We really
didn't have the funny or funded
unfunded positions became part
of the go positions. So with new
administration coming in,
appointing positions, we found
ourselves where.
Those findings will then take
the place of the funding for the
classifieds, um, so it's just a
balance act and really we're
just trying to get back to where
we need to be, um, but to answer
your question, that yes, we had
unfunded positions and so we
could
um hide those positions. Thank
you.
I'm sure, I think LSC would like
to respond.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Um, if
you look at page 4 of your
different sheets packets, it's
the personal services and
employee benefits calculation
worksheet.
Um, if you look at column N,
you'll see the estimated fun uh
funded vacancy in dollars, and
you'll notice that it's
negative. So this typically
happens when agencies have fully
funded positions like the GCB,
they have 52 funded positions.
But they didn't spend their
positions towards, they didn't
spend their funding towards
positions.
One of the first things I did at
the job was I looked at a spo
reports, the monthly reports for
how many people are employed per
agency. And I looked at uh the
gaming control board from July
1st, 2023 to July 1st, 2024. And
I calculated the raises that
they were given.
Last year, I'm pretty sure the
compensation packet that you
guys approved was around 4 to
6%.
And noticing some different
races here, I've found multiple
occasions of higher than 6%.
Here at Tristannez, she, um,
Got a raise of 34.6%.
Doreen Padilla had a raise of
34.1%.
Jonas Myers had a raise of
22.9%.
Terry McGaha had a raise of
21.9%. And there's multiple
occasions of this.
So ultimately, they were given
the funding to hire 52
positions.
But they gave raises instead,
which were out of cycle and
against the budget guidelines
from last fiscal year.
You, you want to respond?
Yes, madam Chair and members of
the committee.
The raise that uh
Mr. Montori just spoke about.
Two of those were promotions,
individuals promoting into
higher positions.
The others were, were temporary
salary increases because we have
people.
Doing two jobs.
We currently have, I'm an acting
executive director. I'm, I'm
also the director of the
enforcement division. I do two
jobs.
We have a state gaming
representative who's also
A board member of the gaming
control board doing two jobs.
When you, when you have a small
agency with 52 people and 11
person leaves a position,
somebody has to take up the
slack.
So nobody was given raises above
and beyond what were warranted.
These promotions through the
Murray system process.
People filled positions they
moved up the ladder.
To the chain of command or they
were salary increases that were
given to individuals who are
doing dual dual duties.
So
That's just not accurate.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, Mr. Holland, represent
Pettigrip. So we're gonna look
into this even more. And I just,
this is, this is a great
concern. I want to read you
something just so you know why
we're doing what we're doing. So
we, we will be taking the lower
general fund recommendation
today knowing that we are
constrained in recurring general
funds. We do this to make sure
we have room to adjust budget
for HAFC. We know that there
will be budgets that need
further general fund adjustments
like yours, and we will be
working with staff to look at
those proposals throughout the
next couple.
weeks. We will give LFC and HAFC
staff specific directions to
bring back to us for budget
adjustments. So as we look into
what you're saying, besides
personnel, you want um
automation and more computers,
we will be looking into this and
and so we can help your
department with what they need,
but we do need further, we need
to look into this further to
figure out what is going on.
It's going to be a discussion.
All right. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Next is a representative
Fernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, this
is my first year, um, on this
committee, uh, help me
understand the Indian gaming
compact we have here in New
Mexico. And uh how many uh
Tribes published nations are in
that compact and uh um and, and
what does that mean for, for the
state of New Mexico. OK, Madam
Chair, Representative Hernandez,
our state gaming representative
is here. This person who's our
liaison with with all the.
For the compact, he can, he can
answer your questions better
than I can.
Madam Chair Representative, my
apologies, can you repeat that
representative? Yes, uh.
Wanting to know about the uh the
Indian gaming compact, how many,
uh, participants do we have in
the state of New Mexico and um
How, how, how does that process
work? Because I, what I do
understand is that there in
different lengths or different
time frames and that I have to
get renewed. Uh, so I'm, I'm
just trying to have a better
understanding of, of, of New
Mexico's Indian gaming compact
and, and also if there's any
material on it, I would also
like to learn more about uh
what this means for New Mexico.
Sure, thank you. Um, madam.
Chair Representative. So the
gaming compacts, each of the
tribes have a compact with the
state, but it's essentially it's
the same compact. The compacts
run through 2037. We currently
have 14.
Compacts in place.
And me as the as the state
gaming rep acts as the liaison
between the state and the
tribes.
To to monitor the compliance of
those compacts.
Um, to Mr. Magaha's point
earlier, I am one of the, the
commissioners on the board, but
I also act as the state gaming
rep.
We, we had a position as a state
gaming rep, that the person
retired two years ago, and I've
been filling that spot ever
since.
With regards to
Dual roles. Same thing with the
executive director. He's doing 2
positions as well, Madam Chair
Representative, did that answer
your question or do you want
more specifics? Yes, and I, I'll
probably uh go offline to get
more specifics. I, I, it's more
about research on my end just to
understand the economic impact
of, uh, the, these gaming
compacts and uh and if that's
something that you're, your team
can can provide to my office,
uh, because I know.
The Navajo Nation has a gaming
compact with the state of New
Mexico and I'm just trying to
understand, uh, that because
they're
What I hear is that they're
putting uh the discussions
together and, and I just want to
be prepared like thank you,
madam, Madam Chair
Representative, yes, I will
reach out to you offline, give
you all that information and as
a, as a side note, we, we do
have our annual meeting that's
going to bring together the
state and the tribes as well
coming up in May to discuss
topics just like that.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Nicks is
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I've got
3 straight questions, right? Um,
but I Chair, the, the question I
saw, uh, $2.47 billion kind of,
um, in revenue to the state
through different things.
Uh, madam, how many, how many
people does it employ, uh,
gaming in New Mexico, I'm sure.
Madam Chair, Representative,
according to the American Gaming
Association data, and this is
data that they, they gather from
us as well as other sources.
Um
The gaming industry in the state
of New Mexico supports 22,000
jobs.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
But I'm sure the next question I
have is, has there been a
request for expansion of the
gaming. I, I know that I heard
that, I think it's
The casino that was north of
Cuba, right? Is that, is that
reopening up as far as the, is
that the
Has there been any expansions or
requests or
Any as far as casinos that were
closed and are now coming back
online.
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
so the, the, the Hickory group,
uh,
tribe, they were closed as of.
2021 for for the pandemic. They
are the, the last ones.
I, I, I should say they're the
most recent ones to reopen.
Most have reopened in in parts.
There are a few that have
remained closed, but the
Hickorya group has opened up
their travel center, and we are
working with their gaming
commission.
To
To confirm the compliance of the
of the their existing compacts.
Thank you, Madam Chair and for
other folks, other, um,
tribes or that is there
opportunity for them to do it?
Have you had new requests for
the expansion of gaming on a
As far as tribal lands.
Madam Chair Representative, we,
we have
To
Make that 3 current compacts
that have that are signed, but
the.
The nations have remained closed
other than those in in the
existing we have not had
additional tribes coming forward
too.
To talk about combats now.
The tribes have, I'm sorry, the
tribes have spoken.
To
Possibly discuss.
The the compacts, knowing that
they go through 2037, um, but
those discussions would have to
go through the legislature, the
governor.
If there's ever talk about
amendments to these compacts.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that answer. The
last question I'm gonna ask is
the gaming commission's efforts
on responsible gaming.
Um, I think that's an important
part for me. I have a story here
recently. I
I'm not a gambler, put in 20
bucks, get a bonus on the 1st
1120 bucks. I walked out of the
casino.
Before I made it home, my kid
took it, so, um, I'm not a
gambler, so it's not, but, but
it is important to, to me and to
many of us.
That along with the support of
the gaming industry.
That we do have efforts as far
as in the responsible gaming and
also uh for supports for those
who may have issues with that.
Can you just speak briefly to
that?
Madam Chair, Representative, I
can, and it's, it's an important
program.
That, um.
Gaming control board.
By, by statute is required to
act upon. It's called a
self-exclusion program where
individuals with problems.
To self-identify themselves
having gambling problems can
come into the ANC.
And basically voluntarily
exclude themselves from all the
casinos throughout the state.
Um, and this.
But doing so, they, it allows
them or prohibits them actually
being on the gaming floor
itself.
And if they were to happen to
get on the gaming floor and have
winnings, and they agreed to
forfeit the winnings and it goes
into responsible game
initiatives.
Uh, one of the things our agency
has done.
And, and the recent past was we
actually reclassified the
position and
And creating the responsible
gaming coordinator, which uh
Gil Ramiro is here today.
Who
Who has expanded our program,
we've put it out more to the
public. We, we, and his, his
role is to make the program a
responsible gaming and push our
responsible game initiatives,
uh, out to the public so that
they know they exist to help
exist, and he has the ability to
not only um
Oversee our self-exclusion
program, but to uh provide them
guidance and counsel.
Um, and to where they can
receive further help for.
Um
the problem.
That's my question. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Next,
Representative Herrera.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Um, I'm just curious, do,
do you, um, does your
commissioner have to hire
through a spoke. We have our own
HR, uh, Madam Chair
representative we have our own
HR person who works with Spall
to meet all the state uh hiring
requirements, yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um
how's that working?
Uh, since we have, we have a
very good HR manager. I will say
it's working well, working well
now, and it hasn't always been
the case, but it's working well
now. Oh, that's good to hear.
That's all I had. Thank you,
doctor.
Thank you. Um, all right, I'll
take a motion for my vice chair,
Madam chair, I move the LFC.
I'll accept LFC recommendation.
Um, do we have any opposition?
Oh, we need a second.
OK.
2 from Representative Chatfield,
um.
Any opposition?
No. All right. And we do pass on
LSC recommendation.
We will get getting back to you.
All right. Our last committee
last presenters are the racing
commission,
racing commission.
gets.
All right, whenever you are,
you're ready. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Char. I
apologize. Do we have someone
who knows how to use computers
so we can connect our laptop
with the presentation.
ready?
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Noel Montagno and I'm
the LFC analyst for the racing
commission.
Uh, they're, uh, agency code
number 469. They're located
behind a tab 4 in your binders.
Uh, so if you want to follow
around on volume 2, it's located
on page 191, and then on volume
3, you can see live race stays
on page 54.
to my far left is the analyst
for the racing commission,
Monica Tapia.
And in between us is Amber
Trujillo and Izzy Trejo.
The executive recommended uh the
executive recommendation
exceeded the LFC's
recommendation by 689.6,000 or
20.4% in general fund revenue to
fund an expansion request that
adds 3 full-time employees.
The base recommendations, the
executive recommended a 3.8%
increase overall in the LFC
recommended 3.4%. So I'll only
be going over this expansion
request.
This expansion request includes
2 veterinarians and 1 private
investigator.
It also includes
Other costs for new equipment,
travel, training, and supplies
for these 3 FTEs.
I'll send it over to Monica to
talk about, uh, any comments she
has.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
The executive recommendation,
total 7.9 million, an increase
of 928.5,000 or 13.1 above the
FY 25 operating budget and
includes a recommended expansion
of.
6500, I mean, sorry, 658,0003
FTE. I will now pass it.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Izzy
Trejo, the executive director of
the New Mexico Racing Commission
alongside to my right is Miss
Amber Trujillo or a CFO for the
agency, uh, just a real quick
presentation, um, and I
apologize, we had a PowerPoint
to show you, but uh yeah.
Um, it did not get to you guys
in time, so, um, I'll go ahead
and, uh, kind of paraphrase and
read from it, but a little bit
about the New Mexico Racing
commission, uh, she is the
foundation of regulation here
for with the New Mexico Racing
Commission is uh drug testing
for illicit drugs, teeters, and
also animal welfare, and those
are two of the focuses that we'd
like to, uh, present to you
today and some of the concerns
we have with some of the
appropriations, but uh this year
in 2025.
The racing season will consist
of 187 days of racing and uh
You know, that that's a lot of
days compared to a lot of
jurisdictions on national level,
um, most jurisdictions run.
40, 80, 90 days of racing. So we
have a lot of horse racing here
in New Mexico, when compared to
other races and jurisdictions.
And as I mentioned earlier, the
cornerstone of our regulation is
drug testing and this agency has
been nationally recognized for
its drug testing program, and a
lot of other regulators around
the country love to emulate what
we've done in the past.
But horse racing is in a
transition period. It's
contracting significantly, and
I'll get to that later on with
some numbers, but uh that means
there's the issues that face
this agency. One is a decline in
revenue for testing and parent
mutual taxes to the state, the
lack of horses being bred on a
national and state level is uh
declining significantly, and we
also have the federal uh horse
racing integrity and Safety Act
that uh partners with uh the New
Mexico Racing Commission
regulating Thoroughbred horse
racing.
the state
Um, the other problem facing
this agency is the shortage and
necessity of veterinarians, um.
We've been
tripping on that for several
years that we need the vets
employed by us to be the
advocates for the horses.
Um, get to the decline in equine
test fund. This is a real
important thing for us. uh
during the past few years,
there's, there's been a drop in
the quintes fund revenue. Uh, we
generate that money from money
that's wagered on horse racing,
and that's been in the decline.
Um
We had a 20% decrease in the
fund over the last fiscal year.
And um,
Some of our testing processes
have increased our hair testing,
which we've been, uh, a big fans
of which has taken a lot of
teenagers out of the game before
they can cheat the betting
public and other fair
participants, uh, the cost for
hair testing went up from $150 a
sample for analysis to $450. So
it was quite a, quite a blow to
us uh during the new RFP
process, um, and it stung us a
little bit and kind of slowed us
down a bit.
As I mentioned, uh, the money
generated from wagering has
declined in New Mexico on our
our live racing and simulcast,
uh, just 23 verse 24, we're down
over 115,000 in our ecoin test
fund, down to 462,000 this past
year.
Usually it's generates 600,000
uh 650,000. Uh,
So the questions are, what does
this decline in revenue mean of
this agency cannot rely just on
Equite fund money alone anymore.
The agency has been using
general fund.
Uh, to assist with the testing,
the horses after their races in
FY 24, this agency utilized
$54,0837 of our general fund to
do testing because we didn't
have enough uh generated by the
wagering going on in the state
and FY 25, more than likely
we're gonna also need to use
general fund money, and that
takes away from other programs
we have.
FY 26 recommendation of uh with
the LFC has appears to cut into
the contracts at the rate of
$98,200.
And that could reduce our
ability to conduct testing
because we uh need
veterinarians, and we need the
money to test. So if we're short
there, which we've been dipping
into that. We're gets us a
little concerned.
And ultimately I think that's
lack of testing money is gonna
start affecting our performance
measures, um, and that's one
thing that we've been proud of
hitting on our performance
measures.
So why the decrease in revenue,
this is a sad state of affairs,
the horse racing is facing
across America, not just in New
Mexico.
Uh, the lack of horses being
bred, and I'll, I have some
numbers that I'll.
Talk to you in a minute. It's an
expensive endeavor. It's uh
traditionally called the sport
of kings.
Um, reality says that a lot of
people have been enjoying
participating in the sport, but
the expenses to own racehorses
and care for them is gone up
exponentially, and it is now
Uh, attrition's taking over
Horsemen, owners, they don't
want to deal with horses cause
it's costly to maintain them. So
it, it's slowly returning to
being the sport of kings once
again.
And so many people are getting
out of the industry, and if
there's a lack of product,
meaning horses, um, that will
lead to a reduction in race
days, you have to have the
horses to make the industry go
forward. So it's equivalent to
the horses or the gas, the
industry is the car. If you
don't have the, the horses to
make that car go. This industry
starts uh failing, uh, race days
get reduced, uh, when I came to
New Mexico in 200016, I believe.
We had approximately 280 some
race days. Now it's down to 187
race days per year. So that's
That causes a lot of problems
within the industry.
There's also a decrease in uh
the per mutual tax to the state,
that revenue is decreasing as
well, because there's less
racing.
Going on and less money being
wagered on the races.
Um, also, there's a lot of
restricted races or depending
upon New Mexico bred horses in
more abundance now than ever,
uh, and that's not necessarily a
bad thing, but um,
People from other states do not
want to come to New Mexico with
their horses because all these
races are restricted to horses
breed just here in New Mexico,
so they're not eligible to run
in those races, so the
opportunities are, are very
limited. So we're not attracting
horses from other jurisdictions
such as Arizona or Texas or
Oklahoma to, to run here with
the exception of the big races,
uh, but on a day in day basis,
um, they're just not here, that
they're actually going different
places. So that's sad to see. So
it's a
shop mentality, and it's
affecting this industry. Uh, we
need competition. Horse racing
is based on the spirit of
competition. You need people to
come here from other places to,
to race. Uh, another issue, uh,
as what, why we're declining in
our revenues is the uh a
decrease in import simulcast
signals, um, horsemen's groups
and other jurisdictions around
the country have made the
decision not to send their
signals, just like the Kentucky
Derby, the biggest race on in
the world. New Mexicans were not
allowed to bet on that race.
Last year, and it appears that
we're headed towards the same
direction. So upwards of
probably 8 or 9 different
jurisdictions have
Have a held their signals from
coming into New Mexico. So our
people here in New Mexico cannot
bet on these races, so that.
causes revenue to decline as
well.
Uh, the implementation of HSA,
you know, a lot of people don't
like the federal oversight. So,
uh, in my charts here, I wish
you could see him, uh, for
example, in 2018, the number of
thoroughbreds that uh had
started in New Mexico as 11,094
in 2024, that number declined to
5,487, whereas quarter horses in
2018, 9,934. Uh, there were,
that's how many horses started
in 2024, 9,891. So quarter
horse.
has remained fairly healthy and
flat, and that's a good thing.
But the Thoroughbred product is
declining rapidly and
traditionally people bet on
thoroughbreds more than they do
on uh quarter horses.
The necessity of vets. This is
very, very important to this
agency, uh, the FY 26
recommendation.
Uh, has the agency vets working
181 race days, which is not
completely accurate, uh, vets
just don't work on race days.
They have a lot of other duties
they do on their days, what
would be considered non-race
days. They have to, um,
Or horses off the vet's list of
the horses injured, they've got
to uh examine the horse before
the horse could return to the
racing population.
In FY 24, when uh we hired our
vets, uh, one that worked 2160.
5 hours, uh, and one that worked
1,147 hours. They do a lot more
hours than we do as a, I think
per year, an average uh state
employee does 2080 hours of
work. So these vets in short
period of time, mind you, these
did not, these vets did not work
year round, so they put in a lot
of hours, sometimes 1314 hours a
day.
Uh
Mhm
The the vet hours, like I said,
uh, they work way more than we
do. I hate to say that, but they
do have a very, very important
job.
And um I want to go back to the,
the numbers on the horses being
bred cause this is a
significant.
Reading is where is ground zero
for horse racing. If people are
not breeding horses to race.
Horse racing doesn't have the
necessity they need to have good
products. Uh, in 1990 for
Thoroughbreds this comes from
the Jockey Club fact but there's
the breed registry. In North
America, there were 44,143
thoroughbreds fold in this
country. It's a good number.
That was in racing's heyday.
There's plenty of horses in
2023, that number has declined
to 18,500 horses.
And for the state of New Mexico
on a economic impact study by
the University of New Mexico in
2022, uh, full bread declined in
New Mexico by 51%.
Between 2008 and 2016.
Since 2016, at another 31%
decline. People are just not
breeding horses. We've got a big
big problem having a
Horse flesh to put on the show.
So, um
Uh, not only do we have Dovex
employees as a veterinarians
working for us, we use.
Contract debts as well because,
um, you know,
salaries that Spo gives for vets
is 700 to $80,000 a year. We're
currently paying our vets
$220,000 a year.
Just to attract that because
there is a shortage of vets
around the whole country, and
everyone's fighting for the
veterinarians.
So the summary of how do we fix
this, uh, a cut in the FY 26
contractual category of
flexibility to continue testing
aggressively as the equinetes
one revenue continues to
decline. It gives cheaters an
opportunity to manipulate races
with illegal drugs and testing
course and less testing of
horses, so, uh, as I mentioned
before, cornerstone of our
regulation is drug testing these
horses to make sure everyone's
playing the game level and fair.
The lack of additional funding
for vets jeopardizes the health
of the equine athletes. We need
them to advocate for these
animals. That's, that's first
and foremost in our book. We
need people to watch over these
horses.
The agency performance measures
could be effected as soon as
next fiscal year with a decline
in testing, uh, and they had a
competition test that we do will
decline as well because we're
just not going to have the
revenue. Uh, currently we're
testing one horse per race.
That's well before our well
below our performance measures
of 4. So that's a reduction of
50% in our testing.
We're just living with the
reality of not having the money
at this point in time. So I
close with this agency
respectfully request the
committee to consider, uh,
providing funding in the
contracts that we had lost and
on the LFC proposal of $908,200
you know, that that would go a
long way for this small agency,
so I appreciate your time. Thank
you so much, and I stand for any
questions.
Great. Thank you for your
presentation. Our first question
is from Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
There were some races ran on
Labor Day, including the
all-American and uh I, I hear
that they hadn't been paid out.
What is the, what is the, you
know, is there a bump? Was there
a
Uh
Um
Photo finished, uh, what, what,
what's going on there? What
happened with
But those races, are, are they
paid out now?
Madam Chair Representative
Chatfield, members of the
committee.
A very good question. That's
some the minds of every reporter
in the racing industry in
America, um, the agencies been
part of an investigation that's
ongoing, and I believe it's
coming to its conclusion here
probably in the next 72 hours
the time couldn't be perfect,
uh, for this, um, we're hoping
to have the results back from
our laboratory that's been doing
some very extensive testing.
And uh hopefully we'll have the
Mount, who's being investigated?
Of participants of the race when
I say investigation, it's merely
a deep dive analysis into the
samples to ensure that the
horses didn't compete with
illicit drugs and then that
enhance their performance. So
there were 3 races on the same
day that are being investigated
on multiple races, more than 33.
Yes, sir. OK.
Uh
Second question, New Mexico
Horsemen's Association.
What's the status there with?
I know there are a long standing
group that I, I grew up around
the racetrack when I was a kid
and.
Yeah, Horseman's used to.
Used to be a big part of, of
racing, what's happening with
the, with those guys. Well,
Madam Chair representative
Chatfield, members of the
committee, uh, Horsemen are
still represented by groups at
each racetrack. The interstate
Horse Racing Act states that uh
the people, the group of
horsemen that sign off on export
signals in order for uh New
Mexico to send their races to
other jurisdictions.
Uh, it has to be approved by the
Horseman's group that represents
a majority of the horsemen.
Uh, these tracts and Horsemen
have developed their own.
groups that are signing off on
that.
And as far as the New Mexico
Horsemen's Association, I'm not
sure where they stand with
their, their group. I, I know
they're uh
One of their board members just
got indicted in Louisiana, uh,
for a multiple federal charges,
uh, running an insurance scam.
Um,
Other than that
They don't contact us, it
doesn't feel like they have a
whole lot of play in the
industry right now, but we deal
day to day with horsemen, the
hardworking horsemen of this
state, they're still getting
their service they need from the
racing commission. They call us,
we give them answers. We're
public servants, so we're there
for the horsemen still. Just the
leadership of the New Mexico
Horsemen's Association. I really
can't answer where they're at
because uh we've had no
discussions with them recently.
Madam Chair, who represents the
horseman?
At Riodoso.
And at Sunland Park.
Madam Chair, represented
Chatfield, members of the
committee, uh, they have a
committee, as I mentioned, I
don't know the names exactly,
but uh I believe I did see where
they signed off on the approval
to export the races of Riosa to
other jurisdictions. Madam
Chair, is it the same committee
or is it two different
committees? It's my
understanding that uh it changes
at each racetrack pursuant to
the interstate Horseracing Act.
It's for each specific race
meat, not just New Mexico. So
there could be different groups
that represent the Horseman
because
redo, so you get a lot of
Oklahomans in Texas that come in
and at
Sunland Park, you don't have
that. So there could be
different committees or groups
of horsemen that represent the
horsemen at that specific race
meet.
The chair, do we still have the
New Mexico grown, uh,
Added money for horses that were
born and raised in New Mexico.
They're running on our tracks
today.
Madam Chair Representative
Chatfield, the members of the
committee, the answer to that is
yes, and it's a good program
that uh we
See is a good potential for
growth in that program.
Thank you, Madam Chair. You
know, Madam Chair, I like fast
horses.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Next
is Representative Baca.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for your, uh, presentation.
I've got two questions, uh,
Madam Chair.
I, I, we're talking about the
testing, right? We talk about
the testing of the hair testing
that we are, that you have kind
of uh referred to. My, my
question, Mountains, this is
about.
Not with the validity, but the,
the reliability of those tests.
In other words, as opposed to I
guess the other blood tests that
we're taking.
Because when we talk about it,
we, we hear all the time.
About, you know,
People that are cut quarters, so
can you please briefly talk
about the reliability of the
hair test as opposed to the
other tests that have been used
in the past.
Madam Chair Representative Baca,
members of the committee. Yeah,
I'm, I'm not necessarily a
chemist, but I know some basics,
um, we utilize hair testing
because um
It doesn't indicate that the
horse had the performance and
had enhancing substance at the
time of the race, but what hair
testing does is that allows us
approximately 6 month window of
a horse, just like if we are two
Olympic athletes, and I'm using
steroids leading up to the
Olympics, and I'm getting bigger
and bigger and bigger, and
you're training naturally, and
then uh come a near Olympic
time, I get off the steroids.
And I'm tested after the event,
I win, but you could win if you
want,
but I get tested.
I'm gonna be clean. You get
tested, you're gonna be clean,
but I reap the benefits of
performance enhancing drugs,
because I was training on them,
and that's the same thing with
horses, so that 6 month window,
they were, were the hair gives
us.
is great at seeing which horses
have been utilizing uh illicit
beta agonists or growth hormones
prior to racing is when we test
it after the race, we test for
blood and urine, and that just
gives you a snapshot of what
happened in the last 14 days.
Hair testing gives us a snapshot
of what happened in the last 6
months.
Thank you, Madam Cha, and uh, so
let me just, regarding the
testing, is every horse tested
after every race or you, I know
you'd said earlier you've
mentioned in your, in your
presentation. Is it every horse,
is it one horse per race? What
is that?
percentage of horses because I
mean it would seem that if we're
looking for
You know, keeping our, those
athletes safe and the horses. I
mean, we've seen that there has
been a rise of injuries to to
horse racing. There's been so is
every horse tested after each
race or is it a section or a
sample of horses that are
tested.
Madam Chair Representative Baca,
members of the committee, um,
pursuant to the rules and then
Mac the, it's up to the
steward's discretion to test, to
decide which horses get tested
per race, so.
To pinpoint uh the answers. The
winner always gets tested. And
right now, currently, that's
what we're doing. Yes, we do
have times where we'll test
other horses, um, because our
limited funding and uh Ms.
Trujillo will not let me expand
our testing budget for for good
reason, uh.
You know, we pick our spots
where we can test more, uh, for
trial races, sometimes we could
send 6 horses per race, but
very, very rare that every horse
in a race is tested.
Traditionally top 2 or 3.
Thank you, Madam chair. And, and
the other um part of your
testimony that I heard was the
decrease in the number of days
of racing, OK? I will say as a
kid, I remember coming up to
Santa Fe Downs, and with my
grandparents to, to go to the
races.
Right when I was right out of
college, I worked at the uh as
far as down the Ridos and Downs,
and I was serving drinks in the
jockey club, to be honest with
you, uh, but they pay good
money, right? Um.
But I guess the question is,
In seriousness of you, you
talked about the number of days
decreased, I mean it, I think
the number you said was
somewhere around 17, 5, 176. My
question is, what did it used to
be and what
If anything, does that tie into
the Rainos that we have uh
attached those race tracks.
Madam Chair, Representative
Baca, members of the committee.
It's an interesting question. I
don't know how it
First off,
I believe in 2016 we had
approximately 285 days of
racing.
2025, we have scheduled 187 days
of racing. So that's a reduction
of over 100 days of racing.
Which
That's big. Um,
Some would argue that how it
would affect the, the casinos is
that traditionally rule of thumb
is when you have live racing and
people are coming to the
racetrack to watch live horse
racing.
That
Those people will naturally
gravitate to the casino after
the races are over and play slot
machines.
Um, the
Exact increases or decreases. I
don't know exactly, but uh
there's traditionally a lift
when you have live racing, uh,
there's a lift in the casino
play, which enhances the purse
structures. So they're, they're,
Mr. Maur there's no um
correlation between having races
in the casino being open, so in
other words, you're saying and
I, I, I would imagine that going
to horse race and going to
racing afterwards, but I'm
clocking more about.
If we have a span of times where
a race isn't being run, let's
say at
Riodoso or let's say Downs of
Albuquerque, does that have an
impact?
On the ability of a uh Raino to
stay open.
Well, um,
I don't know how to answer that
question exactly. I, you know.
Obviously, the casinos get play
and we're not fearful of them
shutting down, lack of horse
racing, I don't think would play
a role in the casinos coming
into a significant shortfall,
uh, you know, the, the net take
on these casinos for purses over
the last good handful of years
has been a, a very, very
consistent flat rate,
approximately $250 million of
which um versus get 20%.
So it, it's been a steady eddy
for us. I, I, I don't think that
that has really
Exploited itself at all when
there's no racing.
Well, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you and just like Jack
Trapfield, I think that the
horse racing industry has been a
part of uh our culture and the
way we've done things for many
years, I would like us to
continue to support that and uh
I, I, I do appreciate the, the
answers that you've provided.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, sir. Thank you,
Representative. Next is
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Just, uh, uh, um, just, just
trying to get more information
on the economy or the future of,
of
Horse racing in New Mexico.
Um,
In, in the community of, of
Ratone is, uh, do, is there any,
um, planned
Uh, uh, um.
Facilities there, I'm, uh, I'm
sorry, let me take a step back,
uh,
I, I had previously had read an
article.
About, uh, the, the community of
Ratone, either developing one or
building upon one, so I'm, I'm
trying to understand more um
about like, you know, cause I
understand that you're saying
that that there's a slowdown of
it, but, um, like in my county,
the Sun Ra.
Um, uh, Downs, um, you know,
it's, it's, it's been pretty,
pretty well attended. The, the,
the attendance.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Hernandez,
members of the committee.
Ratone at one point in time was
selected for the 6th racing
license, a good handful of years
ago.
Uh, it's probably been a little
over a decade ago.
Unfortunately, that project
could not get off the ground.
Uh, I, I guess funding became an
issue for the person that was
awarded.
that license. Um, so at this
point in time, I, I can say that
uh
truly believe there are
absolutely no plans for a racing
facility in Ratton, New Mexico.
that concludes my questions.
Pettigrew.
Thank you, Chairman, and uh I
apologize for missing the
presentation.
They do have a question chairman
with respect to comment uh.
Made with respect to no racing
versus
and casino take.
Versus racing and casino take.
So I would be curious and you
may not have this answer.
Right now
But when we didn't have racing
at the Redosa Downs because of
the floods.
I'm curious, what's the monthly
casino take?
Look like
Without racing.
During its normal months.
Versus what it actually was this
last year.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Pettigrew, members of the
committee, you know, that, I
think the situation that played
out in Rioso this summer, uh,
without having racing there.
Um
It showed a reduction at
Redoso's casino, not not only
because there was no horse
racing there, but
A lot of the townspeople were
busy.
figuring out what to do in life,
uh, I don't think playing a slot
machine was necessarily a
strategy number one, to make
money to rebuild. So, uh, their
casino did see a decline over
there through the natural
recourse of people just having
their minds on something else in
the racetrack not being open and
having to shut down and open,
shut down and open. So, uh, I,
I, I think there would be a
reduction in that type of
scenario, and that's what we
saw.
Determined, I, I appreciate the
answer.
I have the details on my
computer, but I don't have them
with me cause I know the answer
to the question.
And the majority of the casino
take.
There and at the end of the
mountain gods comes from the
influx of tourists coming to the
horse races.
It is not the local economy that
does that, don't get me wrong,
the local economy tends to go to
the end of the mountain gods
before they go to the, to the
race track for, for uh casino.
stuff
So
I think
Sure.
Your comment may be
Not more, maybe a lot more than
just a little bit off with
respect to that. If we don't
have horse racing in a normal
time frame where we have tourism
that comes in for the horse
racing and stays for the casino
later. I think that number's
pretty significant.
Chairman, I'll get that number
and I'll share, but uh at the
end of the day, it is what it
is. It was just a comment that
kind of threw me off.
Um
Cause the, the data supports
something different than that.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Nixon,
Representative Sanches. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I just want to
mention I'm a huge supporter of
uh horse racing, a lot of horse
racing fans in northern New
Mexico also.
Horse owners, um, you mentioned
something earlier that I, I
just, I was just curious about
uh this is um
You talked about not getting
people from other states to
bring horses.
I'm wondering, uh, do we not
have enough uh horses to fill
the races, are we not getting
enough entry fees.
What's, what's the, the big
concern with uh New Mexico
races.
Madam Tara.
Mr. Sanchez, members of the
committee.
Um
New Mexico breads have these
races called restricted races
that are restricted races which
only if a horse is bred here in
New Mexico and registered it
only those horses can.
So
If you have 10 races on a race
card.
And 3 of them are 4 horses, 3 or
4 of them are New Mexico breads,
and there's only 3 opportunities
for people from other
jurisdictions that want to run
what we call open horses. It
cannot run in these restricted
races, you're limiting
Opportunities for people to come
and compete in New Mexico. So
what I mentioned was it's a
closed shop mentality.
So it's great for people that
breed in New Mexico breads. It's
great, but
It could lead to the product
declining, and that's what I saw
when I was in West Virginia,
same, same thing, I just relive
in the same issue, uh, 15 years
later, but the same thing
occurred over there, the closed
shop mentality, they didn't want
anyone coming into West Virginia
to run in the races, so people
stop coming. They made it
difficult to go in there. Ra
days were reduced from 235 days
a year to 165 days a year. So
we're seeing the same thing.
Play out here, so it'd be nice
if we could do something about
that and uh grow this industry
rather than see it continuously
contract every year.
His Madam Chair, uh, so is that
affecting our bottom line? Do
you see if we, we're bringing in
more out of state horses, how
would that uh increase revenues
for our state.
If you brought in horses from
other states, we would.
Probably see the field size
increase, uh, that's field size
is what I mean average horses
that run per race.
Um, that's been a little bit on
the decline with the
Thoroughbreds this year, I think
at the most recently concluded
Zia Park race meet. They
declined over a horse and a half
per race. So if you multiply
that by the number of races run
at that race meet and the money
that would have been bet on that
horse and a half. That's a
decline in per mutual tax to the
state and a decline to our
equine test fund and just uh
assign that horse racing is not
as healthy as it should be.
That's all I have, ma'am sure.
And again, thank you for your
presentation. I'll take my
advice,
Madam move the LFC.
a second
in the.
Alright, um,
I'll accept the LFC
recommendation, any opposition
to the motion.
No, right, move a dope on the
LFC recommendation. Thank you
guys so much.
Thank you.
All right, that's it.
Thank you guys for Madam Chair,
yes, I, I just have a, a, a
question, uh.
I just don't know. Are we gonna,
are we gonna talk about?
These directives from the
federal government and how
that's going to affect our
budgets because I think that's
the elephant in the room, you
know, I, I have 4.
I have 4 federally qualified
health clinics in my district. I
believe uh represent small
chairman Small is going to be
talking about that we're gonna,
are we, are we gonna have a
briefing on that or is the LFC,
is everybody gonna get together
and kind of give us some news on
that or opinions. Yes, so, um,
the tentative breakout in
subcommittee.
Just at least give you an update
on how we're tracking things um
in partnership with the
executive.
the plan right now.
We'll update your genre or the
Thank you.
It
You.
Yeah
Yeah.
Oh
OK.
They, they invited
Thank you for your help.
Thank you for your help
today.
