To date with regard to our
production houses, interest. You
shouldn't have a couple of
presentations in front of you,
and they're up here on the
screen as well
as a hard copy of the
presentation that you will see
on the screen and then another
one is just a two pager here
that can give some information
anybody
little bit. Uh
So
Going to the next page. Uh, you
know about unification. I want
too much time here other than
the state housing agencies
address for continuum of
housing, uh, all the way from
programs to help those that are
homeless shelter all the way
home ownership, the income
limits and we serve ranged from
sometimes no income can come all
the way up to moderate income
people in the workforce for
hundreds like
Teachers, firefighters and
policemen, everything in between
those
Teachers, firefighters and
policemen. Everything in between
zero to my friend from workforce
housing.
The next like it just gives you
a quick picture of our
production for 2023. We do run
on our fiscal year is from
October to the end of September.
These are that you'll see in
front of you here
highlighted here. We're able to
serve just under 19,000
households last year.
Oh, he produced over 3700
financial preserved
And we have over 40 program
statewide. One of the things
that is not on their bodies on
this sheet here that we have a
network of over 30 or 350
apartments process that helps us
to deliver services at the local
level. Uh and we're very glad to
have the best partners. They are
the ones that make a successful
Um, you will see there's on the
preserve and improving existing
affordable housing for
development. There's over 1500
minutes, their home ownership
and wealth over a few of those
two numbers of just over 4700
families were assisted in
creating
health and environment is a lot
of promises programs over 12,000
individuals in that category.
Next play goes into the housing
trust.
Um, as you know, this program is
a trust fund has existed since
2005 with an initial investment
of $10 million. So in the 17
year existence of the front, we
have only received $27
Million.20 21. There's some gaps
in their years. 17 years 19
years we received funding
Eight of those years we did not
receive any funding.
And aside from the $15 million
initial investment, the funding
ranges from 0 to $3 million and
I'm very happy to report that
all of those friends $61 million
in 2023. We have been 100%
obligated allocated during
covered, Um and I'll give you an
update on the recurring funding
budget this year here in a
little bit.
That included by the way they
are up $39 Million allocated two
year period between the special
session in 21 and up to 23 $39
million and all of that has been
fully comfort as well.
The next like you're a little
bit of a breakdown in three
different categories, if you
will, from a housing development
ownership and then rehab
relationship, So the $61 million
just doesn't exclude the
recovering funding that we just
received in July. We were able
to $156 million
For, uh, 61 leverage ratio that
president pointed itself
requires that we leverage 3 to 1
suppose you can consider we're
exceeding requirements
significantly, you'll see on the
total number of music you have
all the problems there if you
were
For, uh, 61 leverage ratio that
president pointed itself
requires that we leverage 3 to 1
suppose you can consider we're
exceeding requirements
significantly, you'll see on the
total number of music. You have
all the problems there if you
will, probably different areas
System over 6500 households with
that funding.
It's next talks about the
current abuses of the $37
million. We received $37.5
million. This is the first
country if you will of funding
that we're seeing from the
recurring funds, but I am happy
to report that the board has
allocated to activities. Uh, $37
million allocated to those five
different activities that you
see on the left hand side.
So that payment assistance first
mortgages, single family
emergency preparedness, and many
have family acquisition really
have and then open single family
development 100% of that has
been allocated about we've
actually issued procurement
documents noticed in
availability or requests for
proposals. 90% of those funds,
the only ones that have not been
procurement is 3.4.
Million dollars on the first
morning affordable
Homeownership along purchased.
We are looking at going back to
the state Finance report to
reallocate that $3.4 million to
one of the other categories, so
90% has been procured for and
we've actually awarded awards
have contracts with 48% of those
funds you'll see on the right
hand side apologize little
small.
You'll see there. The very next
activities if you will have some
of these are activities that you
see on the left hand side there.
So that gives you some
all of the funds can operate
100% devil
activities. 90%. We have
procurement documents for and
48% actually awarded two
entities we do expect here up.
You know, we've just had this
money available to us for six
months. We have been aware of
similar applications or have
inquired about some of these
funding. We expect with them
within the next three months.
Whatever about some additional
applications coming in and
invest majority of funds are
allocated.
Development. You know it takes
the White House once we've
awarded the funds, the
expenditures, little catch up,
So we started to see something
expenditures quickly and
probably want to see it
Development 36 different at
least start being in the next 3
to 6 months,
13 expenditures pick up
The next slide, talking about
the houses the needs of the
state. You are all very aware
we've mentioned in other
occasions
put together a 19 member
advisory committee that helped
us put together the housing plan
for the state that we have
available period. There's also
you are coping on this street
towards the back that will take
you directly to that document to
you.
The 19 members were from the
continuum of housing interview
wealth from homeless providers
of representation of the way up
to home ownership, and some
local and tribal governments
were represented there as well.
The plan outlined the need the
resources available the gaps and
strategies to address those
gaps.
Quality is not blood inclusion
in the slides there I'll go
over. Some highlights Some of
the needs that service from that
study. There's a shortage of
over 32,000 rental homes or
apartments if you love for no
income individuals, there's a
shortage of over 24,000 single
family homes for homeownership.
There's an estimated 350,000
homes that need rehab or whether
it
was built in 1980. We have some
solid data that shows that
there's over 40,000 homes in the
state that complete kitchens or
plumbing the majority of those
in colonial tribal land.
Um
There's also the house
on the right hand next light
little bit about the impact of
the programs that we want to
thank you for the allocation
responded as if it has allowed
us to do more production side
were able to replicate the funds
for down payment assistance. Uh
2.5 months period. We allocated
$8 million 100 families
subsidies and
just recently, we're going to be
a shooting originally allocated
and maybe the lenders are aware,
but I believe at the end of this
week we'll have another $5.5
million for assistance that will
be used in the same way.
Presentation and redevelopment
of for the first time since I've
been here for a long time, we
have exceeded the amount of 4%
intellectual productivity bond
cap application to the state.
Those are used to develop.
Um, rental units Process state.
They're one of the biggest
subsidies for the first time in
over 30 years. That amount has
been fully educated and over
subscribed in the housing trust
fund is going to fill that gap
and be able to assist those
developments out there.
Mentioned in the home ownership
side, some of the things that
we're doing and also allowed us
to do create some new programs.
I mentioned a couple of them for
you out what we call the robot
program, which is restoring our
communities program that allows
entities to go and purchase,
abandoned or closed times.
Rehab for yourself, and we know
there's a lot of those across
the state. I think the account
that we had with our study 1000
homes around the criteria. I'm
happy to report that this is a
lot of those across the state. I
think the account that we had
with our study 1000 homes around
the criteria. I'm happy to
report that this is not the
criteria. I'm happy to report
that this is a notice of
availability within the last
three months, and we have to
service providers that have been
identified already and have a
pipeline of homes and we are
very tough, fuller.
Look for a few more years across
the state to do that, Um
another, uh, programs that we
recently launched the Housing
innovations program is a program
that
we have different programs.
There are some needs out there
that aren't addressed within
those 40 programs or needs that
don't fit neatly within the
parameters of those 40 programs.
So this housing innovation
program is a program where
somebody if there's a housing
needs, that is an addressed by
those 40 various programs. They
can come to us identify that
need and will award him some
funds.
We've had some good success with
that, and awarded $5 million
last year actually $3 million
last year, and we have $5
million available this year for
that.
The next slide. I just, uh
Tells you a little bit about
our legislative agenda for this
coming year. We have two bills
that were endorsed by our
legislative oversight committee
that some of you sit on the
first one is Senator Rodriguez
is carrying the bill for $500
million to the Housing Trust
fund.
And then we also have the
affordable housing Act. M F A
has been, uh the oversight or
has a responsibility of
overseeing the Affordable
Housing act. We are requesting
500 million or I'm sorry,
$500,000 for this, uh, oversight
responsibility or intent is to
assist the local government to
be able to donate towards
affordable housing.
To date and you'll see on the
back of this flyer here gives
you a little bit of details on
the housing Trust fund and then
also the Affordable Housing Act.
To date. We have 37
participating entities or local
governments that have donated
$98 million since the existence
of the fund.
Unfortunately, out of those 37
entities that have donated the
$98 million that composes
roughly about a dozen of those
37 entities or intent with his
money is to assist those other
entities that may not have the
capacity to help them with the
capacity, provide some training
and technical assistance to get
them to the stage where they can
also be able to donate donate
funds and then also encourage
other local governments that
don't have
Housing plans or ordinances to
to do the same.
So, Mr Chairman with that that
concludes my presentation and
I'll take any questions that you
are. The members may have. Thank
you very much, Mr Hernandez. And
thank you truly, for the sort of
the interactive nature really is
very helpful. And so we'll go
straight and, yeah, impressive
numbers straight to questions.
First. We're gonna go to
representative
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Uh, Mr Chair, one of the things
I think about when I think about
housing is when I drive down the
street here in Santa Fe, I see
all those homeless people don't
have a house.
Most of them house is not going
to cure their problem. They need
a house They need, uh, services.
They need counseling. They need
a lot of other things to go with
it.
Ah, the other thing that I see
in our state.
And I know you talked about some
of these things.
Is the
Elderly.
That
Needy there either home to go to
or
Uh, repairs and improvement on
the home. They have
So my question is
Hello. Do you interface with
aging and long term services
department? And how do you
interface with some of these
efforts?
To clean up.
Are homeless problem. Do you
work with these agencies? Do you
How do you house? How do you
tackle that problem? Or do you
worry about it? Thank you, Mr
Chairman and representative
Chatfield. Yes, We definitely
do, uh, interact with those
agencies and they are something
that's within our mission. So
I'll give you a couple of
examples on each of those with
regard to the elderly. The
programs that we have for rehab.
Um
Definitely assist those
individuals that are elderly and
one age in place and haven't
been able to maintain their home
or may need to put some grab
bars in. There are ramps. We
have a program that does that we
recently made an award to the
man I forget the exact name of
the agency. Maybe Robin can help
me here in the back, but it was
the
Uh, New Mexico ramps. I believe
we awarded him some money is
under the housing innovation and
there. I think it was
Uh, $500,000, and they're going
to be building ramps for seniors
across the state. We also
recently made an award to the
agency, the New Mexico that
North Central Economic
Development District and they
have some money for families or
think they oversee the agency on
aging or some funding.
So they have some funding to
able to be able to assist them
with that as well. So I'll tell
you that
Or rehab program is one of the
most impactful programs that we
have at the in the organization
in the most grateful people when
they receive that assistance, so
we have a total of about 12
partners across the state that
do rehab and another three
agencies that do weatherization,
which is something that makes
the homes energy efficient for a
lot of these seniors as well.
With regard to the homeless
population in the needs out
there we have over 25 entities
across the state that worked
with the homeless.
Unfortunately, as as you
mentioned, it's not just the
housing or the shelter that they
need. They need a lot of
supportive services, one of the
best models that we've seen out
there that has worked well and
we funded. Some of these
developments is permanent,
supportive housing.
Where they not only provide the
shelter, but they have 24 hour
supportive services there within
the housing there, providing as
well we there's a complex if you
will or housing community done
in Las Cruces Desert Hope
there's one in Albuquerque with
Hope works, and there's another
one that we're funding. It's at
the very beginning stages.
Also in so coral that is going
to be providing supermen
chairman. Uh
What are what suggestions do you
have for this body of what we
can do?
To put some more of these folks.
In the in the home in a shelter
and to what do we need to do to
help?
Resolve this problem of
homelessness when I when I go
Down Syria's road. It's just, uh
People in you don't want to turn
off some of those side streets.
It's It's a real problem for our
state, and, uh
Is there something something
that we can do?
Two.
Alleviate that problem.
Mr Chairman and representative
Chatfield. I'm glad that you
asked. I think it is a difficult
problem to solve. It won't get
solved overnight. Those
scenarios or these programs that
worked very well. The permanent
supportive housing that housing
is actually significantly more
expensive than just building a
traditional apartment if you
will, for the different design
standards that they need to have
in them.
Ah, so more money for that is
something that would be very
helpful. So supporting the
Senator Rodriguez's Housing
Trust fund bill, which the body
has been very supportive of in
the past. I think we would be
very grateful for your support
there, and it will just allow us
to do more of those permanent
supportive housing where it has
a services embedded within the
shelter that's been provided. So
so Mr Chairman, Senator
Rodriguez.
Fund deals exclusively with what
we're talking about about the
homeless problem, Mr Chairman
and representative Chad Field,
It is one of the activities that
is eligible under that it is not
exclusive to funding just a
homeless that gives us uh, it
also funds uh, you know,
accessibility and rehab for
seniors that allows us to
develop housing both rental and,
uh,
And single family, So a lot of
different uses is a flexible
fund, but definitely the
homeless situation and building
permanent supportive housing is
one of those those activities
that is eligible. You, Mr
Chairman.
Thank you very much for episode
Chatfield. Next, we're going to
go to representing Montoya, then
Reps. F Herndon.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Mr. Hernandez, Um
Over the last two years. Um, the
The indigent population in the
states grown dramatically.
And several of the
Partners that MFK partners with
that provide, uh
Shelter services or temporary
housing.
Have come to, um, the M F a
committee and given
presentations and
During that time I've had an
opportunity, Mr Chair to ask
several questions of of those
partners.
And
As
As we've seen the crisis just
grow.
Um, the partners that we have
Generally are unable
To deal with the total.
Problem.
Um, we're dealing with with
mental health and addiction.
In particular.
And so, so, Mr Chair.
The issues that have been before
us have been
These nonprofits that are
generally in place across the
state that the state has
Relied on
Um
To make sure that that their
communities are safe. They don't
allow drugs to be present.
And obviously, folks who are
prone to violent outbursts or or
things like that.
Um
Are not allowed.
In these in these facilities.
So I've seen. Obviously the
governor has her eye on
Trying to fix this problem.
But this issue doesn't seem to
be an issue of housing.
It appears.
That the problem is
The people who need housing.
Are unwilling to take advantage
of
The shelters that that are there
periodically they'll go to them.
They can get a
He'll get cleaned up.
Uh, but in general
It's it's kind of a choice to
not go to those facilities.
So to follow up on
representative chat Fields
question It does appear as if
A different model is needed to
deal specifically with that
problem.
Um and Mr Chair. I've heard of
some other legislation.
Uh, based on Houston model and
based on the Miami model have
both been discussed.
But part of that's going to
require something that we just
don't want to do.
And that that appears that that
that that
What has to be done. There is
Ah, we're going to have to
potentially when we're dealing
with mental health issues.
What we're dealing with.
Severe drug issues that that are
becoming either a public
Um, safety concern or a public
nuisance at
Particularly the Miami model has
what is called
Uh, if forced incarceration.
Element that is drug treatment.
Unfortunately, the discussion
that we have has been almost all
around housing as if the problem
is
Not enough houses. And I think,
Mr Chair
We do have a housing problem. We
have a legitimate housing
problem that we have to deal
with, especially low income.
Or or let's say worker housing.
And I and I just, uh I am
hopeful that we're able to parse
the issue and address
everything.
That needs to be addressed.
So here's the question, Mr
Chair. Um, Mr Hernandez.
I've seen that the money that
comes in T m F a
Obviously has a very good match
of 16 to 1.
Match.
Um, some of that federal
dollars. Some of it is grants.
Um, but
That's impressive. What's more
impressive is the
The dollars that do not sit
there we've had we had Secretary
from the EFTA in here earlier.
Today, we were talking to him a
little bit. He had to feel some
questions about why they're
having a hard time getting
money, even though it's supposed
to be allocated. Why are we not
getting it allocated to doesn't
seem to have that problem.
So, Mr Chair and
Mr Hernandez.
Um
If we're truly wanting to deal
with the homeless portion of the
equation that needs to happen.
And all of these dollars are
going out.
Um and you're increasing the
size of your staff. You
relocating to a new area.
What budget increase.
Is a reasonable increase that
would actually help the housing.
Problem in New Mexico to housing
portion of the problem. The rent
rental units
And the affordable housing the
assistance with down payment.
What is a reasonable amount when
seeing an amount from the
governor?
But
It's like a bunch of spaghetti
being thrown up against the wall
and see what sticks.
Rather than doing that if we
were to target
The housing section.
What
What request or what? What? What
should we be thinking about Mr
Hernandez?
Mr Chairman and representative
Montoya that, uh,
A very difficult question, so
I'll do my best to address that.
I will tell you that that the
need is tremendous based off of
our housing study here in all of
the needs, if you add up all of
the units that would need rehab
or need to be developed. I think
we came up with a number of $42
billion
Um so that the need is different
than what the capacity is to put
those units on the ground. I
would say that, uh, you know,
it's gonna take some time to
meet all of those needs. I would
say a reasonable amount that we
could reasonably realistically
say that on an annual basis, we
could expend those funds with
the capacity that we have out
there with the 300 plus partners
that we have
Um
You know, I would say maybe in
the 80 to $100 million on an
annual basis, the $500 million
that you'll see on the
legislation that
They are oversight committee
endorsed and that Senator
Rodriguez will be putting forth
We were envisioning that it
would take us if we were
Successful in getting that $500
million that it would take us
anywhere from 7 to 8 years. I'm
sorry, 58 years to to put that
money to work and get heavy, all
encumbered and expended so it
would take some time but just
based on the capacity not only
of the partners that we have out
there, there's also labor force
issues that I'm sure you're
aware of.
Supply chain issues so
Realistically between maybe 80
to $100 million on an annual
basis that we could commit to
actually getting out the door.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and I
appreciate that, Mr Hernandez to
give us what you've always given
us and MF a committee.
Is reasonable expectations.
Um and I and I appreciate that
because we take that money out,
and instead of using it for
Roads and infrastructure, which
will help a lot of folks. Um,
I'm concerned about just
encumbering that especially in
something that's untested.
So, uh And I appreciate that.
If we put a
80 to $100 Million and M F a
That it's going to see a very
similar leverage.
As to what you're already doing.
So the multiplier effect is what
I just can't get over is if
we're going to
I wish we could do that in every
one of our departments is to
have a 16 to 1 leverage.
Um, if we could do that are we
wouldn't be talking about
Uh, departments being
underfunded. So thank you, Mr
Chair.
Next. We have representation in
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and, um
Thank you very much, Mr
Presenter for being here today,
So I I just need some client.
I'm asking some clarification
questions first, with respect to
the 500,000 If I understood that
The question of the amount
correctly regarding the
affordable housing act in the
oversight over that, I think
that the based upon the
information that was presented
by your office that an
affordable house is one that is
not around 30% of what a
person's
Growth income is if I have that
definition correctly, and so
people are making $15 an hour.
And that's going to be a very
low amounts that would be
available for housing. So does
this affordable housing act
helped them and getting, uh,
affordable housing that is
comfortable and safe for their
families.
Chairman and representative
Herndon, the $500,000 that we
are requesting for the
Affordable Housing act would not
be direct assistance to the
To the people that may be
looking to buy a house. This
would be assistance that we
would we would use that money to
provide training and technical
assistance to the local
governments that currently have
affordable housing plans in
ordinances in place to help them
put their plan to work and be
able to donate either land,
different infrastructure.
Buildings or funding towards
affordable housing. Um so that
would be the purpose of that
$500,000 is to help the local
governments put their housing
plans in Orleans to work if you
will and be able to donate
towards that, and then also
assist. Uh, additional local
governments that may want to put
those plans in place is help
them with that that process.
Thank you and Mr Chair and Mr
Presenter with respect to the
definition of an affordable
house, you're helping cities and
counties and other organizations
put their plans into place. Do
they understand the definition
of an affordable house in terms
of making it available to people
who might need it in our state?
Mr Chairman and representative
Herndon. A, uh, part of the
requirements for these, uh,
current 37 local governments
that do have plans in place they
are definitely aware of the
affordable house if you will.
The definition normally that HUD
uses is that somebody doesn't
use more than 30% of their
income towards housing.
Uh, so they are aware of that
and the housing plans that we
review at M F A. In the
ordinances that gets into us for
review as well before they are
adopted. Make sure that they
kind of identifying and know
what that requirement is. I will
say that are the affordable, Uh,
moderate income definition that,
um FA had
For many years was 120% of the
area. Median income we quickly
came to realize over the last
couple of years that somebody
with 120% of the area median
income, uh in a lot of areas of
the state was not able to
qualify for a median priced
house. So our oversight
committee with the support of a
lot of you around the table.
Redefined moderate income to go
up to 150% of the area Median
income, which now enables many
of the individuals out there to
be able to use our programs in
qualify, uh and it went further
in to give us some flexibility
for those high cost areas like
Santa Fe towels and read also in
Los Alamos to increase that
further.
Ah so that a medium priced home
could be afforded.
Thank you and Mr Chair, and Mr
presented just one last question
with respect to the rock program
and those 12,000 homes that are
available for remodeling.
When those houses are remodeled
in any way are they made
available to people who would
fall within that affordable
housing range? Could you explain
what happens after they remodel
them?
Mr Chairman and representative
Herndon. That is the requirement
of the rock program is that when
these houses get a acquired
rehab and sold that they be sold
to somebody in the low to
moderate income range, so they
definitely become available to
those individuals, Uh and
they're placed on the market so
they'll market them through that
Realtors.
Put them on the MLS, so folks
are fully aware there are some
entities, one of which you may
be very familiar with home wise,
who's participated in our
program before with other
funding that they actually have
a pipeline of individuals that
are filled with fit within that
category that they've already
counseled in our pre qualified
to go into these homes once they
are
Fully completed.
All right. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. Mr Presented. Thank
you very much. Representative
Herndon. Next we have
represented Alison and then
representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you for the presentation,
Mr Hernandez.
My first question is do the
residents of Indian nations
qualify for all the services
that you mentioned?
Often times when we hear
agencies present before us, it
seems that the urban population
benefits more from the services
than the rural people. So my
first question is with residents
of Indian nations qualify.
For the services that you
mentioned.
Mr Chairman and representative
Ellison. Absolutely. Yes. And if
you'd like, I can give you a
couple of examples.
Mr Chairman and representative
Allyson So San Felipe that you
are very familiar with. They are
happen to be the highest user of
our rehab program. They've been
very successful at doing that.
So Mr Isaac Pet is there is a
great partner, some Felipe
housing authority with him, FA
and they use our programs. We
have some examples and
Santo Domingo Oh of a comma here
recently. Uh, there's a
development that's going up in
Mescalero. So we have tribal
partners that use not only our
rehab program, but also our
multi family development
program. And here recently, we
actually made an award. I'm
gonna forget the name of the
agency to specifically focus on
providing
Whether ization and energy
efficiency services on tribal
land. I believe red feather,
maybe the name of the
organization that's doing that.
So we have some, uh, some
commitments on tribal land, and
there's a huge need out there so
hopefully we can do more and
more on tribal lands.
Okay. Thanks for that, Mr Chair.
Um my second question is
First of all start with a
comment.
A lot of my constituents in my
district. They live in mobile
homes and these mobile homes
were bought in border towns or
Albuquerque and other larger
cities.
And they moved him to the
reservations. Often times I have
heard that
People that were asking for
funds for
Rehabilitation or modernization
were denied because they were
told when you moved your laying
off of state land onto the
reservations. You became
disqualified or not eligible. So
what is your answer to that? Um
The mobile homes that were like
I said were bought in border
towns and state taxes and all
kinds of taxes was paid on them.
So why are they
All they don't qualify for
modernization funds.
Mr Chairman and representative
Allyson
I'm not sure which agency they
are going to. I can tell you
under the program manufactured
homes, whether they're on tribal
land or not, or eligible to
receive rehab and re
modernization we have found in
in some areas where the
manufactured home or the mobile
home is sold, and maybe it
doesn't make sense to rehab it
so sometimes that that's taken
away in a new mobile home is
used to replace the
Ah!
Existing mobile home if it's in
really bad condition, and it
would make more sense to replace
it with a new one.
Okay. Thank you for that. Mr
Tear. My third question is a few
years ago quite a number of
years ago.
There was some
Never whole families that were
displaced from the Hopi
reservation under what was
called the Bennett Free, Zack.
A few of those residents were
moved into my subdivision.
And the Navajo Nation and the
government bought homes for
them.
But they were not told anything
about paying property taxes.
So some of those residents are
now behind and property taxes or
Homeowner Organization of fees.
What assistance can you give
them or do they qualify for any
other assistance like, uh, with
down payments on other houses or
affordable mortgages?
What services? Do you recommend
that they seek it. And what is
the contact number who should be
Contact. Should they have any
questions relative to that?
Mr Speaker.
Mr Truman and Representative
Allyson? Uh, I don't know if my
contact information is on the
back of one of these pages here.
Maybe it is they can call me
directly and I'll make sure that
they get to the person that is
the expert on the program. I
will tell you that.
With regard to folks or families
and maybe behind on their Texas.
We currently have a program that
it's close to running out of
money. The Homeownership
assistance fund, There was
actually some federal money that
came to faith through the FAA to
help folks that fell behind on
their mortgages or their Texas
due to Covid.
So why would I don't know that
they would exactly qualify and
need to look at the
qualifications for that program.
Robbins telling me that they may
so if you can please give me a
call, and we can see if we can
assist those families and
getting caught up with their
taxes with regard to, uh, first
time Homebuyers are folks
needing down payment assistance.
Please have them call that
number as well and we can assist
them. We definitely have
programs to assist and one of
the things that we're actually
going to our board for your
board meeting next week. Uh,
There's a 184 heard 184 loan
that's specific to making loans
on tribal land. Uh, it's a loan
that isn't made very often
because it's very cumbersome
requires a lot of documentations
of what we're doing is we are
offering an additional 1% feet
to lenders that are use that
mortgage to help out tribal
members.
There are so with our board's
approval will be offering some
additional moneys and incentives
to give more lenders
participating lenders to be able
to use that loan product.
Thank you for that. Mr Hernandez
and Mr Chair, Mr Hernandez, I
think
In the next year. You and I are
going to get to know one another
very personally. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Mr Chairman,
Representative Allyson. I look
forward to that excellent
represent Garrett and then
representative. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Um, It's good to hear this
follow up because I'm sitting
there I remembering that
moderate income and Santa phase
143,000, which is interesting
question on the housing trust
fund. So since it's a trust
fund, how much do you anticipate
being available?
Uh, each year, at least
initially, Mr Chairman and
representative Garrett, Uh, the
The recurring funding that's
coming into the trust funder
This year was $37.5 million. I
think this committee would know
better than I, but I think the
estimate for next year is like
$39 million and then maybe it
starts going down a little bit
After that. That's 2.5% of the
severance tax bond capacity that
is coming directly to the
The fund. I will say that the
way we some of these monies that
we use our loans that are non
advertising allowance that don't
generate a whole lot of program
income, And then there's others
that do generate program income.
I think over the life of the
program we've generated about
$40 million in program income,
and I see that
With the new servants tax money
coming in the first couple of
years as we're getting it off
the ground and allocating some
of these funds, there won't be a
whole lot of repayments made
that I believe in years. Three.
Robin, we're looking at, uh,
starting to generate some
significant program income in
the ballpark about 10 to $12
million. So in addition to the
2.5% that we get which will be
I'll say in the Ballpark of a
$37 million in a couple of
years, will be adding another.
10 quote, million dollars. On
top of that So ballpark about 50
million a year if you will, uh,
that excludes any success we may
have with the additional
funding. Um, that will be coming
to the Legislature with this
year in the potentially in
future years. Thank you and Mr
Chair. My second question is
So that trusted money. Can it be
used and applied for by
individuals, or does does it
have to be entities who are
providing the services that you
listed?
Mr Chairman and representative
Garrett the way we are currently
structured. It's actually
entities, one of those 350
partners that we have across the
state that deliver at the local
level, but we generally do not
contract directly with that
individuals. Okay, Thank you.
And my final question That is, I
know that housing is the big
thing that everybody's talking
about.
Leo Albuquerque is housing
Collaborative. I think they're
looking for 50 million, so
Um, I'm multiplying that across
the state, and it seems that
first like a lot of money, But
it actually isn't is it
The
500 million. Mr Chairman and
representative Garrett to it
does sound like a lot and it
would be for you and I, but when
it comes to trying to address
the housing need, which we
estimated about $42 billion that
$500 million doesn't go very
far. Thank you address the
problem, but it doesn't solve
it. Okay. Thank you very much.
That's it. Thank you.
Representing Garrett,
representing the ham, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Director for being
here with us today. Um
And
Everything you've done
throughout the interim. I just
have a couple of questions as
I'm looking at the executive
budget recommendations and then
what has been mentioned through,
Um
What you have you have put
before us without five regarding
the $500 million for statewide
housing initiatives. How is
that?
Is that is that the same bill or
initiative that we're looking
at? The same monies were looking
at Mr Chair, Mr Truman and
Representative Lou Hana. Uh,
they they are separate request
the request that we have before
you. The 500 million is
something that was endorsed by
our legislative oversight
Committee and the bill that
Senator Rodriguez will be
carrying out
They just happen to coincide
with the the executives Budget
recommendation for housing, Mr
Sheriff, if you could. Could you
tell us the differences and why
those are two separate $500
million requests, Mr Chairman
and representative Luana. I
guess at the end they could be
blended and they could be the
award that comes to M F a will
obviously be used for the
Housing trust fund. I think
that's that's what they have in
common is that
They would both go to the
housing Trust fund. Um, the
difference. I'm not sure the
from the
The executives budget
recommendation. Uh, I think
comes the housing piece of it, I
think is related to the governor
put together a housing
investment committee or council
and these are part of the
recommendations that are coming
from that council. But they are
separate. If you will from the
Oversight committee that we have
and what they decided to
endorse. Thank you, Mr Chair. I
was on the oversight of voting
member that day for the
oversight committee and and did
vote to endorse this. This piece
of legislation. Um
But my my concern is that we
have to
Really big amounts of money that
we're looking at. How were you
Did Mr term? Sorry. Did you
serve on that council, Mr Chair?
Mr Chairman and representative
Luhan? Yes. I was a member of
the governor's housing
investment counsel. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Um and so
From from those recommendations
that they know about this other
piece of legislation I'm trying
to. We're going to this is going
to end up here in this
committee, so we need some
clarification points. Mr. Chair,
Mr Chairman and Representative
Luhan. We didn't did not
specifically in the housing
investment counsel did not
specifically talk about the
recommendations or the
endorsements that would be
coming from our oversight
committee. Thank you, Mr Chair.
I appreciate that, Um
Okay, I'll probably have some
other questions that I'm going
to move on to another question.
I'm looking at the Opportunity
Enterprise Review Board request
from N M F a
Um
And
My question is
And looking over this
information. There were seven
requests projects that were
prioritized and I guess seven of
them in one, maybe not making it
through the process.
And us only using
A fraction of the $70 million
that we appropriate to this
fund. My understanding is when
we set up this fund, it was to
be used for really big projects.
And so it looks like it's being
baby. Those big. It's part of
the reason why we're not seeing
those really big projects to
utilize a lot of this money or
these big amounts of money.
Is the reason why you're asking
for these amendments, Mr Chair.
Mr Chairman and representative
Luana. I am going to actually
the
That Enterprise Opportunity Fund
or Opportunity Enterprise fund
is not managed by M. FA. It's
managed by the Finance
Authority, so I think, Miss Miss
Russell may be able to address
that a little bit better than I.
I will tell you that there's a
significant need for housing and
the infrastructure that goes
that needs to be made available
to open up some new
subdivisions. If you will is a
Something that is a very
expensive and something that I
believe maybe the Enterprise
fund it could assist with and in
the future, But it's not
something that I would be able
to give you a whole lot of
details on the applications and,
uh what that fund may be able to
address just going to ask this
question to prep. Um, an M F A
when they're in front of us.
So what we're looking at here is
$500 Million being asked from
the executive for Housing $500
million from um and endorsed
piece of legislation with
Senator Rodriguez and then
another.
Change in this this fun for more
housing. Is that correct? Mr
Chair?
And I'd like to know, like like,
I'm just this is a compound
thing, And I know that housing
is really expensive, but these
are really big amounts of money,
and I just want to kind of get
my head wrapped around what
we're dealing with for the
session. Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Mr Chairman and representative
Luana. I believe you are
definitely are correct. There's
the $500 million endorsed by our
oversight committee that Senator
Rodriguez will be, uh,
sponsoring that bill, and then
there are under the executives
budget recommendations. There's
another 500 million for housing,
And I believe 500 million for
the
Enterprise fund.
Okay, That's that's just a
really a really significant
amount of our budget. Mr Chair
that I think we need some
further explanation and what's
going on there and how we're
going to remedy or come together
and bring everyone together to
find a happy balance? Um, my
last question, Mr Chair for the
sake of time.
Is regarding, Um
With some of this new language
and new things that we're doing,
um, mobile homes.
Initiative, I guess for for lack
of a better word.
In using funding for that. What?
What are we projecting for
growth or what is it? The funny
that we're looking for? For that
project specifically with mobile
home used, Um
Purchasing 10. Can you just
elaborate on that Mr Chair?
Mr Chairman and representative
Luana.
I don't have an exact number for
you. We like the flexibility of
the housing Trust fund and that
we can put money in different
activities if you will to help
us address the need. Um, I would
envision, uh, I'll tell you that
currently under our home
ownership program about 12% of
our funding, uh, which would
equate to
We do about 2000 so shy of 200
loans a year or for manufactured
homes, So that is something that
we're currently doing, and I see
us with the additional funding
being able to provide additional
subsidies to do that, and maybe
incentivize more lenders, uh, to
do more manufactured housing as
well. And I see this as a
Definitely It's not going to fix
the whole problem. But in some
rural areas that may be the only
affordable housing that's
available as a labor shortages
exist across the state. Thank
you, Mr Chair. I really do
appreciate that. And I just
wanted to be cognizant of that.
Because if we see this as a way
of growing and looking at
affordable housing in that area,
especially in a rural
communities I'd like us to like.
Maybe there's some policy that
needs to be accompanied with
that, because of the landowners
that that opted owned the land,
And then these if we build these
communities, so to speak with
these types of affordable
housing units being mobile
homes and what that all looks
like, and I think this is
something really significant and
getting to some of the questions
that I'm hearing.
From other members about
What is the significance and and
how we're building out? You know
this affordable housing? Um
Issue that we have in using
policy to really enforce good
things to come for those who
really need it. Thank you, Mr
Chair. I do appreciate the time.
Okay, that I think concludes the
questions that we have, as
you've heard from the committee,
Mr Hernandez. There'll be a lot
of focus, and I think really
support from this committee to
help bring the executive M F A
and perhaps other entities
together. Um, but very much
appreciate your work, and the
clarity was excellent.
Okay.
There we go.
All right. Good afternoon, Mr
Chairman and members of the
committee. It's a pleasure to be
before you, um, have been asked
today to speak about a couple of
programs operated by the Finance
Authority. Some of you know us
pretty well. Others of you have
less experience with us. So I'm
going to give a little bit of an
overview of the Finance
Authority a very brief one and
then touch upon the programs
that you asked us to.
Talk about today as well as just
a few others that I think might
be of interest to you today. Can
you hear me? Well enough. I
can't tell. Absolutely. Yeah,
The closer the better, but I
think
Yep. Okay. Perfect. Volume is
usually not my alright just to
remind you all. Um and I'm
speaking both from this
presentation that has been
handed out to you. Should you
want to doodle or something? The
Finance authority isn't, a broad
based finance agency. We were
made in the, uh
In the form of the M F A, which
was quite successful, so we were
developed to do everything but
housing because M F A had done
it quite so well. We have an 11
member board. Um it is currently
chaired by Kathy Keith. Um, who
many of you may know she used to
be in state government 20 or 15
years ago and is currently the
director of partnerships,
community partnerships with
Landel.
I'll also note that since I last
spoke to many of you, we've had
a new addition to our board.
Teresa Costantini aides who is
the senior vice president for U.
N. M, has joined our board as a
early December.
Our primary purpose is to fund
economic and community
development projects through
infrastructure and building.
And we are currently overseen by
a 32 member, Um, oversight
committee That's chaired by
representative Garrett and vice
chaired by Senator Michael
Padilla.
Um so a couple of the things
that I would just note the
Finance Authority has known for
a couple of programs pretty
well, But in the last five
years, you've added nine
programs to the N M F A nine
programs, all of which are
dealing really with economic and
community development to be
quite clear, and it represents
more than a half a billion
dollars of funding that has come
through.
The Finance Authority or is
currently going through the
finance Authority so you can see
starting at the pandemic. We had
no change in programs between
2011 and 2021. And those are
fiscal years. So in June of
2020, you added the first of the
recovery programs that were
ultimately 31 of which isn't
even listed here because we did
it as a joint as a
Um, sort of as a service to D F
A. So it wasn't a statutory
program that was authorized, but
it was $100 million in federal
funding that went out to small
businesses. So about a half a
billion dollars in the last five
years of for
Primarily businesses in New
Mexico. Um most of our program
levels are driven solely by
funding levels, so our activity
comes up and down, based on
program balances we have as
you'll note here, a couple of
programs that have what I'll
call predictable levels of
funding. That is to say that
we'll see, um annual cycles,
Whether those dollars go up and
down. We know that annually
we're going to receive money
from to the water Project fund
to the Colonias Infrastructure
Fund.
To the federally funded drinking
water State Revolving loan fund.
so those infrastructure programs
have a predictable level of
funding. What does not have a
predictable level of funding or
the things that we found for
businesses and community
development that comes usually
through one time. Appropriations
is what we have found, as well
as high levels of federal
dollars.
So about 95% of the funding that
we have used to date outside of
the pandemic related activities,
um, have been federally funded
so business and community
development programming through
New Mexico Finance Authority,
with the exception of the
recovery dollars 95% of it has
been federal funding.
So we have been a vehicle to get
federal dollars into New Mexico
communities.
One more preface, and then I'll
go into the programs. You've
asked me to talk about. Um, and
that is
I lied to more pro. Two more.
Two more sheets. Um then the
impact from the finance
authorities. Perspective is one
of growth. We have basically
doubled in size, since, uh, 2019
when I took over as the CEO of
the Finance Authority again,
primarily related to the growth
of the program activity,
starting with the recovery
funds. It required us to bring
on a great deal of new
technology.
Recovery funds, primarily those
that are directed towards small
business was a great opportunity
for fraud. And so we had to
bring on a bunch of technology
in order to help mitigate fraud
and to help increase efficiency
and reduce errors that could be
made that technology has then
been re allocated to other
programs within the Finance
Authority, making each one of
them stronger than they were
before.
Um, so we've increased our
investments in technology and
security we've brought on we've
dedicated staff internally to
bring all of these disparate
systems together for a better
Both user experience from our
client level, as well as lower
levels of potential errors
within the finance Authority.
We've redone our work charts
several times because we've had
to grow. So significantly. Um
and then we've reached We've
redone all of our standard
operating procedures and
policies to keep pace with the
new programs that we've
operated.
Um, from fiscal year 2020 again.
When I took over a CEO, there
were 39 bodies in the building
were now budgeted for 71. And
I'm asking for an increase for
as part of our midyear budget to
73 at the end of January, and
our budget has grown from $8.5
million to $19.8 million. We're
in the midst of building of
facility in midtown Santa Fe to
house all of the people that we
currently have operating there.
Um and I will spend two seconds
just talking about the public
Project Revolving fund, which is
the flagship program of the
enemy. If a we are the A is the
house that PPR F built and PPR F
was solely built by the
government, aggress receipts tax
and some prudent lending that
came as a result of that, so
your communities
Uh, your local governments
access the public project
revolving fund for very low
cost loans. Uh, for
Equipment. A lot of fire truck
loans have been made for 0% when
we do water projects, a lot of
road projects any sort of local
government project we do. A lot
of school bonds. We purchased a
number of school bonds at 0%
interest rate.
That all happens through the
public project revolving fund
because we have the stream of
revenue that comes in from the
government, Aggressive receipts
tax were able to go out and
leverage that significantly
through bond issuances, allowing
us to do easily 200 to $300
million a year based on demand.
So it is a program that is not
capacity. Constrained. Um,
generally speaking.
One of the things that we did
and that we're in the process of
doing for fiscal year, 24 is to
expand that bonding program
again to utilize the full
capacity that's given to it so
that we're able to do more
transactions. Some that didn't
have real homes at the Finance
Authority before so projects
that were authorized.
Since 2009 but really happened
had a home are things like
public improvement Districts
charter schools, things like
that, where they've just not fit
our regular program. We've been
able to extended a little for,
So let me just start about the
opportunity Enterprise. I think
that's the first program. You
asked me to talk about, Um, what
I will note in a month page H
myself there.
Um, that was created in 2022,
The Opportunity Enterprise Act
creates a board that the Finance
Authority administers, and it
creates a fund within the
finance authority that we make
loans from projects recommended
by that board, So it's very
similar to the setup that we
have for water trust board and
colonias Infrastructure Board
where you have sort of a subject
matter. Expert board.
Sift through the projects and
make recommendations. And then
we get the the projects and
underwrite them and those that
meet our underwriting criteria
were able to make the loans is
outlined.
Um, we have had one
Program one application cycle to
date that will touch on in a
minute. Um, but here's your
board is currently chaired by
Joe Far, who is with Duke City
commercial in Albuquerque, and
vice chair is Jennifer Garcia
Kozlowski from Las Cruces. She's
part of the downtown Las Cruces
partnership. Um, many of these
members are
And I think the first
Three of them, um, are
First. I'm sorry. The first four
listed on this page are all, um,
appointed by Legislative
Council.
And the rest of them are ex
officio members.
The policies that the board uses
in order to prioritize. These
applications are listed on the
right hand side there. This is
the more revised version, the
Opportunity Enterprise board
very carefully on, unfortunately
did to get to representative
Luhansk question very carefully
chose to do a smaller
application the first time
around. They wanted to make
certain that the policies that
they had established
We're working the way they
intended to. And so did they get
what they expected. So a limited
amount of the funding about 25%
was made available through the
first round of application. The
board then went back and looked
at its policies to determine
whether or not the they were
doing what they hoped it would.
They actually did make an
adjustment and they put more
Emphasis on projects located in
rural communities. They thought
that that the an additional five
points there would be very
helpful. So the criteria you see
here has project location of 15
points and that is an additional
five points from the first time
around. Their hope was to get
more rural projects and they
were expecting to see
A greater representation from
rural New Mexico and so on Page
10. The first round of
applications, which ran from
June 7th to July 31st. We saw 33
complete applications totaling
about $136 million. I would note
that very little outreach was
able to be done. There was such
pent up demand that we put that
application out immediately.
And had some significant
interest in the program. The
average request was $4.2
million. That's not the average
size of the project. But the
average request because what we
saw was in some instances, just
a portion of the amount needed
to complete the project. So some
of them, um applied for full
amount of funding, and some were
just for let's say 15 or 20%.
So the amount of the
applications varied
significantly, both based on the
size of the project and whether
they were looking for full
funding.
A team of six staff members.
three from an M F A and three
from the Economic Development
Department reviewed those and
they prioritize them and
pursuant to policy projects that
right that received at least an
average of 60 points and were
determined to be moderately
ready that is that they could
proceed within six months are
then placed on a priority list
and sent to the Finance
Authority.
The top project was one that was
actually $17.5 million. And so
that took a couple of months for
us to get through. Ultimately,
that project got bypassed and is
no longer in consideration for
the opportunity Enterprise Fund
is looking at another enemy of a
program because the timing for
that project they couldn't
complete it within the six month
period.
And so they were now moving on
to the next. There's five more
projects, so two of the seven
actually ended up going to other
Mmf A programs and the other
five are still under current
consideration. So we're working
through those last five
applications. Um, as we embark
on the the new opening of the
application around which begins
January 16th through March 1st
We anticipate all of the
remaining funds to be made
available in that round. So
again, they've tested the
policies. They think they
worked. But now how they should
have worked, and so we're now
ready to open up that
application around for the
remaining money is made
available. Um, I will turn you
to page 11 were just note that
once the projects get
prioritized and are sent over to
the Finance authority
We underwrite them, and we make
loans based on the following
terms. Um, we can't have any
loans of more than 25% loans
can't represent more than 25%
Let me try this again. The
portfolio can't have more than a
than 25% in anyone. County. I
got it.
We can't have more than 50% in
any single industry and we are
limiting applications to clients
one a year so one per round and
they can only received one lone
each year. So that is to say
that we don't want a developer
That's got seven projects to to
submit seven applications they
have to choose.
Their project that they think
will have the greatest impact
and apply for that project in
any given round, And then if
they're successful, they can
apply again the following year.
Um, so that is the way to limit
the amount of developers that
might take advantage of the
program because they've got the
money to to put the resources to
a grant, writer and application
writer.
Um, we have to determine before
we make a loan that funding is
insufficient or unavailable
Without the AARP's assistance.
We have to ensure that it the
project actually creates or
expands economic development
opportunities and otherwise
complies with state law and
federal law.
So the maximum loan a $17.5
million. The interest rate is
60% of prime and that's fixed at
the time that we make the loan.
So right now, Prime said about
8.5%, so just over 55.1% would
be today's interest rate.
Um, currently the loan the terms
pursuant to statute require that
they released 15 years.
And no more than 30. Now they
can be prepaid at any time. But
I can't make a loan currently of
less than 15 years.
Um and then our requirement for
collaterals, a minimum learned
the value of 80%, and we
required personal guarantees. Um
And minimum equity contribution.
Um, Mr Chairman. We have also
been asked by the Opportunity
Enterprise Board to make some
recommendations for their
consideration. They want to
endorse a proposal for you, Um,
for changes for the Opportunity
Enterprise Act. There are a
couple of them that relate to
the revolving fund itself. One
is that we'd like to clarify the
definition.
Of an Enterprise development
project currently virtually any
for profit or not for profit
business can apply. We believe
the fund was intended to create
new spaces for third party use
spec development if you will, Um
and so we'd like to see that
there be some exclusion for
owner occupied facilities or at
least not more than 50% be on
our occupied.
Again because there are funds
for owner occupied facilities.
There are no other funds
available for spec development,
not federally, not by the state.
So we would like to see this
fund. Um um, really hit the that
target.
We'd like to change the
definition of non urban from
communities of 40,002
communities of 60,000 that's
consistent with other economic
development department policies
and programs. And we think
consistency. There is a good
idea.
And we'd like to eliminate the
requirement that the loan be at
least 15 years. We have seen at
least in a couple of instances
where the loan could be paid off
sooner, which means that we
could replenish recycle those
funds into other projects
sooner.
So we'd like to see that taken
away.
Um, Additionally we have been
talking at the board level about
adding housing as a use of the
fund our proposal to the
Opportunity Enterprise board is
to create its own housing
development fund within the
opportunity Enterprises. Same
board would make recommendations
based on two different kinds of
projects.
One is commercial or or spec
development, and the other would
be for housing.
The housing would be, uh, would
be two components. One would be
infrastructure that's needed to
support affordable housing that
the kind of housing that um is
he was talking about those kinds
of things they can't do
infrastructure funding with
those dollars, But we could with
these dollars, so we would like
to recommend that you allow us
to use
Some of the Housing development
fund that's being proposed to
create the infrastructure so
that they can then come in and
do the vertical construction.
And then the second is to allow
for both infrastructure and
vertical construction of
workforce housing, something
that falls outside the limits
currently of what currently
funds So we're going is to
augment, um, and support. What
the, um the M F A does and not
in any way duplicate the
funding.
And then Lastly, we are
recommending that the executive
director replace the current
position that's held by the
state auditor. He's not been
able to attend anyway as he's
cited a conflict as he has to
audit the fund itself. So we
have a board member. That's
there. That unfortunately,
doesn't feel that they are able
to participate. And so we think
that would be a good replacement
right there.
Um okay. I have just a couple
more slides here. Mr Chairman. I
wanted to just touch base on the
venture Capital program, which
was again created in 22 with
significant amendments made in
the 2023 cycle.
Or legislation. It allows US
Finance authority to make
investments in both New Mexico
businesses and in funds.
Currently, we are only doing
private equity funds. We are not
making investments any direct
investments in businesses
themselves.
We've spent the last year and a
half, making some really
significant progress in the
development of that fund, um,
and have taken on the role of
administering some federal
dollars at the Economic
Development Department had
applied for and received for
venture capital. So they started
to venture capital program with
federal dollars prior to this
legislation being passed.
And at the point at which it got
passed, they realized it was
probably not a good idea to have
two agencies serving the same
kind of mission with venture
capital dollars, so they've
turned those dollars over to us
to manage on their behalf.
I mean, the most significantly,
We now have an investment policy
so that we can make this
investment recommendations.
It shows that all of our federal
funds those that were managing
on behalf of the Economic
Development Department must be
matched with private capital 1
to 1.
The state funds can be matched
70 cents on the dollar.
Um and again we're only doing
the private equity investments.
Um
You know, I would just note on
page 14 that one of the
amendments made in 2023 was to
allow us to do explicitly
differential rate investments.
That is to say that we can get a
lower rate of return on the
investment itself and get
economic development returns
instead. And so the our
investment policy lays out the
kinds of returns. In addition to
Economic returns that were able
to accept and we do score them
at the time that we make them so
that we can go back and find out
if indeed it made the kind of
impact that we were expecting.
Um we spent a great deal of time
in 22 and 23, working with both
the state investment counsel and
that the time the economic
development Department to ensure
that we were hitting
Different targets with these
dollars than what you already
saw with the S I C and at the
time with the Economic
Development Department, we
commissioned a report to find
out where the missing gaps were,
and we utilize that report not
only to target our own dollars
that were under investment under
this
The state funds the federal
funds but as well as additional
federal funds that have been
given to us and that was to look
at what they called no man's
land. Things that were greater
than micro lenders were able to
fund and loans that were too
small for most banks to make, so
there's someplace between
100,000 and about $450,000.
That's very, very difficult for
small businesses to access and
new Mexico is made up with the
small businesses that need that
kind of capital. So we've been
working to develop.
Help those funds internally.
And with venture capital
managers.
Um, this is that no man's land.
I'll tell you about. We have
been looking at this bottom
line this numac New Mexico
Capital option Capital options
for other industries, that
middle line their high growth we
believe are being currently met
pretty well with other venture
capital funds. So we wanted to
target things that we're both
with our loan dollars and our
investment dollars that were not
being targeted anyplace else.
So I was getting like six
programs to talk about something
zipping through these, um and
then so to date through just the
December board meeting. We've
made three investments so that
all happened. I think we
finalized our investment policy
in about July or August, and
we've now made three
investments. Um, one is a $10
million investment using our
state dollars to the New Mexico
Opportunity Fund, which is being
managed locally by Sun Mountain
Capital.
They will use both debt
instruments and venture capital
instruments to help meet the
targets that they're looking
for.
There's a $7 million investment
using federal funds to train way
partners, three that is a early
stage company. Um, are fun that
targets early stage companies in
medical, biotech and healthcare
sectors.
We did a $10 million investment
of we've approved a $10 million
investment into advance. New
Mexico That is a fund that's
being started by mission driven
finance specifically to hit the
targets that we just talked
about that no man's land. These
are going to be loans that we
don't expect would exceed
Prime plus
Four. So it be less costly than
like a seven A s B a loan. Um
and would have they would be, um
Unsecured debt Pretty much so
we'd be using venture debt
looking for things like event
driven transactions. If they've
got a big contract that they
need to get money for up front
and they know they're going to
get paid, you know, had to help
them get to those kinds of marks
unsecured for very small
businesses. Um, and we expect to
hit a significant
Have a significant portion of
that bey in those businesses
that we just talked about that
100 to $450,000.
Um, And then we have two other
projects. Uh, currently that
we're looking at the total about
$25 million and they are, uh,
focused on diverse founders
That's native and Latino
entrepreneurs as well as new
segments that were not currently
hitting, which include act
agriculture and broadband.
Um
And Mr Chairman. You didn't ask
about this, but I'm gonna tell
you anyway, one of the programs
that were monitored that we are
administering for the Economic
development Department, your
federal dollars through the
state Small business Credit
Initiative. That's the 15
million of venture capital, and
then we'll take on another $40
million that will be
administering through two
separate funds. One is to
participate with your banks.
It's a loan participation
program. Where, because their
federal dollars we can take a
second position behind the bank,
and they can therefore extend
more capital for the available
collateral business. May have we
did this program back in 2012
with the same federal dollars
very successful program. It was
greeted, um with open arms by
lenders back then, and we
anticipate that the same kind of
response this time.
And we're also looking at a
venture capital. I'm sorry
Capital Access program, which
allows us to use the federal
dollars to match basically loan
loss reserves in credit unions.
C D. F I s and banks for
projects that meet a certain,
uh, type. So for very small
businesses.
For underserved communities. We
also think that this will be
very successful again. $20
million will be spent their
those programs we expect to roll
out in the spring, and we're
incredibly excited because they
should hit that target that we
identified that no man's land.
Um
So in total that federal the
federal dollars which are
approximately $76 million, or
$74, Million.20 would go to a
program that operated currently
by the Economic Development
Department, 15 to the venture
capital Program 20 million to
our capital Access program and
then 20 million to our loan
participation so between the
Economic Development Department
And the N M F A. We're going to
have a broad set of new tools to
serve the smallest of businesses
in New Mexico, which I've never
been able to say in 23 years
working at the Finance
Authority.
Um, so that's our economic
development activities. I can
bring you over currently to the
water Trust board. I'll hit that
very quickly. Many of you know
that there's a 16 member water
trust boards been in existence
Now since 2001. They are able to
recommend projects that meet
five different project types.
They're they're written there on
the right hand side, but
basically 75% of the funds
coming for
Your water storage tanks and
pipes projects so most of the
money comes into drill a well
replace the water tank or put
new pipelines in replace the
pipelines. Um, there are two
sources of funds that go into
that one is the water trust fund
money. There's about 100 and
$37 Million is about the current
balance. Roughly 138 million.
In the trust fund. You added 100
million to that last year, which
is why it has a big number. Now,
um and, um a portion of that
gets peeled off annually and
sent over to the water Project
fund. We also receive an earmark
of severance tax bonds.
Currently, that earmark is 8.1%
and that also funds those
projects.
They've been pretty successful
to date. I would just note that
this is a lot of small numbers
and I apologize, but I'm going
to focus you on the project,
Starting from the pandemic down.
You'll note that prior to the
pandemic, only one project still
remains open. We've been able to
close most of them, but once you
get, um started it takes a while
for some of these, uh
Materials and things to come in,
so the pandemic slowed down a
number of these projects. We
also have had some slowing due
to some consent that we need to
get from the USDA if we're going
to make a loan to a client that
they already have a loan to that
currently has been taking
sometimes up to a year to get
that consent and has
significantly slowed down
progress and other
Yellow part indicates that we
have didn't fully allocate the
money in the year in which the
money became available because
we wanted it to be set aside for
any cost overruns for some of
the smallest clients who, as we
saw
Through no fault of their own.
We're seeing costs tremendous
cost increases, and they had no
capacity to backstop that so
some dollars went
Went into a set aside fund.
Certainly not enough to cover
what we've seen So far. We've
almost fully allocated the set
aside from 2021 most of our
projects in 2022. We're really
not in the point of having spent
a lot of money or gone out to
bed. So we're not really seeing
those yet in 2023 is entirely
too soon.
But you'll see here that we've
approved or awarded 528
projects more than 500 of them
are in awards, so that means
they can spend their dollars 94
are the numbers of open awards
that we have, and that includes
the 50 that we just made awards
on in the summer.
Um, we've spend it. We've spent
70% of the funds again,
including the 20 $23. If you go
pre 23, then we have spent 85%
of the dollars and completed 91%
of the projects.
What we see for this year Mr
Chairman is about $130 million
or so in funding for the
projects. There's $275 million
of requests. We saw an
unprecedented level of, uh
Requests from your cities.
We have not seen this level of
participation from cities before
20 cities applied for funding
and are and sit on your on your
authorization list that has been
endorsed by the New Mexico
Finance Authority Oversight
Committee. We have projects in
24 counties. Um, and as I said,
I, we usually do a handful of
cities and then he'd given year.
So that's what you'll see.
coming before you in the form of
an authorization bill.
And again, we'll have, um
More than enough projects for
the $130 million, even though
that's and then lastly, Mr
Chairman, um, Behavioral Health
Capital Fund Primary Care
Capital Fund, and I'll throw in
there for fun. The childcare
revolving loan funds are all
programs that we've had in place
for many years. Childcare
Revolving loan fund was created
in 2003, the Primary Capital
fund was
1995. So these things have been
around for quite some time.
They've received very little
money. But I've had some
significant impacts we've made
from the Net negative $900,000
appropriation 20 loans totalling
$13 million, the most of the
sweeps of that money came fairly
recently. So we were able to
really make some use of it early
on.
Um, but there was a $5 million
appropriation made back in 1995,
and we have just been re lending
those dollars. We have $0 left
in that fund.
Um, Behavior Health Capital
Fund. We've made six loans
totaling about 4.5 million
again. We had, um, that we have
not had sweeps in that
particular fund, but we don't
have money to lend in that
program. Um and the Childcare
Revolving loan fund initially
received 250,200 was swept for
solvency. We made one loan to an
amazing childcare provider and
Dona Ana.
In in Las Cruces, but it was a
$50,000 loan We know from
dealing with the early childhood
education and care department
that they have significant need
and a $10 million appropriation
would help us, um makes them
very low cost flexible loans to
the childcare providers so that
they can expand their services.
Mr Chairman, That is it. I
certainly happy to answer any
questions.
Thank you so much, Mr Russell.
It's really, uh, just no, not
sort of really, incredibly
impressive. The work that you've
done and your arrival. Uh, we
have a number of folks will
first go to breaking member
Armstrong. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. I'm exhausted from
hearing all the things you do.
Thank you. Um, I was curious, Um
How do people know?
About you and and all the
different things that you do.
How do you advertise it Best and
Howard the everyday average,
Joe? No.
Where'd it go? Mr Chairman, our
average Joe. Municipalities and
county see us quite a bit at
their conferences. We go out
into their communities. Those
again are the the funds for whom
we have the most predictable
levels of funding when we had
pandemic related with dollars,
you saw advertising both on
radio print Internet We were in
your social media accounts
during that time.
We don't have predictable levels
of funding anyplace else for us
to advertise. So we work
through, um, cards. We work
through associations that have
similar levels. We work through
our partner agencies to find
projects when we have dollars
available, but we have such
inconsistent levels of funding
for those programs that
advertising with just, um
perhaps
Put us in a position of not
being able to meet demand and,
you know
We've just had so few dollars to
the
The new programs that we're
rolling out. We're going to roll
out through the chambers of
commerce through the banks
through some associations and
then look, assess what kind of
support we need. But one of the
people I brought on when I first
took this job was a marketing
person so that we did have that
kind of outreach available.
Thank you for that. I just want
to make sure that people
understand where to where to get
help when they need it, Um, on
your on page three. I see active
with check marks and then funded
but I see annually like little
dotted zeros and an X and so I
don't know what that means.
Can you explain that? Yes,
Sorry. Um, so in that particular
instance um, we've as I
mentioned, we get inconsistent
levels of funding and the public
project revolving fund as long
as we have loans that are being
repaid. And right now I know we
have about $2 billion in loan
receivables. The vast majority
or from the public Project
revolving fund.
So we'll see loan dollars come
back in that are greater than
what's needed for our bonds. We
expect to have capacity there
forever the annual drinking
water water project funding
colonias. We get varying amounts
that come in so depending on
what the feds put out.
Um, check marks are those that
you know, we again have
consistent level of funding, but
I couldn't tell you necessarily
what that would be in any year
It's based on appropriations
that we make from that. You all
authorized us to make from the
PPR fo there And then the zeros
are those that are coming into
into that we're developing
currently, so they are for the
collateral support. That's that
loan participation program that
we use those federal dollars.
The new markets. Uh, small,
requires additional funding.
We've got an application
outlined there. Um, and the S S
B. C I capital Access program
again requires we've got the
loans of policies under
development Right now. The rules
have been approved by the
oversight committee. Now the
Treasury has done available.
And the X of the excess. We no
longer operate that program.
Okay. We had dollars available
under the Cannabis Micro Loan
Program Micro Business Program
We operated it really as a pilot
for about 15 months, maybe
almost a year and a half. We We,
um, stopped accepting
applications under that the
risks were higher than we were
comfortable with, Um, the cost
of developing a micro business
were much higher.
Um, that as a result of a lot of
activity.
So we have stopped making those
loans. Thank you for that. And
Mr Chair, and so it didn't get
transferred to somewhere else,
Or you just don't do it anymore,
Mr. Program get done away with
the Mr Chairman. That program is
on what I would expect to be
permanent pause, but certainly
pause until there's if there are
changes to zing and the industry
itself. We would take a second.
Look at it.
But it was an internally funded
program. Um, and it was not
explicitly authorized by law. It
was author. It was one of the
programs that we operated under
the statewide Economic
Development Finance Act. Okay,
thank you for that. I just I
just knew that the cannabis
Control division wanted to take
a pause on licenses, so I just
wanted to make sure we weren't
still funding.
Things to create more businesses
under that entity. The other
question I have, Mr Chairman is
Um, it was where you want to
make amendments to, Um um
To the maybe the upper
Opportunity Enterprise Act. Yes,
like 12 and, um
I think one of them. Oh, here it
is. Yes, The opportunity
Enterprise Review board
requested recommendations for
amendments. One of them has
changed definition of urban of
non urban
From communities of 40,000 to
60,000. What is it? What is it?
Is it 40 now? And they want to
make it to 60.
Okay. Mr Chairman. Yes, and the
Economic Development Department
already operates a lot of
programs that we wanted them to
have similar definitions. And so
we were making this
recommendation so that we align
the definitions of equal rural
New Mexico doesn't like it.
So I just wanted to say, you
know, I don't
I don't know. Maybe a population
of
You know, 2000 people and some
of my areas and so, um, changing
those definitions even at 40.
It's it doesn't really help many
of my communities, so I was just
curious about that. And Mr
Chairman, I should note that
frontier communities some of the
ones that you're describing get
the maximum number of points
under our policies. This
particular provision actually
doesn't deal with the
prioritization but allows
finance authority if we have to.
Projects that come over with the
exact same
Score.
It allows us to do to fund the
one that's in a non urban
community first, and that's
where that definition comes into
play. Okay, Thank you for those
answers. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you very much. Next. We
have represented Chatfield. Then
we'll go to represent Montoya.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
I'm sorry that I came in just a
little bit late. And you're
you're talking about a new
office and, uh, additional
Personnel which you will deserve
I I think every program created
by the Legislature.
We give it to the
Mexico Finance Authority Because
y'all do such a good job with
them.
And, uh,
I remember when you were still
Down in the wide where the world
separating that walked in and
gave a grant to I think it was
ago. Now you're over in a
building. It's very tiny.
Um
So what I missed was, Do you
have the funding better office
and police projects.
Mr Chairman. Thank you for that
question. So, yes, the board has
been very generous to allow us
to grow our budget to meet the
demands that are that these new
programs require in terms of set
up and operation. Um, what I
would say is that when we first
when I first moved into this
role, we realigned the way the
staff operates, and it used to
be funded by and staffed by
program. Dollar spiked, We would
have to either add staff and his
dollars dropped. We'd have to
figure out what to do with
staff.
Um, what we did was change it to
be organized by function. So
alone is alone. Grant is a
grant. We have the same people
that are you know whether a
credit analyst is looking at
credits they may specialize in
healthcare or water systems, but
our credit department doesn't
distinguish between private
credits and public credits.
So that's what we did, and that
allows us to scale so when we
have bursts of activity here
You know if if there's
versatility of of activity
across all programs, that's
problematic, but it does allow
us the periodic bursts of
funding so that we don't end up
being understaffed for these
programs. And I remember Mr
Chairman, when you all were
starting out. There was a
problem because of the
restrictions put on some of the
bonds and stuff. The
Several attacks. Bonds and stuff
is first finding your staff
So very happy that
That you have what you need. You
deserve. What you what? You need
something that I've stood. I
know that historically.
The water Trust.
Project fund has been funded by
4 million
Did I hear you say 2% did I hear
you say a different number of
minutes. Mr. Chairman, you did
only because 10% of all dollars
that come in to the water
Project fund currently then go
over to the state engineer and
then further to the
administrative office of the
courts for adjudication, so the
actual amount of severance tax
bonds that are dedicated to
water projects.
Is 8.1%. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much.
Representative Chatfield. Next,
we're going to represent him.
Montoya, then represent
pedigree.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Um um
Miss Russell.
Um
A couple of questions, two
different topics, but one being
the
Housing development Fund.
The second item that you
mentioned Workforce development.
Housing projects weakens, which
include both vertical
construction.
And infrastructure needed for
vertical construction. Could you
Elaborate on that just a little
bit. Certainly, Mr Chairman, So
I think you had a really good
presentation from the Mortgage
Finance authority about how far
their their, um
Programs can go in terms of
median income. We still think
that there is a portion of
housing that could help
communities that might be just
above what the mortgage Finance
Authority does. So we wanted
some flexibility to do what we
call middle income housing
that's yet to be defined. It
would be defined by rule but
would allow us to augment what's
Available for workers in your
community. Um
So that's what we're hoping to
get done with that, so a small
portion would be. We expect
vertical construction, but that
we expect from both the, um
The affordable infrastructure
fund portion of it and the
workforce development that a
large portion would be for
infrastructure. We are seeing
more and more public
infrastructure being developed
by private entities, and this
would be one way to really, um,
support that.
So thank you, Mr Chair. And Mr
Russell. Yeah. I was looking at
the infrastructure projects.
That obviously is something that
does not
Have anything to do with it, but
the second part is really
The same thing that they're
doing, except for higher income
than levels, Okay?
I'm just trying to figure out
what the difference is. So it's
the same thing they're doing.
Just
Mr above 150% of the median
local income, Correct. Okay.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, have a
couple of questions for you on
the, um
On the venture.
Capital. Um, so somebody comes
to, um
Get a loan for that.
It says in here.
Funds these fans are expected to
generate.
Differential rates of return.
Must demonstrate potential.
To generate commensurate
economic development impact. So
is that a
Is that a
Some sort of a an application.
Is there a, uh, business model
that must be presented? What is
that? Thank you, Mr Chairman. So
again, we are making investments
into fund managers who will then
use those dollars for a purpose
that includes economic
development returns. Um, and it
could be that they're
supporting a fledgling industry.
Or individuals that have
historically lacked access to
capital, But they'll have an
articulated they do have an
articulated target when they
apply to us for the venture
investment, But the the
investment is into the fund.
They're the ones who were
expecting to see the returns
from. So thank you for that fund
managers. Could you describe a
fund manager? Do they exist in
New Mexico now? Certainly. So,
um
The three fund managers that we
have made investments awards 21,
his son, Mountain capital. They
have done work with the state
investment Counsel Tramway
Partners, which is an
Albuquerque It's a woman owned
woman run, um, venture capital
firm. They do biotech, primarily
medical
And they are an existing firm in
New Mexico. The last one is new
to New Mexico. It was someone
that we that we sought out to
develop a program that hit that
target that are, um, that are
studies showed lacked.
Any, um
Focus, so we didn't see any
existing fund managers trying to
hit this exact focus, so we
engage them to develop a product
to hit that target. So mission
driven finance out of San Diego
is the fund manager, Mr Chair.
Um so
Um
These fund managers. How how
will people find them? That's I
mean
I thought they were coming this
board so the Finance Authority
will put on our website.
information about how to access
the dollars, um, that that folks
are have under management again.
There'll be matching the capital
with other investments so we
don't anticipate being the sole
investor in any one of these
funds.
And they'll have to match those
dollars so they will have their
own marketing strategy. That's
part of the consideration when
we make our investment is, how
are they going to reach the
targeted investments? The folks
that they say are gonna create
this?
Economic development return.
They have to tell us in advance
how that's going to happen, what
they expect to see and they will
have their own marketing
strategy. But if folks know
about our dollars, they can find
information when we start to
close. These funds will find the
information on our website. So
thank you, Um do you have an
example or
What these
Um, fund managers require
I mean, is there Is there
something that you could present
to us as legislators that shows
What is the minimum requirement
for someone seeking alone? I
mean, you know, I don't have
that today. But Mr Chairman,
that's something I can get back
to you as they start to develop
that in in the two instances of
the Sun Mountain capital and
mission driven finance. We are
there leading investor. They're
now going and getting the
matching capital from other
investors so that the fund is
bigger than what we're investing
in.
Um so that they're in that
process now and the point at
which they are fully raised
their capital. They're putting
out that kind of so they don't
have. They don't have those in
place now.
They don't have any of them. Mr.
Chairman, they do have them. I
don't have them available for
you now and then again when
they'll start marketing them is,
I think at the point at which
they raised their capital. Okay,
So are these in and just a quick
reminder to go through the Thank
you, Mr. Chair, Mr Chair and
Miss Russell.
Are the will These loans are
they ensured at all?
Or
Or is the taxpayer? The
So you got to one of these, Um,
look for one of these loans.
Are they? FBI C insured?
These loans. So, Mr Chairman, I
believe there are two different
programs that we might be
talking about. There are going
to be some debt instruments as
part of the venture capital
program and again I can get you
information on the requirements
by each fund. As that becomes
available, I'll make certain
that you have that information
and then we'll be taking on as
part of our management of the
federal dollars.
A capital Access program, which
really works as a loan loss
reserve.
And that's information that will
we expect to be able to roll
that program out in the spring
after we have Treasuries
approval on that, and and to the
extent that our dollars are
sitting in a bank, they will be
ensured until they move over
into the loan loss reserve and
they will likely exceed the
amount of the insurance at that
point. So thank you, Mr Chair.
Um
Miss Russell. What is the
request for this? Uh
Uh, this year for this venture
capital investment.
There is no request Mr Chairman
request this year so well, that
will be something that will get
before were asked to Mr
Chairman. Yes, I look forward to
that because I want to. I'm very
concerned that, uh, that
We have local community banks
that provide
Some of this If I'm wanting to
get a loan to
Put in a business or to expand
and just want to make sure that
we're not two things that I want
to make sure that we're not
doing one is that we're not in
competition with our
Banks that are in our
communities.
The second thing that I want to
make sure
That happens is that we
Don't get involved in in lending
that the taxpayer
Is ensuring
Um
And I know we want to
You know, specifically, I know
what we're looking at here.
Venture Capital and
That's very risky.
And I just the two things that I
want to make Sure before we put
money into this is that we're
not
Asking the taxpayer loans so so
as soon as you can get that
information
To this committee. I ain't got
anything very helpful. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you very
much. Represent Montoya. Next,
we're gonna go to represent
pedigree, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Miss Russell. For your
presentation. Um
Not going to belabor
represented. Montoya asked
several of my questions.
With respect to the venture
capital side.
Mr Chairman. I do have one when?
When Sun Mountain.
And tramway partners and then
mission driven financed.
Were selected What kind of
process
Did the state go through to
select them? Do you have the
records of that process?
Okay. So Mr Chairman, the son
Mountain capital in mission,
driven for net and finance were
selected before we engaged in
investment consultant. Um at
that time, we thought we might
be managing that program more
directly ourselves. So we did an
RFP for fund managers, and those
were the two that were selected
for a fund manager. We then
engaged global.
Investment consultant. Um, to
help us manage that program, and
we have them do the due
diligence to make certain that
they were meeting. Um all all
Prudent investment criteria. So
they both went through an RFP
process and went through, Um,
the vetting of a very
experienced, um, investment
consultant. Makita is their
name.
Um and then
Tramway came through an RFP that
the Economic Development
Department did for their federal
dollars.
Um, when they were managing them
themselves, and then again, we
had Makita investments do the
due diligence and it's an
extensive due diligence process
that they go through.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Miss Russell.
Um, if I was interested in in
reading the executive summary
from that report, where would I
find it? Mr Chairman? Um, when
we approve an investment at the
Finance Authority level, they
make a presentation. They have
their own stack, and then we
have a high level summary that
goes through what they expected.
Economic development is and
that's that happens at our board
level.
Thank you, Chairman. And thank
you, Mr Russell. So how would I
get a copy of that? You could
just request a copy and I can
send you those materials. Thank
you very much.
Uh, Mr Chairman and and Miss
Russell.
If feeding off of what
representative Montoya's
question, But how do you go
through this process?
Is if I'm somebody that wants to
start something.
And I was looking for venture
capital process to do that.
Who in your office?
With that person call or how
many people in your office and
is that listed on your website
on touch to so and so call this
person at this.
Or email here will be back in
touch. Does that listed on your
website? Mr Chairman? I cannot
Tell you exactly what's on our
website. Um, if it isn't it will
be certain soon because we have
closed on at least one of those,
uh, tramway partners. We closed
on that investment. They have
met all their matching funds and
are ready to start making
investments. So that's one that
has closed. The other two are
still meeting their match
requirement in order to close
I would hope that we would have
those documents relatively soon
for us to close on that
investment, but they should be
contacting internally woman in
my office named Ryan Decker. She
is our policy and capital
strategist. She's working
directly with the fund managers
and she can get folks into the
right locations so that they're
dealing directly with
Thank you, Chairman. And thank
you, Mr Russell. Um
My last questions deal with I'm
off the to the projects that you
went through county by county.
Zero.
Mr. Chairman. Is there a place
on your website Where
I can get a list.
Of each of the projects.
Mr Chairman, I think what you
are referring to is on page 23
or water Trust board. Yes. So
that is the bill that's going to
be before you. It was endorsed
by the New Mexico Finance
Authority Oversight. It's an
annual bill that authorizes if
you pass it, and it decided,
authorizes the finance authority
to make grants and loans to
those projects.
On that, bill. Um and so that
Bill will be before you There
are places on our website where
you can find the projects that
we have funded by county. You
can also go to our bond website
and find some of that same
information but the debt they
have outstanding so between our
bond website and our regular
about the projects that we have
funded to date.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for that answer. I'm I'm
just curious because
Um and I hate to actually admit
this, but
You have two projects listed in
Lee County and I'm not aware of
anything being submitted to you.
So
That's why I was curious about
it. Mr. Chairman. I believe
those are municipalities, but
I'll double check.
And and I can look that up. So
Mr Chairman, and Ms Russell with
respect to page
Uh, 21.
We have several open projects.
Uh, if I went
To the enemy. If a website would
I be able to get the details on
each of these projects? Mr.
2020? No, Mr Chairman, not on
our website. This is information
that we actually send over to.
Um, um
Lfc and maybe the FAA for sure
they get the the
Million dollars in greater
report, and it lists all these
projects, so this kind of detail
is really provided to analysts
at the LFC primarily, but I also
think the FAA
Thank you for that, Mr Chairman,
um so
How would I get the detail?
Mr Chairman. We don't regularly
put out details of where we are
in funding yet we're not that
sophisticated enough. Our
systems aren't developed enough
force to be able to produce on
demand reports like that, But we
will be in a year. We're just
not there. We're building we're
still building. Mr Chairman. I
appreciate the work that you're
doing. I'm I'm just curious. How
can I dive into this without
asking for a whole bunch of
As the information like 2021 you
have 64% of your funds.
Expended. Um
Percent of the projects
completed 52. If I wanted to see
what that breakdown was, how
would I get that? Mr Chairman,
we would have to supply that to
you. I don't have a place where
that's available, right?
I appreciate that. And Mr
Chairman. My last request,
actually some question request.
And I really need to start this
with everybody. Um
Each of our departments that we
have in our, um, Executive
department level or secretaries
do an excellent job with respect
to sending out We just
Gave the scholarship or we just
funded this project, and it can
come from anywhere from the
department or from the executive
office. Well, what I don't see
as a as a legislator.
It is.
Emails saying Okay grants are
opening.
I don't get that information. I
understand that that we we
talked, Mr Chairman that
That we have something coming up
very shortly. I think opening
January 16th that are going to
go to the chambers and some
different ones.
I don't know if any of the other
legislators are getting those,
but I don't get them.
And so it's not something that
when I meet with our chamber
directors are Edie seaboards
within Lee County. Um, our
hospital boards, you name it.
Um, I don't have that
information Is that there and
say, Hey, we need to meet
Got some grants coming up very
quickly, And this made me apply
for something that you want. And
so if if I can make one request
from from all the stuff that you
do, if if there's your, um
Your PR person. Whoever that
person is.
Um
At a minimum at me. I don't know
if the other legislators want to
be on it, but I'd like to be
able to have that communication
with my with my neck of the
woods.
Mr Chairman noted. It's a great
idea. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Okay. We'll move on
now. Vice Chair, Dixon. Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Fun.
Thank you, Miss Russell for the
great presentation. I appreciate
the thoroughness and the, uh,
range of projects that you were
able to discuss.
Mr Chair and Miss Russell. I
also want to commend you on two
particular things. Number one. I
find your website. Very easy to
navigate. Um, And as my
colleague was asking some of the
questions I was able to find
some of the information there so
I can assure him that he'll be
able to find it as well.
Um, and second, I wanted to
thank you.
Um for the venture Capital
Investment fund, the process you
went through for identifying the
gaps that were missing and
really where the funds are
needed because
I appreciate that you've taken
the time to make sure that the
state funds are being invested
in the most impactful way.
So I just wanted to start with
that.
Um, Mr Chair in Miss Russell my
questions, um, actually relate
to the Opportunity Enterprise
Fund.
Um, with the proposed Housing
development fund.
And
What I am interested in and, um
Somewhat concerned with is first
off the board members for the
Opportunity Enterprise fund, so
right now
There would
With the proposal with the
recommendations that are being
proposed, there would be there
would only be one member with
direct housing experience. Is
that correct? Mr Chairman?
That's right. And none of the
members Mr Charron, Miss Russell
would be
Housing developers, or, uh,
because it would just be MF A,
which provides funding and
support to, um
Other entities. Is that correct?
Um, Mr Chairman, so I don't
know. There. There are
There are you know some Realtors
in here There are
Yeah. You can have a developer
in here. Uh, I think it would
just be based on. There are six
members that are appointed by
Legislative Council so you could
appoint someone that has more
housing experience rather than
commercial experience, But it
might be good to be explicit in
in that and add that as a duty
of the as a qualification of one
of the board members.
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you for that. I think it's you
know, it's someone, um
Who was involved in the crafting
of the initial legislation.
And understanding legislative
intent. I think it's very
important that the people
reviewing the projects
Have the experience for which
they are selecting the projects
And the intent for the review
board was that you would have
folks in different parts of the
state in different capacities.
For the commercial side.
Um and so
This is where my concern is that
if we
Housing people to the same board
that we're deluding the
expertise, which is the whole
point of having a review board
for the commercial side, so I
just wanted to flag that.
Um
And then Mr Chair and Miss
Russell Similarly, and this is
my last question. Um, with the
criteria, and I think, um
You're on. You know, I've
emailed with you. So, um
I think you're aware of my
concern that the
Uh, point system.
For the selection. So for the
review board and project
selection is tailored to
Commercial and industrial and
economic development activities,
And so I feel strongly that if
The Opportunity Enterprise Fund
is open up.
Opened up to housing
infrastructure.
That the criteria number one be
spelled out in legislation as
they were initially and number
two
That they are more applicable to
some of the housing concerns
that communities have
Mr Chairman. For that reason,
the finance authorities
recommending a separate fund
that would be governed by
separate rules and separate
policies for project selection,
so all of them would be separate
and there would be different
appropriations put in each Don't
think the opportunity Enterprise
board wants to be wants to
choose between really good
housing projects and really good
economic development projects.
So the appropriations
Would go as you as policymakers
as appropriators would decide.
and but that the funds
themselves would be entirely
separate and operated with.
Thank you so much. I really
appreciate that information.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much. Vice chair. Dixon.
Next we're gonna go to represent
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Mr Russell. For your
presentation. It's really
impressive that you have this
programs focus on small state
businesses. So with with that it
thinking about that I do know
that there's a big push to put
of paid family leave on the
calendar. And with that race,
and in that respect, there's
been an effort to join with the
aging and Long term services
division to put together this
platform or that would live.
Just all people who have
Who have, um
Retired. But if help have all
these great experiences and
could step in and continue to
help a small business if and
indeed one of their best one of
their employees had to go out
and paid family leave. Is that
something that you all would be
doing or assisting with to make
sure that these small businesses
continue to be successful?
Madam Mr Chairman. It's a great
idea. And I think if they
contacted my, um my folks at
those folks would tell them
about those resources, but that
would not be an active part of
what we do. Our job honestly can
be hard enough just making sure
that we have maintaining, um, a
good oversight of the loans that
we make.
Um, that's a specific job in and
of itself. But I would note that
the person responsible for our
business and economic
development or community and
economic development programs
came from the SPDC. He ran and
SPDC for many, many years, so he
understands that he is a small
businesses and understands the
resources that are available for
small businesses.
So he's training his staff to
make certain that they also have
that experience. Thank you, Miss
Russell and Mr Chair with
respect to your program for
Behavioral Health Capital Fund,
One of the things that is also
being discussed right now is a
coordinated plan between the
state the counties in the
cities.
And creating a plan that would
make sure that we're helping
every single person at every
single stage that they may need
it. So I'm just clarifying that
if we are looking for a
provider, your capital business,
um your business, behavioral
healthcare fun would be a place
when you have money that's
available for them to utilize
and be a part of this bigger
program.
Mr Chairman, if they have if we
have money, and there are
nonprofit provider or it's a
local government owned facility
than they would be able to come
to us. Currently, we don't fund
for profit healthcare from
either the primary care Capital
Fund or the Behavior Health
Capital fund. Only nonprofits or
those, Um as that are part of a
local government. Thank you for
that. Clarification. Cason.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much for
Okay. I think that concludes us.
Uh, sorry, reps. Everyone.
Thank you. I'm sorry. I missed
most of the presentation had to
Um
Take my daughter, pick up my
daughter and take her somewhere.
So thank you. And I apologize,
but I think you did maybe
capture something that I had
asked previously, but to add to
that, I think I'm just gonna go
back into just some of the
things I've I've currently
heard.
And
Um
Going back to the opportunity
Enterprise Revolving loan fund.
Uh, Mr Chair and
Just trying to understand that
some of these these
opportunities I guess we're
looking for amendments.
And
Just looking at what you've
provided for us, and maybe some
of going back to it.
Representative Dixon was was
saying, and maybe opening this
up to
I would have to say or ask. It
would be a language change to
look at the board members to be
more specific if we wanted to
add more commercial type.
Uh, representatives on that
board and
How that would, how we would
balance that out so that there
wasn't a leaning special
interest at hand if you would,
and also
If we already are looking at the
policies and the applications
with the points system, and it
is already tailored towards, um
Commercial and retail and such.
What
What the language change. I
would be very interested in
knowing what that would look
like. If we're trying to make a
balance with that, well
entering, you know the housing
and some other objectives that
we've been there have been
mentioned, and I've talked about
earlier and I'd be just you
know, I just feel like
On the side of government. We
have to be careful with that.
And I think you as the quasi
governmental entity that we
have, Um we're in into policy
that we are asking a lot of you
and there's a lot that you're
already doing and contending
with. And I feel like, um, I
just would like to know a little
bit more about this and how
these are balanced. And as as
representative Dixon said she
was one of the the, um
The sponsors of the initial
policy. Just how things are
changing with this. It's a
little, um
It's I don't know that have all
the information in front of me
right now. And I'd really be
interested in that so that we
are making economic development
decisions in regard to how the
house what kind of housing that
we want to have an opportunity
we have is growing and workforce
as we're looking at all these
entities in putting those
factors into place because I
just don't feel like it's all in
front of us right now. And I
have some. I have some questions
in that regard.
I know in regard to the You know
these different parts of $500
million here. $500 million here.
Adding to this Is there an added
amount that we want, Uh, funding
was to the opportunity
Enterprise loan. Um fun, Mr.
Chair. Mr. Chairman of the board
had asked for some changes. We
didn't make too many
recommendations for board member
changes because, of course, it's
kind of awkward to recommend
that some of our board members
be replaced by others. So we
didn't even get into other than
the
Um, Auditor. We did not touch
any. UM, board member
recommendations to the
opportunity Enterprise. I
believe what they would like to
see is additional money is being
put into the opportunity
Enterprise. As I noted earlier,
we with very little outreach
received, you know, and enough
applications to fund um, you
know, that would take up twice
the fund. Ultimately we had
available.
Um, So we do think that there is
the market and the need for
additional opportunity
Enterprise. I would have to
defer to them. We could easily
see the same amount of money
being utilized pretty quickly on
the opportunity Enterprise side
that is being recommended for
the housing side. It just
exists. The need exists, but the
amount I would leave to the
policymakers.
Uh, I appreciate that. So, Yeah,
That's what I'm I'm trying to
get at the the the other guests
of the position. You know all
these different plans. And what
What is that?
If you know which I think you
may know, because you know so
much. What is that amount that
we are looking at for that need
statewide for housing? If you do
know I'd offer Mr Chairman. I
actually don't know the housing
side Very well. I know that the
infrastructure side pretty well
and we've been looking at the
commercial finance authority
doesn't have a lot of
information on housing. So what
does that commercial need? Mr
Chair? If you would
Um, Mr Chairman. I think it just
depends. We we, as I said, we
saw if we got a $300 million
appropriation appropriation in
there that we thought we could
utilize that in about 18 months,
given the size of projects that
people are asking, think we have
a lot of handed in an
unfortunate and in play right
now that we should be looking at
those opportunities that we've
created and put
Good policy like this in place.
Um, thank you for those
responses. Thank you. Thank you
very much. Okay. Thank you very
much, Mr. Russell. Uh, we'll
look forward to seeing you back
again. Soon as we work through.
Great. Okay, we're going to ask
Mr Secretary.
Uh um.
And your team's, uh,
Have Mr Liu coming up as well In
thanks to Amanda members were
under Tab nine.
And we also want to note of
course, uh,
Dr Prayer ornament who's here?
Um, and her team with the
Legislative Education Study
Committee. If there are
questions that come up will feel
okay. Let's get going.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Hmm.
Excuse me. My name is Sonny
Liew.
And the LFC, analyst for public
Schools. And today Presenting
with me is Simon Miller from the
Department of Finance and
Administration to talk about the
executive recommendation.
Will be mostly working from this
high level, which I've also put
up on the screen.
And
Just to give you a overall big
picture description of the
budget recommendation
differences.
For your recurring
recommendations you have about
280 million
And the executive
recommendation.
And about 240 million in the LFC
recommendation about a
difference of 1% so
6.8% for the executive and
recurring and 5.8.
And then on the non recurring
side, you're going to see the
difference of about 383 million
For the executive
recommendation about 246 million
for the LFC recommendation.
And we're gonna go down into
some of the details on these
differences, but to give you a
brief road map on how to read
this document. For those of you,
who may not be familiar with it.
If you look at lines two through
27, you're going to be adding
these from top to bottom. These
are sort of the base parts of
SCG and then each incremental
change to that line item in the
budget.
For the remainder of the budget.
You're going to be reading from
left to right.
Okay?
So without further ado, I'm
going to go over the SCG section
briefly and then I'll turn it
over to Simon for a few things I
want to highlight for you and
the SCG recommendation for LFC,
which is on the far right
column.
There is online 13 average
salary increase of 2% in the LFC
recommendation for all
personnel, plus a flat 2%
increase for all personnel
altogether about a 4% increase.
That is in comparison to the
other. The executive
recommendation of about 3%
Online 15 you'll see about 60
million to backfill some Kato
plus funding that originally
came from the Education Reform
Fund.
And online 27 you have about 10
Million and additional education
reforms, which are part of the
L. C s recommendation to
incorporate things into the SCG,
including career technical
education programs, community
schools, early literacy
initiatives, teacher mentorship
and like
Altogether the increase for the
SCG under the LSC recommendation
is online 34, which is about
$202 million or 45.4%. I'll go
ahead and turn over to
assignment for the executive
section.
Thanks, Sonny. Madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Simon Miller and I am an
analyst with the Department of
Finance.
Um so going over the executive
recommendation for the SCG.
Sunny pointed out one of the
biggest differences is 4%
compensation increase in the LFC
recommendation versus in the
executive recommendation.
One of the other big differences
is for K. 12 plus online 15.
The executive recommendation is,
uh
$41 million higher and that's
largely because of the
department's proposed rule for,
um, a minimum number of a
minimum of 180 days of
instruction with students. So,
um as calendars are lengthened
to comply with that proposed
rule, then more schools will
Go above 180 days, meaning that
they'll qualify for this K 12
plus funding, So that's why you
see that difference there.
Another thing I'd like to
highlight is line 20.
For insurance.
Uh, the executive recommendation
is a $41 million increase.
Uh, where's the lfc
recommendation is a $25.7
million increase. Um
Both of those recommendations
are actually lower than the
proposed amount needed.
For the preliminary premium
increases put forward by the New
Mexico Public School Insurance
Authority and buy a PS.
Those proposals altogether are
over $50 million for the premium
increase amounts.
Um most of that is driven by the
New Mexico public School
Insurance Authority and their
risk fund that funds liability
claims property claims workers'
comp claims Their preliminary
premium increase is, um, almost
32%. It's not finalized, Um
But that's really the main cost
driver behind the
50 million or so that would be
necessary to fully fund those
premium increases. They don't
make a final determination
usually March or April.
Um
So I'm guessing that you know,
those will probably be revisited
at that time and and decided
upon
And finalized, but but the
preliminary risk increase for
the public school insurance
authority was 32%.
And with that, oh, in total, as
as Sunny said, um
The executive recommendation for
the S E G is a $260 million
increase, or 6.6%, as opposed to
the LFC s 5.2%, so I will turn
it back over.
Thank you. Simon. Mr. Chairman.
I'll turn your attention to
lines 36.
Through 60, which are the
categorical appropriations for
public school support.
Just a few items that I want to
highlight and remember, we're
reading from left to right in
this section.
Once again lying 41. This is the
salary increase for
transportation employees.
4% for Lfc and 3% for the
executive. Another item I want
to highlight online. 46 is about
$4 million to replace the
population density factor in the
transportation formula do a
reality factor.
All together, bringing the
transportation recommendation
online. 47 to 134 Million, which
is about a 5.9% increase.
The other two items. I'd like to
highlight our online's 53 and
54.
The L C recommendation proposes
an increase in standard space
assessments of about $2 million
from the prior year.
And the difference is that the
executive has those
recommendations and section five
and we've tried to in this
document point to the lion items
so that you don't have to keep
asking us where they are. So we
hope that that's helpful for
you. Thanks, Sonny. Mr. Chair.
Members of the Committee. Um
Nothing to add on this section.
Other than that, you'll find the
standards based assessments
recommendation and the Indian
Education Fund recommendation.
Um, in Section five, like Sunny
just said the standards based
assessment recommendation on the
executive side is a bit higher.
It's for the 10 million in the
LFC recommendation back to you,
Sonny.
Thank you, Simon. So moving onto
line 62 through.
70 are your what's cloak a
little referred to below the
line appropriations.
The biggest differences are
lions, 6465 and 68, where some
of these appropriations have
been moved into Section five in
the executive recommendation.
In the L. C recommendation for
Lyon 68. The steam appropriation
has been moved into the
Government Accountability and
Improvement Trust fund, which is
the expendable trust you've
heard of at LFC.
The other big differences online
69 with the LFC recommendation
being 21 million for Universal
school meals, which is flat with
the prior appropriation and 43
million for the executive
recommendation.
Um
I'll hand it over to Simon for
his discussion of that section.
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Yes, this is, um one
area with a
Very large differences the cost
for universal school meals that
Bill was passed last session.
And the amount of the
recommended recommendation here.
The 43.5 million is the
projected costs for FY 25 from
the program manager. So the
executive has that in their to
fully fund. Um what That bill
requires.
Mr Chair if I could just bring
your attention to line 81 on the
second page. This is your grand
total for public school support.
Recurring appropriations from
the General fund once again
about 280 million
For the executive, which is
6.8% increase of the prior year.
240 million from the LFC
recommendation, which is a 5.8%
increase over the prior now
actually have Simon start us off
on section 56 and seven
Mr Chair members of the
committee. Uh, the non recurring
appropriations or
recommendations start online,
84.
So in total for non recurring
appropriations, um there are
quite a few differences between
the executive and LFC
recommendations.
Uh, in looking at specials and
supplementals, so everything
except for capital. The
executive recommendation
includes 383 Million to fund 54
different educational programs
and projects and public
education Department
initiatives.
The LFC recommendation includes
255 million to fund 19 of these
programs, projects and
initiatives. So, um in total
there, the executive is about
$130 million higher than the LFC
for special and supplemental
appropriations. It's not quite
an apples to apples comparison
because some of the LFC
appropriations are
Are for four years. Um, as you
all have been discussing
throughout the day from the new,
um
The proposed New Trust Fund
Government Accountability Trust
Fund. Um
So I won't go through all the
differences because we'll
probably be here until midnight.
Um, so I'll try to highlight
just a few of them.
For starters, a point your
attention to two items that are
focused on improvement,
intervention and corrective
action at New Mexico's lowest
performing schools. Those are
items number 128 and 129.
Titled School Transformation and
School Turnaround.
The executive recommendation
includes 10 minutes, Quick, Can
we scroll down on the screen? By
chance? Perfect. Thank you. So
Yes, I'm Mr Chair. Members of
the committee lines, 128 and
129.
Uh, school turnaround and school
transformation.
Um the executive recommendation
includes 10 Million for school
transformation. Um, it's also
known as P. E. D s
differentiated System of
Supports, which provides
evidence based academic
interventions at New Mexico's
lowest performing schools.
Selection of the schools
requiring intervention is based
on peds New school performance
database known as investors.
That assigns a designation to
every school based on a variety
of student outcome indicators.
Ped is using Federal Arpaio s R
funds in the current year for
this initiative, Um, and those
funds won't be available next
year.
So the executive recommendation
includes $10 million to continue
this program.
The 10 million in the executive
recommendation would provide an
average of $200,000 to 80 of the
lowest performing schools around
the state.
The executive also includes 24
million for school turnaround.
For a variety of correction
Corrective action strategies at
persistently underperforming
local public school systems
across the state due to
inconsistent adherence to
statutory and regulatory
requirements, Um, as required by
the federal every student
succeeds Act, so those are
Two of the major differences on
the LFC had a recommendation of
zero for both of those
Now moving to career technical
education.
Uh um.
The
Which also includes, UM
innovation zones and and work
based learning.
I won't even point to the lines
on the page because they're like
Five different ones, some in
recurring, some non recurring,
so I'll do my best to summarize
it. Um, the executive has
$40 million for career technical
education, which is flat to the
current year's appropriation.
The LFC recommendation includes
14 million in non recurring
Uh, but also several million in
recurring.
Um, the executive
recommendation. There's there's
10 Million in recurring for, um,
educational reform, so that
could include CTE. It could
include community schools. So if
a portion of that 10 million
goes towards career technical
education
Then.
The LFC recommendation is
somewhere between
Ah!
15 and 24 million for career
technical education. So, uh,
That's uh, about half as much as
what's in the executive
recommendation. Another area was
significant difference is for
structured literacy.
So structured literacy is an
evidence based instructional
model that the state began
investing in back in FY 20 to
improve statewide literacy
rates.
Um, you'll turn to
Line 97 and 98.
Uh um.
That's where the non recurring
recommendations are for
structured literacy.
But you'll also find
Recurring recommendations.
Apologies. This is a complicated
budget. Um, recurring money is
also found.
In line.
Uh um 63.
And there's uh, $8 million in
the SCG already for, um,
structured literacy. So against
apologies, the lines aren't
really going to help you very
much, and I'll do my best to to
explain.
Um
The executive recommendation
includes 35.1 million in non
recurring funding.
In addition to 23 million in
recurring dollars for structure
literacy, so that's a total of
58.1 million.
The uh then that's a $37 million
increase over the current year,
So some
Uh,
More than double the budget of
the current year.
Lfc recommendation includes 3
Million in non recurring
And then between 22 and 32
million in recurring
For a total appropriations of 25
to 35 million.
So a difference of
20 to $30 million for structured
later it seems with the
executive being higher.
All right. A couple more Mr
Chair. Members of the committee,
um
If you can look at line 110
That is 12 plus supplemental.
The executive recommendation
includes 25 million to
supplement the FY 24 SCG
appropriation for K 12, plus
units. This is funding for
schools that go beyond 180 days.
If your calendar goes longer
than you qualify for K 12, plus
units through the
Funding formula.
So the, uh and
Last year. It was the
department's understanding that
50 million had been appropriated
for K 12 plus in the SCG, but
the number of schools that
adopted calendars beyond 100 and
80 days actually went.
Beyond the 50 million
appropriated for it, so
Um, the executive includes a $25
million supplemental. Uh, lfc
recommendation, um, did not have
any additional K 12, plus
funding for the current year.
And finally, um, Universal
meals. Um, already talked about
on the recurring side how the
executive recommendation is
higher for fy 25 but for FY 20
for the executive recommends a
supplemental because the
appropriation from last session
Um, it is
Not enough for the program. So,
uh, the executive has 19.9
million for the current year
shortfall. And that's line 111
sorry.
And the LFC. Uh
Doesn't include a recommendation
there so
Those are some of the
The biggest differences in non
recurring, um, I'm sure that
there are a couple of things
that Sonny probably wants to
touch on. Um, maybe the
government um
Accountability Trust fund
appropriations that are in the
LFC recommendations, so I will
turn it back over to him.
Thank you, Simon.
Just a few things I want to
point out. The LSC
recommendation includes just 15.
Initiatives for below the line
non recurring.
The first time like to point out
is online 86, which is 50
million for the tribal Education
Trust fund.
You might also like to highlight
that
You'll see on lines 188 and 189
that the LFC recommendation is
using
Fund balances in the career
Technical Education Fund and
Community schools fund.
Now we're unspent to pay for
some of the initiative funding
for this fiscal year.
And I actually like to spend
more time on lines 192 through
196, which is at the very end of
your high level, and this is the
Government Accountability and
Improvement Trust, fund or
explainable Trust concept that
you've been hearing about the
last few days.
The L C recommendation includes
three items for
A four year study essentially
front loading some of these pro
programs to give the department
time to implement these well
have US detailed action plan and
do some research and evaluation
to ensure that we're getting
outcomes for some of the most
important things highlighted in
the Martinez Yossi lawsuit,
which include quality educators.
Um
If there's anything else you'd
like to highlight Simon. I can
move on to the next few pages
and then wrap it up. Alright,
just very briefly.
I won't go over the rest of the
document that you can look on
pages for
Through late
These are the language
differences between the
recommendations. There's also
some notes for the L. E. S. C
recommended recommended language
as well. If you have any
specific questions on any of the
language sections would be happy
to answer questions on it.
And then on section Sorry, Page
nine. You'll see the performance
measure differences and note
that the analysts have come to
consensus and agreement on
targets for FY 25 With that, Mr
Chair, I'd be happy to stand
back and answer questions.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
We're just smiling because the
print
Here for the languages is quite
quite small.
Um
Yeah, we forgot to bring
magnifying glasses that we may
need to put that up.
Word by word on the No.
We'll be sure to highlight it.
If you have questions about
Yeah, obviously, this is the
first chance we're just But it
is small Anyway. Thank you all.
Thank you very much for going
through. I think this gives us a
good sense. You know something?
Obviously that is a giant card
not only of our budget, but of
course, the core part for our
state. We're going to go first
two questions and we're gonna
start with representative Luhan
go to representative Sanchez.
Okay. Sorry. We'll go to
representatives. Sanchez and
Great and we are. Yeah, Great.
So we're gonna go to represent
of Sanchez tournament? Uh, I
just want to thank the secretary
for his responsiveness. Uh,
At some school board
representatives, and he met with
us pretty quickly. So thank you
for that.
I just wanted to reemphasize. Uh
Uh,
What I've seen is a strong
opposition to, uh
Forcing our schools to go from
Four day weeks to five.
It's been pointed out to me as
some of those schools are the
highest performing schools in
the state. Uh so just something
to keep in mind.
Uh, one thing I asked, your
predecessor is, um um
I asked him how to use short
term bulls were and what his
long term goals are. I know
we've been 49th or 50th.
In the country for a long time.
And, um
I asked him this question.
What's your goal for five years
from now?
And what's your goal and 15
years? Um
I want to ask you the same
question and how how do we get
there?
Um
I know I took over.
Organization that was failing,
And, uh I stole ideas from high
performing mean organizations
and I was able to completely
turn around the organization and
I just I just want to ask you
what your plans are. Yes. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr Chair
Representative. That's a great
question. Get a little closer
for everyone.
Ah!
We want all of our students to
be able to be successful as they
grow into adulthood students
when we think about
kindergartners today, they're
going to be the ones taking care
of all of us as as we get on to
our next stages in life, but
they're also going to be going
into jobs that don't even exist
yet. That's the challenge that
we have many times. So I think
the very quickly answer your
question. My short term goals
was his def definitely to
improve student outcomes when it
comes to literacy. When it comes
to math, we see those as great
glaring issues that we have.
Within our state right now, no
matter where you're at within
the state, uh, those two items
will allow them to be able to be
more successful in science,
social studies and every other
core area within within public
schools.
I want to talk when we talk
about, you know, 1015 year
goals. Well, those
kindergartners now will now be
seniors moving on into college.
And so I definitely feel like it
is not enough for us anymore to
be able to just simply graduate
students, but that's even a
challenge within itself. We need
to be able to graduate more of
our high school seniors, but at
the same time we wanna be able
to graduate them with the
ability to have multiple credit
If they're going to a college
bound, you want them to be ready
for
College courses when it comes to
literacy and math. Many times
many students do you have to
take remedial classes when
they're going into those two?
Those high red states settings?
We want to be able to make sure
that students have the
opportunity to graduate with
certificates of industry so they
can go right into the workforce
We hear time and time again from
the from the industry.
Of us having to bring in outside
workforce to be able to, um, um,
support our infrastructure
building of new new buildings.
Uh, when it comes to our our
electric grid, whatever that
maybe we need to be able to take
advantage of our students that
are here right now and have them
ready for that. And the last
thing I really would like to be
able to see is that all of our
graduates build the graduate
speaking more than one language.
We have the infrastructure to be
able to do that now.
And right now for all those
areas when we talk about, um,
dual credit opportunities when
he talked about certificates of
industry and bilingual students
there really outliers. Still, we
need to make that the norm. So
that would be my quick answer to
that representative. I'm gonna
make my question a little more
simple. You did answer, uh, so
in five years
What's your hope that were
ranked 40th like, realistically,
very wasted. You want to be
number one. We know that's true.
That's not gonna happen. But
what is what is your goal in
terms of rankings? Thank you, Mr
Chair, Representative. I would
love to be 29th or 30th. I'd
love to be able to drag, you
know, drastically moved down in
the rankings and be able to be
in the top, You know?
Something something on the top
half of our states. There's no
reason we can't do that. I know
that you've heard me say this
before, too. You know when we
when we googled New Mexico, we
know what that is. We're in last
place. But in so many areas we
are the model and we need to be
able to make that expand that
out to every area, So we see the
outcomes, um of students, and
that's that's our major goal to
be.
29 to 30th.
And in the short term, and I
would say less than five years.
I know that I've only got a
limited amount of time here and
doing this guaranteed or, you
know, I think so. And so I want
I want to be able to move fast
to be able to make that happen.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for
President Sanchez. Next we'll go
to represent the hon, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um I'm just
gonna go back to line item. Um
69, the university school meals.
So I'm
There's a big
And sometimes we have other we
have put in other places as as
I've been educated is
The big discrepancy. I'm seeing
here from the executive asked in
the LFC and Ali SC, um
Her big
Am I missing something there, Mr
Chair.
Is that are we is their funding
in another line item or
somewhere else that or is that
federal funding? Is there
something that I'm missing? Two
to share up? What is necessary
for this funding Mr Chair
because it
It is mandated. If I'm not
mistaken. Is that correct? Mr.
Chair Representative? Yes, the
Senate Bill four from the
previous legislative session.
Did require schools to provide
universal school meals,
regardless of whether they
qualified for free and reduced
lunch.
The bill also asked schools to
fully leveraged the available
federal funding that was made to
them. They're significantly more
federal funding that goes into
school meals than the state
appropriation.
The major difference here is
that the LFC recommendation is
flat with the prior year's
appropriation, and the executive
recommendation includes a
projection based on current, um
reimbursement rates to my
understanding and let the
secretary add to that if you
thank you, Mr Chair.
Mr Chair represented by and just
to point out a couple of
different things. I think
there's two parts of that. One
is now that we've gone being
able to go through this far with
universal free meals. We know
what the impact is. We know what
the cost is, Um, this is how to
dramatic, positive impact across
entire entire state of New
Mexico. When it comes to, uh,
students be able to have access
to breakfast and lunches.
There's two asks we we we do
have an asked for this current
year, supplemental Ask, we know
that we're not going to be able
to. There's not enough funding
in there to be able to finish
out the year it's going to get
us through the next month or so.
We need to be able to finish out
the year families have become to
rely on this and it's been a
positive thing for students in
New Mexico.
Secondly, we have that same ask
for next year to be able to kiss
so I just want to make sure we
point out that there's two
different asks for that.
So, Mr Chair with that does that
so? When will we know?
Where that gap is, I guess for
the next for this next fiscal
year as and it seems like we
have a if you're seeing this,
I'm hearing this correctly. We
have a shortfall this year.
For this current fiscal year. Is
that correct?
Sorry. I should have waited.
It would be better if Kendall
please ahead. Mr. Chair. If
that's okay, absolutely.
Um, Mr Chair. Members of the
committee, Um, Representative
Luhansk to your question? What
Sunny, Just referenced.
Um
Without getting too wonky. The
feds the feds Now allow, um 25%
free and reduced and above.
Are free to the students. It's
not free to the schools are the
districts So that's what we
passed last year? You all as a
legislative body? Um, past s
before, which made Universal
mills universally free to every
student in the state. If we
don't fully fund the projected
number that we that we have in
the exact recommendation, which
is 43 million in recurring and
just under 20 million for
Supplemental, the schools and
districts will be stuck.
Holding that cost.
So just because the USDA changed
their federal the regulations.
It doesn't change the baby happy
to give you more information on
that. We can show you the
calculations, but there is a
misunderstanding from LFC staff
on how that works.
Which we have had. We have had
preliminary conversations about
Okay, Well, I Mr Chair, um
Yes, I think I would like to.
I'm not understanding it clearly
right now what I have in front
of me, Um
I'd like to. I'd like to know
more about that. And just how
that equation puts in that 25%
from the federal a portion. So
if we are I mean, I'd like to
see the
The amounts and how do you chair
representative If I may, and
it's easy, this is a pretty
wonky kind of formula and
subject. Um, so pre the USDA
rule that changed in December
which that threshold was at 40%
and came to 25%. All that does
is change the type of s F a, a
school or a school district
That's eligible to be 100. But
that's 100% free for the
student, not 100% free for the
school or the district.
So the the really simple
calculation as an example would
be for a school that's 50% free
and reduced. The feds apply at
1.6 multiplier, which brings it
to 62%. If I'm correct somewhere
around there, the feds pay 62%.
The school is left with the
other 38.
No matter what, so they cover
the cost of the free meals the
school in the district are
required to pick up the rest of
that cost. So when we passed SB
four last year, we said that as
a state we are now covering the
difference between the free and
and they were just in the paid
mills.
And so that again is a
misunderstanding from LFC staff
on how that how that funding
mechanism works and funding and
others to give a bit more
background information on
Why these projections are what
they are. And again we're the
numbers were pulling this year
are based on actuals. These are
incurred costs by schools and
districts. That calculation does
not change at all based on the
25% threshold, the CPI threshold
changing at the federal level.
All right. Thank you for that.
So then my next question we can
follow up later on. That is for
the next fiscal year and how
we're going to see those
projections and what you are.
You know how that's going, if it
is significant or what we need
to look at their if we are
seeing this within this fiscal
year, I think that's going to be
a significant discussion. That's
all I really have. Mr. Chat.
That's where I saw big.
All right. Thank you very much.
Representative hunt. Great
questions. Next, we're gonna go
to a ranking member.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank
you for the presentation. Always
interesting. I, too am concerned
about the funding for the school
meals. If there's one thing we
can do for our kids is feed them
So I'm all about that one of the
things that I wanted to ask
about is the support for
attendance for success.
And, um, I know I've been in
contact with Sonny and others
about the attendance teeth that
we took away and the problems
that it's causing in our schools
And And is this a way to fix it?
Or what? What is this funny
going to do?
Uh, in support for attendance
for success.
Mr Chair. Actually, our
understanding is that this
attendance for success act money
has been distributed by formula
Is that correct? No, I will have
the department answer that
question.
Mr Chair and members of the
committee. So the the the
current funding that that we
have we have 5 million this
year, and it's not clear that
the funding for next year would
be used in the same way that it
is this year. But at present, we
have funding that is used for
statewide, um, statewide
services for the districts. For
those students who have
Gone through all of the
interventions that the district
may have available to them, and
they're still not attending.
Then they may use the services
that the state is providing
through a contractor to receive
additional services.
Um, Also, there are grants made
to districts. Um
Two. They were competitive
grants to districts for asking
for innovative plans for how to
address attendants and we funded
seven of those as well. Those
are the two largest, um, uses of
the funding at present, but
again next year. I think we are,
um
We are considering expanding the
services that the state provides
to those students who have maxed
out the interventions.
Thank you for that, Mr Chairman.
I just, You know, I'm I'm
concerned for rural New Mexico.
Who doesn't have access to those
services. Where are they going
to get those services and are
the schools is the school's
funding being dinged?
Negatively because they have
high absenteeism.
Uh, Mr Chair and Representative
Armstrong, So no, there is no
Right now, The attendance for
success Act really is about
providing services to families
to help them get their students.
Uh,
To school and there is no
penalty on schools. Other than
that, those schools who really
have no attendance problems at
all there, at 95% of or above of
students not being chronically
absent, which are very, very
few. They don't have to do a
plan Everybody else has to do
and attendance plan and that's
really the only administrative
difference between
Schools who are really killing
it with attendance and those who
have more attendance problems.
Thank you for that. I still say,
you know, we removed the teeth
are schools have no ability to
hold parents or Children
accountable. They can report it
to see why FD but we all know
where that's gonna go.
And so I I really have an issue
with, um this kind of funding
and and the attendance problem
in the state of New Mexico. Um
so I I am concerned about that.
My next one is on Mr Chairman is
on What 109 the transportation
for 180 Day minimum calendars.
And so I was curious if, um
If that will change if that's
not implemented, or
What? I don't know what that's
about.
I mean, I know what it's about,
but it's in the executive rec.
Then I see where it is in the
line items.
Is this? This is only for
transportation. Correct, Mr.
Chair members of the Committee.
Yes, Uh,
The executive record.
Built under the assumption. So
if you look at the SCG
appropriation, there's money for
K 12, Plus that calculations
based on this 100 180 Day
scenario, And so that's what
this non recurring funding would
be vented. Thank you for that.
That's what I kind of assumed
that and and just to reiterate
what just
Representative, Sanchez said. I
think there's plenty of
opposition, so I hope you keep
that in mind. Um, the other
thing. I just want to really
push the career technical
education. Um it's uh it's
really been phenomenal in
districts like coral and many,
many others, and I'm I'm highly
Uh, in favor of that, and I
would encourage that. Keep
happening. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you very much.
Ranking member. Next. We're
gonna go to representative
Herndon represent Baca and we
keeping a list We have others as
well.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you presenters, So I am bringing
your attention two lines 1 66 1
67.
And 165.
So respectively. They refer to
special education, training and
credentials, instructional
materials, supplements and math
achievement.
Let me specifically say that in
talking to teachers many times
they go into their own pockets
for additional instructional
material, and I see zero amounts
for helping teachers at all in
that area and in terms of
special education, training and
credentials often are teachers
may need additional training to
understand. Maybe it's cultural
differences and special
education and training.
There is zero in those lines.
And also if we look at math
achievement, which is where we
are not at the top of the scale
in zero in those lines, Could
you please explain why
Sure, Mr Chair representative.
So if you look at the top of
this section, it says public
Education Reform Fund That fund
is being depleted. It's
currently only at about $55
million. So this appropriation
that you're mentioning these
three came from that fund. If
you go a little further up on
the
Document two lines.
94, you'll see There's
recommendations for special
education initiatives.
Um and also for steam and math
achievement online 105
And when I was six
And I believe you had one more
question about instructional
material supplement those would
be in the SCG online.
Um
19
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you Sunday. Then I would just
direct your attention to land
159. And that is Teacher Loan
Repayment fund is that
redirected in another place?
Mr Chair.
Representative Herndon.
Uh, yes. The Teacher Loan
repayment fund, uh, lives at
HDD.
Um, the executive recommendation
has $15 million.
Based on the current application
rate, that 15 million would get
the fund through.
I think it was fy 27 if the
application rate stays the same,
Um, I don't know what's in the
LFC recommendation. But when the
A G D hearing happens, um
I'm sure they'll have the right
information for you. So thank
you very much. Simon and Mr
Chair and presenters. I also
want to point your attention to
lines 99 and 100.
Referencing the Black Education
Act and the Hispanic Education
Act.
I
I see no funding recommendation
from the L. E s C and I am not
sure if I see funding from the
LFC. Could you please explain
why
Mr. Chair, representative. I'm
gonna go ahead and make a few
comments and I don't know if
Director ornament would also
like to make some comments on
the L. E S C recommendation.
Um the LSC recommendation does
not include a specific section
Five appropriation for the
Black Education Act, the
Hispanic Education Act. There's
acts do not have specific funds
for deposit, and additionally,
the Black Education Act
appropriation that was made two
years ago was built into the
base operating budget for the
public Education Department. Our
understanding of this
appropriation is that
It's for a conference, which we
for teachers and educators, and
we feel that that's that was
determined to be a bit did
Plicating of the teacher
Professional Development Act
funding?
There's also additionally,
request to reauthorize funding
that was not spent prior years
for the bilingual act and other
Hispanic act type.
Working, so there's concerns
about the departments.
And I don't know if Director
ornament wants to comment on
The L A C recommendation. Okay,
Oh, and director. If you think
we should have a microphone.
Oh, that Mike is Yes. Well, Mr
Chairman, representative and and
thank you for the question and
wrote 102. You'll see it at the
L. E. S C has recommended $4
million for the bilingual,
Multicultural Education Act. We
feel like that is
Critical actually, Terry about
supporting bilingual education.
To that degree, we feel like the
Hispanic Education Act, also
echoing um Mr Liu have fund but
part of the comprehensive vision
at the department. I think that
should be comprehensive. We also
acknowledge.
People going public Education
Department is already embedded
in the public education. Thank
you, Mr Chair and thank you for
the explanation. I just present
the comment to you that in
talking specifically about the
Black Education Act, it was
concerned about funding for
carrying out the provisions of
the act, not just attending
conferences.
So I my hope is that you would
take another look at that.
And that we would come with
Equitable funding for all of
those X from all sections of the
representation and just, uh,
going back, Mr Chair and members
of the presenters if we if we
listen to Secretary Romero, and
as he talks about, uh
Making sure that our students
are successful and that they
have literacy and math training
and that they graduate with a
certificate and that they move
forward and above their high
school and tell me I'm not sure
that you addressed this stuff. I
look at 128 and 129 under the
school turned around. Why is
there zero of recommendation
from the LFC and the L. E S C
Perhaps you could explain that.
Mr Chair.
Representatives. So the LSC
budget guidelines EST.
Read the recommendations that
were
Focusing on the findings and the
Martinez Yossi lawsuit and to
evaluate any new initiatives
under a seven point rubric.
Looking at the program premise
whether there's an action plan
Fidelity or implementation plan
if there's any valuation
component to the new initiative.
Um The Martinez Yossi lawsuit
finding was that there were too
many below the line
appropriations and let the
departments
Initiatives were not other, not
at scale, or they were too it
inconsistent or volatile to have
a large effect for students. And
so the idea was to
Asked the department to
prioritize and minimize the
number of initiatives that the
department would implement The
second thing about the rubric
with the seven points while the
department did provide
Um
Detailed explanations for most
of the requests here. Um, the
root break indicated that while
the program premise in the
description of the programs are
very good, many of the
descriptions lacked a good
research and evaluation,
component Action plan or
Fidelity plan, and so were
deemed not appropriate for
recommendation in the LFC
budget.
Um, happy to turn it over to the
director of Elia, See if she has
comments on
Director and I see that
Secretary Romero has. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
And I just want to take this
opportunity. Mr. Chair
representative to kind of just
really described those to the
differences there.
We've we've had again. I've been
a principal superintendent for a
number of years in the state.
This has been a dramatic, um,
support for me and many
different districts and many
different schools that I've been
in, Uh, these schools that I've
been able to come in and really
turn around has I have to give
credit to the support I've given
from the public education,
Public Education department over
the last few years.
I want to point out kind of the
difference that we have in those
two line items when we look at
the school improvement in
transformation. These are
definitely the areas where we
want to work with individual
schools needs that they have to
be able to improve. This is to
be able to go into that school
site specifically work with
leadership and teachers to be
able to create a very intensive
plan to very quickly support
students in that area.
We get to the area around school
turnaround, It might be better
to say District turnaround as
we've been able to catch up with
data to provide 22 districts.
We're also seeing some different
trends. And so in some of these
trends, we're seeing multiple
schools in the same district
needing support, and this would
indicate that we want to be able
to not only support that school
individually.
And the next call individually
and Xcor individually, but
actually the whole district, So
we actually also have the
Central office, the
superintendent and the school
board involved in that in those
efforts also, and so that takes
as kind of a different beast to
be able to overcome. And I just
that that is why we have really
kind of two different, um, goals
that we
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you for that explanation. I I
see that in the executive
budget. Those amounts I mean,
there are amounts there to take
care of the things that you
described.
I
Depending upon how the budgets
are accepted. I certainly hope
that
Taking into consideration the
turnaround and the improvement
and transfer transformation are
things that we really do need to
take into consideration and
thank you for that explanation.
Um and Mr Chair and presenters
If I go up to line 86 and you
there has been a lot of
discussion regarding the Yossi
Martinez.
Um, case and then making sure
that our schools are in
compliance with that.
I is there something I don't see
the executive recommendation
with any funding. They're at all
I do see it with for the LSC.
And maybe for the L.
L. E S C and the lfc.
And it
Kid, Perhaps, Simon, you
explain, maybe why that amount
is zero. Mr. Chair,
representative her and didn't
know you're correct. There's not
a different line or, you know.
Of the 200 lines. There's not
another one for that.
It's it's just not in the
executive recommendation. The
creation of the
Travel Education Trust fund is
part of the other two
recommendations, but not the not
the Thank you, Mr Chair and
presenters. I have just one
other question. During the past
year, there has been a lot of
focus on individuals bringing
guns to school and then school
shootings that have been
occurring. And so during this
past year, there were 41 schools
that applied for mental health
rooms. There were only 12 that
were funded.
Can you tell me in this budget,
and I'm just not seeing it? Is
there room for those mental
health rooms in the schools that
require them so that students
who are having mental challenges
can go and talk to someone and
not resort to picking up a gun
as the result of resolving any
type of dispute they may have.
Mr. Chair, Representative. If
you look online, 174
The LFC recommendation continues
the wellness room pilot that I
believe you're referencing.
From the consumer settlement
fund again.
And
Mr Chair and representative if I
may as well some of the funding
that that the agency received
this past year from our
behavioral health, Uh,
appropriation was used to
augment that as well and provide
additional wellness rooms and
that that particular
appropriation has been cut out
of the lfc.
Um
Recommendation.
Mr Chair. That's his line. 96
representative, Mr Chair of
Simon. I'm sorry. I don't
understand what you're saying.
What's the relation to land 174
to walk the line? 96, Mr. Chair
representative line. 96 was the
bucket of money that Mr Frostad
was used for. Uh, okay.
And and Mr Tear in Simon. Am I
to understand that the money in
996 can no longer be used for
that purpose. Is that what
you're saying?
Um, Mr Chair representative, the
executive recommendation.
Doesn't specifically have the
wellness room appropriation.
But
It.
It could be funded out of that
bucket of money. The if the
department chooses so
I see. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Simon. And as I look
at that line, 96 I I I I see
that the LSC put no money into
line nine.
Line 96 and I see with respect
to lot, 174. It was the L. E S.
C and the executive who put no
funding in so putting the two
together, Mr Chair, and Simon
and I do understand that somehow
those mental wellness rooms
might come about.
Mr Chair representative that
that's up to you all.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Representative Herndon next week
and go to representing vodka
represent out
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Um, like
always, I will be direct and I
expect a brief answer. So and I
promise I will not slam my hand
this time, Uh, New Year's
resolution. Right? Turn your
attention to the line 27. I
believe that's dealing with CTE.
Can you go over the numbers
there and tell me if there's any
other place that CTE is
addressed in this budget?
Um
Mr Chair, Representative, Um
Make it the right Hackett here,
But yeah, there. There's a CT
appropriations throughout.
The recommendation. Um, here we
go. So
Executive recommendation between
recurring and non recurring.
Uh, I
Just has 40 million in non
recurring
Um, and that's flat to this
year.
The LFC recommendation has 14
million in non recurring
But then also has the added 10
Million, um in the SCG for those
educational reforms, so a
portion of that 10 million would
likely go towards CTE. So if you
put the 14 million together with
a portion of that 10 million
If you'd like.
Mr Chairman, Mr. Miller had
described that very well. I just
wanted to get back line numbers,
which are line number 27.
My number 1, 49, 1, 5151 and
193.
Yeah, And thank you, Mr
Chairman. And I guess the point
just so I could with what
Representative Armstrong is is
that we do need continual
funding for CT that maybe
What gets our students? Not
just, you know, prepared there
or is that hook for education
but also provides them with
opportunities and trainings.
Also certification programs.
Um
Mr Chairman. My next, um
Question nine line at 94.
Can you? Can you tell me what
that funding
And just a sentence or two what
that is targeted for.
Mr Chair for the LFC
recommendation that includes a
universal I P platform.
As discussed in the LSC
valuation that was recently done
and I'll turn over the
department if there's other
initiatives picked into the
executive.
Mr. Chair, Representative. Yes,
I think I could pry some of that
up and kind of two big areas.
One is a statewide I P platform.
The other is to be able to
increase staffing within the
these do the work instead of
doing it from Santa three weeks.
So, Mr Chairman, and because
Secretary Thank you for that
answer, so part of that money is
too as far as staff the newly
created Special Education
Department is that correct?
Mr Chair representative. Yes,
It's to be used in that in that
department. Um
And the differences between the
exact budget and the LSC budget.
There is a difference of about a
million
That will significantly impact
the goals that we have within
that department.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, one
other next next line.
Line. 97. Can you tell me?
What that money is.
Oh, set aside for what is the
activities associated with that
money?
Chairman. Thank you, Mr Chair,
Representative earlier. You've
heard me speak, speak about
multiple areas in which we want
to be able to tackle structure
literacy within the state of New
Mexico. We've been very
successful in being able to
train teachers K 12 3/4 this
year. We wanna be able to finish
up the next next year with fifth
grade. Uh, the 30 million that
you're specifically asking for
is to be able to have a
We want to be able to very
quickly impact 10,000. This is
to be able to have that happen.
We need to be able to one hire
the teachers to do that. We're
looking at a six week program in
the months of June and July.
That will be a half day program
five days a week. We are looking
at working with multiple
supports to be able to do that,
whether you are in a rural area
or an urban area.
And we're also looking at this
being something that will impact
positively K through 12
students. So whether you are
early reader or whether you are
in high school, we want to be
able to give you that very, uh,
very high Doses Structural
diversity program, But we're
also looking at focusing on 40
year olds to these are students
that are going to be
kindergartners the next year.
When we look at kindergartens
coming in, we know that many of
our the average is that we can
be up to 18 months behind and
exposure to literacy. We wanna
be able to cut that down as
quickly as possible so that we
don't have that issue of having
to close that gap their entire
And thank you and Mr Chairman
and thank you, Secretary. I did
You know my my comments and I
made before the Christmas break
about access to all schools,
especially ruling in Mexico
because
You know, outside of the Metro
areas. Santa Fe County Canning
were very sparse. And so I
really am going to be cured. You
know, interested in seeing as
how
Even my friend up there in the
northwest. As far as with this
how is those our those students
going to be impacted because
many of them will face
transportations, and they may
not be able to get
To a training center, so I'll
leave it at that.
And my last question is line
120.
Ah!
As far as
Hard to fill positions. I
understand about special
education, What other teachers
or what are their job categories
would be included in that hard
to feel and is it up to the
individual district Because
For my district. It may be hard
to you know, it may not be the
same as my other districts
across the state.
Mr Chairman, Mr Chairman and
representative in in the
agency's idea of how we would
implement it would be up to the
to the local, uh, school board
well to the district or the
charter school to determine
which
Positions in that area were hard
to feel. For instance, bus
drivers are problem across the
state and could be addressed
that way. Um, one of we are
Should we have received this
appropriation were considering
put putting that as part of the
ed plan, so the district would
say this from this appropriation
that we're receiving, we would
use to support um, salary
differentials for these
positions, which are hard to
fill in our area.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank
you guys for your presentation.
I have no further questions.
Thank you very much.
Representative vodka. Next we're
gonna go to represent Alison.
Mr Here. My question as far as
the secretary
In one of your last lfc
presentations. Afterwards, I
received a number of calls, and
this was
Concern with your proposed PD
accreditation rule.
I think it was mentioned that
yeah, if funded schools were now
a part or
We're now part of that list.
And it was felt that the state
Does not have the authority to
do that to put the III funded
schools on an accreditation
lists.
And it is further filled that
accreditation should not be
required for the B I. B II
funded schools to excess state
funds in my area and never who
preparatory school has high
standards, and I think they lead
by examples over some of the
local public schools. So there
was concern why it was added to
the accreditation list.
And my final question is, uh,
where the leaders of the B I You
funded schools counseled and
what was their response, Mr
Jeremy?
Mr. Chair representative. Thank
you. For that. The intent behind
the accreditation is is for K
through 12 schools. Uh, we we
got that feedback also, so we
want to make it very clear that
this does not is not a
requirement for B, I e or
private schools. The reason that
that language is in there and we
we will we We are working on
adjusting it. So it's very clear
that we do sometimes have a
request to accredit either.
Private schools, and that could
include by schools, so it's not
our intent is not to make it a
requirement at all. It's going
to be able to allow us to be
there as a service should be I e
school or private school request
accreditation again. The intent
behind the bill is to accredit K
through 12 public schools.
Okay. Thanks for that, Mr Chair.
Um
For for my safety and my
response back to the people
asking
Can I get an email from you
staying? That's what you had
told me. I am still waiting for
a response from you or my
question on international
Baccalaureate.
How it was being handled. It was
kind of a stray from my original
bill. So thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much for percent.
Alison.
Um, Next, we're gonna go to
represent Garrett.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I do have
to comment on four year olds
reading.
I think that we really have to
think about the development
developmental growth of four
yields. I happened to read when
I was three. But I wouldn't
force anybody to read, so I just
think in our structured
literacy, we can't forget the
power of play. Anybody's read
the story of the boy who thought
he was a helicopter. I recommend
it.
Um and I'll find it and tended
to so just a comment.
On one reason that we have to be
careful that
We don't misguide Children.
Two questions, Mr Chair.
The loss of Section nine for
transportation.
But does that mean that 1 93 94
9596?
Would conformed to
Um, the executive and the alias
C categories because we're
depending on the gate. We have a
new Ackerman gate.
The gate of fund.
Um
If that doesn't this is this
depends on that passing correct.
The chair representative as it
it is. Contingent on legends
can't really say that money
under Lfc would have to return
that correct.
Mr Chair representative. I
believe there's about a billion
dollars in the gate for various
initiatives across all state
government and that would have
to be a re appropriated.
Okay, Because again, it has this
CTE initiatives that many have
been so effective and then
surprise Surprise.
My other question is about a
page for number five.
And I found a way to get to it.
Let's see what it it goes Sorry.
Um, yeah, This is instructional.
Our requirements.
So this is really director to
you, Um Secretary Romero.
It says for the executive thing,
the public Education Department
budget of any school district or
charter school that provides
fewer than 180 instructional
days with students. Can you give
us a date when the ruling is
going to come from ped as per
the proposed rules? Madam Chair
representative
We are going through all the
feedback. I'm taking it very
seriously. We had, um over 3000
pieces of feedback. We also had
about it over 100. People come
that day. Um, so I want to do.
I'm listening to everybody and
how it affects not only rural
communities but urban
communities, every community
involved so I'm not ready to do
that. Quite yet. I
I wouldn't. I wish I could tell
you exactly the answer for that
yet I want to be able to do the
thorough job to be able to make
a good decision. Mr Chair and Mr
Secretary.
We are going and that totally
affects schools.
Families, communities it again
disrupts the legislative antenna
Hospital. 130 can't say that
enough.
And I like what the LFC put,
which is honoring. Uh they put
that the public Education
department shall not approve the
operating budget of any school
district or charter school that
provides fewer than
instructional hours of students
in 2425.
And the original bill that said
people wouldn't go below the 22
to 23 school year so very, very
concerned on the timing. The
disruption, the uncertainty that
insecurity and the impact on the
entire state.
Whether they're urban, rural
tribal or frontiers, So thank
you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much. Represent Garrett.
Next. We're gonna go represent
dela Cruz. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Uh, we're all familiar with the
teacher.
Alone.
Help repayment program. All
right, gentlemen, Are you
familiar with any programs where
the state actually loans? Money
to students? Do we have anything
like that? That you're familiar
with?
Hiring students.
Mr Chair representative. There's
not a specific, um, Public
Education Department initiative
that provides a direct loans to
students that I'm aware of.
But there is a paid student
teaching.
Appropriation and I can follow
up with you and our higher
education analysts to get an
answer to that question. But I
don't know if Simon has an
answer.
Mr. Chair representative. I
don't know any more than Sonny.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you very much represented
Delacruz. Very interesting
question were nesting, Go to
Vice chair Dixon and represent
Brown. Then I have a couple of
quick questions. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Um
Sorry, trying to figure out
where to sort of start. So, um,
teacher residencies.
Um, I have. I've been trying to
figure out
How much is appropriated in the
different
In the executive versus LFC for
teacher residencies, and I had
been focused on line 175.
Which was the teacher residency
pilots, uh, in parentheses. LF
um
And was not funded or was not
recommended. But then I also see
line 116. So can I just get an
act? What are we funding and
Where? Where am I not looking,
Mr Chair representative, The
executive recommendation is
online on 16.
116. It's um 13 million, which
is flat to the current year. The
reason why it shows zero on one
page and then 13 million on the
other pages because last year it
was funded.
By a different funding. Source.
Um
And this year under the
recommendation its general fund,
so that's why there's that
confusion and then the LFC
recommendation one.
52
But there's also funding from
the gate. Talk about it.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Adam,
Vice chair. The 2 million that
you're referring to was from the
Educator Licensure fund this
year.
The LSC recommendation moves all
of the
Teacher residencies, principal
residencies educator fellows
paid student teaching all into
one appropriation called
educator, clinical practice.
Which is on line 196.
The first part of it will be
paid from the Public Education
Reform Fund had about $20
million a year and the rest will
come from the gate in the
subsequent years.
Thank you. Um sunny. Um and Mr
Simon for the explanation. I
think I'm I think I'm following
along, Mr. Chair. Um
Sorry. There was another
question. That was that was in
there and just just flew out. Um
Line 67 for the Advanced
Placement International
Baccalaureate, um, that
representative Allyson spoke
about
Do we have language?
Proposed language in the budget
to address the issue that we
discussed in December.
About legislative intent.
Versus implementation.
Are we fixing that?
To make sure that we are
funding. Um
The I. The students at, um are
Native American schools as well
as fully funding the cost for
the exams.
Hmm.
I'll go ahead and go first. Mr.
Chair, Madam Eyes chair.
Where there's substantive law
governing how something should
be appropriate. The budget
language tends not to interfere
with that, but I'll turn it over
to Greg if he has other comments
on the matter.
Mr Chair and Madam vice chair so
that the current year language
does say that it has to go to
Kate, Uh, Kate, or public
schools. And if we want if you
all want to expand that, then we
would look for language that
would include B III schools as
Barbie. I funded schools as
well. Thank you, Um
Thank you, Mr Chair. So if I
could just make a note, um, if
if we could just clear that up,
and and maybe somebody can work
directly with representative
Allyson to make sure that we are
fully funding what was intended
moving forward, That would be
excellent. Um
Then line 94.
I know that representative Baca
brought this up. But could I get
a little bit of elaboration on
what the funding for special
education initiatives is?
Mr Chair, Madam vice chair for
the LLC recommendation. It is to
primarily cover a statewide I P
platform and I'll let the
secretary at the remainder.
Mr Chairman and vice chair. We
have 89 school districts. We
have 100 charters in the state.
We only have 189 ways in which
we do I A P s. This has been a
consistent ask, you know, across
the state is to be like to be
able to do that by providing a
gonna be a very important as a
student moves from one area to
the next very mobile
unregistered from one school
site, Go to another in the I P
Is there being a teacher? There
would be times where I would
have a student for a month or
two months or six months before
I got that I p. We're hoping to
resolve that issue.
The other parts to this funding
is to be able to, of course,
expand the services that we can
have within our special
education department to do that.
We want to be able to add more
FTS two positions to do that.
There's a lot of work to be
done. Even with the statewide I
I p process. It's going to
require that we go out to
districts help support them how
we integrate into the district.
And how we train them to do that
and continue to provide provide
that technical guidance. That's
just one thing that we can go
down the list. We want to be
able to provide support when it
comes to our special programs.
So on and so on, and so on.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Secretary In the statewide I P
platform, um, very, absolutely
critical. And so I'm really
appreciative that it is included
in terms of, you know, funding
for the office. Um, that was
created last year by Executive
order. I believe I just want to
flag that.
I feel as though that
appropriation request is
circumventing the Legislature,
which did not choose to pass
that legislation and then was
implemented via executive order.
So I just wanted to flag that,
Um and then the last item that I
have a question about is, um
The differentials, and I believe
this is an LFC recommendation
for supplemental
Especially education
differentials. And, um lfc is
recommending $60 million. My
question, Mr Terence, Sunny is
Is that to provide a one time
Stipend to spend.
To encourage teachers to focus
on special education and what
happens in subsequent years.
Mr Chair, Madam Vice chair so
once again because this is
coming out of the gate fund.
This will be over the course of
four years. So about 15 million
Per year. Let's say it's quite
synonymous with line 120, which
is the executive recommendation
of 16 million for differentials.
This is also aligned to the LFC
evaluation that you heard
earlier this year about
Needing to have a substantive
bonus of at least you know 5 to
$10,000 to ensure that
Teachers go back into these
hardest staff areas. And so this
would give us four years to
study this and see the results
of whether that improved
retention or filling of these
hard
Madam Chair, Mr Chairman, Madam
vice churches very quickly.
We're looking at in two ways. We
want to be able to one encourage
people that are in currently,
teachers that have spent
licenses that aren't using it to
be able to come back into that
profession. That's one of our
highest news right now. And the
other is to be able to get our
pre service teachers to go into
special. Thank you. Um and Mr
Chair. Um, I just remembered
That question that
Flew out of my head and that is
for the teacher residency
programs that goes through an
RFP process. Correct head
shaking in the back. Okay. Um, I
just wanted to make sure that
that was going to be a fully
transparent process moving
forward. I think there was some
concerns brought up in December.
Um, about that.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much. Vice chair
Dixon represented around please,
Mr Chairman.
Thank you all for the
presentation, and there's a
whole lot of information here
for us to digest.
I think, Mr Chair, one of the
comments I'd like to make before
we leave today is that I think
we have heard from so many of us
members of the house that we're
really concerned about literacy.
And the data are not good, and
they haven't been for a long
time on on literacy, so
I feel in some ways, as if the
way we are presented this budget
We have basically three
categories to look at.
Well, four. Actually, we have
what we are currently doing, and
then we have the LSC
recommendation.
Then the executive wreck and
then Lfc is wreck and we're
going from bundling certain
lines of information to try to
get to numbers and what I would
like to see Mr Chairman.
Is a summary.
Based on things like literacy
and C T E and have
Uh,
And, uh, accurate picture.
You can do this in a graph if
you want, but
Are we losing CT funding on the
whole or are we increasing it or
are we not and I can't really
tell at a glance.
And I guess I could get, you
know really dive into the
numbers here, but I just want
you to summarize for us. I know
it's a little more complicated
than I would like it to be,
because some of this is
recurring funding, and some of
it is proposed to be non
recurring.
So I'm looking for two things,
Mr. Chairman, one. I believe we
need to increase funding for
career technical education.
I can see why some of that would
be non recurring, because maybe
it's standing up a program.
And that there's an initial cost
there.
But continuing those programs
that would be recurring. I guess
I would like to see that in in
the base budget.
But I just need a little more
information for you to
summarize. So my personal
preference, Mr Chair, and
Panelists, more CTE funding.
And literacy initiatives that
are actually going to get us out
of the basement.
I believe our education budget
has doubled.
And I'm talking K through 12 and
just a few years.
And the results are not showing
themselves and we keep putting
in these programs and I'm
hopeful.
That they will be successful
where we endeavor to do them.
But we're not seeing the results
and I'm impatient Now. I guess I
I really thought And I've been
here 13 years now, and I really
thought we would have seen some
movement in the right direction.
And it's not there yet.
And I know society is very
complicated.
And a lot of students have some
disadvantages in life that they
hope will overcome. But why
can't we at least teach everyone
to read?
And do some some math.
Job one and job to in my
opinion, so, Mr Chair? Um, Also
wanna just talk a little bit
about
Let's see where my sheet went. I
just had it. Um
It would be nice and I don't see
it here in what we've been
presented today to have a total
some certain
For each category. L E s see
what would that be? Would that
ped budget look like?
Adding up all the L S C. L. E S
C numbers, adding up all of the
exact numbers and all of the lfc
numbers. I have a feeling
LSC is asking for the most
funding.
And then there's the executive
maybe is in the number two
position on that. And then maybe
Lfc, but would be nice to have
that summary as well.
Um and I do have a question Mr
Chair for Secretary Romero.
Um, there has been so much
public comment.
And that includes teachers and
parents about, um, how many
How many days should should our
students be in school and I have
a school in my district, Mr
Chair That is on a four day week
schedule, and it's doing so
well.
And I just
I just hope
That
Somebody in PD and the
administration. Somebody's
listening to what the parents
are saying.
They're saying, Don't ruin it
for my kids because it's working
for them now.
Um And my question, I guess for
the secretary is when will you
Mr Chair published the rule that
you're going to
Ah!
Put in place for school days.
Will it be while we're in
session?
Or when we're
And what we've gone home.
We meet once a year as a
legislature. We need to kind of
decide this while we're up here.
And I just hope that
We will have the opportunity to
do that. So, Mr Chair. That's my
question.
Mr Representative. Thank you for
that again. I received
Lots of feedback. I want to make
sure that this is done
correctly, How we move forward.
I'm listening to every every
everybody out there Whether
you're person whatever that may
be, and they all have good, good
feedback to what That may mean.
Also want and tear to your
previous comments. I am
impatient to I won't worry that
every year that goes by that's
another coder students that
aren't where they need to be.
This is one aspect of many
things that need to happen. I
know that for years for my whole
career, we always talked about
how there's not enough time in
schools.
And, uh And when you talk to
teachers, they that was always
the conversation.
And so now there's opportunities
to be able to have more school.
This is again. This isn't the
only thing that will happen that
I'd like to see happen.
Attention question. I don't have
an answer for you today. I wish
that we do the right thing and
moving forward And I want to
thank you. Um, Mr Chair. I, um
I really want. I really want
this to come from the parents on
up. I don't want it to be
imposed from on high.
Because it is working the four
day schedule and so many places
and I don't I don't want that to
be defeated.
We all lose in the end of that
happens. So, Mr Kerry, do you
have one question? This is, um
regarding, um, school Busses,
and I see that information
provided at line.
179
And there's something else on
line 180, but
Business amount of money that is
being proposed, include the cost
of adding or having
I guess having Erkan dish inning
on new school Busses, especially
in districts in the state that
have very high temperatures.
While our students are still
Mr Chairman. This line item 179
is the cost of replacing Busses
that have entered their 12 year
replacement cycle.
My understanding is the
department did issue a new role
to require.
Conditioning on Busses, but I'll
ask for clarification from the
department on
Mr Chair representative. Yes, as
as Busses are replaced, so I
believe I just heard you say
yes, there will be a Erkan dish
inning on some of these new
school Busses where they will
be.
Deployed in areas that have high
temperature presented. Mr Chair
Representative. Correct. Okay.
Thank you. This is something Mr
Chair we have been asking for
for a very long time. And I'm
glad the day has come. So thank
you very much. Thank you very
much Represent Brown. We're
going to go to represent
pedigree for a quick question,
And I'll have several chairman
Um oh.
Thank you very much for the
presentation.
Um, I appreciate all of it.
The
I think you've had enough
comments on the five day work or
school week.
You know, so just understand
that the uprising that comes
with with the five day school
week will be enough will well,
any other thing that you wanted
to impose on the state of New
Mexico will not create that kind
of rising.
That you will get with a five
day school week.
Trust me, I know. Rule America
room to Mexico as well.
Chairman to the point of my
question, and I'd love to have
this conversation a little bit
later.
The I e P mechanism and back.
Special education and what we're
talking about.
I worked for.
A company that when they
purchased an asset they took
members from
Um, both teams. They did an
assessment on the business
model.
This was the third largest
materials like company in the
world.
They could be buying a million
dollar business. They still did
it the same way every time and
if something worked within one
organization.
They implemented it worldwide.
When they implemented it went
across.
Mr Chairman, secretary. My
concern with that is
One of the statements I heard
was that we're gonna go down and
teach them.
I want to be crystal clear the
best people to teach the state
of New Mexico how to take care
of our special education.
students are are special
education teachers.
They should be coming up here
showing you how it needs to be
done. Every area is going to be
different. I understand There's
some based models that
everything has to work to move
from area to area.
But we need to reverse the model
in the state of New Mexico if we
ever have you want to
Answer that That's fine if we
want to have that conversation
offline. Just think we need to
get to a point where Santa Fe is
not the top of the world.
The world that they serve.
Actually get served.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you
very much. Okay, if there's so
thank you all very much. Thank
you. Members think it's um
really great to see so many
detailed questions about the
different areas of the budget.
Thank you very much. Staff. Uh,
briefly, um
For the internships.
These would be sort of high
school internships that we would
be during during the summer.
Um Dona Ana County has helped
really pilot this we have over
1000 students.
Great to take this statewide and
to bring the funding.
We will work through to make
sure that there is sufficient
funding because if uptake
Vastly expands across the state.
We don't want communities that
have sort of gotten a head start
to lose slots we want as many
Secondly, actually picking up on
representative what
representative like Cruz
mentioned, Um
And this has been something
raised in the past.
Were our attendance for success
were spending proposed in the
executive budget. I mean, well
over $50 million. Is that right?
Or could you give me a ballpark
And the reason that I ask is
Are we? Perhaps in a place now
to consider.
Creative and innovative
approaches.
Along an internship line that
say it's actually more cost
effective to give direct
support to students that we need
in school, as opposed to, you
know, a
Whole outline of services.
Whose effectiveness is sort of
very uncertain at best.
Mr Chair, um, the amount in the
executive recommendation is $6
million. Apologize first.
Leave the rest of the question
to Mr Charity. Yes, I I love it.
It's important that we meet some
of this will be and apple trick
If we can provide better see one
can find that niche that allowed
can keep doing that, at the same
time. Just improving overall
instruction with them. Just want
to be in school. Okay, that I
look forward to it, and because
when we see sort of the high
rates of we can
Sort of correlate the higher
rates of chronic absenteeism and
say that's X number of students
in this district.
Why number of students in that
got it. Okay. Um, yeah. Would
you sort of as we wrap up today?
Are there any perhaps the top 3
to 5 proposed interventions, Mr.
Secretary from you and your
team.
Understanding that meant that
that all are important. You've
included them in the budget.
some correspond to federal
requirements and other things
that are sort of, you know, not
the like to do, but you just
have to do it.
Are there any that you would
draw our attention to?
Uh, Mr Chair. Thank you for
that.
Absolutely on top, and I think
this has been a reoccurring
conversation today is we need
students to be able to learn how
to read to be be successful as a
student and also in life were
attacking the literacy problem
for multiple areas. We want to
be able to improve instruction
in the classroom. That's the
ongoing letters training. There
was also an asked to be able to
ramp up the training at our
middle school levels. It's it's
just integral that success at
middle school
That they get to grade level if
we can get them to be successful
in ninth grade graduating, so we
want to be able to hit that That
was something that was cut out
of the LFC budget, the middle,
The middle school secondary
training for also would love to
be able to hit the 10,000
students this summer. This is
going to be huge for us when we
talk about all of us getting
impatient with this. We can all
agree with that.
This will help get us a huge
boost forward to do that. And of
course, there is the
conversation around, Um, having
that literacy institute in the
state. We've had some amazing
conversations with our hydrogen
institutions looking forward to
how they're going to be
collaborating together to make
that happen. And those
conversations and just really
blossom into something pretty
special. So one literacy. Also,
we're looking at pre service
teachers and what that looks
like teacher residencies and
fellows programs. How important
that is to be able to have our
pipeline of teachers coming.
Gin, including our next set of
leaders. We know that we have
issues with hiring teachers.
There's even fewer people that
can be principles, even fewer
people that can be
superintendents. That's another
one.
Help me think of God. She got
the pressure on. That's a good
start so important.
It's a great I appreciate it.
This is obviously not. I'm going
conversation as we usually do.
We'll have a education
subcommittee, and I expect a
great deal of of
Many more opportunities to sort
of engage here and, um one quick
question before we wrap up. Uh,
so on the reimbursement
schedule. This is something I
think we frequently here in
different sort of capacities.
In what way would would you
share that data with us so that
we can sort of get a sense of
how
Uh um, Acute. That issue is for
districts when perhaps it does
become acute. This goes into
sort of our awareness of school
cash balances. You know, we
don't want folks overspending,
nor do we want huge, You know,
really large amounts of funding
meant for classrooms meant for
kids sort of staying on the
sidelines and one of
Is because there can be a very
Help sort of start us as we look
to dive into that this session.
What would you sort of stardust
very important. It's always a
concern of school districts get
reimbursements. I'm happy to
report that we have been able to
already makes some really good
increases in the timelines we're
averaging about 32 days to be
able to get reimbursements out
there. I wanted to be under 30
days were close to that. I'm
happy little bit of an excuse
here. I'm finally getting
through my first cycle.
The entire year, so I can see
all the different problem areas
throughout the year. So now we
can really make those
adjustments. I am very
optimistic that we'll have some
really positive changes this
next cycle, and my goal is to
not have any school district
school Passos 30 days. Okay,
Thank you very much. Thank you.
all. And and Mr Secretary, you
know, noting that your service
has been at all of these
different levels.
I want to extend actually a
personal thank you to you. I
think it's been said as well.
There are a number of
challenging issues and it's
right for us to sort of really
engaged robustly there. But you
have been all across the state
and so many different levels.
You continue to serve and I
think, yeah, even as there may
be really robust. Okay, members
we're going to now turn if
there's any public comment.
I don't see anybody in here. Uh,
We're looking online.
Um, we do have one hand raised.
Uh, this will be, uh, reminder.
We're trying to live in a two
minutes per comment. Miss Sanya
or Sonia more. Go ahead, please.
For two minutes.
Mr Chair.
Members of the committee.
I'm, a school food service
director in Hobbs, New Mexico,
So I would like to revisit the
funding.
For your healthy, universal free
US school meals.
I need for you to understand
that the budget recommendation
fully covers the cost of
implementation through the end
of this physical year and
beyond this current year we are
under budget.
We are being asked as a school
district to follow the law.
But not get the money for it.
were this the students are going
to be held or the school
districts are going to be held
whole left holding the bag but
for feeding them for free just
to give you a really quick
example. We are cooking and
serving 10,000 meals daily in
Hobbs, the federal government
reimburses me or our school
district for about 62.
100 of those daily.
The law requires that I serve
all 10,000 at no charge, so that
leaves 3800 meals every day that
I have no one to pay for. So the
funding that, um, is included in
the healthy Universal school
Meals covers that.
A strongly urged and request
that you reconsider and fully
fund healthy universal school
meals. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Miss more.
We have another person, Marie
Johnson.
Please go ahead.
100 of those daily.
The law requires that I serve
about
Hi. Can you hear me? We can.
Yep. Yes, ma'am. This is Marie
Johnson. I am a student
Nutrition program coordinator
here at Farmington Municipal
schools. Um, just like Miss
more. We're very concerned
about the funding for SB four.
Um we will be feeding our
students as the law has told us
effective July 1, However, the
monies that have been budgeted
Currently are not enough to
cover the expenses and so
districts will once again be in
a position.
Where we are, um, abiding,
mandated, um unfunded mandated
mandates. Um and so please
reconsider.
Um, um, really re examining.
The budget that has been put
forth.
For s before the program is 100%
needed it just making a
difference. It will have
Long term effects on our
education performance hungry
kids cannot learn so since we
now can feed everybody
Irregardless of their their male
status. We will see benefits in
the future years to come. Thank
you for listening.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much. Thank you
for your work and thank you for
your comments.
Okay. I don't see any further
public.
Okay, members. We're gonna wrap
up then for today will have the
agenda online. We'll get
everybody there. Subcommittee
assignments will be working in
subcommittees tomorrow. Um and,
uh, let me just go off and let
me go ahead and read these
subcommittee, a chaired by
representative Karen Yana, vice
chair, representative Allyson.
Was representing vodka
represented. Chatfield
represented a la Cruz Garcia
represent Garrett represent
Montoya and representative
Sanchez. Uh and then
Subcommittee be chaired by Vice
Chair Dixon, Uh, vice chair with
ranking member Armstrong,
Representative Brown represents
how to Garrett and
representative Group
And so tomorrow will be broken
out. Sub. Uh, members just want
to say a big thank you for a
really good first day, thanks to
the staff, thanks to all who
participated will see everybody
at 9 A.m. tomorrow and as a
note, they'll be continuing
education opportunities before
that as well. Focus eight AM for
that.
Okay, Thanks, Everybody.
