this would give are so a
political subdivisions money at
the appropriate time or an
emergency matter so we wouldn't
have to wait for the fuel monies
to be processed I know that we
were on the subcommittee that
went out there Mr chair members
the committee somebody committee
members I think it's it's very
important vital that we get this
money out sooner than later I we
only got the spring coming would
not run off coming off the
mountain the stuff and there's a
lot of us take as in response
and you don't Las Vegas more
money in Seminole county so you
know if we can get this bill
passed.
Sooner than later once again in
the very very positive for our
communities Mr chairman of the
committee thank you very much
Representative passed out on the
Senator Campos I would go over
you for additional comments and
please also we wanna hear from
the
Representative Sweetser in our
department of homeland security
following these initial comments
we're going to go to the
audience for free public comment
we also vice chair Dixon here if
there are folks over soon we're
going to try to be able to take
that input today and then we'll
go to committee questions
Senator Campos thank you very
much Mr chairman of course
members of the house
appropriations and finance.
As we continue to move forward
there has been that devastation
within north eastern part of New
Mexico we start talking about
these two counties of course the
subdivisions the areas that that
have been personally affected
we're dealing directly if you
well not only with the
combination of COVID but as we
move forward with the wildfires
and floods the record we've been
working very closely cessation
of the six the course with
homeland security and so many
other agencies as we move
forward but again having this
bill come before you this early
in the session shows as well
that you all are very interested
and concerned about the
devastation that has occurred
within this part of the state of
course with this particular
piece of legislation other
resources would be used for
reimbursement so that we can
ensure that these entities are
given the resources necessary in
order for them to move forward
so that Mr chairman of course we
thank you very much for calling
this meeting in a lot of present
before you thank you thank you
thank you and I mean Mr Chairman
real quick these are loans that
are going to be given to the
entities and then they'll get
reimbursed when the two of the
money comes back in Mr chair
just so people understand thank
you very much thank you
Representative percent of any
additional Representative
Sweetser officer try just one
out that this is for a hundred
million dollars
zero interest loans and I think
that was pretty everything else
is pretty much covered thank
you.
now we with the department of
homeland security and I
apologize for if you I uh
introduced yourself to the
committee and then offer brief
comment again then we're gonna
go to the audience and then
we'll go to our committee for
questions.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is alley right
I am the deputy cabinet
secretary of homeland security
and emergency management for
here the state New Mexico
I don't have too much more to
add other than than with the
folks on this table do but I do
want to make sure that we
reiterate so this is a read this
is to help the community with
the reimbursement public
assistance grant so what that
means is.
Grant is designed for the
communities to go out and spend
their funds to bring their
infrastructure back up to pre
disaster conditions for most of
the folks sitting in this room
do know that we have the city
Las Vegas behind us they've
exhausted all of their their
monetary budget there there
general fund budget their
maintenance budget by going out
actually responding to the staff
disaster so they literally have
nothing left in their coffers in
order for them to be able to
spend on the public assistance
grant with the dollars that you
guys could approved through this
loan would mean that they would
have funding to be able to go
out get the work completed FEMA
would come out review what has
been completed give them funding
given reimbursement for the
dollars that they have and then
it would go back into the
general coffers from these folks
this grant is the public
assistance grant is completely
different than the hermit's peak
half canyon Act which many
people are getting kind of criss
crossed
have canyon Act is not a
reimbursement program it is
actually just a full out think
of it more like an insurance
settlement claim.
so folks go and find their
claims that they've lost and
then
the federal government
reimburses them based off of
what they have lost so we're
talking about two different sets
part of money the federal public
assistance program is based
Canyon Act was actually in on
the bus that got created out of
Congress in order to respond to
the the situation that happened
in the north.
Mr chair that's all that I have.
Okay thank you W. secretary and
I really appreciate you being
here appreciate the close
coordination and a big thanks to
Marty here we're going to now
we're going to open it up for
public comment
it for folks who would like to
offer brief public comment in
support of this legislation if
you wouldn't mind sort of lining
up here in the middle we have a
handheld microphones we can keep
our that legislators and W.
secretary here at the table for
anybody who would like to offer
COVID please now is the time for
public comment here
And please go ahead.
Laura McCarthy our energy
minerals and natural resources
department forestry division
director just here to support
this bill and it's very well
thought out and it is an urgent
need.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much
congratulations Mr Chairman
appointment.
Thank you all representatives
Michael Montoya said consonants
illustrate his and the pro
father of our new elect New
Mexico state treasure Montoya.
I want to thank you all for what
you do.
For having the patience to deal
with people like us let me.
This is a bill that is going to
help us move forward messages
with our water system we have
fourteen thousand people in our
community and not including the
surrounding areas not including
some good county not including
not a company a lot of us were
affected with the wrenches and
with our water system this will
open up the floodgates for us to
be able to get back to normal if
there is ever a normal.
So we thank you on behalf
Sedillo status we thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank thank you committee
members my name's councilman
David Romero also from the city
of Las Vegas and of course we
come here to support this bill
thank you to our leadership for
you know put in this bill
together we thank you but not
only that thank you to the many
members that offer their support
during the fires I think if any
time in the state of New Mexico
you know you so I revert to come
together and you guys all did
that for us so thank you guys
and just with that as councilman
Montoya mentioned is you know
this is going to be something
that we know as reimbursements
are gonna take a while and this
is going to give us something to
move forward a little quicker
than what it normally would
thank you.
Thank you.
Okay I don't see any additional
public comment here building we
do have a vice chair Dixon is
monitoring are
Our webcast currently I don't
that I don't think we have any
attendees there so we won't have
any comment from the webcast at
this time okay with that then
we're going to go now to our
committee for questions
act includes okay great faced as
a list here it's going to be
Representative a cruise
Representative Lujan.
Ranking member Armstrong and
then we'll keep going from there
Representative occurs please
thank you Mr chairman Senator
welcome.
I support this effort but I do
have a couple questions does
this affect at all
representatives the folks that
were affected by the fire in the
red does Soria would that
qualify as well.
That makes representative at.
Mr chair representative I know
this one will not take care of
the folks that are down and city
of Las Vegas alright this use me
I'm so sorry Lincoln County the
reason behind that is more in
San Miguel have been obligated a
hundred percent federal share
meaning that they're getting
straight dollar for dollar we're
looking County still seventy
five twenty five percent match
one of the other reasons to is
more in San Miguel thanks it's a
damage that we're talking about
and and the lack of resources up
in these communities are are
quite significant compared to
some of the damages that were
seen done in Lincoln County.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
Chairman one of the things that
this this struck me and and
maybe a little bit of education
this regard so if you do the
work okay and then you're going
to be reimbursed by FEMA.
I thought I heard something see
if it qualified could there be a
a sit there be a situation
where.
There if somebody does work and
then FEMA doesn't qualify them
what would happen in that
situation or is that not even
just a case that could happen.
Mr chair representative so the
way that we have fought out
behind this bill.
So the FEMA public assistance
grant program right out what we
call project worksheets those
project worksheet outlined the
scope that needs to be completed
in the dollar amount that's
associated with it so it's up to
the entity that that is designed
to rebuild or redesign that
infrastructure it's up to them
to do that very rare cases not
reimbursed and if they do it
could be a partial payment a lot
of that has to do with not
following the scope of work not
getting the it the correct
permits that are needed in order
to so like historic preservation
or the cultural permits needed
to to get items completed so
with that I I hear you loud and
clear I I get what you're saying
department of homeland security
will be monitoring and doing a
lot more check ins with everyone
kind of like quarterly reports
to make sure that everyone is
staying on track sure that is
critical to have those
guidelines because I'd hate to
see folks get themselves out
there and then be in a pinch
because are not qualified for
some reason or another thank you
Mr thank you very much of the
day a cruise next we have
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr chair
and thank you for bringing this
forward this is something that
we we looked at through the
interim
Committee settings so.
When you're.
You're asking that we have this
appropriation and it's going to
be for us zero interest
long can is that correct.
My question to you is how many.
Individuals or
I just like the our state kids
in other entities are unable to
apply for a zero interest loan
or loan at all because they are
not in good standing with our
auditor Mr chair.
Mr chair representative so we
actually do of whenever they
applied for the FEMA public
assistance program they go
through somewhat of a a check
and that's through the sand dot
gov they have to register dun's
number and with that they turn
in like their financial
information they turn in like
any kind of
stating that they're currently
and and they have to do that
yearly with that the
organization and then we check
that on the state side to make
sure that they're still in good
standings with Sam doc got I
will tell you that because I I
hear your concern lot of clear
and for some folks this is a lot
of this is a lot of money being
handed to them it's another
reason that we put in the checks
and balances that I talked about
with Mr it down occurs.
I appreciate that and so.
When there is so that my
understanding or the is that
there are individuals that may
not be able to get the theme of
funding because they didn't have
good standing or they don't have
insurance coverage is that
correct Mr.
Mr chair representative so
that's not it it's not exactly
so what it is is they do have to
prove whether they had insurance
or not if they had such I'm just
one of the program but if they
had insurance their insurance
deductible would be deducted
from the amount of money that
they could receive if they
didn't have insurance it does
not automatically knock them out
there is very limited reasons
just to someone would get
knocked out in my organization
my department does a lot to be
able to make sure that we're
wanting these people with hand
by hand so the way they do get
approved what you could be
hearing about is some people who
are not who didn't fit either
especially for the sake you
should fit the because I
government standard for them
where their privatization and
and because of that that we
cannot cover private SCG as we
can only cover my government and
and because I government so that
could be probably were a little
bit of that coming from.
And thank you for that
explanation and I think there's
that's that's where my concern
is coming from is that there are
and there are individuals and
entities that will not be
covered and there is legislation
that is in the process right now
that could potentially
supplements those those
qualifications
So.
How do I say this as we're we
haven't moved past get getting
this in place what what is it
the time line I guess I haven't
had enough time to reduce is
there a time line that if we do
get that legislation passed that
they would be able to use that
the and the chair thank you
thank you.
Can you answer that in a second
Mr chair representative so no so
as of right now the public
assistance grant which is what
we're basing the bill off of had
an open application period from
the beginning of June to the end
of October and at that point in
time is when folks should have
been applying for the the grant
we actually extended it out
three different times allow for
more applicants to apply so at
this point in time the it's
closes the FEMA program so it's
completely closed and we can't
open it back up now if there is
specific people that you know of
I would love to hear about it
because there might be other
avenues that we might be able to
apple in order to take care of
them that would not apply to
this this bill or to the public
assistance grant that's the
whole the whole job my agency is
to find people in need and fit
them with the resources that
they need thank you Mr chair
that's all I have thank you Mr
chair.
These I just want to add to just
remember that our federal
delegation got billions of
dollars this is only a hundred
million dollars to try to bridge
the gap so if we are committed
put our federal delegation
committed do you have for state
budget are pretty close and
we're not able to do that so
this is just to help the system
the suffering right now just to
bridge the gap thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative Lujan
great questions next we're gonna
go to ranking member Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chairman I have a
couple questions so just to
clarify FEMA doesn't normally
this is just to governmental
entities is that correct this Mr
chair an E. I'm sorry I'm sorry
yes ma'am that is true the it's
only to government entities and
Private nonprofits so it is not
to public citizens or to private
businesses or any kind of
private infrastructure thank you
Mr chairman and thank you ma'am
and so nonprofits I haven't
heard of FEMA getting involved
with nonprofits before just
governmental entities so is this
included in this bill.
Or is that normal.
I think it's just political
subdivisions
Percent of New Mr Chairman.
So I don't think the
nonprofit's problem that they
don't know they're not they're
not eligible for this bill and I
can explain why if you if you if
I know that thank you ma'am I
thank you Mr chairman I've I've
just been involved in a lot of
female things of my districts
with flooding and you know the
black fire which is unfortunate
that we're not getting this kind
of assistance there but I'm
happy that that they're taking
responsibility for for this fire
the the federal government
anyway
but the the Four service did let
the fire burn at the black fire
and it jumped in and got out of
control and put a lot of my
constituents out but that's not
the we're here to talk about
years I'm just wanting a little
bit thank you.
and so I when this happened
Mister chair I I called.
People here in this round
building to say we need an
answer for the people that were
affected by the black fire and
then read also in other big
fires and so because they're
asking me why don't we get the
help and so I have to explain to
him the situation so and I
appreciate this bill I
appreciate everything that we're
trying to do one of the
questions I have those I read
in.
The FIR is
it says the political
subdivisions shall repay the
loan within thirty days of
having received approved federal
public assistance funding and so
do you have any idea Mr chairman
then when that federal
assistance funding will be
coming.
Mr chair ma'am so the way it
works is I don't have a time
frame for you honestly it's up
to to how long that applicants
chooses to take tend to do the
work so they complete the work
using the dollars that you guys
have provided they turned in
their receipts and then FEMA
pays based off their receipts
that are turned in so if it
takes applicants six months to
complete the work that's when
that that exchange occurs it
could take you know an applicant
up to three years and the reason
I say that as we all know that
monsoon season is coming again
you know if we're talking about
roads are talking about culverts
and things like that these folks
can't get out there and they
can't do the work on a covert
well it's you know pouring down
rain so we do have certain
limitations in place but I will
say that these areas these
communities are very eager to
get out there and get this work
completed and get their you know
their skin unity's back up and
and get him back running one of
the other things I will also say
to is
we required department homeland
security because the public
assistance grant falls
underneath me we require that
they do somewhat of a quarterly
report they also have to ask for
an extension if they go past a
certain time period so these are
all items that we use in order
to keep track of their progress
and these are items that we can
turn in and submit that they're
moving the longer they're
hitting kind of like a headwall
and this is the reason why
they're hitting that and and if
I may Mister chairman some of
these political subdivisions
that receive this money they
don't just get a loan for ten
million dollars they got to come
up with an assessment once the
assessment is done with the
homeland security they'll go
through every that's why they
need to turn in the receipts so
they're not left with a million
dollars in the bank so I think
it's it's something that we will
really thought of that these are
just getting money handed out
alone here's fifty million see
what you can do with it I think
it was something that was done
in this bill to protect the
state money also protect
entities are receive this money
stretch.
Chair and members of the
committee thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that I I was
curious it's it's it's it's an
emergency at through FEMA is
there a bit process for.
How does that work is that still
the same kind of action.
Members of the committee is a
committee yes so there is they
do have a procurement process
that they do have to follow it
of course it keeps so that way
all the dollars that are being
used are done appropriately my
office walks them through that
as well female also does a
procurement training program
with these communities prior to
them receiving federal dollars
thank you Mr chairman I look
forward to supporting your bill
thank you very much thank you
member Armstrong we're gonna go
to Representative Chatfield
Herndon Garrett and brown.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chairman I'd like to first of
all welcome the delegation from
Las Vegas appreciate you guys
coming here welcome Senator to
the house the.
Appreciate all the effort you
guys put into it you know I was
a.
Blessed to be able to be able
able to take a tour after the
fire before the flooding and it
was kinda scary
you know of lived up next
country my whole life and and
that is to see those
hillsides that were burned down
to mineral are just waiting to
slide and I think some of
probably already slated by now
so many more entries so we're
waiting to fall over the
electrical infrastructure was
gone and to top that off of
America has trouble getting
supplies in right now for
whatever reason
I said on the local board of my
local collector coop and we
looked around out there see what
we had you know poles and
transformers or whatever we
could spare to send over and
kind of to the initial wave to
try to get things started back
we took the tour we saw the
burned fences home page burned
out cars the the homes it didn't
burn have no electricity to pump
water
the it was a.
Kind of a frightening I opening
experience the watershed in some
places will you'll see some
grass and shrubs and stuff come
back in other places it's burned
so hot.
That like we said it's mineral
soil so after the tour we got
together with a local officials
and the local subdivisions of
government because this act does
state subdivision of state
government that very
specifically and we met with the
in the number they gave us that
day was about a hundred million
dollars to get the motor started
to kind of get to get him
through till the federal money
coming in and I think it's money
that's needed it's money well
spent and I supported all the
way
appreciate you all
Persevering stand whatever it
takes whatever it takes thank
you Mr thank you very much
Representative Chatfield next
we're gonna go to Representative
Herndon and Representative
Garrett and Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker and pan
panelists I am just asking for
clarification questions on the
inside the legislation itself it
talks about two hundred and
fifty thousand to be use for
issuance of loans and
administration of enforcement
what are you enforcing.
Mr chair representative so what
that's going to be is for DFAT
used to put towards an FTP to be
able to administer this grant.
This loan excuse me I'm so sorry
I don't.
To give his anybody so this is
the path Mr chair of panelists
so and I find that this is to
pay for an F. T. E. that is not
already on the FAA's of payroll
to bring them in specifically
for this purpose is that
correct.
Mr chair representative.
And
The other item with respect to
this Mr chair as I'm looking on
page
page of the bill and it talks
about the unexpended or
unencumbered balance is so
revert to the general fund so
we're asking for a hundred
million dollars that is going to
be reimbursed but then what if
we don't use it all we get to
the of federal dollars into our
general fund this is a little
bit not clear Mr chair Mr
Chairman that just means
anything that's not used goes
back to the general fund so
let's say they spend fifty
million dollars and there's
fifty million dollars left on
the table that fifty million
dollars to go back to the
general fund.
It it Representative as
Representative Sanchez said this
means whatever is unspent of
this hundred million
at the end of fiscal year twenty
four any on obligated amount
comes directly back to the
general fund it reverts back to
the state general fund from this
program are I think as
Representative sciences thank
you Mr chairman thank you at
this the clarification so then
we only get reimbursed for that
which we actually get out even
though the appropriation side
thank you Mr very quick thank
you Representative and okay
Representative director thanks.
Thanks for being here on I
support it but I have two
questions based on the fiscal
analysis on on page two and our
Representative forestry
commented that they'd be happy
to work with the local political
subdivisions.
my question is if the money is
to replace infrastructure
damaged by fire floods and
debris flow so.
How would have learned is that
sometimes all the agencies don't
come together and that makes a
success or not the success of
programs so we'll DO to another
agencies been involved like
DOT's been involved with the
culverts the roads
is that automatically or is
there going to be reaching out
to all these other people
besides forestry.
Mr chair representative so yes
ma'am you are correct so we do
so we have underneath my agency
what we call the unified command
group that command group
includes state agencies federal
agencies partners you know all
across the board that are very
active in this disaster and the
reason behind that is like
you're talking about we want to
make sure that everyone's at the
table and getting work completed
that needs to be at the table
one of the big reasons to is
we're trying to make sure that
there's no duplication of
benefits because most of these
entities you're talking about DO
T. forestry things like that
they have other federal programs
a full introduce them to
allocate funding to this
disaster as well we want to make
sure that we are not duplicate
those benefits of making it to
where people are losing out on
funding because that's a big
deal whenever we talk about the
federal government if you get
double did you get nothing so we
don't want that to happen at all
so that's a big reason why all
of the all the partners are
coming to the table it's also so
that way we can help these
communities so maybe do as he
has the capability to help in an
area that we never thought of
and they they you know they put
on the table and say Hey you
know we could we could do A. B.
or C. it levy it's the stress
off of the communities that
we're already talking about
thank you and one more question
page three Mr chairman
it says that date let's see we
find it DFA suggested that it
may be more feasible to
appropriate funds directly to
the department of homeland
security emergency management to
streamline the disbursement of
funds in the repayment to the
general fund is that something
that's being considered since
it's not in the bill as it
stands now.
Mr chair representative as far
as we're talking right now that
is not being considered we're
going forward with the way the
bill is written right now.
Thank you very much thank you
very much Representative Garrett
Representative Brown and
Representative Montoya.
Mr chair thank you so much and
to the panel thank you I I
support the bill but I do have a
couple of questions Mr chair in
and panel so it says on page two
that these loans shall be made
to and I'm looking at starting
at one three two two one three
the department shall provide
these loans to political
subdivisions that have been
approved for federal public
assistance and so the question I
have is how many political
subdivisions that we are really
having and you hear have
actually have their paperwork
approved by the I guess FEMA Mr
chair.
Mr chair representative so as of
right now I have
I'm sitting around said been do
to applicants that applied and
these range anywhere from more
County to city of more to the
city of Las Vegas to San Miguel
County to multiple acequia is
that we're talking about in
these communities so we my due
diligence on my side when the
application opened up we
literally go applicant per
applicant to the folks that we
think should should apply and we
strongly encourage them to apply
and then we help them through
the application process of
getting to where they need to
get to.
Mr chairman and and then so time
is of the essence with the
spring weather coming soon
what is the timeline typically
for federal approval
and something like this Mister
chair Mister chair
representative that's already
been completed so applicants
were completed at the end of
October projects are pretty much
completely done I will tell you
that we have one such as like
the safety is who have still
damage how have still still in
their sake yes and because we
still need to get out that silt
we don't know what kind of
damages they have underlying
underneath the still for the
most part I will say that
projects are sitting at like
ninety eight percent completed
written written why so we can
combine right into a project
worksheet Mr chair and members
are they approved it yes that's
the word that we may use for
that thank you and then Mr
chairman I also have one other.
I got out my red pencil.
And I'm looking at page two more
money starting at one three
towards the end of that one show
provides zero interest
reimbursable loans and I tripped
over the word reimbursable I
don't think it needs to be there
Mr chair and panel I I think to
reimbursement part comes just a
few lines down where it talks
about the the requirement for a
contract for reimbursement from
the political subdivisions I
also I just think it confuses
things to have reimbursable
there in that in that sentence I
really have to think about what
does that mean how does that
work so I just think that's
something that's superfluous
there.
And also Mr chair look at the
bill titled and reimbursable
does not appear in after the of
the that will zero interest
loans I just think it simplifies
things to take out the word
reimbursable again it is
covered.
in the bill title as well as in
the text of the bill and I just
think it would make things a
little more understandable.
Mr chair just real quick on that
point I just want to point out
this is the first time that
concerns been brought up the if
we do any changes.
The delay the governor signing
off and getting the emergency
clause if executed so we're
we're hoping that we can get
this through with no changes as
possible Mr chair I I understand
your if you're concerned about
this is a that's not a deal
breaker our hope is just to get
this through as is thank you Mr
chair representative on is that
fair it's not a deal breaker for
me I just like things to be
really plain English and not
cause people to have to think
things through too much anyway
thank you Mr chair thank you
very much Representative Brown
next we have Representative
monthly.
Thank you Mr chairman
permission to treat the panel as
hostile not.
I've always wanted to say that.
just the one guy in the out of
order.
Instead of.
Representative please yes Mr
chairman I actually that was
actually a concern of mine as I
was reading the different
language the reimbursable does
seem to be it's confusing but
Down to the Mr chairman.
I'm gonna start on page three
and then work backwards Page
three line thirteen and fourteen
any breaches of contract and
subsequent enforcement actions
pursuant to this section
so.
Then Mr Chairman gonna be two
more sections and and then ask
questions about that on page two
line seventeen the these
political subdivisions
subdivision shall repay the loan
within thirty days of having
received the approved federal
public assistance funding and
then drop down to line twenty
four.
Upon failure to meet the
requirements of this subsection
the loan shall be repaid at
current matching.
Interest rates
I would just chairman that that
that's in there because this is
a possibility
and an online fund on page three
it talks about the DFA can
pursue legal.
assistance with it so I I mean
do do we really expect this Mr
chairman and and panelists we
really believe that should be a
problem I mean we're we're
giving a zero interest loan.
and
We foresee any problems here at
all.
Well Representative Mr chair
representative if the entity
keeps the bills and receipts of
the amount of cost of the
projects that we should see that
at all we should pursue that
cause the money it's going to be
loaned is exactly the money is
going to be on the.
So thank you Mr chairman I I
guess the question I have is do
that does the DFA have the
ability them if they have to
pursue legal means however today
but they have the ability to to
recover the costs of those legal
means.
Mr chairman to chairman of the
committee I would think so
Representative Montoya okay I
would assume that would have to
be in the contract.
Just looking at that this is a
trying to help the community out
with quick money but at the same
time if if that were to happen
and I I would hope that that DFA
puts that language in but I
don't believe to to
Representative Sweetser I I
don't think removing
reimbursable.
Would cause before for any
heartburn I do think that that's
they say that that has to go and
as is.
Mr chair I guess my concern is
not the fourth floor it's if we
make a change that we got to go
back to the Senate for
concurrence and that'll delay
things so that that's what I
meant with delay Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chairman I.
Thank you very much
Representative Montoya next we
have Representative scea the
representative Baca
Representative Trujillo thank
you Mr chairman Senator
Representative director of.
My concern is that the fires
happened Mr chairman
I heard the president United
States state that he will take
care of it one hundred percent.
Why.
Is the state and put money up
front at the federal government
responsible for these fires from
one you know number two Mr
chairman of.
In this will Representative
Castellano.
Are the poor people for the poor
people that lost everything of
the beating Carroll.
Mr Chairman representative
Garcia the money for the fund
right now is for the political
entities it's not for private
people right now so I mean we've
taken some I think some people
have gone money from their
insurance is I don't know
exactly what FEMA is doing me my
expected top but does I this
money it's not for private
people.
Mr chairman I understand FY well
maybe I got ahead of myself a
little bit too much but of the
people that lost their homes
they did not have insurance are
they being taken care of to get
that hundred million Senator
million under cover everything
you know of my cultures as COVID
district but you know if it
would happen in my district and
be really concerned about the
people are this fortune and that
don't have insurance don't have
receipts Mr Chairman and the
first thing about the Muslim
masses were you received for
your houses or furnishings and
how do we address that the
gentleman at representative
Garcia so yes FEMA has come out
and they have provided
assistance to these communities
they've done everything from not
door to door to set up what we
call DRC's disaster recovery
centers I'll also say is that
the state is taking their due
diligence to make sure that
we've gone through and checked
every single one of those
applicants to make sure they are
getting everything that they
need those who aren't we're
finding other programs whether
it be voluntary agencies other
grant opportunities other
funding opportunities in order
to make sure that these folks
are taking care of I will tell
you because I was on the front
lines the governor looked at me
dead in the face and said you
take care of everybody take care
of everybody now and so that's
been my job for the last nine
months is making sure that
everyone has a roof over their
head so we we've been working
tirelessly not only with the
mobile like I said with our
volunteer agencies to make sure
that everyone does have a roof
over their head while we're
starting to see now slowly start
working on gathering all those
other needs whether it be you
know a new couch or you know a
refrigerator or things like that
we are also setting up we called
disaster case managers to be.
Navigators the hermit's peak
cash canyon Act so that way we
make sure that everyone is
receiving their full amount that
they are they are you know
obligated to receive if they do
not receive that money case
managers are to step in and help
find other means of
opportunities for them.
Mr chairman and thank you for
that director.
one last question how do you get
a price on somebody's house
did been reserves the
generations how do you put a
price however in our stores
they're offered thirty nine
thousand dollars on for the
house.
What is justifiable for the
people that lost everything you
know thirty nine thousand
dollars not gonna fix anything
and you know these people are
out there Mr chairman are are
getting battered you got better
but the fires at the the federal
government started in other
suffering because the federal
government going to put a price
tag on their house they have no
idea what it's worth you know
you cannot put a price on a
hundred year old house and see
what I think it's worth fifty
thousand dollars to thirty
thousand and and these are my
concern and I met in the
Representative center have the
same concerns because the at the
end of the day.
The state and says the skin you
dog could solve please and these
people have nothing you know I
have people in requests living.
In my credit report that are
from here the had nothing left
you know and I don't even talk
to rent there because the these
people don't have nothing New
Mexico government is dragging
their feet on I'm trying to do
what is right what they need to
do what is right for the people
are not doing it you know I
support this bill I really feel
the but they need more money in
this and I know it's for for
local governments or whatever
that's fine but we need to keep
in mind that there's people out
there that don't have anything
at all thank you Mr thank you
very much for some Garcia next
have Representative Baca thank
you Mr chairman
thank you for bringing forth
this legislation I think it's
actually for the people that
have gone through so much I
think this is a good step
my question really is about as
far as the process for bidding
in procuring these projects as
we're going to be someone of Mr
chairman that is going to
oversee these projects as each
community and today going to be
getting these projects with my
first question Mr chair
representative August so it's up
to the organization who who
needs to procure that it's up to
them to be the one overseas and
make sure that all that's done
so if we're talking about the
city of Las Vegas or San Miguel
County or more I County it's up
to them to follow the proper
procurement they get it laid out
in front of them but they
they're the ones who are
ultimately up to that.
Thank you Mr my question really
is as far as with these
contractors are providing the
service okay as far as what is
the the recourse or what are the
safeguards for these communities
so they they get a loan they've
they've done some infrastructure
with a view for the seculars
with there be for the roads are
otherwise and then as we say
before the rains happen once
who's up and and we have some
kind of problem is there is
there the ability potential to
come back three daughter how
what is the what are the
safeguards are to protect these
communities because I could see
very much based upon the nature
of the improvements.
That it may not be the done
properly the made a few
additional and then they may get
stuck with the bill then get
into some of these as we kind of
talked about so just very
briefly and I I mean this is
very briefly.
can you just tell me as far as
what safeguards that we have for
these communities who have gone
through the process they've gone
through the procurement they
went out to bid and then there's
something as far as the
contractor or those would do the
work thank you Mr chairman Mr
chair representative Baca so
what I think I can tell you in
order to help with this so we
have what we call category B.
which is emergency protective
measures so it means that they
go out and they fill in the
holes quickly it's not claim
it's not pretty it is not ready
to go but it gets it to where a
person can drive down the road
we're talking about in this bill
is for category C. which is long
term permanent measures so my
recommendation to most of these
communities especially when I
sit down with their road
superintendent do category be
put in put in terrible work and
then whenever the monsoon season
is done you go back in and you
can you put a category C. and
we're not just putting back in
you know rocks and Phil we're
putting and chip and so we're
putting in something that's
gonna last a lot longer than
what they currently have sitting
there.
Thank you Mr I I'd like I said
before with this I just want to
make sure that these communities
who already struggle for these
improvements is going to be
there and I don't want them to
be taken loans for that may not
cover and they have to go back
to the process so I do
appreciate it thank you for
bringing for this legislation Mr
Chairman thank you very much
Representative Baca next we're
gonna go to Representative
Trujillo than by projects.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you all for kept asking
clarifying questions and
providing clarifying answers
I think Representative Garcia my
fight with all the time.
As some really very pertinent
questions what some of them were
well obviously the occupants
that lost homes but for me this
specific significant concern is
that yeah he does there are so
many people that speak Spanish
they're on Seattle's right and
their kids of grown up and gone
away who is advocating for them
I recognize I think you said
seventy two.
Applicants but they were and
they were specific right
applicants they were not
individuals so.
And then you stated Mr chair
that people have gone house to
house to check up on folks but
the concern for me is who is
really are advocating for these
vehicles that have no one to
speak on their behalf.
Mr chair so the females been
having sessions with the
community which I've attended
and people are voicing their
concerns one you mentioned has
been brought up quite a bit and
we've been assured by FEMA that.
Those concerns are going to be
addressed over and over sorry
hope is that they keep to to
their word and I I know we keep
talking about the individual
people but like I said a our our
state can't afford to give out
of billions of dollars of loans
we're trying to bridge the gap
we're trying to Mr chair
Fix the infrastructure fix the
things that can help the masses
so one time we're trying to stop
the bleeding as much as we can
with the the amount of money
that the state can afford so I
think that's the purpose of this
legislation we're just trying to
help as many people as we can
and do it is because we can't
thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr chair and and then
maybe we can visit for the
because I know that there are.
Smaller.
Issues that are ingrained in
there and that this is the big
picture issue but I appreciate
what you're doing and I I
support this bill Mr chair.
Thank you very much for sentry
I'm gonna go to by projects.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative and senator for
upbringing this bill
just a quick question to sort of
follow up ranking member
Armstrong
has there been discussion in
earlier iterations about making
this or involving a long term
revolving loan fund.
Mr chair up by your I there has
been a few discussions on it I
don't think anything con
concrete has officially happened
I could say from from my
standpoint that it would be very
beneficial if this was something
that was a revolving fund that
you know more than one community
could be able to tap into as
disasters unfortunately keep
occurring in the state of New
Mexico.
Thank you Mr chair as we look at
it but and if I mean center
closing I think if that happens
we can help out a lot of people
that you know I think this
disaster.
Put us at a point where we need
to start taking care of our own
here I mean we nobody has ever
we were trade is a state for
disaster like this and I think
if we can make this reoccurring
I think it's something is going
to protect our state in years to
come Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you ranking
member Dick something or some
caused down a Senator any
closing comments before before
good representative on to the
thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the house
appropriations and finance
committee just a few responses
when we start talking about
roads and infrastructure right
now we have assessed about
seventy eight million dollars in
improvements that are necessary
in order for us to go
unaddressed the wildfires in the
flooded areas that have occurred
within the area that we've been
talking about secondly when it
comes to some of the other fires
and other issues we start
talking about the black fired we
talk about really does so and
some of the other areas we're
now working on legislation to
see if there's a way to also
include USDA and some of the
other organizations that are
going to be able to help us if
you will to go beyond not only
the political subdivisions but
dealing directly with farmers
and ranchers and others that
have been unfortunately
impacted by the kind of things
that we've been talking about
when we start talking about the
safeguards so we're building
those in working very closely
with DFA the intent there as we
move forward I want to make sure
that we have the procurement
that we have the ability if you
will to take care of some of the
consequential issues that may
arise because this is not free
money this is these are
resources to to go in to help
right now of the Medicine
pallipes the other forms of
government that are within the
area so we can help to get
people back on track in terms of
what it is that we're dealing
with I could go on with the list
but those are just some of the
the safeguards in the issues
that we're dealing with but
again your voices have been
heard we're going to continue to
deal with this because this is
an issue.
but definitely has affected the
entire state of New Mexico the
last issue that I would bring to
your attention right now and I
know they've been using the
assessment of about three
billion dollars worth of damage
that has occurred we're looking
at upwards of five billion
dollars worth of damage that has
occurred the issue of homesteads
that the homes that have been
lost the infrastructure that has
been destroyed and the
rebuilding of communities within
this particular area and of
course the entire state
definitely needs our attention
it will continue to go ahead and
deal with those issues
throughout this session again I
want to thank each and everyone
of you for the agencies that you
have brought forward by
indicating let's meet let's try
to get this piece of legislation
out there so we can get the
resources to these communities
that and of course the a
political because I subdivisions
that have been affected so that
we can get back if you will to
doing business for the people of
New Mexico it in a much better
way but this definitely brings
hope to the people that have
been affected not only in that
area but as we deal with other
legislation for the future for
New Mexico is going to be going
through so again Mr chairman I
really appreciate and applaud
the work of this particular
committee in this this
particular issue thank you thank
you very much Senator okay
Thank you thank you to the
members of the public and thank
you to members of the
communities who are here today
we this committee very rarely
takes up any legislation prior
to our budget however the
importance here I think is
clearly we recognize the
importance and that's why the
committee wanted to hear this
today members were going to go
to the to the members whose
districts cover these areas
we're gonna go to Representative
Sanchez for the motion we're
gonna go to Representative
Chatfield for the second
Representative census to track
movement do pass recommendation
thank you okay there's a motion
and a second let's please call
the roll for this photo.
Representative.
Representative Armstrong yes
Representative bar graph yes
Representative Brown yes
Representative capital yes
Representative.
Yes Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Garrett yes
Representative yeah that.
Yes Representative.
Yeah.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative one point after
yes.
Representative.
Functions yes.
Funding at yes okay.
I hear the exam yes.
Chair small yes.
Okay by a unanimous vote
seventeen affirmative Senator
Representative is do passed for
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill six
thank you very much thank you
for acting as the committee she
expected to pay members that
will conclude.
What will wrap up the committee
and then we'll but we can check
in afterwards that concludes the
committee's business today thank
you members for coming in
members just a quick note on
Wednesday morning at nine AM we
will be taken up the our budget
So.
That that's members of the that
that is the this committee.
has to take the budget up on
Wednesday morning in order to
continue to moving effectively
through our process we'll see
everybody at nine thank you all
very much for your time.
