Uh, I'm here. OK, we have a
quorum members. Thanks so much.
We're gonna go get ahead and get
started. I want to welcome the
Chief Justice here, uh, Mr. Read
from the AOC and we're gonna,
members, we're gonna go first to
agency code 218, the
administrative office of the
courts, uh, we'll ask our uh LSC
analyst, Mr. Chavez, to get us
started. Welcome to the DFA
analyst, uh, Mr. Semiglia, and
again, Chief Justice, welcome to
you.
Mr. Chavez.
Uh good morning, chair. Members
of the committee, like the
chairman said, my name is Felix
Chavez. I am the LFC analyst for
the judiciary, and with us is
Marius Siglia, the DFA analyst,
to my counterpart, our handsome
faces will be in front of you
guys for a good while today. I
moisturized today, so I feel
good. But um anyway, Mario and I
will go back and forth
presenting the AOC budget with
me starting it off with an
overall view of the differences,
and then the subsequent program
or P codes.
Um, again, like the chairman
said, we'll be behind, we'll be
behind tab 2 agency code 218.
And in the volumes, the AOC is
in in volume 2 and pages 13
through 20. Again, pages 13
through 20. Well, you guys get
situated in the packet there is
what we call a high level. I
would like to point your
attention to that high level
because it gives you a better
visual understanding of what me
and Mary will get into because I
know us rambling can kind of get
confusing.
Seeing it here will give you a
better picture of that.
But with that
Go to the overall differences
for the AOC.
On the revenue side, the LSC
recommendation exceeds the
executive recommendation by $4.2
million in general fund and
$3.96 million in fund balance.
The general fund difference is
due to transferring is due to
the LFC, excuse me, transferring
all pretrial services to the AOC
from district courts and the
Bernardo County Metropolitan
Court.
The fund balance difference
results from the LFC
recommending adding revenue to
the AOC's jury and witness fund,
as well as the Supreme Court
automation fund.
Pretty much sums up an overall
for the differences, but for the
expansion differences in the
overall sense, the executive
recommendation included an
expansion for one financial
specialist position, which is
not included in the LFC
recommendation. However, to note
for you all the LSC recommended
some of the agency's expansions
related to access to justice
initiatives and assisted
outpatient treatment or AOT
through grow appropriations.
But with that, with that
overview, I'm gonna pass it over
to Mr. Samiglia to explain to
you all the differences in the
administrative support P code
559. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
committee members. Thank you,
Felix and right on and
moisturizing. You gotta do that
up here. So, uh, my name is
Maria Semiglia. I'm our DFA
analyst for the courts and the
DAs, so you'll be seeing a lot
of me. Uh, it's my 3rd year here
with the judiciary, so I have a
good understanding of their
budget needs and what has been
going on, um, kind of in their
picture, um, a big theme you'll
see in the differences between
Felix, uh, LFC's wrecking the
exact rec is moving the pretrial
services.
from the district courts and
metro court into AOC's purview.
That's what makes up a big chunk
of that $4 million difference. I
couldn't believe my eyes when I
saw the LFC was 4 million above
me on that morning, but um I
thought the system had um had
broken, but um in terms of what
the agency will be talking
about, will be seeking a few
years ago, the legislature
passed and the governor signed
uh legislation that eliminated
post adjudication fees for folks
in our criminal justice system.
and that kind of left a lot of
little holes in AOC's budget
that, um, we've been trying to
fix and make sure that we're,
we're keeping our, our end of
the deal when we passed that
legislation, so that's something
you'll see a lot of this time
around, but I know the Chief
Justice wants to
get us started in terms of uh
like a general orientation, is
that right?
Awesome. So I'm gonna pass it on
to Chief Justice David Thompson.
Thank you, thank you.
Well, good morning.
Uh, I'm going to spend
a few minutes with you, Carl's
gonna get into the details. I'm
gonna explain who he is.
I want to give sort of a brief
overview of
Of our operation, which I think
will inform our budget, um, then
I'm gonna sit down, I'm gonna
get back up.
The different hat as the Chief
Justice Supreme Court and
present my budget at that time,
I'll talk about
Um, our building, which is 88
years old, um, and I think it's
fitting today as I stand before
you because that building.
Like my face is very handsome
and classic.
But requires a lot of work.
Um, so I apologize for my
appearance today, and I
appreciate your attention.
So I'm Chief Justice in Mexico's
Supreme Court. There's 5 of us.
We do two things. We write
opinions.
Hopefully they'll be one coming
out next week, and we administer
the courts in each one of your
communities.
Each one of your communities is
divided into districts, and
those have different counties in
them.
Um, some are combined forth.
Uh, we have the 3rd, the 2nd.
We oversee from, I'll just
describe it bottom up.
You probate courts, which are
county courts, municipal courts,
which are municipal courts,
they're not our employees, but
we oversee them, we regulate
them.
We directly oversee your
magistrate courts.
It handled non-felony small
claims above them are district
courts, I call them felony
courts.
Those district courts
Work with their magistrates
above, the district courts or a
court of appeals you hear from
Chief Judge Atrip next. Those
are 10.
Judges that hear appeals as of
right.
Everything goes to them. That's
important when we talk about
technology.
From there it goes to the
Supreme Court, we only take
cases were asked to take and we
accept.
a rid of certiari.
We have administrative office of
the courts, Carl, formerly known
as Artie.
Um,
And he is our administrative arm
along with with Sarah deputy.
R
judicial branch.
Not agency, branch.
Um, plays a direct role in the
regulation of our branch. The
Supreme Court, we divide up our
responsibilities as chief minus
to oversee this budget and our
court operations.
So that is the landscape of what
we do as a branch.
And I'll highlight a few, um,
Discussion items that uh Carl
will cover.
We have um a couple focuses this
year was part of, um,
That the state of the judiciary.
As we are tasks and we are
willing to accept additional
responsibilities to address
problems in the communities.
I remind Carl all the time, we
still have to focus on our core
function, what's our core
function as a judiciary, it's to
get timely resolution to
dispute, so that's it.
That's really what we're built
to do. And so let's make sure we
don't neglect those.
Focus a couple of things on
that. First priority is going to
be judicial raises, we talked
about, you have the information
with regard to the the gap
between the executive.
And the judiciary, these are
individuals.
That live and work in your
community.
Um, we have provided and can
provide you the number of
judicial employees. The nice
thing about all these great
folks behind me as you'll have
an opportunity to meet them. And
they're a wonderful group of uh
public servants.
Next is, uh, port security.
is another high priority of
ours.
When I put this PowerPoint
together, every time I put
together a PowerPoint, I add
another incident. It's really
unfortunate. I am updating this
PowerPoint more often.
A judicial security issues than
anything else.
Yesterday
We had a horrible incident in
the 2nd judicial.
Very concerning.
And as I said in the state of
the judiciary, we can't operate.
What's my core function? If I
want equal access.
Equal opportunity.
Neutrality,
courts have to be safe, have to
be.
Because people cannot function
well in an unsafe environment.
Um, our judges deserve it.
Our employees deserve it. So
that is one of our highest
priorities.
Staff salaries.
Um
Security
Technology, it goes to the sort
of the description of how the
court system operates in order
for us, as you look at our
performance measures for us to
perform well, and I look at them
every quarter for every
district, and one of them is
time to disposition how far when
they filed that pleading Chief
Justice, just to pause for a
quick sec, Miss, do we want to,
you don't have to, but if you
want to run the PowerPoint,
it'll
show OK go with the next one.
Thank you. Please go ahead.
So we have the security needs of
25.2 million, that's the um
second bullet.
Uh, going up to the technologies
of 40 million, and that goes
towards.
Um, real time, um, transcription
of uh proceedings.
Currently
Those proceedings are recorded.
It used to be on a tape.
It's not much better, except
it's in digital format, so when
we're listening to proceedings,
we are listening to a tape on a
little tracker. This provides um
Allowance for remote access and
for a transcription.
The last bullet on, on these is
uh jury costs.
Let me just touch on Jerry costs
I.
If your funding department of
transportation.
You're not gonna not fund
asphalt.
You don't find asphalt.
There's a sign in the middle of
the road saying the road ends.
Uh, any conversation we have
about jury funds between us is a
way respectfully of your time
and our time. That has, that is
core, core, core to what we do.
And we need citizen juries in
order to operate our government.
Um, so I appreciate the
The full consideration of that
next.
Um, employee compensation.
I touched on this, uh, a little
bit. I'm gonna, um, turn this
over to Carl to give you more um
details.
Uh, we continue to fall behind
25% less than the counterparts
in the executive branch, many of
our employees qualify for means
tests, um, assistance.
You're gonna hear from uh my
colleagues at the district court
level about the amount of
turnover we receive as we
compete with the executive, we
at the Supreme Court have
recently um lost a very
qualified employee to the
executive. So we need some
parity there, next slide please.
Um, statewide security, we
talked about, um, the recent
threats I've, I've described,
uh, one in Grants.
Uh, we had up in Farmington in
Santa Fe, and then
unfortunately, most recently in
the Senate judicial.
Next slide, please.
Um
Much of the security goes
towards um
Our magistrate courts, which are
increasing and becoming more
busy a lot a lot oftentimes
those are off site from our
district court.
Um, our district courts, the
county will provide security for
that often, depending on the
county, there's there's
different levels of.
Um, security provided. A lot of
times those magistrate courts
are off site and we, we need
some money to um provide
adequate.
Uh, scanners and magnometers for
those.
Uh, next slide, please.
I turned to uh briefly, and this
will be 2nd to last. I'll turn
it over to Carl.
I do want to give you, um,
Because often I'm here as an
ask, I wanna try and explain to
you our successes and to assure
you as best I can that the money
you are appropriate could use.
Behavioral health is top of the
agenda, it seems, perhaps in
this.
Session
Um, we have, uh, launch
competency diversion and
assisted outpatient treatment.
Um, in 3 districts, Donana, San
Miguel.
Um, judicial districts. Morape
Lincoln and Otero counties.
And AOT is operating Bernal Leo.
Um
The 3rd judicial and and the 1st
judicial is just launched its
first program. This has all
occurred, as I described in the
state of judiciary from the time
you provided the special
appropriations.
In
Um
The um
Special. Thank you. So, the time
between, I think it was probably
August and December, I think it
was fairly remarkable progress.
Given how
State government operates and
I'm a
Well, uh, veteran of state
government, um, we did quite a
bit and I want to congratulate
EOC on that.
We'll touch on a couple more
successes and challenges.
And then turned it over to Carl.
Case filings continued to
increase, um, a lot of felony
cases, interestingly already we
can track there's been an
increase in felony.
Uh, matters, um, so it's up in
district court, up in magistrate
and of course, metro court.
are, uh, busy courthouse in
Albuquerque. Clearance rates
remain high when you see over
100%, that means they are
cleaning out old cases, so it's
hard to close more than they
open, but that's because they're
working through their old cases,
including, um, 110% in the in
the Supreme Court, so we've
written opinions.
This last year, um, more than
we've taken in on er.
Our basic challenges is this is
all people as all ate well, it's
all judicial branches that
appear before you will argue,
um, we take a smaller part of
the budget, it seems to be
dropping. It's a general share,
but our obligations are
increasing and the complexity of
what we take on is increasing,
um, for all the reasons I've
described.
So with that, I will close and
I'll turn to Carl or.
Um, any details and then Cherry,
you let us know when, when
you're ready.
Mr. Chair, uh, good morning,
members, uh, thank you, Chief,
uh.
Just to pick up where the chief
left off.
We're a tiny portion of state
government were were less than
2.5% of state government, um,
general fund appropriations.
And just to kind of highlight
the scale that we're talking
about, all state agencies across
the board, uh, reverted.
$69.4 million last year.
And we're, we're asking you for
$43 million. So we're, we're
less than the reversions is the
scale of, of things that we're
talking about.
Uh, I'm Karl Resse. I'm the new,
uh, director of the
administrative Office of the
courts. We have a couple one
time appropriations the chief
that I wanted to highlight here
at the beginning.
The chief talked about
technology we are um.
Hoping with your help to really
bring our courtrooms into the
21st century, we are stuck using
approximately 1980s technology,
uh, in the courtrooms right now.
Um, it's an analog technology.
We need to recable, we need to
get really nice microphones, um,
and then we need to have uh a
nice uh software backbone.
Then provide
A little bit like you're seeing
at the bottom of the screen
here, an instant readout of
what's happening in the
courtroom.
And that will really help our,
um, not only our judges, but
also the prosecutors and defense
attorneys.
At trial, and then again on
appeal, right, because right
now.
They sit and they have to listen
to the audio, uh, this new
technology lets them sort of
scan, search the text if they
want, and then click and then
hear the official audio only for
the portion they really need,
rather than spend hours and
hours, uh, wading through the,
the child transcript. Uh
appreciate DFA is wreck there 5
million toward that. That's a
start, uh, but obviously, uh,
only a portion of what we're
looking for. The chief talked
about our security requests, um.
You'll hear me talk uh later uh
more about language access and
our needs there, uh, just want
to highlight, we do have a
supplemental request.
Um
Talking a little bit more about
our courtroom modernization, uh,
right now, today, if you go into
a courthouse and you say, uh,
hi, I'd like a transcript of the
trial, we say, well, we just
have it on audio.
And I can charge you $4 and give
you one of these guys.
Or you can get a bunch of these,
uh, for a whole trial, right?
And you can, you, the party or
attorney and sit there and wade
through that, that audio like I
talked about.
Um
And, and this is something that,
you know, the PDs have brought
up to me and said, what, what
can we do to support this? The
DA is really like this. Um, and
so we're, we're really hoping
that can get some kind of
funding. One trick with this is
it's both a software solution
and a hardware solution, and so
when we go to the Capitol
committee, they say, well,
there's software in there, it's
not capital. And we go and we
talk to the analysts about
specials, and they say, well,
there's, there's stuff in there,
there's hardware in there. It's,
it's not a special, it should be
over in the Capitols, and so I
want to highlight.
There's sort of this paradox
that if we don't fund both the
hardware and the software, it
doesn't happen. Um, and so we do
have this in as a capital
request as well, but we're
hoping to.
Um, our analyst did a nice job
of, of preventing the over
presenting the overview of our
budget, the AOC budget is broken
into 4 programs, uh, one is
administrative support in this
funds our human resources,
fiscal services, um, and a whole
lot of the backbone of what AOC
does.
Um, we talk a lot, of course,
about um the need for staff and
you can see it, we hired um one
of our 214 people working at AOC
we hired 97 people and FY 24 or
55 new hires and 25. That's a
lot of turnover.
Um, our courts all have similar,
extremely high levels of
turnover. One new feature of the
employment landscape is I go and
I offer jobs.
And people say no.
People say, no, that's not
enough salary. And so then we
rifle the couch cushions and try
to come up with a little bit
more, and they still tell us no,
and that's happened 8 times just
since this July.
Um, we are asking for one extra
HR project manager to help
manage our staff. AOC's HR, um,
is a little bit like Spo on the
executive side where we, we
handle stuff for AOC but they
also have significant statewide
responsibilities for all the
courts.
Um, our fiscal staff who thank
you very much last year, we were
able to uh add our first fiscal
person or first new fiscal
person in 7 years, uh, with
funding, uh, you funded one of
our two requests that we're back
this year to ask for the other
request. We did, uh, also really
appreciate those matching funds
uh for county court improvement
projects that you gave us in
your that, that puts a burden
though on our, on our fiscal
staff, I know there's a lot of.
Interested in giving us money
for behavioral health, but that
needs that fiscal staff back
backbone to roll that out.
Um, the Chief Justice talked a
little bit about um jury and
witness and that's paid out of
this administrative support
program as well. Um, we need
$2.2 million just to make it
through FY 26, um, last year we
got that through a variety one
time appropriations, uh, so
since it's not recurring, we're
back here asking for it again.
The DFA recommendation uh is uh
810.9, uh, which is moving in
the right.
Direction, but it isn't quite
enough, um, you could make that
up through one time, the LFC
recommendation is for a $2.2
million.01 time infusion, um,
that's in the narrative of the
recommendation, but I, I haven't
quite seen that Mr. Chair, in
the actual numbers, and so I
wanted to highlight that that.
I want to make sure it's really
in there if it is, we're good to
go for one more year. If it's
not, um,
We will not make it through FY
26, uh, to pay our jurors. One
reason, uh, 3 trials are going
up, um, is because we've, we've
recovered from the pandemic, but
also by statute we pay jurors
minimum wage, and in the
legislature through uh
policymaking, you've decided to
raise the minimum wage, but you
haven't provided us additional
funding, uh, for the jury trials
and that, um, I know, uh,
representative Little uh helped
us with some growth funding last
year. We got some good one time
funding last year, but again,
it's a recurrent.
Issue. We did ask for one more
person in the jury program to,
to really help process just the
payments and speed that up, um,
that, that didn't make it into
the, the wrecks, however.
Our language access program is
also paid for out of this, um,
out of this budget.
Um, and these are the folks that
provide interpretation in courts
around the state.
Um, not only Spanish to English.
But, uh, we have a growing
number of other languages that
we need to provide
interpretation for, and we don't
necessarily have those
interpreters in New Mexico.
Uh, at the same time, our pay
rate uh for our interpreters who
are largely contract.
Um, lags significantly.
behind a neighboring states.
And the number of jobs for our
interpreters, that is the number
of interpreter requests we have
for court sessions, whether
that's a quick hearing or
whether that's a multi-day
trial, um, are increasing, uh,
significantly.
Um, and so we're, we're really
looking for help to um meet that
need. We appreciate the LFC rec
does fund the interpreter rate
increases. I'm also looking to
add to administrative staff.
Right now I have.
Um
8,
interpreters who are employees,
the rest are contractors, but my
employee interpreters end up
doing a bunch of scheduling,
rather than being in the
courtroom interpreting, and so
I'd like to hire some lower
level administrative staff, they
can do the scheduling, I can get
the interpreters back in the
courtroom.
Um, turning now to our next
program is the statewide
judiciary automation, uh, we
call it JI, the judicial
Information division, they
handle IT needs throughout uh
the state. They do everything
from paying our IT bills, paying
our internet bills, uh, to, uh,
trouble, troubleshooting um to
also doing our cybersecurity and
and some more high level stuff.
We have 8 positions, um, that
are uh currently funded through
other state funds, and we'd
really like to make them uh
permanent employees, and DFA's
got that in their, in their
recommendation for 809.9. Um, I
really like the idea of making
people permanent state
employees, and we can pay for
this stuff with the one time,
right? Because we're able to
manage that a little bit more,
um, if we start losing the one
time money.
money for people, um.
We, we start to face some tough
choices.
In addition, it's really hard to
recruit people, because they
know on the job advertisement
right there, it says whether
it's perm or term.
And those term positions that
I'm going to talk about a little
later make it really hard to
recruit.
Um, you see, we also have a, a
big request, um.
For some essential IT services
or internet connections or
cybersecurity tools, or email
licenses.
Um, an interesting feature, uh,
a little bit like jury.
The, uh, LFC, um, has a one-time
infusion in their
recommendation, and again, I see
it in the narrative, but not in
the line items.
We have something that used to
be called uh the Magistrate
Court Division and still is on
your papers, but it's really the
court operations division, they
handle our facilities for our
magistrate courts in every
county, um, security across the
state, they have our quality
assurance team making sure that
we're, we're filing correctly,
um, and that we, we also have a
statewide toll-free call center,
so the general public can just
call in and find out information
about their case, find court
records, um, they handled more
than 10,000 calls a month.
They're based down in
uh Las Cruces.
Um
And it is though it is that
group that um is top of my mind
in this budget. Uh, we have 12
existing term funded positions.
They got some one-time funding
for this year, uh, without that,
continuing into the 26, I will
have to find something else for
them to do, cause their funding
will be eliminated. It is in the
DFA but not the LFC rec, and
those are the folks who are
answering that statewide
toll-free number, uh, as well as
doing some of the quality
assurance across the state.
Um, we are looking to add a, uh.
Staff member both in our
security program and facilities
program.
Um, and add a, uh,
Security contracts so that we
have an on-call security vendor
so that when uh security cameras
go out or door swipes go out, we
just have somebody on call and
they can go out. Right now, we
have to go and procure it, and
there's a that that adds in a
time delay. It's only $70,000
but it's an important feature.
Appreciate the recommendations
to fund the magistrate court,
lease increases.
Um, and our special court
services, this is our 3rd, uh,
program budget.
Um, this group is our treatment
courts. It's our pre-trial
program. It's um
Uh, a lot of the programs that
you actually see out in the
courts, and it includes our
behavioral health uh efforts as
well.
Um, we have a group within our
special court services, um, that
it within our pretrial services
that the electronic monitoring
unit.
And these are the folks that
really monitor.
All of the defendants across the
state ordered a GPS. They, they
do the nights, weekends and
holidays. Local court staff
takes the business day and we,
we pick up the tough hours.
They've had one time funding
since uh they started in the
fall of 2019, and uh this year,
DFA recommends funding them, uh,
LFC does it, uh, primarily
through grow funding. Um, it's
great that we have the funding.
But again, I have this challenge
of recruiting people to work
nights and holidays and
weekends, and if you add an
additional challenge of term
funding on top of that, it just
makes it even harder to recruit
and retain those folks, cause
they know if they take a term
job, the first thing they do is
find a perm job as soon as they
can, and then I just like have a
behavioral health funding, um,
that you've talked about from,
uh, the summer, we'd like to
make some of those programs
permanent.
Um, and then we really would
like to increase our services as
well for self-represented
litigants.
I know that our electronic
monitoring unit is always, uh,
The subject of uh discussion,
and so I wanted to talk just a
little bit that they they
managed to handle over 245,000
GPS alerts.
Um
When we look at those, about
3200 of those require a really
intensive look, uh, with the
supervisor and those resulted in
200 excuse me.
Uh, yeah, 201 bench warrant
requests to judges across the
state, so people that we really
felt.
Um, we're way out of compliance
with their.
Um, terms of release, that's
about 250 people, uh, 215,
excuse me, Mr. Chair, people per
day that we, we managed through
that unit. So uh right now that
that funding expires at the end
of 25, so.
Um
Either
that you funded them somehow or
we'll understand that that's not
a good program, and we'll, we'll
Focus our efforts elsewhere.
Um
And that takes me through our
budgets, Mr. Chair, I just want
to in conclusion, say there are
a lot of discussions around the
legislature on a lot of
different legislation this year
asking the judicial branch to do
more. Uh, we want to be your
partner, we want to do, uh,
whatever we can within the um
context of our branch of
government within our separation
of powers mandate, um.
But those additional mandates
require some kind of funding,
and so my request to each of the
members here is, as you sit on
other committees,
And these proposals come up.
Please be thinking about, well,
is this funded? Is this in-house
bill too? You know, how is this
going to get paid for? Um, there
are good proposals around
requiring us to train more, um,
around behavioral health and we
just need the tools to
accomplish what you all want us
to do is is all I'm all I'm
saying.
Uh, with that, Mr. Chair, we'll
certainly stand for questions.
Thank you very much, Mr. Rice.
Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
Uh, thanks to the analysts. Uh,
you all, of course, are a
foundational part of our
constitutional system of
government and we deeply
appreciate your work. Uh, I want
to ask first our analysts,
perhaps uh supported by Director
Seli. We have 9 new members on
the committee. Um, so maybe, uh,
director Sali or Mr. Chavez, uh,
let's have a quick overview of
some of the recent work of the
committee and the legislature.
Including the removal of fees,
um.
Uh, that, that this legislature
chose as a policy choice.
Um, if we could have that, and
then we're gonna go right to
questions.
Morning, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. Uh, so on the,
the fee issue.
AOC in particular, uh, had a
significant amount of its
funding and operations, uh, were
funded through a variety of
different uh fees that were
imposed on people coming into
contact.
With the court system.
A couple of years ago, uh,
working with the judiciary, the
legislature chose to
Eliminate the imposition of
those fees, all in one fell
swoop in in one year. That was a
significant change to their
budget, which meant that.
They would need to live off of
fund balance for a period of
time, uh, but eventually, uh,
there would need to be um a
replacement of that revenue
source, uh, that was not from
the general fund.
Uh
So, at the same time, you're,
you've been trying to backfill.
Uh, some of those, uh, fee
revenues, the courts also have
additional funding needs that
they've been uh requesting. So
it's, I think of it, it kind of
as a double whammy in terms of
general fund pressure in this
particular area to both replace
the last fee revenue, uh, as
well as, uh, fund the
incremental cost increases for
the courts. One strategy that's
been taken, uh,
is to
Use some of this surplus in
non-recurring to load up those
funds, uh, where the fees
previously were as a way to to
try to
still incrementally grow the
recurring budget, but then allow
for um
These non-recurring fund
balances, essentially to come
in, uh, to help balance it out
so you don't see a huge pike in
in increases in recurring
general fund as a kind of a
bridge funding. Great. Thank you
very much,
Director, just a quick bit of
overview for all of us as
members and, and I voted for
that piece of legislation, I
think it's helpful for us to
discuss. Thank you, Director
Soli. Uh, we'll ask Mr. Chavez
to come back up. We're gonna go
straight to members and members,
our list right now is Pettigrew
represent
Silva represent Luhan and
represent Herndon.
Representative Pettigrew isn't.
Kick us up. You heard us.
Um,
Thank you, Chair. Uh, apologize
for the interruption. I have one
question with respect to the uh
uh
First part of the
Presentation.
On page.
The statement on in the
presentation was means tested
public assistance.
German, uh
Chief Justice, if you wouldn't
mind, just explaining that for
the people on,
on Zoom or on the webcast.
Mr. Chairman, representative,
thank you for the question.
Of Carl explained the the
technical aspect of it, but
here's basically what is
occurring.
And this, I was a trial court
judge in the first judicial. We
had employees like this.
Our lower level employees would
come in and they're, they're
paid by the state, they can get
benefits, they can get
healthcare benefits.
They're choosing not to because
the salary is so low they
qualify for governmental.
So their employees in which the
salary.
is so poor that they are
choosing more in their pocket by
not buying loveless or press and
qual most of those are very
Our clerks, our frontline
workers, Mr. Chair
Representative, yeah, the chief
is correct. Uh, it's Medicaid,
it's also SNAP. It's um also
that they'd qualify for a public
defender, um, if they were
charged with crime, and that's
what we mean when we say.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for your answer. So when we
say that they're coming in at
such a low rate.
What, what's that rate, if you
wouldn't mind helping me out.
Mr. Chair Representative, it's,
they're paid less than $45,000 a
year. It's around.
4042, depending on the court.
Um
That's 1000 a year.
Uh
And it's just the cost is so
much to move everybody up that
we can't figure that out
internally, we need your help to
meet that need.
Mr. Chair, I may come back to
this later as we have
conversations today.
Parts of those that confuses me.
So, uh
Let me do some math in my head.
Thank you. Sounds great. Thank
you for flagging Representative
Petter group. Next, we're gonna
go to Representative Silva,
please.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you, uh,
Chief Justice and Director and
presenters for the information.
um, I, I know I've talked to uh
at length with uh the director
and AOC staff on issues
concerning access to justice in
rural communities like
Chaparral, uh, where I represent
and um I will say that places
like Chaparral in New Mexico
will suffer more when we cut
costs to access to courts.
And staffing and interpreters
and um software and hardware, so
I just wanna to name that. Um,
and when um
I would love to know like how
programs like the assisted
outpatient treatment, access to
justice and pretrial services,
support New Mexico in achieving
positive outcomes to the um
issues we're trying to solve
around public safety and
behavioral health. Thank you,
Chair.
dress chaparral.
Mr. Chair, uh, representative
Silva, uh, thank you.
Um
We have a lot of programs that
we have to
Do competing things, right?
Where the judicial branch, we
balance things all the time. Um,
I think for, uh, a great example
is our pretrial services, right?
We want to maximize court
appearance and maximize public
safety while making sure that
all the folks who don't need to
be in custody or not in custody.
Um, so that's where we're, we're
providing court date reminders
so that, you know, folks are
coming to court. We help, um,
connect folks voluntarily with
other services that they might
need that might be housing or
that might be um some kind of
treatment service. Um,
Our assistant outpatient
treatment is in that vein, uh,
as well.
want to expand that service to
make sure that
The statutes you all have
passed, folks can actually take
advantage of them, right? The
whoever the petitioner is can
come into court and
We work hard on our end to make
sure we know what the Bay Hero
Health Services in the community
are so that then.
If there is an order, we can,
you know, help connect uh folks
to them.
Access to justice.
Extremely important. There are a
whole lot of folks, about 50% of
people on non-criminal cases,
you know, so family cases, civil
cases don't have a lawyer.
And so what we really want to do
is stand up uh a sort of a one
stop.
Shop online or forms for
directions on how to access, you
know, legal aid or people's
legal services and DNA People's
Legal Services, um.
And make sure that folks know
how to connect with those
services and have.
Easy to understand forms. We
have a program that um you can
actually file certain court
forms like domestic violence
forms in Spanish.
In court, and then then we have
a program to translate those, it
takes less than an hour.
Uh, the judge or or DB
commissioner can then uh fill
out the order in English,
retranslated the other way and,
and the petitioner can get their
forms back in Spanish, so they
have them in Spanish and
English.
Um, I know the chief ones, but I
think in particular
this as well, Chas good.
We are there magistrate courts
in each basically each one of um
what we've discovered.
One of the positives of COVID is
the ability for remote
proceedings for rural community
chaparral is a good example.
Which questions is whether you
need a courthouse there or, or
an access station for sure. One
of the bigger cultural changes
was to put all traffic cases
online. And as we all came here
to do our job today, what did we
do? We set our schedule part,
right? If you have family
members, you have someone to
take care of your family, if you
had other work, you had to take
care of that, that's what people
are doing when they're answering
the traffic court. We didn't
want them driving 2 hours.
For 10 minute hearing.
Displacing the rest of their
life, because that causes a
cycle that's not productive.
It's not productive to the
courts, it's not productive to
the individual.
So
Money that's asked for with
regard to technology.
Um, with benefit the community
for that exact reason,
Chaparrals a perfect example.
OK. Thank you, chair, uh, in a
follow-up question, um, when
What's the consequence to
justice involved New Mexicans if
these programs aren't fully
funded or staffed. Thank you,
chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair represents, um,
thinks there are a lot of
You know, if we don't have
interpreters,
Folks that don't speak English
as their first language, you're
gonna have a lot harder time
accessing the court. We actually
have a constitutional mandate in
New Mexico to provide
interpreters for um both parties
to cases as well as jurors.
We're the only state in the
country that um
You know, we need a pretrial
services, otherwise, you know,
You end up with tougher
decisions on uh
Attention versus um folks are
just free but then without
anyone to monitor them, you
might have, have less of an idea
of what's what's happening in
their lives.
So we view this this funding as
as critical to making sure that
we're really providing service
to New Mexico, um, in general,
to every person, and again, less
than 2.5% of the state budget.
So we're still, I think,
reasonably small. Thank you,
Director. um, thank you, Chief
Justice. Um, I wanna appreciate
the suggestion of um using
growth funds for uh things
rather than staffing and so I
just want to make a note of
that. Thank you, Chair. Thank
you very much Representative
Silva next week.
Representative Luhan, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Justice and and team
is um always happy to see you
guys, um.
To my question, I know we're not
specifically going to get too
deep into specials, but we, we
do have them as part of the
budget, and you did, uh, bring
up.
The funding that we gave you
during the special session, uh,
this past year, um, and I'm
looking at
The spending down of of some of
the funding there, um, and one
of the things we have is a $2
million.
Amount for technology projects
at the Court of Appeals, the
Supreme Court, and District
courts subject to review by the
judicial Technology Council. and
It looks like you spent that
all, so I, I want to commend
you, you're already, you, it's
true to some of the, the
testimony you're giving us today
as far as your needs, but uh it
looks like we gave you $2
million there that's been 100%
spent, um, but we're looking at
other um amounts that haven't
been spent down, there's a 1.5
million.
Uh, to replace discontinued
court fee revenue, um, and
another.
300,000 to develop and update
research and training materials
for the judicial system.
So
In your, um your testimony
today, um, under with your
slides.
I'm glad we we covered, we
started to cover the behavioral
health update, um, how much of
that money was was uh to go to
the competit is a is a 180,000
to comp competency diversion and
1.52 this is pain treatment. Is
that correct, Mr. Chair?
Mr. Chair Representative Lujan,
uh, no, I'm sorry, those amounts
are overall for both, uh,
programs. So we've
Spent completely $180,000 that
was through the end of December,
so it's a little higher now. Um,
and then we've obligated under
contract another 1.5 million.
That's, that's total for
competency diversion and AOT.
Right
So with with those programs,
we're only in a few counties
now, a couple of districts, um.
We know that Donana, Mr. Chair,
has had, uh, the only county
that's had the AOT.
Kind of, kind of up and running.
There's still some setbacks. How
is, we're what we've delivered
to you and what you're asking
additionally this year going to
help those AOT and diversion
programs Mr. Chair
Representative Han, uh, so we
did launch in Santa Fe County
AOT last week, had our first
petitions, um, so we've got that
going on. Um, and that's one
reason, you know,
We get the money and then you
have to do all that hard
coordination work and get
everybody together before the
money starts getting spent and
so I think you'll start to see
that really snowballing here in
the second half of the year.
Another challenge, and we're,
we're really grateful for the
funding, but a challenge of one
time funding is then
Yeah, contractors are sort of
like, well, that's great that I
can contract with you through
June, but
You're telling me you don't have
that money come July, so I can't
go hire more staff on, I can't
count on that money yet. Um, and
so that's why we're coming back
to estimate some of that
recurring.
Mr. Chair, what I'm hearing is
without that consistency of the
revenue stream that we are still
um not confident that we're
gonna.
Have the the infrastructure that
we need, uh, particularly we're
looking at it a very big.
portion of our um policy
initiatives this this year. Is
that what I'm hearing, Mr.
Chair?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, I,
I think that's correct. These
are pilot programs. Um, we're
hoping to really see if they're
as effective as we hope that
they will be, um, and then be
able to present those results to
you, um, but we do need a little
bit of money to keep them going,
uh, right away before we can
even get to that evaluation
stage. Mr. Chair Representative,
I can add to that, there will be
cost savings, for example, in
the first judicial with the COT
there's what you're gonna hear a
lot about Sims mapping, it's
basically
Looking at what infrastructure
you have available to those in
need. Um, that is conducted as
part of your special
appropriation.
Those plans expire after time,
but we will not need to do the
first judicial again, which is a
large district.
Um, again, a top rating.
In the 3rd, somewhat in the
second, so some of our larger
populations are moving and and
there will be some cost savings
from the special.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, and the reason why I'm
asking too, and I'm glad we've
launched the program here in in
Santa Fe, my district, part of
District one is because we know
we get a higher rate or higher
volume of cases here in in this
district and so that's, that's
part of my concern, um, how are
you, Mr. Chair? How are things
evolving in Bertol Leo County.
Uh, Mr. Chair, representative,
that's a great question, um.
It's been uh
kind of goes to these um
treatment programs generally
before you there was a large
focus on behavioral health. A
lot of these were organic from
the district. They were just
dealing with.
The organic problems they faced.
Um, so,
Second judicial is one of those.
They were dealing with a large
population,
they develop their own
program.
Um
There is going to be a point in
which it, it, it is now began to
accept.
Um, referrals, but there's going
to be a a a.
Point in which that those are
gonna have to be folded in to
what our experts describe as
best practices with them, and
that is part of the evaluation.
The 3rd is slightly different
also.
Um, but
You know, it gives us an
opportunity to look at these
different models and see what
works, apply best practices and
use the one, the best one going.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for your answers, and it is very
clear to me that we are still in
a in a phase in a place where we
don't know what's going to be
the best model and we're where
those things are going, um,
which I'm grateful that we are
very concentrated as the
legislature to move forward to
productive or helpful, if you
will, policies and in those
areas, but it's still, you're
still in that space, and I
appreciate all the the work that
you're doing, and I'd like to
see.
Um, or have reports back and how
you're spending down those
funding and how these these
models are are um really having
an effect. My concern is that we
still don't have enough
infrastructure. My concern is we
still need to do some additional
um work there looking at the
different intercepts and places
of
Before we even get to AOT of how
we can um manage what's in front
of us. Mr. Chair, my next
question is um going to uh talk
about your operational budget
and some of the needs there and
some of the differences that
we've been, that have been
coming up during the interim and
even now that we're seeing and
how you are working with the um
state personnel office, if at
all to look at a.
Any kind of study or alignment
with other state agencies, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative Luhan,
the legislature ordered a um
sort of a staff study, right?
That's that Deloitte study. And
uh the it specifically excluded
the judicial branch, so we were
not included in that, and
they've been really focused on,
on doing that, um, study in the
executive, but so that
There is not
A bunch of talk with them about
how they work. We, we have our
own classifications, um, and
employees are the vast majority
of our employees are classified
government employees.
Um
But that's a, that's
It's it's an apples and oranges
sort of comparison with the
executive. I understood and I
hope we can find a place we can
find alignment so that it which
other how we work together and
get to get to that space and
then also I think.
I'd like an update and how we're
doing that. It sounds like we
don't have enough information
today, but you know, in my
district I have a, a majority, I
would say of state employees
that I've been having contact
with and they like some some of
these things answered. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, entative
Wilhan. Next, we have
Representative Herndon and
Representative Herrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters and Chief
Justice, um Thompson, one of the
most important things of
Facing our courts, you're
correct, is security. And you
talked about some major items
that occurred in breaches of
security over the past uh few
weeks. But just to help us
understand, could you tell us
in, in a high level what those
look like, because right now we
have uh guards, we have uh metal
detectors, but tell us what else
you are thinking about and how
those security breaches might be
uh closed.
Uh, thank you. Thank you, chair.
Thank you, representative. Very
good question.
Um
It really much of it depends on
the geographic um location again
for everybody's benefit, the
district courts or the felony
courts are, the county is
responsible for the security and
the not the operation of the
courthouse, but the upkeep of
the courthouse.
Generally we have very good um
relationships with our county
officials and the, for the most
part stand up when we ask, but
they are making decisions,
right? Are we going to put
someone on patrol?
Or a constituent, or we're gonna
have someone protect the
courthouse, um, and oftentimes
they are deciding that person's
gonna be on patrol.
Um
So we, it, it first starts with
security of the courthouse,
which is usually provided by.
Um, the sheriff's office, we're
looking at models in which we
can perhaps contract to the
sheriffs to provide additional
FTEs.
Sometimes it's contract.
Security, um,
It includes a physical barriers
like um.
Fences, um.
bulletproof, uh, bullet
resistant glass.
Uh, it also, and that's the
point in which they are in the
courthouse.
We've had instances where um
Judges have been threatened
outside of the courthouse, and
that requires.
Um, sort of an additional layer
of uh provided security either
with regard to some of their
public information being out
there or ensuring that they have
direct contact with their local
law enforcement um should
emergency security be needed.
It should also include uh I do
not want to pass on this point.
Technological security is just
as important.
Strike that it's.
It's not life or death
necessarily, but the security of
our technological infrastructure
is also important, and that's
why we're asking for.
Um
Some of the money that's
included in the budget for that.
So, we're looking at different
avenues, um, in order to bolster
the the physical security.
Um, on site.
And right now, Carl, you can
perhaps uh address the question
as to the
I'll do it. And if we need to
come back to that, that's OK
too. One of the great things is,
uh, really appreciate the
engagement of the committee if
there's need to follow up on
answers, you can just distribute
them to our, our great staff and
we'll make sure the entire
committee has it. You want to
answer, that's OK. If not, we'll
go back to representative
Ferndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. It was, I
think I was just really
important for this committee to
see what the security areas are
that this court is, that the
courts are asking for and for
having the um representatives
here today to explain those in
greater detail just to say
security was a very broad
statement and your security is
incredibly important. So thank
you for that and we can follow
up on that a little later. I
appreciate that.
You know, it's uh Mr. Chair, as
we continue to look at, uh,
access to justice, and we talked
about these fines and fees, uh,
with respect to them no longer
being available and one of the
reasons that they were taken
away, Mr. Mr. Chair, and, and
members of the panel was because
we didn't, we were trying to
take those off the backs of
people who were um sometimes
always appearing before court.
So they were funding their own
legal services, but now we talk
about the civil legal services
and I'm speaking.
Specifically, Mr. Chair, to the
Office of the Administration of
the courts. The civil legal
services is incredibly important
for helping to make sure people
have access to justice. And is
that, is that section or
provision within your operations
being funded fully.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Herndon.
Um
We're talking about a couple of
different things when we talk
about our request for funding
for uh self-represented
litigants. That's the court's
own efforts. The Civil Legal
Service Commission is a separate
budget that you all fund
separately, so I don't want to
accidentally mix them, but our,
our efforts are, um,
Are aimed at that same
population, folks without
lawyers who were trying to
access the courts for family
cases for domestic violence
cases for landlord tenant cases,
um, those are the big ones. Uh,
one of the efforts we did, uh,
in the past years, we've
started uh with the Supreme
Court's leadership, ascribing
program, so we allow our clerks
after they've been properly
trained to help folks write down
what they want to say. People
come in, uh one of my favorite.
Uh, lines people use as they
come into court and they say.
I need to squash my warrant.
And the word, of course, is
quash, right? That's the word we
use, but people just don't know
the vocabulary, right? And why
would you? You don't use it
anywhere else in the world. And
so that scribing service kind of
is
helps translate, if you will,
everyday language in the court
language so folks can kind of
more easily access the courts as
one of the things we've been
doing already and we're hoping
that this funding can, can help
make our firm standardized,
easier to understand for for
everyone, but that civil legal
service funding is, is a
separate item that you all fund
separately.
A Mr. Chair Representative, good
example of that with regards to
legal services is the behavioral
health again, as that new
program rolls out, I, I got this
question in committee, and it's
a fair question. People coming
into the courthouse, trying to
avail themselves to that
opportunity for a loved one and
deciding whether they file
criminal charges because they
were abused by a loved one or
there can be other options.
Someone needs to be able to
explain those rights.
And someone needs to be able to.
Um, defend the rights of uh of
the person being petitioned,
that's where civil legal
services uh comes in in the
state judiciary, I offered my
support not only for that
program, or for all the justice
partners, including the public
defender and the district.
Thank you. And Mr. Chair, just
two more quick questions on
access to justice, um, Mr.
Chair, the presenters have
talked a lot about making sure
that that access to justice is
available. And more than once
you have missed it, you have
mentioned domestic violence with
this state being higher than the
um than the national average in
terms of domestic violence. And
one of the things that um in
terms of pilot programs that
have been, that are being
presented during this
legislative session is making
sure that
indigent victims or survivors of
domestic violence don't go to
court without an attorney to
make sure that there is that
equal access to justice and Mr.
Chair and presenters, and I'm
asking you, what are your
thoughts on that program?
Miss uh Representative Herndon,
I, I think that's a really good
policy debate for the
legislature to have.
Um
I will have a little bit of a
separation.
Our role concerned a little bit
with our branch of government.
We don't want to be in the
business of providing attorneys
for one side or the other, just
like we're not the ones who
oversee the public defenders.
We're not the ones who oversee,
you know, the CYFD attorneys who
are prosecuting abuse and
neglect cases. I don't think we
need to be in the business of
providing an attorney for one
side or another, um, but I do
think that from a policy
perspective, that's something
that's that's worth the debate
of this body and and something
you should really think about. I
think it's the
Civil legal services providers,
the, you know, the legal aid,
the DNA people's Legal Services,
the um
Uh, Esperanza Esperanza, yeah,
those kind of folks who can
deliver that service and and you
all should I encourage you to
have that debate and discuss
that. And my final question, Mr.
Chair, and presenters is with
respect to, um, again, access to
justice and trying to improve
our um process and to prevent
reentry. I'm just trying to find
out, Mr. Chair, and presenters,
if as a part of your budget, are
you looking to work with
organizations like Goodwill, for
example.
that's trying to help with the
prevention of reentry, uh, a
recidivism rather into our
criminal system and how is that
a part of your budget to work to
make sure that we are looking at
a broader aspect of our
community.
Mr. Chairman Representative, um,
it is.
part of the planning that goes
into the programs you a policy
may the behavioral health
reforms or AOT. So the idea of
this mapping this planning is to
bring in all stakeholders and
and get a survey of what is
available and connect those
people to those um.
Uh, facilities.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
presenters. Thank you,
Representative Hernon. OK, we
have Herrera, represent Garrett
represent Little represent Do,
and we'll keep on going.
OK.
Ah, thank you, Mr. Sher. Thank
you, Chief Justice and
presenters, I
I actually think this is a very
modest request, given the
overall size of our budget.
Um
I'm very worried about the rule
of law.
In in this country.
Um
And I think the stronger we make
our court systems and our
attorney General's office, I
think we're going to need that.
I mean, I was, you know, our
current president just uh
Issued a uh executive order
regarding the FBI last night. I
don't know one has to comment on
this, but I think that speaks to
how, how much we have to work.
To keep our state courts.
As strong as they can be, and
that's all I have to say, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. OK, uh, next
we have Representative Garrett,
and Represent Little, then
represent down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to
thank all four of you and just
compliment you on your
presentation styles and stories.
We're gonna be sitting here for
5 hours, whatever, and you've
made it very clear, succinct and
your stories helped create a
visual picture. Thank you. Um,
and I want to thank the chief
judge and um our administrator
of the courts, um, for pointing
out the downside of growth
funding, because it's become a
popular mechanism that we're
looking at for funding, but
you've pointed out.
That the term hiring for these
two-year periods or 3 year
periods contribute to turnover
of what could be very good
employees. I hope that we'll
consider that as we do growth
funding. Uh, 3 quick questions.
Um, the courtroom modernization
that you're asking for 40
million. It seems that that
amount of money, Mr. Chair,
covers a lot of labor because
you're using technology and as
you held up the CD which I don't
know if
Anybody here even has a CD on
their computer anymore. Um, it
seems like that 40 million is a
significant ask that Mr. Chair,
I would ask that we really look
at.
Um, so thank you for pinpointing
that. Uh, I have a second
question, Mr. Chair. Do you have
any concept you have 2000
employees across the state. Any
concept of how many of those
also have 2nd and 3rd jobs due
to the low wages.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
don't have the number in front
of me. I will get that to you,
but it is a significant number
of people. We have a formalized
process that if you're going to
ask for paid outside employment,
you have to get an approval of
either your chief judge or if
you work at AOC me.
And so, uh, I signed a lot of
those and it's eye opening, you
know, even folks making $70,000
a year feel the need to to work
that second job and it's, it's
eye opening.
Thank you Mr. Chair, if, if you
can give us, I think that says a
lot about the need.
For higher pay so that people
can actually uh have dedication
and then just my last question.
Uh, you mentioned Mr. Chair,
that difficulty getting
translators. Is there any
specific language that's
emerging as a needed translation
language more than others.
Mr. Chair, represented Garrett,
it's a lot of languages in um
Berlio County, for example, I
know Vietnamese is uh increasing
in demand, but we have
demands for, you know, uh,
Cantonese and Mandarin, we have
demands for Japanese. We've had
demands for Russian, um, it,
it's kind of across the board,
just these, these other
languages that, you know, we, we
call them languages other than
Spanish. Um, there's sort of
this extra uh demand in one
piece of the interpreter puzzle
is that much of the interpreting
now can be done.
Remotely, which is great because
it saves us on the travel time,
but it's a drawback because now
we're not competing locally any
longer, we're competing, you
know, nationwide or at least one
time zone in either direction.
And so folks can go to
Washington State and interpret
there for a much higher rate.
and it's a, it's a one hour, you
know, time difference and they
do it from their house. And so
it's that.
Market that we're in is
expanding and and our need is
increasing and so of course, the
wages, thank you for giving,
explaining that comprehensive
picture. Thank you, those are my
questions. Thank you. Next we
have Representative Little, then
Representative down.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you so much for the presentation
this morning, um, I'm both
heartened by this and really
kind of.
Boomed out about it. It's very
uh concerning to me and the
areas that are of most concern
to me. Uh, I'm gonna take us
back to the very beginning of
your presentation, uh, Mr. Chief
Justice, about the um fees, uh,
that had been um uh eliminated
uh by uh a decision here in the
legislature, um.
And so, uh, I understood that
they needed with those funds
being uh eliminated, Mr. Chair,
that they need now, you're
looking for a way to replenish
those lost fees, uh, the funds,
but I understood it can't be
from the general fund. So my
questions, Mr. Chair, um,
Is what, and I'm not quite sure
who to ask who this question is
directed to, but.
What was the plan to replace
those dollars, those lost fees.
Representative Little, we, uh,
The judicial branch did
Um
Right, feedback to the
legislature and we, we said we
thought that was a, a good um
policy decision, and but we also
provided those cost numbers at
the same time, um, and so we
showed each fund that was
impacted and the impact on the
judicial branch.
We thought maybe more of that
funding was, was going to come
to us, but it, it hadn't yet
materialized, but
Um, as our analysts talked
about, there was kind of this
idea of use a little bit of our
fund balance, get us through,
and then really see what level
we're at. And so we're here now
sort of saying, well,
All right. Thank you for that.
Uh, and, uh, uh, Mr. Chair, my
next question to the panel would
be where now would you, do you
have a recommendation of where
that, where those funds might
come from.
Um, Mr. Chair Represent Little,
we, we're asking for increased
general fund of funding for
For those er
areas of need, and just to
follow up on Representative
Garrett's question. It's 43 out
of my 214 employees have an
improved second job, so it's a
little over 2.
I don't, I don't have that for
all the courts statewide, but on
the 214 and AOC, that's what it
is. Thank you very much for that
information because it actually
leads to my next uh next uh
group of questions, um,
Regarding the compensation
study. I can understand
innocence that because the
judiciary is the third branch,
is one of the three branches
that a compensation study under
the executive might not include
the judiciary.
Though it would seem to be kind
of cost effective to do so.
However,
Um, I'm wondering if you've
considered a uh compensation
study, and if so, art is that
cost included in your request
now.
Mr. Chair Representative Little,
we did not ask for funding for
compensation study. The reason
is when you look at our.
3
job classifications that have
the most people.
And then you go look at the
general schedule, so those are
just kind of the, the clerical
positions over in the executive
branch, and you look at their
three most, their 3 most
populous, uh, if you will, um,
job classifications, that's
where you see the comparison on
this slide come from. So we
already know we're super behind.
Um, so we're sort of saying,
Please meet this need now, and
then we're happy to do that
study and get more in depth.
But we know there's this massive
deficit and it's, it's been
there for several years.
Chair, if I, if I could come in,
um.
The, um, what I can say is the
LFC is also looking into options
to possibly look into this, into
the lower pay band people for
the courts were looking at the
few options, um, not, nothing as
materialized yet, but we are
looking into options.
Thank you, uh, very much, Mr.
Chair. Um,
I, um,
Uh.
I'm very concerned. I have
worked in entities where when I
came into the position in
management that there were, I
found some employees who had
been underneath the minimum wage
requirement, uh, the minimum
wage and I remember telling
Uh, the administrators I was
working with that, um, that's
illegal.
Uh, it was then under the
federal minimum wage, so that
made it more so.
So understanding that peace and
watching and uh talking and
visiting with the employees who
were in that area who are facing
minimum wage, I mean, who were
living with the minimum wage.
was
Very heartening. These were some
of the most committed people to
their jobs that came in every
day to do their jobs and did it
not just well, but
We hear this a lot, but went
above and beyond what was asked
of them to do.
And I remember telling them that
uh we would, I would raise this
flag this and raise it with the
uh administration. I was working
with and uh impressed upon the
entity, just how important this
was and necessary.
I
Filled the same in this
situation, and I must commend
everybody who's working, the 2
and 3 jobs.
Uh, extra.
Those that are still working
underneath the state minimum
wage, and I believe it is
something that needs to be
flagged, that we include, um,
because it is
Mm
Shameful that these employees
are having to apply for public
assistance.
I
And in some of the most
necessary fields that we can
have and our judges.
Uh, it, let me just, uh, I'll
conclude. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, but um,
The work that you do for the
benefit of the people of the
state.
That are find themselves in this
situations is so important and I
feel that the commitment that
the people have.
Showing up every day is uh
It would, it is to respect them
that we do establish.
A compensation, uh, study.
Uh, that will
Um, honor that commitment to
their work, and yes, I know it's
about the classification of the
positions, but um thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for allowing me to,
for having me, giving me the
opportunity to comment on this
as well as ask questions, um,
thank you.
Excellent. Thank you very much
Representative Little. Uh, next,
we're gonna go to Represent down
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for the presentation on
yesterday in our subcommittee,
we heard from Doit, and they
were able to demonstrate large
savings for folks that are using
their resources, um, increased
trainings, access to audits,
reduced incidents, and they
mentioned that this is a
resource available to the
judiciary branch. Is there a
reason why you're choosing not
to utilize that to save.
One save dollars, but also
increase your
Your resources too.
Um, this is for cybersecurity.
Sure. Uh chair a representative,
um.
Uh, I think we have a good
relationship with do it, I, I.
It is not that we, um,
And we've coordinated with them
and this has come up in other
committees with regard in their
opinion, when we're procuring.
Firewall, who they view as the
most effective. So we do, um, at
times I don't know if he's head
of and she can address a
representative.
Um
And
So we, we do engage in those, we
do request, however.
That we'd be able to maintain
and we have a very robust.
Um, cyber defense system,
cybersecurity system.
That is crucial to us as a
separate branch of government,
we understand we are the target
in a lot of ways.
Um, but we do, um, that does not
mean we either ignore the advice
of do it or not work with them.
The Cassie, would you address
the representative. Thank you,
Chief. Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I, I will echo what
the chief has said, we are in
close collaboration with do it,
I'm a member, a named member of
the cybersecurity Advisory
Committee that operates the
Um, on a statewide level, as
well as our, we have our own
chief information security
officer who's actively involved
around the state, um.
We have actually found um very
effective
and introduce those two members
across the other other entities
across the state in the
cybersecurity field.
Given the size of the judiciary
and and as our director and the
chief mentioned earlier, um,
The, the fraction of the overall
budget, the economy of scale to
be achieved in the cybersecurity
realm is fairly small, and so we
found that collaboration is the
most effective way. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you team for
that answer. I do think the
executive branch is using them,
so they're.
If it was differentiation of
duties, but anyways, it's I, I
wouldn't like brag onto it, but
it was nice to see that they
were succeeding at something
because we've had a lot of
issues with public education,
having and it's been apparently
reduced greatly. So they've,
they've got something that's
working really well. Um, you
mentioned that the sheriffs are,
uh, their statutorily required
to provide the security or
presence of law enforcement for
the courts. Are you reimbursing
them for that?
Uh
Currently, um, we are not.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, we
are not, um, and that is.
Perhaps one way to remedy some
of the security deficiencies if
um we can build a relationships
and we've been in a conversation
with the association of
counties.
To do just that to.
Um, state money through the AOC
people to fund FTEs either
directly the sheriff's office.
When we talk about these temp.
positions, the sheriff's officer
in that team.
Situation, they're not crazy
about.
Year to year contracts, it's
hard for them to hire law
enforcement. If we can offer
them something longer term, it's
easier for them to hire someone
to then provide security to the
courthouse. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. And aren't they
also statutory statutorily
obligated to transport?
Mr. Chairman Representative,
they are statutorily obligated
to transport and thank you Mr.
Chair, and are you reimbursing
them for that?
Um, that is not a cost imposed
by the judiciary.
Um, that is the county's
obligation from the county jail
to the courthouse. We've tried
to alleviate some of those costs
by allowing for remote
appearances.
Um
But we do not reimburse them.
Thank you,
Mr. Chair, and that, oh.
I want to make sure I'm not,
that's not your issue, but it is
a burden that falls on the
counties and especially for
those of us in rural New Mexico,
where we have multiple counties.
It's an unfunded mandate. It's
something that we put in
statutory mandate but do not
fund. And I'm even at a loss to
figure out how to fund my
sheriff's 3 sheriff's
department, the vehicles that
they request not to mention the
city law enforcement office
requests. So I, I just want
Spoty to know that the sheriffs
are statutory.
obligated to provide services
that we're not reimbursing them
for. I don't think it's
reimbursed. Charles may think
different, but, but I, I think
we should take that in
consideration. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you very much
Representative. Uh, next we're
gonna go to Representative
Hernandez and then Vice Chair
Dickson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and uh
Chief Justice and director, um,
first off, uh, I echo my
colleagues when I say, you know,
um, you have my support, you
know, the courts, um,
especially, uh, the courts up in
in in Northwest New Mexico, um,
and, um, and Mr. Chairman, uh,
I, I just have a, uh, uh, just
wanna have further informa or um
questions, but I'm gonna ask.
If I could have that offline,
um, just so that way I could
have a better understanding and
I appreciate the service that,
um, that the employees are doing
for the state of Mexico. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Representative Hernandez, and
we'll make sure that staff
facilitates that conversation,
um, and with, with, uh, Mr.
Resta. Thank you. OK, Vice Chair
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, um, for the presentation.
It's nice to start with the the
big overview, um, and before we
go to the um district courts and
um other folks. Um, I have, I
think, 3 questions. Um, my first
is, uh, Mr. Chair, um, I was
wondering what the role
currently, what's the role of
AI?
Um, in the judiciary in terms of
how is it used frequency, etc.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Vice Chair, very
good question. We are in the
process of developing a rule
with regard to that.
Currently, um, it goes among
degrees.
If I am researching, I have a
case in front of me and I am
researching that.
I'm entering a search.
That is AI, right? That is, it
is looking at the language I'm
entering and trying to find
cases either in the state or
across the country that will
inform me about that.
It goes all the way to some
jurisdictions in which are
operating their lowest courts.
On AI
You enter traffic citation, it's
giving that judge
recommendations, we're not doing
any of that.
We need, we are looking at
regulating it both with regard
to.
The the use by judges.
Um, and the use by
practitioners.
It is here. It is an efficiency
in a lot of ways, especially for
access to justice issues. It can
be in a very effective tool.
It can also be, um,
Concerning with regard to its
validity or origin, so we are
currently in the process of
regulating that both with regard
to use by judges and
practitioners.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, uh, Chief
Justice. Um,
A couple of days ago, the
appropriations committee, um,
you know, we heard
Some of the behavioral health
funding requests and a lot of
those funds um were the
recommendation was to sort of
distribute throughout counties,
and my question gets to the fact
that, you know, we are sending
some of the behavioral health
funding, um, like AOT to um the
courts. And I am
Interested in whether or not
It just makes the most sense.
Um, I think I'm concerned that
We are siloing pots of money.
Trying to get
To a one objective, um, and I'm
just curious.
If you have an opinion on um the
effectiveness of
A sort of segregating funds.
Mr. Chair, vice chair, very good
question. Let me have Carl
address sort of how it works,
maybe just in, in, in the 1st or
the 3rd and then I'll give you
my view.
Sort of is, is the one that
oversees the the whole uh Mr.
Chairman and vice chair in FY
25.
Only recurring behavioral health
money we get is $325,000.
Uh, in the judicial branch that
does not include our treatment
courts. I'm, I'm, I'm talking
about the behavioral health
programs.
Um, and then we got this $3
million over the summer. So this
is a, you know, a 10 times uh
expansion of, of what we do. I
know there are a lot of
discussions, um, that would be,
I think, another 2 times, uh,
that is what we're looking at
right now, and we're happy to
Partner with the legislature
and, and take your direction on,
on where we need to be, but.
We also aren't
Trying to get more into this
space either we we want um
uh and I think where we want to
be is really focused on those
behavioral health issues that
really closely connect to court
cases, right? So that might be
in the future, we don't have so
many of these right now, but
some diversion programs like
that competency diversion where
folks who
have had their competency come
up many times in the past, we're
identifying them early when they
pick up a another criminal
charge, and then we're trying to
marry them up, if you will, with
services to kind of divert them
out from just cycling through
misdemeanor after misdemeanor
after misdemeanor.
Um
On AOT is another great example,
right, folks in crisis in the
community, their family or their
provider can file a petition in
court and we can order that
service, um, but they're
remaining in the community,
right? But we need, so we need a
little bit of funding in that
area and make sure that's all
happening, but I
Uh, I think the there are
providers that have the
expertise that need that funding
more.
Uh, focused on them.
And if I may share briefly, as
this starts out, I will say as a
manager and I may have some
disagreement for me, you'll see.
Having the money come.
through the courts is beneficial
in this way. We are good at
convening.
Um, and our experience through
much of staff at AOC, we are
good at once we put a program
out, testing it, making sure it
Matches
Um, best practices that we
understand nationally. And so,
Because we are the judiciary, we
are the weakest branch. I cannot
exert any authority over local
governments, you all can cause
you write the checks. The
executive can.
I really can't.
You know, I'm not gonna summon
them into court to tell him put
together this program or to
provide housing. So for us to
have at this stage, um, the
ability.
Um, or it to sort of start at
AOC is helpful for us to do what
you want us to do, which is sort
of convene the groups.
Look at what is there and trying
to prove some of these plans.
That, that's my aunt, that's,
you know, having.
Governed a little bit for some
time. That's been my experience.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, I really appreciate uh those
insights. Uh, last question, uh,
this goes back to um.
You know, a number of members
have, have asked about this and
uh in your presentation you
talked about um employees.
At the lower end of the pay
scale that are also needing to
take advantage of um state.
Benefits, state or federal
benefits. Um, I would be
curious um if the LFC could
coordinate um with AOC to figure
out, I'm curious how many.
Employees are needing to do that
because my question is,
Would it be more cost effective
for this state to raise
Wages, so that they're not
Needing to utilize those other
benefits, you know.
Which
Where do we
achieve greater return. So, um,
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I will ask
for the folks sitting behind me
is the districts come in front
of you for short presentations
that they focus if they have
those employees to describe what
those circumstances are.
Thank you, Vice Chair, uh,
Representative Ba please.
Excuse me. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Um,
So I think we've talked about a
few. I'm gonna be asking some
questions about
The general fund transfers, the
personal, um, services and
employee benefits category.
And um just make sure I fully
understand what's happening
here. So, Mr. Chairman, I'm
gonna start with
Um, the 200 category, and this
is on the different sheet.
Um, personal services and
employee benefits. Um, so the
operating budget for
2025 is basically um $21 million
there, but for FY 26, um, LFC is
recommending, excuse me.
Only, and I can barely read it.
It looks like nearly 17 million
and then the executive is
slightly different amount the
difference or the disparity is
about $900,000.
So I'd like to know, Mr.
Chairman, why this
Uh, decrease why this disparity.
Mr. Chair, Representative, um,
Great question. The um the first
the the PSCB um category does is
it does appear lower than last
year's operating budget. I
believe this was um.
But this was
A um requested decrease.
As well, but I, I can, I, I
would like to explain more on
the general fund transfers, I
think that will give you a
better understanding, basically,
I'm
A lot of that, a lot of the
changes in the funding in
general fund is because of that
transfer of all of the pretrial
services funding, which includes
personnel as well as contractual
obligations that they may have
and other costs, including
transcription or anything like
that, so that's what.
That's what's the general fund,
um, change, and then that
explains that flu the
fluctuation in the categories
because every, not every
district has a pretrial services
program, and the ones that do
they they vary in how much money
they have in personnel funding
as well as in contracts in the
other categories. So that's
what's throwing off.
Well, that's what kind of
causing some confusion there,
but it's because many districts.
that.
Thank you very much. um, Mr.
Chairman, so we do see her on
the sheet that pretrial services
is basically being that
responsibility is being sent
over to the AOC.
For the operating budget for
2025.
For pretrial services we're
seeing $3.9 million.
And then, of course, the big
boost for AOC in the budget is
because of the uh transfer of
that responsibility. So my
question is, Mr. Chairman, and
panel, um, functionally, what do
we gain by putting pretrial
services into AOC.
Mr. Chair
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
great question. Um, yeah, let's
see your recommendation believes
that if we concentrate all the
funding in the AOC, we can have
an administrative body truly see
where the funding is going,
because a lot of times when it's
in the individual courts, LFC
struggles to get some of that
data and having AOC do it being
a very accessible partner, it
would be very easy for us to
bring up data and a better
analysis on that funding.
And Carl also has a comment for
you and Mr. Chair representative
Brown, that was not our
requested approach this year,
although we can
Live with it, if you will, if
that's your direction. Uh, one
challenge in that area, I meant
to cover this in my primary
presentation is that um
That money
That's currently in district
court's budget, pays for people
in the district courts, and I
want to make sure that we keep
them as district court
employees, we cannot effectively
supervise them from Santa Fe or
Albuquerque, um, they need to
stay district court employees,
and they need to stay perm
employees for the reasons I
already talked about. I think in
our conversations with Director
Sully and uh Felix that we can
probably work that out, but that
is uh
A need for us.
Also, we did ask for uh funding
in each of the district court
budgets to make sure that every
court district has pretrial
services, so that would include
the 5th District, uh, Chavez,
Addy, and Lee Counties. Um, it's
also the 9th district, uh, Curry
Roosevelt, the 10th District and
the 7th.
Um
And that money in the LFC
proposal is again grow so then
if we have that challenge again
of the of the recruitment and
retention so I just wanted to
add that. I'm sorry for that.
And Mr. Chairman and Kurt, I
agree with you about that. I
want to make sure we're not
diminishing the availability of
those services because
The situs of the funding has
changed, so maybe we should
really be paying attention and
Mr. Chair, also hear back from
you next budget cycle to see how
it's working. All right, thank
you.
Thank you very much,
Representative Brown. OK, I
don't see any other questions.
Uh, I'm gonna, first, thanks to
the members, really wonderful
questions. It's awesome to see
so many folks tuned in to Volume
2 and looking at the other
sources of information we have.
Uh, second, um, there was a $2
million technology thing special
last year. Do we have an update
on how that was utilized.
Yeah
Mr. Chair, I know that we have
parceled out that money. I do
not know the status of the
spending, but I do know that we
met our budget, uh, our
technology committee and our
budget committee proposed a
distribution to the Supreme
Court that they adopted, and
that was.
Over the summer or perhaps in in
August.
Um, we're looking up right now,
but we may need to follow up
with you, Mr. Chair, on the
status of actually spending
those dollars. But of course,
that's in the current year, so
we still have a few months.
That's right. Uh, thank you very
much, Mr. Rice, and uh, that
would be great to get an update
on that. Also, there was a um
there's been several years of uh
well-warranted requests for
enhanced.
Court security and sort of that
infrastructure. Um, there, can
you give us a, uh, a summary of
how that has been spent.
past and I, I know there was
several million dollars in the
past couple of years that were
invested in that.
And at least one of those
tranches, there, there was a
request from AOC to reauthorize
that funding because it had not
been expended in the fiscal year
in which it was dedicated.
I know, Mister Chair, we've had
past requests for um like X-rays
and, and the metal detectors and
the magistrate courts around the
state.
I'm trying to remember off the
top of my head, and I'm sorry, I
don't the, the amount, but let
me get back to you, no worries.
We, we can get you those
details. I can tell you most of
it's gonna be that kind of
hardware it's going to be, um,
the metal detectors, um, those
kind of things that that
especially magistrate courts
we've done a lot of work in
medicine.
Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
Um, that's great. We'll have a
public safety work group will
announce work groups across all
areas of the budget, uh, today,
members will be assigned, so,
uh, we'll have a lot of time to
sort of dig into further
information there.
Um
The
Uh, I, I wanna highlight and
appreciate the conversation
around the AOT and then it sort
of other um
Services in that realm. It's a
very robust conversation that's
gonna be at the heart of a lot
of our budget work, particularly
around specials and behavioral
health.
Uh, thank the members for asking
a lot of great number of great
questions on that. And it
sounded like to me, Mr. Chief
Justice, that right now, AOT is
Fine in the role is sort of
maybe a co-facilitator that sort
of a soul facilitator, that's
not a desired role, or is that
overstating it from my end.
I prefer coal over soul.
Uh, I will choose that. I think
it has to be quite frankly, Mr.
Chair, it, it has to involve all
three branches and um.
It it would be, it's called,
and, and let me make this offer
for anybody that
In two areas I would like to see
on the ground how things are
operating, we make available our
first judicial district court
with regard to AOT.
Um, or, or second, you want to
see the courtroom technology
we're talking about, we have
some courts up and running in
that regard. Anybody that would
like to see that, we will make
that available to you. Thank
you, Mr. Chief Justice. Um,
moving into the, the request for
the um transcription, um.
The we would need additional
clarity on what the 40 million
is for.
Um
Related to the vice chair's
question, are there
subscriptions for artificial
intelligence services that the
court currently has or is
looking at, because particularly
in sort of public translation
services.
It seems like there's a fair
argument to be made for very low
cost.
Machine-based.
Readily sort of verifiable clear
translation opportunities that
are available.
I'll fill in the details. That
is a fair point. Um, I would
Urge and, and we'll even come to
your body and, and try to get
sort of an example of what this
technology does, it does it
slightly different for court
use. It literally identifies the
plaintiff and the defendant,
prosecutor and the state who the
witnesses are, and for purposes
of a court record, it's very
critical. It is also very
hardware based, so it's not just
a license or software, it's
putting new lines in and
additional hardware, but we can
break out those costs.
for you as we've, we've done a
couple of courthouses and we can
give you very. Great. Thank,
thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
Um, the
Uh-huh
regarding the the employee pay
my assessment, Mr. Chief
Justice, and Mr. Rice, that
would be over the past several
years and finally sort of signed
by the executive last year after
several years of vetoes, there
were uh sort of judicial pay
increases that had been sought
broadly and in a bipartisan
fashion, were rejected by the
executive finally accepted by
the executive recently. It seems
like now, the focus is sort of
Expanding to the broader court
staff. Is that to sort of catch
up, Mr. Chair, that's correct,
and I wanted, and I did stay the
judiciary very much thank you
all for those judicial races
last year and the executive for
signing that into law. The focus
now is on.
Our staff, we did have a
workforce improvement plan.
Maybe 58 years ago, um, but the
gaps have increased since then,
so you're exactly right.
We do, we do very much
appreciate your efforts last
year, and it's made a difference
in the second judicial we've had
a number of qualified.
Um, applicants
From Department of Justice, we
rarely get US attorneys to apply
for state court positions.
And I think the salaries made a
difference. That's great. Thank
you for that. Um, I think that
wraps sort of for for right now,
um, uh members again, thanks for
the great presentation. I'm
gonna go ahead and ask for the
LFC recommendation all in while,
as we acknowledge that there
continues to be a lot of robust
both staff and member work that
will be part of this.
Madam Vice Chair, Mr. Chair, I
would move that the committee
adopt the LFC recommendation.
OK, it's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by ranking
member Chatfield. Is there any
opposition to adopting that
motion, not seeing any, we've
adopted that. Thank you very
much.
OK,
now we're gonna go to our court
of appeals.
Well I think the staff for
having water for our analysts up
there.
If the analysts need more water,
just let us know,
yeah, that's fair.
Fair point.
And welcome Judge Atrap. We
appreciate you being here today.
Thank you for having us.
OK.
Uh, Mr. Chavez.
Um, chair, members of the
committee, um, here I am again
to talk again to you all. Um,
I'm here, I'm here to clarify
first that I will be explaining
the differences within the
courts, and I'll pass it over to
Mrs. Smiglia for any comment
that he may have or if I missed
anything and we'll pass it over
to the court for their
presentation.
With that for the Court of
Appeals, it's behind tab 2,
agency code 215.
And in volume 2, it's in pages 9
through 10, again, pages 9
through 10.
And in the packet, you will see
my wonderful uh tool here, the
high level, again, to show you
guys a more visual
representation of what I will be
speaking on.
And with that, the differences
for the court of appeals, the
differences in revenue.
Is the executive exceeded the
LFC recommendation by $74.5,000.
This difference is this
difference in revenue is because
in the base, the LFC recommended
partially funding increases in
IT travel, education, travel
indus, a lot, a lot in the other
category because the LFC
prioritized funding salary,
judicial salary increases. The
executive fully funded that
aforementioned other costs of
the um increases in IT and
travel.
And for the expansions that the
Court of Appeals requested, the
LFC recommendation funds and
expansion for the custodian
position, while the executive
recommendation funds a judicial
specialist as an expansion. The
agency requested both positions
as expansion, you can see the
differences that were split on
that.
And with that, I'll pass it over
to Mrs. Smiglia for any comments
he may have. Thank you.
Madam Chair, committee members,
thank you, Felix, um, like you
said, just a small 74.5,000
difference between RX. I want to
make sure to thank the Court of
Appeals and Chief Judge Atrap
for inviting Felix and I to
their facilities, really letting
us know what the issues are that
goes a long way, especially when
you have 36 agencies to manage,
um, they, their staffs very
willing to work with us. I think
it's someone's birthday, um,
according to discreet pin he's
wearing, but, um, like, like
Felix said the experiences we
kind of just each viewed one, as
more necessary than the other,
but overall, you know, they've,
uh, the Court of Appeals has
asked for pretty nominal
increases in the time that I've
been with the judiciary, uh
analysts, so definitely wanna.
Um, advocate for, you know,
giving them their request this
year. I'm going to hand it off
to Chief Judge Jennifer Atra.
Thank you. Uh, yes, good
morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, again, my name is
Jennifer Atrip. I am the chief
judge at the Court of Appeals,
and I'd like to introduce a few
folks with me today, Ramon
Maestis is our chief clerk, and
uh, as Mr. Semiglia indicated,
it is Ramon's birthday. I'm sure
he cannot think of a better
place to be today,
um, and I'd also like to
introduce Kimberly Tran. She is
our new CFO, uh, and so thank
you again for having us, um, as
the Chief Justice.
mentioned, uh, the Court of
Appeals serves the entire state
of New Mexico. We have uh over
50 employees and 10 judges, uh,
and we operate out of Santa Fe
and Albuquerque, uh, and on
behalf of all of our staff and
all of our judges, uh, I really
want to thank you for your time
and consideration of our court's
budget, and I very much want to
thank LFC and Mr. Chavez, DFA,
Mr. Semiglia, for your review
for coming to our courthouse and
seeing what's going on in our
court and for your
recommendation.
Um, but before I get into the
court of appeals uh request and
I will, I will keep that uh
brief.
I do want to spend a few
minutes, uh, speaking in strong
support of the judicial branch
compensation initiative that
compensation initiative for our
staff, um, and I'm, I may be
taking a slightly different uh
perspective than, um, my
colleagues at the district and
trial level, um, for the Court
of Appeals lagging pay in the
judiciary has really acutely
affected our ability to operate
our clerk's office in Santa Fe,
and I'm gonna tell you why that
is.
Um, our clerks office staff
though, I want to say they are
the backbone of our courts
operations. They interface with
our public. Uh, they provide
customer support, they ensure
everything is timely filed. Uh,
they keep the court's official
records, um, but entry level pay
for these positions is well
below the living wage in Santa
Fe for employees with families.
This has made it very difficult
to recruit and retain clerk's
office staff.
We at the Court of Appeals are
lean, uh, and we run a fairly
efficient body. We have 2
full-time clerk's office
positions in Santa Fe, just to,
uh, but both are currently
vacant.
One of these positions has
experienced near constant
turnover since February of 2021,
and this position was most
recently a vacated in October.
The second position just became
vacant last month when our very
long time employee took a higher
pain position in the executive
branch.
Now just to keep our doors open
in Santa Fe, Ramon, our chief
clerk, and Stephanie, our deputy
chief clerk. They often staff
the window. I have sent my law
clerk multiple times to keep our
clerk's office open.
These vacancies additionally tax
our Albuquerque clerk's office
staff who've taken on more and
more responsibilities.
They worked overtime just to
ensure that the court's work is
timely completed.
Passing the staff compensation
initiative for the judicial
branch will go a long way.
In resolving our clerk's office
staffing issues in Santa Fe, and
I really just want to implore
this body to support this
initiative in full. Uh, and
before moving on to our court's
request. Um, I want to express
thanks to this body and to the
legislature as a whole, again to
DFA and LFC, um, over the last
couple of years, you all have
supported the Court of Appeals
budget. Uh, it has resulted in
much needed funding increases,
and I am pleased to report that
we've put those funds to good
use.
Uh, and it has made a real
difference in our performance
for FY 24, our disposition rate
was 106%. This is the 6th year
in a row that the Court of
Appeals has obtained over a 100%
disposition rate.
Also in FY 24, we improved our
time to disposition by 16% in
civil cases and 6% in criminal
cases. And I'm very pleased to
report that as of the end of FY
24, the Court of Appeals has
cleared its historic backlog of
general calendar cases. I'm
really proud of these successes
and so very grateful for all of
our staff and our judges. Their
tireless efforts made this
happen.
But I'm coming before you today
saying we've got more work to do
at the Court of Appeals, as we
always do, and our budget
requests are focused on two key
initiatives this year. Um, I'm
gonna touch on those key
initiatives and highlight some
differences between uh DFA and
LFC's recommendations. Uh, so
our first key initiative is
improved performance.
Starting this fiscal year and FY
25, the Court of Appeals adopted
national timeliness standards
set by the National Center for
State Courts. And although we've
made great progress that I just
touched on, we still have a ways
to go to meet these national
standards.
Eliminating delay at the very
beginning stages of our
repellent process, will go a
ways in meeting these standards,
and the court has sought an
additional judicial specialists
in our clerk's office to do just
that. This specialist would also
support our overburdened clerk's
office staff who've stuck with
us at the Court of Appeals.
We are also seeking one time
special appropriations for our
mediation and pro tem funding
programs.
Uh, we want to continue these
programs that have been so very
helpful in clearing our backlog
and working towards national
standards.
The Court of Appeals has
successfully utilized pro tem
judges over the last 3 years to
resolve more appeals, and just
one year ago in February of
2024, we restarted our mediation
program. It had been dormant,
uh, or non-existent since 2019.
We restarted this program with a
contract, contract, uh, uh,
employees or staff, we have a
contract attorney chief mediator
and we also contract with
retired Judge mediators, and
just this first year,
We've resolved 28 appeals
through mediation, uh, most of
which were complex civil cases.
And just to put that in
perspective, that's about the
docket of uh one court of
appeals judge with the
assistance of two law clerks,
but at a fraction of the cost,
about 25% of the cost.
To date, the court has funded
these programs with junior Bable
funds, uh, as well as grow funds
this year, and I come before
you, uh, this year seeking
special appropriations to
continue these programs for one
year, so we can report back next
year and hopefully get permanent
funding for these programs.
Our second key initiative is for
Albuquerque courthouse. Uh, the
Court of Appeals is one of 3
judicial entities that own our
own courthouse, along with the
Supreme Court and the
Metropolitan Court in Bertollio
County.
Owning your own building, uh,
presents a difficult budget
challenge without adequate
funding for building needs were
left often with a difficult
choice between deferring needed
repairs or leaving vacancies
unfilled, which of course
affects our our performance. We
were lucky enough in the last 4
fiscal years to have access to a
capital outlay appropriation,
that appropriation has been
exhausted, uh, and this past
year, our facilities manager,
thank you for funding that
position.
In our building committee
undertook an exhaustive review
of our, of our building. It is
approximately 16 years old at
this point. All the warranties
have expired, um, and they have
uh come up with a list of
repairs and renovations that are
really needed within the next
year.
Um, we don't have funding for
these projects currently, um,
and we don't have funding for
issues that come up with our
building, um, emergency issues,
and I, I just want to touch on
one example. So within the last
few weeks, uh, we, uh, had large
2 ft by 2 ft sandstone tiles.
They are on the exterior of our
building, uh, they
They fell off. This is not the
first time this has happened,
uh, luckily no one was hurt, um,
and they fell onto the 2nd floor
deck. We have secured the area.
Um, however, we do not have
funding to make those needed
repairs. So this one time we're
seeking one time, uh, special
appropriation of just over
500,000 to cover necessary
repairs and renovations that are
really critical for public
safety and for court operations.
Uh lastly,
I want to speak in favor of that
custodial position that Mr.
Chavez mentioned. Um, again,
it's in LFC's recommendation,
uh, but was excluded in DFAs.
Um, our courthouse in
Albuquerque is 37,000 square
feet. Uh, we have one custodian
to service the entire building.
He is amazing and does a
fantastic job, but this is just
more than one person can manage.
Um, so Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I would respectfully
ask you to adopt the DFA
recommendation with the addition
of that custodian position. Um,
I will end by drawing your
attention to the one page flyer
that's up on your screens and
hopefully you've been provided
with this, um, this summarizes
our request this year. It
highlights those differences
between DFA and LFC, and it also
includes our.
Capital outlay and supplemental
requests. So with that, thank
you all again so much for your
time, for your consideration, we
so much appreciate it and we're
happy to answer your questions.
Thank you very much. Uh, we're
gonna go straight to questions.
We're gonna start with our
ranking member, Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh
First, uh, question. Can you
explain to me
Um
Disposition and how can you have
16% disposition.
Mr. Cha, Representative
Chatfield, thank you for that
question. Yeah, so our
disposition rate is roughly
calculated by the number of
cases we resolve.
Divided by the number of new
cases that come in the door. So
how many cases are we closing
and finishing up, and how many
new cases are coming in. And so
what 16 disposition rates says,
is that we're resolving more
cases, uh, than, than are coming
in our door.
So you're gaining on them.
We are, which is, which is great
news. Yes.
Thank you. Happy birthday.
Thank you sir
um.
And, and
Uh, my second question.
It looks like you have
Not enough money.
To pay your employees this
current year.
And uh you LFC did not recommend
any addition to your budget for
next year, uh, in that category.
Uh, can you tell me about your
Tell me about that.
Mr. Chair, Representative, thank
you. Uh, yes, this year is, is
tight uh for the Court of
Appeals for our budget, um, and,
uh, particularly tight in the
salary and benefits category.
Uh, we are awaiting, uh, and,
and implore this body to provide
the Court of Appeals as well as
all the other judicial entities
with supplemental funding, uh
for that, for last year's um
judge raises, uh, because we are
short $164,000.
for that, uh, that doesn't sound
like a lot of money for the
Court of Appeals. It is. And so
we really need that funding to
make up the difference in our
salary and benefits category.
So, Mr. Chair, could we hear
from LFC and, and just to
understand what the thought
line, the thought process is
there why there was not money
added into the budget to deal
with that.
Mr. Chair, a great question. I,
I, um.
To explain that basically the
LFC recommendation was, um,
Sorry, give me one second and
collect my thoughts for 1 2nd.
So, basically the understanding
for the budget for the LFC side
was we wanted to fund judicial
pay increases to keep them.
Keep them as what they want it
to be because that's what's
causing a lot of this um
shortfall or keeping the PSMB
category tight and what LFC did
as a supplemental, they.
They put that needed funding
into that supplemental for them
and also put it in their budget
as a recurring.
Um, expense.
In order to clear that.
That, um
that tightness in the category
for lack of a better term.
So, Mr. Chair.
Let me understand this. You took
some money out of that was a
supplemental appropriation, and
you put it into recurring so
that they won't be short next
year.
And Mr. Cha, excuse me, I did
not, I did not, um, I answered
that in a confusing way.
Basically, the LFC
recommendation as a supplemental
for FY 25 to get them whole in
that category and moving forward
in F5 26, they requested amount
to have that funding hole is in
there. So the supplemental is in
there to help them for FY 25,
and then that funding will also
be in there for recurring for
the foreseeable future.
So, uh, Mr. Chairman, are you,
you're good?
For next year, you, you can pay
your folks that work for you.
Mr. Chair, uh, representative,
um, with that addition, I, I
believe the supplemental
funding, uh it's, it's all going
to the administrative office of
the courts AOC for then
distribution to, to the judicial
entities. Uh, so that's why it
may not be showing up on our
line item, um, that will cover
the uh judge pay increase that
you all passed last year and
thank you for that. It'll cover
that. Like it, it, it won't
cover, um, you know, needed
positions, uh, digital.
specialists, custodian and all
that.
So Mr. Chair, what I'm trying to
understand is just make sure
that it covers your shortfall.
Uh, expansions is a different
thing that we talked about, but
it covers your shortfall.
And your, your main hope for
next year.
Mr. Chair Representative, yes.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, ranking
member Chatfield. We have
representative Pettigrew and
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Chief Justice, for being
here. I
Uh, my colleague,
Representative Chatfield stole
my first question. Thank you for
the answer. You clarified it for
me as well.
Uh, Chairman, uh, Chief Justice,
I hear that it fixes
What we legislated last year for
a year 25.
And makes it recurring for 26.
Chairman, uh, Chief Justice,
does it make you whole to finish
this.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Pettigrew, um,
Yes, so if we get that
supplemental funding that's
funneled through AOC, yes, it
will make us whole for that
judicial salary increase.
Mr. Chair, Chief Justice.
Is that a big if or a small if?
Uh,
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
it's an absolute we need that
supplemental funding to be
whole, to to.
To operate for the remainder of
the fiscal year for sure.
So Chairman, uh, Chief.
I look at fiscal year 25 as
starting July 1st, going to June
30th of 26.
And recurring
Problem fixed in 26, with the
other one.
I, I still am concerned to
finish fiscal year 20 this year.
I don't know that
The answer I got really
clarifies or
Solves the problem of where
you're at budget-wise to get you
through June 30th of this year.
Can you expand on that?
Either ease my mind or tell us
we're not.
There's gonna be a problem and
there's gonna be adjustments or
there's gonna be an additional
ask between
Representative, uh, thank you
for that clarification.
We will not, at the Court of
Appeals spend more money than
we've been appropriated. That
will not happen.
Uh, and so I hope that puts your
mind at ease. We will make the
necessary hard choices,
including coordinating off an
area uh where tiles have fallen
off the building, making sure
nobody gets there, but delaying
repairing those, uh, because we,
we want to ensure that we can
pay our salary and benefits for
our employees. So we won't
expand our budget, uh, this
fiscal year.
We really need that 164, uh, to
fill in that gap for judicial
salaries, uh, but, but we are
good stewards of public funds
and we will not overspend our
budget and we, I don't
anticipate us needing to come
before, uh, the body for
additional emergency funding.
Chairman Chief, I appreciate uh
that answer, and if I came
across in any way, insinuating
that you were gonna overspend a
budget. I apologize for that. I,
I know better than that. I'm
just concerned that sometimes we
get so focused.
In my opinion on what's gonna
happen next year and the
following year that we don't
even look at whether or not our
agencies are gonna be whole to
finish the remaining 5 months.
And so that concerns me.
Chairman and Chief Justice, with
respect to that is
This building is is owned by the
state, so with is GSA in charge
of that? or who, who's in, who's
in charge of, who do you go to
if you need money to fix the
building right now.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
we, we come to the legislature,
so it's my understanding and,
and I'll turn to my CFO and my
chief clerk if I'm mistaken,
that the Court of Appeals owns
this building, uh, and so we
don't, uh, we don't go elsewhere
in terms of funding we come to
the legislature for funding. Uh,
we've received capital outlay
appropriations in the past, uh,
and we are seeking a one-time
appropriation to be able to fix
those repairs, uh, that we need
to over this.
next year.
OK.
Thank you for that answer. Thank
you, Chairman. One last
question, um, in the beginning
part of your presentation, I
think I heard you say that
you're starting, or where you're
at and your base salaries for
new hires.
Doesn't make them whole with
respect to
I think the words were livable
wage in Santa Fe. You need to
find what that livable wages and
and what that starting salary
is.
German chief.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Representative,
yes, thank you for that
question. Uh, and so, um.
In terms of a a living wage, um,
MIT, uh, sets out, uh, living
wages around the country, um,
and for Santa Fe for a family
with one working adult with
children, uh, which oftentimes
are uh entry level judicial
specialists fit that category.
At the living wage in Santa Fe
is $38 approximately $38 to $46
an hour. OK.
Um, and, uh, currently judicial
specialists if we pay them.
Uh, 100% of their comper ratio,
uh, they're at $21 to $23 an
hour.
Um, and here in Santa Fe for a
family that just.
It's insufficient.
Chairman Chief 21 is somewhere
around 45,000 a year.
Fantastic Matt.
Um,
Actually, you can thank the
Chief Justice, the other Chief
Justice for that one, because
when he gave me that number, I
started doing a whole bunch of
calculations, pulled up a whole
bunch of reports and uh our
analysts are
Uh, I over here helped me get
through some of the, some of the
numbers in this, uh, off the
website.
I appreciate the numbers that
you gave me, um.
I think I have a whole bunch
more questions, but like I told
the chairman earlier, I'm still
trying to wrap my head around
some of them, so thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew. Next,
we're gonna go to Representative
Vincent and then represent Dale.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, Chief Judge Ramon, happy
birthday. Hope you're having a
great time
in this year
looks like you're in here
yeah, I was gonna ask how old
you are, but never mind.
Um, anyway, what, what my
question was, is, uh,
ranking member Chatfield did get
my question, but do you
So since I've been listening to
this for 2 years and people
being backlogged and backlogged
and backlogged, and we always,
we don't want that backlog
there. Do you share your ideas
with other courts, uh, maybe
even like district courts and
tell them how you're keeping
your, your logs down.
Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Vincent, um
I would say that the way the
Court of Appeals operates and um
how our backlog came about maybe
pretty distinct from our trial
courts, um, I anticipate the,
the trial courts were post
pandemic, uh, we've got a lot
more trials coming up, uh, that
that may contribute to their
backlog. But then in turn it
could contribute to our, our
backlog here at the Court of
Appeals, um, we would be happy
and I, I, I have great
relationships with our chief
judges around the state, uh, to
chat about.
What we've done, um, but really
alternative dispute resolution
mediation. I know a lot of trial
courts utilize that uh pro tem
judges as needed, a lot of trial
judge judges utilize that. So,
um,
We may not be that innovating uh
at the Court of Appeals, but we
are utilizing those tools and we
are doing it because you all
have supported our budget. We
have the money to do it. And so,
um, thank you, and I, and I urge
you to support, uh, to the
extent that's part of any, any
court's budget to support those
types of, of programs uh to keep
backlogs down.
Thank you for your answer. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, for the time.
Thank you very much
Representative uh Vincent. Next
we have Representative down.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and thank
you.
On the mediation, what are the
minimum requirements for someone
to be a mediator.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Dao, uh, so we, um, submitted a
request, uh RFP, um, and, uh,
Ramon could certainly speak to
all of the requirements for our
chief mediator, um, but before I
turn it over to Ramon, our other
mediators are retired judges um
from the Court of Appeals, uh,
and from a trial courts uh
around the state and so they are
all currently licensed. Um, I
believe they've all, uh, had
training and mediation.
um, and they've all had a wealth
of experience in terms of the
cases they've personally seen.
So it's, it's a great group, but
in terms of the qualifications
for a chief mediator, Ramon.
Thank you, Chair, uh,
Representative, the chief
mediator is part of the RFP was
required to be an attorney in
good standing with an extensive
history and mediation and to be
certified mediator. Um, they had
to, in the proposals show their
ideas of how to manage the Court
of Appeals mediation program,
and then also show experience
with keeping stats, working with
attorneys, working with parties
from various backgrounds, uh,
and, and the ability to screen
cases and select cases that
would be ripe or good for
mediation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I'm
really glad that's back up and
running, but I've been traveling
over the holidays, and I've been
in different states, and I've
heard commercials on radio and
satellite. It, it sounds like,
you know, it wasn't, it wasn't,
it wasn't 8 years of law school
and
Years of experience. It was like
fast track to mediation, so is
that something other states do
and we don't do.
Oh gosh, Mr. Chair
Representative, that's a
fantastic question that I don't
have the answer to, uh, perhaps
AOC would have some, some more
insight in terms of ADR around
the country. OK. All right,
thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm just always looking for ways
that we could pass that fast
track some folks. We have such a
shortage of workforce, and we do
not have enough people
graduating with degrees and
certainly not with this sort of
expertise. So, thank you. Thank
you.
Thank you very much,
Representative Dao. Uh, next,
we're gonna go to Representative
Duncan, please.
Thank you Mr. Chair, uh, Ramon,
I was just wondering if I could
sing Happy Birthday to you.
This kid, Mr. Chair, um
uh just a quick question for
you.
You'd probably be throwing it at
me, not just gambling me down.
Um, just a quick question for
you, uh, Chief, and most
investors and real estate
investors, they put aside money
every year for renovations,
repairs and stuff like that. Is
that a thought that you thought
about instead of coming back
year after year.
Yes, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Duncan, uh,
absolutely. Uh, so part of our
court's budget requests, uh, the
last couple of years, um, have a
sought funding that would be on
a reoccurring basis, uh, and
through the unified budget
process this year, um, uh, the
decision was made that, uh, a
special one-time appropriation
was the better direction to go,
um, but we've also explored the
possibility of seeking capital
outlay, um, so that we aren't
faced with
with reverting, uh, funds at
least in one year, um, and I
believe there's also um
Legislation that's being
advanced with uh the judiciary
or through the judiciary, uh,
for a court emergency property
reserve funds, um, and that is
uh my understanding of that uh
bill would be for, again, our,
our judicial entities who own
our buildings, Supreme Court
Court of Appeals, Metropolitan
Court, uh, this would be a
fairly small fund, I believe
it's $450,000 that could be
available for emergency building
issues, uh, that really doesn't
address.
the, you know, as building ages,
we obviously just have to keep
it up, uh, and running, so this
is great. I, I would encourage
and uh you all to support that
bill, um, but in terms of the,
the Court of Appeals needing
specific funding for a building,
we really, uh, really need that
special appropriation this year.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
and, you know, the song still
some it's ready to go. Thank you
very much, Representative
Duncan, um, and well, I don't
know that we have any other
questions, um, um, thank you
very much, uh, Madam Chief.
We've, uh, in our, um, I think
it's uh in our volume one, we do
have that money that's in there,
uh, the supplemental funding,
which is great. So thanks to the
members.
the questions there, we do have
that in there. We'll go ahead
and ask for the LFC uh budget
recommendation for right now and
go from there. Thank you all
very much. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I would
recommend the committee adopt
the LFC recommendation.
It's been uh moved by Vice Cha
Dixon, seconded by ranking
member Chatfield in the
opposition to that motion,
saying no, that's adopted. Thank
you. Thank you.
Oh
Next, we're gonna go ahead and
uh come back.
And asked uh our Chief Justice
to return.
contact.
As we're getting ready, maybe
we'll ask Mr. Chavez to start us
off and want to make sure, Mr.
Chief Justice, we get to the
appropriate uh slides when it
comes time for that, but we can
go ahead and uh get started if
you can guide us into the
materials, Mr. Chavez, and we'll
go from there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, um, we're here to
present the Supreme Court's
different sheets. They're again
behind taboo, like all of them
will be. It's agency 216 and in
volume 2, it's in pages 11
through 12. Again, 11 to 12.
OK, for the uh revenue
differences, the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by $31.1,000.
That difference is because the
LFC recommendation and we both
included different types of
positions in our funding. And
let's see recognition includes
funding for a court financial
manager.
As well as funding for student
extern contracts and utility
costs.
The executive recommendation
funds a financial specialist,
night watch person and partially
funds travel and training costs.
Both recommendations, of course,
do the judicial salary increases
as well as expansion into the
Westlaw database for magistrate
judges.
And um the expansions, the LFC
and executive recommendation do
not include expansions on the
LFC side, we wanted to see what
this, uh, how the effect is of
transitioning to a term
schedule, which I imagine the
Chief Justice will elaborate on.
But that, that's the
understanding from the LFC side.
With that, I'll move it, I'll
pass it on to Mr. Samiglia for
his comment. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, committee members,
thank you, Felix. Uh, not much
to add in terms of um the
conversation that came up
earlier about the judicial
salary increases, uh, every
judicial district court and
Court of Appeals Supreme Court
put in their base requests, the
amount that they need to get
there, so I believe Felix and I
fulfilled that in both our
recommendations for the Supreme
Court, it was $256,000 a year,
so they should be taken care of
there, like Felix said, a night
watch person, uh, funding for
that and funding for a
financial.
specialist senior was included
in the executive reck, and we,
we included $50,000 for staff
and justices travel and
education training and um a
couple of non-recurring things
which we can talk about at a.
Separate date, um.
Am I still buying? That's all
I've got. I can, we can sync to
Ramo now if we want. We can
proceed.
Thank, thank you very much, uh,
Mr. Semiglia.
And Mr. Chavez.
We'll just go ahead and proceed,
chair. That sounds great. Um, we
are so efficient. We don't need
that many slots.
I'm back. Uh, I'm Dave Thompson.
I'm Chief Justice Mexico Supreme
Court presenting to you with
regard to our court in
particular. That's me in the
picture. Um, I'm joined by Liz
Garcia.
She is our chief clerk. She
operates our courthouse,
anything involving our
courthouse just a little bit
north to you. That's Liz's job.
Christina is here. She's our
CFO. She can answer any
particular, um, I'm going to uh
have Liz, there was some
Conversation about employee
compensation, you've been
briefed on that for appeals Chip
did a nice job. You'll hear a
lot about it.
Um, let me just have Liz, uh,
give you some concrete examples
with regard to our staff, you
want to talk a little bit about
a compensation. Mm
Dixon and members of HAFC. It's
our honor to be able to present
to you the Supreme Court of Y26
budget request in terms of the
Supreme Court of New Mexico.
We have 42 employees that
proudly serve the state of New
Mexico.
Out of those 42 employees we
have 6 Supreme Court employees
that have to work a second job
to make ends meet, um.
That's
We have
2 FTEs, uh, that make less than
45,000. We have 10 FTEs to make.
From 45 to 80, 60,000.
We have 8 employees that make
from 600 to 75,000 and 22
employees that make from 75 to
100.
$1000. It's approximately 11.1%
of our Supreme Court staff.
I wanted to share with you a
personal story from one of our
uh night crew individuals. Her
name is Susanna De Martin. She's
been with our court for 5 years.
She told she wanted you to know
if she would make more money,
she would have less stress
paying her bills, as she is the
head of her household. If she
didn't have a second job, she
would have more time to dedicate
to sleep more than 5 hours a
day, cook healthy meals for her
family. She also said that she
would like to continue her
education but right now there's
just no time.
She also wanted to let you know
that she wanted to enrich her
spiritual life.
She informs us that she has been
working 2 jobs for more than 19
years.
She is tired and she wants you
all to know that the intense
work.
Of the hard work it's been
taking a toll on her, but she
loves working for the Supreme
Court.
She has made the building
commission a stronger place, and
it's a wonderful place to work.
Thank you, Miss Garcia, I will
turn then to um a little bit of
a change in our operation, we
are going to term system which
is similar to what you might see
by US Supreme Court. We take
argument mostly in the fall, um,
it ends about the holidays.
And then we issue our opinions
um with the target date of 6
months.
Um, after that, so we're looking
for June or July.
That will, um, ease hopefully
the analysis with regard to
disposition rate um
representative asked about how
do you exceed 100%, um, we write
more opinions than we grant
cert, and that's how we get the
disposition rate of 110.
percent
We are seeing at this point,
post COVID.
Actually, we have discretionary
appeals, which means someone
asks you to take it, and we have
non-discretionary things you
told us we have to take, we have
a lot of those capital crimes,
post COVID.
Majority of our docket is
currently consumed with that and
PRC cases, so the majority of
our doctor, quite frankly, is
non-discretionary cases and will
continue to work.
Uh, through those, it ties in
with our budget request for the
additional staff attorney in the
paralegal, um, to assist in the
drafting of those opinions.
And with regard to the
paralegal, it's a general
operation of the courts, so we
don't just write opinions, we
issue rules, um, on AI for
example, we have a pair and they
are civil rules of procedure or
criminal rules of procedure in
our UJI.
Um, Liz, will you tell them
please update them on our
vacancy rate and our reversion
rate, please.
Yes, I want uh this body to
know, um, the Supreme Court's
budgetary strength comes from
very strong leadership.
Um, it's demonstrated how we've
managed and the appropriated
budget that you've been
fortunate to give us.
At the Supreme Court, we have a
low vacancy rate of 8.1% and
we've had tremendous fiscal
stewardship of our budget in FY
23, we had 0.07 we're
Reversion rate and in FY 24 we
had 0.35%. Um, I will say that.
We have had a generously through
the AOC we had a term employee
that's joined the clerk's
office. Her name is Mary Anne
Stoneback, um.
She's a term employee, but she's
helped to strengthen our uh
term-based appellate schedule,
Marianne has been helping us
monitor our case activities,
doing case performance reviews.
He helps us with the justice's
votes, case assignments, uh,
judge designations, but really
the, the point of Marianne is
she is a term employee and she's
become a critical
Asset to our operations, helping
us with our disposition rate,
which the chief mentioned is
110%, really keeping up with our
incoming caseload, um, the term
calendar has helped us really
efficiency, efficiently decide
our appeals and our performance
measures.
I thank you and chair last focus
will be on our priority request.
Which would include a financial
specialist senior to ensure that
we report back both to, let me
say I do apologize, I often just
jump right in. Let me thank your
now analyst from DFA and LFC,
they've been very supportive and
we very much appreciate their
communication. We have a budget
committee where all budgets are
vetted and and they make
themselves they need the
financial specialists to ensure
that the money you're
appropriating is spent
correctly.
Um, the night watch person we
keep odd hours.
And the building's haunted, so
it really is. I mean, you know,
I need some, I need someone to
go to if I'm there at 2 in the
morning, um, education and
training as our duties increase
and the subject matter gets more
complicated. We need an educated
judiciary with us in particular,
a commercial disputes or or um.
The last thing is it's little.
Go to my face lift comment.
The 4 million appropriation for
the HVAC in the elevator.
I think that's just a statutory
change to allow us to.
use that capital outlay for that
purpose. We have one elevator in
there.
Um, it's probably as old as the
building, we just need it fixed
and it's just easier if we can
do it.
Um, but that will answer
questions.
Just wanted to lend support uh
for our capital LA request for
the Supreme Court. Um, we went
through the Capitol outlay
board. We get a comprehensive
facility conditions assessment
as requested by the Capital
Outlay Board. We hired a an
architect and engineering firm,
um, just to let you know, the
Supreme Court building is an
architectural gem. A lot of your
constituents come to visit the
Supreme Court, the only building
in New Mexico.
that's being used for its
original purpose.
was built under President
Roosevelt in 1937. We love that
building and it's such a special
building, um.
But in order to keep up with our
current needs, um, as well as
our future needs, we really do
need to invest in some capital
outlay to ensure that we have
the the moneys necessary to.
Perform repairs, mechanical
plumbing and electrical upgrade
security.
ADA and energy with that we
stand with questions. Thank you,
Ms. Garcia.
Thank you, Ms. Garcia. Thank
you, Mr. Chief Justice. We're
gonna go first to Representative
Sanchez, and ranking member
Chatfield. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, I think this is more of a
comment than a question, uh.
I just want to ask that this
legislature, the LFC, and this
committee, uh, year after year
we keep hearing about how our
agencies are underpaid and
that's fact.
Uh, I know, uh, one of the
judges mentioned earlier that uh
People living in Santa Fe,
they're not making enough to
make ends meet, uh.
It's not just Santa Fe. People
are moving out of Santa Fe to
your Rancho because it's more
affordable. San faces become
gentrified, um.
Two of my sisters retired from
AOC, single mothers, raised
their kids, um.
We, we keep hearing about these
excess revenues year after year
from oil and gas and uh all I
keep seeing is we keep expanding
these new programs and stuff,
and we're not addressing our,
our core issues. Um, we have
schools in disarray facilities.
We have a school in
Uh, my area that, uh, they smell
sewer because the, the
building's 70 years old, um, so
at some point, uh, I hope, uh,
this legislature starts to
address those issues in terms of
funding instead of continually
expanding programs that's fix,
uh, what we have going on before
we
Expand. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you Representative
Sanchez, next ranking member
Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, I'm looking here at our,
some of our books, that looks
like last year you had a small
reversion. Can you tell me about
that?
Our reversion was less and just
a quick reminder to go through
the chair. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, chair. Thank you,
Representative Chapfield, our
reversion rate, uh, has been
demonstrated to be very much uh
lower than 1%, um, or we go
through a unified budget process
and in FY 24, it was lower than
0.35%, um.
I can say that one, there was a
contract that had not been
expended, but.
Overall, our reversion rate is
very fiscally sound and we use
the appropriations that are
provided to us. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you for that
answer. I just looked at this
28,000. It's not a lot, it's, it
is a reversion and I'm looking
over here at your fund balance
of $2,953.
327.
What is it? Not too many
$950,327. Sorry about that. And
so,
I assume it's in the, it's in
the
Grier to be spent and, and not
gonna be reverted. I just was
just uh going through the
numbers. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very regular member Chatfield.
Next we have Representative Han
and Represent. Um, thank you,
Mr. Chair, um.
And, and thank you to
Representatives for his.
I feel I share the same
sentiment, um, we wanted to just
quick update on your behavioral
health commission.
And how you, if you, if you can.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
representative, um.
The, uh, behavioral health
commission, the Supreme Court
commission.
Um
I will use the verb issued a uh
piece of legislation upon which
this body, uh,
Used perhaps as a foundation
for.
Um, behavior health forms or
competence I think occurred in
the fall.
Um, as of the, uh, today's date,
I, I don't, I'd have to check
with Justice more exactly, she's
a liaison what they're working
on. Um, I assume, as we get an
understanding of what the
policymakers want to do in that
area.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And how
often does the commission meet a
year, Mr.
Chair Representative, um, they
meet on a fairly frequent basis.
It's pretty large mission, which
makes it slightly unwieldy, um.
Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I've, I've attended, uh, quite a
few of their meetings and uh,
just commend them for the work
that they have contributed for
us to have some kind of uh
foundation and fundamental um
way of approaching what we're
doing is uh regarding competency
diversion and the AOT um
implementation that you've been,
you've been, um, moving towards
and again I'm just gonna, you
know, you heard me, my last
comments, and I just want to say
in this regard, I'm, you know,
you're taking this.
upon um.
Additionally, to all the things
that you're doing, and I just
wanna say thank you and thank
you to the Supreme Court for all
the work that you've done there,
um.
And um again, I, I share the
same sentiments of of
representative Sanchez that we
need to really establish what it
looks like to have.
Um
People to uh continue to live
and work in Santa Fe,
particularly with our our income
increases here and and um and
what that really means to have
a, a quality of life of living.
Thank you, Mr. Chan. Thank you
very much. Next we have
representative Pettigrew, then
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Chief Justice for
suffering through this again.
Um
My first question, Chairman, is
Just a clarification for, for
me, how many full-time employees
did we say we have?
Mr. Chair and Representative,
uh, we have uh 55 employees full
time at the Supreme Court in New
Mexico.
Thank you chair. For some
reason, I had 42 stuck in my
head when, when that, when, when
I was listening to this means my
listening skills are a little
off today. Thank you for that
clarification.
Um, chairman, I have a request.
The presentation that we saw up
here.
I don't know, but
Everybody else, but it wasn't on
my table.
Wouldn't at my desk, and I'd
love to have copy of it.
If, if we could get that.
We'll make sure that happens.
Thank you very much.
My, my last one is um
More of a
statement that I will keep it
short, sure. Um,
Representative Sanchez hit the
nail on the head.
We have
Um, continued to expand year
after year, just in the short
period that I've been here.
Uh, or, or expectations on
government.
I'm gonna give you an example. 3
years ago, Chairman, our
non-recurring budget was maybe
300 million.
This year, we're gonna exceed 3
billion.
We're expanding.
Our expectations on everybody
that comes in front of us.
But we are not addressing.
The problem that we put them in,
and then we try and hold. I am
not a fan of growing government.
So, but I am saying if we're
gonna pass legislation, it's
like Representative Sanchez and
Representative Lujan said, we
should look at a bigger picture,
with respect to that.
And I empathize with each and
every person that comes up here.
With the, the struggles that you
have to go through.
To accomplish that.
Uh, I don't think the way we've
grown government has been good.
But um
One of the 112 people.
And I, I appreciate that the
opportunity to say that we've
grown our budget since.
Under this administration from
south of 6 billion to somewhere
around 11 billion this year.
But each time we do that, we
don't solve the problems of the
people that we asked to solve
problems for us. Thank you,
Chairman. Thank you very much,
Representative Pettigrew. Next,
we're gonna go to Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, along with what
Representative Pettigrew talked
about. I'm self-employed. I work
about 80 hours a week.
Um, and a lot of the
self-employed people that I know
work 80 hours a week just keep
going so uh while I um.
I certainly understand the
predicament in, in the private
sector, trying to find employees
is just as difficult. I, I don't
know where to find him. I, um,
I, I've looked and looked and
looked and looked, um, I own a
company in Arizona as well, and
it's the same problem over
there.
So my uh sympathies and, and uh
I feel for you on that one. I
just have a question. I'm just,
just curious uh what you do with
them uh student extern
contracts.
Tell me a little bit about that
if you would, and I'd just like
to learn about it if I could,
Mr. Chair Representative, um.
Most those are opportunities for
um 2nd year, 1st year law
students, mostly come from
university in New Mexico and
some from other, uh, everybody.
Uh, for the opportunity to.
Over the summer, see what it's
like to be a law clerk.
So we bring them into the
Supreme Court and the extern in
the chambers or the court of
appeals has been kind enough to
host.
Students as well.
Um, we provide, um, what we have
discovered is that
Um, it's easier to recruit
people into clerking or working
in the judiciary if they have an
understanding of its operations.
So we provide a small stake
because a lot of these students
are making decisions to go to a
law firm over the summer, purely
financially.
Um, and then we give them what's
called a boot camp, and we train
them on basic things like
writing, basic legal concepts.
So we have had this program for
about 4 years, and it's been
very successful. We have a
number of clerks currently in
our chambers.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
that's a great opportunity. Uh,
so thank you for that
information.
Thank you very much
Representative Duncan. We have
representative Fernandez next.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My experience of, of your
courthouse, uh, was actually in
20019, 2020 with the Energy
Transition Act, and I, um, uh,
I, I learned a lot about this,
uh, the state Supreme Court
justice system.
And uh I also saw a lot of money
being spent on that case on both
sides of the argument.
My question, Mr. Chairman, what
is the cost for the court to
take on a single case.
It's, you're looking at it. No,
I, the cost is um
Uh
Chair representative, very good
example, those PRC cases are
non-discretionary. The
legislature said you take them
in the first instance. They're
going right to the Supreme
Court.
On our docket, we probably have
in this last term.
3 or 4 of these.
I can tell you in the last 2
years, almost all of them, no,
strike that, that's not 75% have
involved the energy transition
Act. A new act promulgated by
you.
had some natural ambiguities
that had to be answered. Those
are expensive cases, both the
PRC, we have a lot of what's
called Amicus, Friends of the
court come in. They are massive,
the records, meaning what you
are reading is over 1000 pages,
1500, 2000 pages.
Um
It requires a specific expertise
in regulatory law in the energy
transition Act.
Can I, I, I will try and reduce
the numbers the cost per case
and get back to you if that's
all right, chair or
representative. I can assure you
those cases are some of the most
complex and the most expensive
as.
I hope your experience was good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
still reading those cases and
that concludes my questions.
Thank, thank, thank you,
Representative uh Hernandez. OK,
I don't have any other uh folks
on, uh, I have a few questions,
um.
First,
the first, uh let me ask this,
Mr. Chief Justice, Ms. Garcia is
the Supreme Court subject to
Spo?
No.
And so, Mr. Chief Justice, Miss
Garcia, there's wider latitude
within the Supreme Court to set
salary schedules.
It, it would be our preferences
an independent branch of
government, yes.
Don't disagree with that. Third,
Mr. Chief Justice and Ms.
Garcia, and this is both with
the Supreme Court in light of
particularly the testimony, I
think the understanding of many
of our committee members, uh,
the connection with and
appreciation for the testimony
about uh some of the challenges
of the lower paid workers.
I want to, it seems to me what
you, what we're hearing is that
the Supreme Court has wide
latitude to set salary
schedules.
So the questions I'm gonna ask
are gonna be one over the last 3
years. My sense is that the
request for salary increases
have been focused on um and, and
perhaps rightly so, on judges
themselves.
Number 2, from 2020 to 2025.
Average, uh, court salary pay.
So non-judicial salary has gone
up 26.8%. So that's
Statistics shared uh with by LFC
if there's a difference on that
statistic, I'd like to go
through it.
So the second question, first
question, last 3 years have been
focused on judicial unjudged
salary increases, correct?
Um, that is correct. We have
emphasized, um,
Staff salary as well, um.
But you're correct. OK. Thank,
thank you. And can I correct
myself, Mr. Chair, please. We do
have classified employees.
My answer to your question
directly is we don't answer to
spo necessarily. We have
classified and exempt employees.
Got it. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chief Justice, and the
separation of powers is, um,
again, bedrock and foundational,
we deeply respect that.
Uh, number 2, the numbers that
I'm given are 26.8, nearly 27%
increase in judicial in
non-judge salary from 2020 to
2025.
Can we see what the breakdown of
that salary increase, whether
that was concentrated in the
lower pay bands, the mid pay
bands, or in the higher pay
bands.
Mr. Chair, may I bring my, my
expert up because I know we've
worked. I was gonna address the
pay bands in particular. Would
you have a moment? Let me have
Carl answer that question.
Absolutely.
OK
Mr. Chair, thanks for letting me
come up, um, I, I'd really want
to get uh offline with with you
and LFC staff on that number
because my mind don't mind don't
match that. Uh, I think since
20.
Um
Since 2019.
We've had about a 19.7% increase
is my internal number, but
that's, um,
Once you take into account
inflation, we're actually in the
minus 3.3%, so we need to do
some work on that, I think,
offline. Sounds good, uh, Ms.
Ray. We'll do that work. Do you
have a sense right now of
whether those increases have
been spread equally amongst from
high to low pay bands, they've
been concentrated in any of the
high, mid, or low pay bands.
Mr. Chair, we've had the
legislative increases. We also
did you all uh every year we've
been asking for more targeted
increases for our staff in
addition to the judges, and a
few years ago, you did give us a
few more percent off just for
our staff and we're, we're
grateful for that. So I think.
And, and this, this
just, just a, and thank you.
The testimony that we heard was
that the lowest pay bands have
been stuck in very low pay
bands.
With the legislatively
authorized staff increases, the
very clear question I want to
see is as most of that increase
gone to the lowest pay bands,
that is some of the what we
heard about sort of the, the
employee that was the, the names
that were mentioned, has it gone
to the mid-pay bands, or has it
gone to higher pay bands,
because I think that helps.
Uh
Looking backwards, that's not
looking forwards, but I think
that provides me at least
context to understand if we've
been not paying enough attention
to staff or if with the raises
we've provided, uh, as a
legislature, perhaps there needs
to be more direction for more of
that to go to the lower pay
bands.
So Mr. Chair, I can, I can, I
was at the trial court when you
did the whip.
The workforce improvement plan,
those were targeted towards the
lower.
Cateegories. I, I don't know how
long ago that was now. Um, but
there has been a period since,
since that expired. As for your
general appropriation,
generally, it's all pay bands
equally across the board, but
we'll get that information for
you.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chief
Justice, and thank you for
mentioning that previous uh
program and perhaps that's
something that as a committee,
we might want to think about and
maybe we wanna um
Sort of bring that back a little
bit, um.
The, the, the last question,
this, uh,
As we look at recruitment and
retention and this sort of falls
within that space.
It seems to me that we should
prioritize sort of that
recruitment and retention in
that um this legislature will
probably be asked to consider
legislation that grants wider
authority for sort of payouts of
different uh accrued time.
Can we agree that that that we
should focus on folks who are
still working versus folks who
have already retired for sort of
that.
Some of those incentives.
Um, miss, Mr. Chair, I, I agree
with you that um.
Uh, retention and recruitment
are our top priority. Great. OK.
Uh, thank, thank you very much.
I think this has been very
helpful committee. Thank you for
really diving in and a number of
different areas, uh, and it
sounds like we'll get some more
feedback. And Ms. Garcia, if
there's anything to add, please,
we want to make sure and have
time for that.
Mr. Chair, uh, Vice Chair Dixon
and members of HFC. I just
wanted to say at the time being
at the Supreme Court, it's just
such an honor and privilege to
be serving the citizens of New
Mexico at the Supreme Court. At
the Supreme Court, we have a
recruitment and retention, uh
philosophy. We want the best and
the brightest to be serving the
people of New Mexico at the
Supreme Court, we know that our
appeals by the time they get to
us, um, we're the last
in the road for an appeal, um,
it's been difficult to recruit
and retain a top talent at the
Supreme Court. A lot of people
have a passion and a commitment
to the citizens of New Mexico
and the work that we do in the
justice system, um, but I will
just say it is an honor and
privilege to recruit. Um, we've
lost quite a bit of people to a
law firms, private sector, uh,
the executive branch and uh
You know, that's been a
challenge for us, but again,
it's our priority to make sure
that employee compensation is a
key priority of the Supreme
Court.
Awesome, thank you very much and
thank you for that focus and
again, thanks to the committee
for I think really connecting
with and and supporting that
initiative. With that, we'll go
ahead and ask for the LSC
recommendation for right now,
and then we'll keep on going.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I would, uh.
Moves that the committee adopt
the LFC recommendation.
It's been moved by Vice Chair
Dixon, seconded by
Representative Little to adopt
the LFC recommendation uh for
right now. Is there any
opposition to that motion?
Seeing then. Thank you very
much.
It
OK, members, we're uh going to
go into our district courts. If
the analysts, if we need to take
a couple of quick minutes. If
not, that's OK. Sounds like you
guys are ready to go.
All right, we got to be up to
your channel. We got to be up to
your standard then.
Um, OK, uh, we're gonna go ahead
and uh invite up our district
courts
Yeah.
But uh.
Mr. Chair.
OK, let, let's do this. We're
gonna get our order for our
district courts and maybe see if
there's any district courts who
have long travel days and need
to go back, give us, we'll give
5 minutes, uh, to make sure that
we get that right and also
members, uh, so we'll reconvene
here.
Uh, we'll come back here about
12:05 and uh so we're adjourned
at the call of the chair to uh
start at recess gets called the
chair.
OK.
Um, thank you.
test.
Right.
When we've got,
OK.
Excellent. Thanks, everybody.
Uh, we're gonna go ahead and get
started. Uh, members will, uh,
will go through our district
courts where I'm gonna announce
the 3 courts that are coming up
just so we have a sense and
everybody has a sense, um, we're
gonna start with our um 6th
judicial district, then go to
the 5th and then the 3rd, those
will be our 1st 3.
Uh, Judge, um Haaket, thank you
very much, uh, and please
correct my pronunciation, yeah.
Uh, once we get to you, please
feel free to introduce, of
course, your staff that is here.
Um, we'll start with Mr. Chavez
and uh we'll start now get right
going.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, uh, I would like
to point your attention to um
volume 2 1st. It's on pages 21
through 22. Again on volume 2.
21 to 22.
And in your binders, it's behind
tab 2. All the courses will be
back to back to back, as well
as, oh, no, actually we're not
going in order. So I'll retract
that. I'll tell you the page
number. But overall, the um I
like to point your attention to
volume 2 because it shows that
LFC, it looks like we cut every
single courts budget, but that
is not the case.
In order to, in order to give
you guys a better visual of that
and something to compare it to,
I like to point your attention
to the packet in the high level.
This high level basically shows
on the left columns from the
half point. It shows to the left
all the what the executive did,
and the operating budget that
you will see in your sheets and
on the middle to the right of
this table, you will see an
adjusted operating budget for
the LFC. This adjusted operating
budget is the new base that we
went off of when we transferred
all pre-trial services funding
over to the AOC. So it might
look like a reduction
In our volumes, but it is
actually a 3.1% increase, still
lower than the executive, but I
just want to clarify that.
That, that is the case that
we're working off of a new base
rather than.
Rather than what the executive
worked off.
With that, let's move on to the
6th judicial district.
Give me 1 2nd. I have big hands.
It is hard.
Sorry, well, we're getting to
that, members, if we have any,
we can sort of
I think that that explanation is
right on and very helpful if we
need to sort of clarify, we can,
but essentially the
LFC transferring all pretrial
services, once that transfer was
complete, that was the base upon
which our budget is built.
The executive is still
reflecting that uh a base that
includes free trial services.
And so even if the smaller
increase from LFC versus the
executive, um.
Some of that will always be
explained by the executive is
starting with a higher base that
included pretrial services still
at the district courts as
opposed to put into the AOC.
going.
Thank you, Chair. Members of the
committee, moving on to 6
judicial district, the 6th 1 in
your packet. It's in volume 2.
It's on page 28 for your
reference.
But with that, for the
differences in general fund, the
executive, uh, the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by $336.4,000 and
that difference is solely in the
transfer of pretrial services.
Other than that, both, uh both
recommendations adhere to the
agency's request. And with that,
I'll pass it over to Mario for
any further comment, if he has
any.
Thank you, Felix, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, good
afternoon. uh, like Felix said,
both the LFC and executive rec
gave the agency the 6 judicial
district court there 1.8% uh
increase requested, the main
difference obviously being in
that uh pretrial move over
there, 6th District court
includes Luna Hidalgo and Grant
Counties and all ended off the
chief judge Ofake.
Mr. Tarr, members of the
committee, I'll keep my comments
very brief, uh, because the
recommendations are so similar,
uh, a couple of points. 11 of
the thoughts I have had on our
staff.
Uh, and the need for us, uh, to,
to really push for this, uh,
staff compensation increases
that in one of our courts in the
magistrate court in Silver City
in Grant County, just for
various reasons of life, uh,
we've had 4 different magistrate
judges in that court since 2022.
And one of the things that
happens when you get a new judge
is they learn on the job.
And an unforgotten pillar of how
they learn on the job is very
experienced and consistent
staff.
And the staff turnover that
we've been experiencing in all
of our courts and particularly
in that court has put a real
challenge on us, uh, with,
without the retention. I know
we're talking really on the low
level, some of our, uh, uh,
employees, uh, at the lowest
level can make more money, uh,
working at some of the fast food
places that have uh the signs
out front because they are also
desperate for employees. Uh, we
have, uh, to answer one of the
questions, we have, uh, at least
5 that we could count of our
employees that are working
outside jobs.
assistant outside jobs, so uh
there there are a few that work
uh one off things, but
consistent outside jobs. We have
5 employees that are doing that,
um.
We, we've lost two employees
because they asked for
permission to do outside work
that we had to deny for conflict
reasons, and so they, they left.
They could not afford to stay
without that outside work.
Um
Our uh
The only comment I would have,
I, I, I think there's just an
accounting, uh, difference on
the pre-trial services, but a
critical component, I think Mr.
Reichstick spoke about it with
the pre-trial services is
keeping whether the funding goes
to AOC and that is funded to the
court, or whether it comes to
the court directly, but keeping
the employees as a district
court employees is critical. Uh,
these are employees that are, we
have recruited, we supervise, we
train, uh, we are 3 county
district with a single pretrial
services program director, the
employees, uh tra travel.
to our different courthouses
weekly, uh, we, we, uh, have
them in uh state cars that are
owned by our district, or we
reimburse their travel costs.
That is not something that is
part of the numbers that we
turned over to the committee on
the cost, it's just something we
absorb for our employees. We
also pay for regional and
national training, and I think
Representative Dao was talking
about, um,
Unfunded mandates, and I'm not
certain what the counties do
have a legal obligation to house
6 judicial district employees.
I'm not certain what the legal
obligation is for them to house
AOC employees in the same
facility. Maybe, maybe there is
an obligation, maybe there's
not. It's just something that I
had considered our employees
already tripled up in some
offices doubled up in some
offices uh office space is at a
premium in our courthouses.
Uh
And to echo the thoughts of
representative uh Sanchez and
Representative Pettigrew, uh,
I wouldn't consider myself a
visionary leader of our court,
uh, I am just somebody who is
trying to make sure that what we
do, we do very, very well. Uh,
our performance measures reflect
that, I believe, I'm not always
the most popular judge, uh,
chief judge with the other
judges, uh, no with the
litigants in front of me, but I
think efficiency is a key pillar
of the judiciary, and I'm proud
of the numbers that we do have.
And as far as letting us go 1st,
1st, I appreciate that as well.
I stayed back in Demi to watch
my boys play basketball last
night, got in at 1:30, and uh
Mr. Chavez knows the distance
because he's come to visit us.
It's, it's a heck of a drive.
I appreciate that and we'll
stand for questions. Thank you
very much. Uh, we do have
questions. We have uh uh ranking
member Chatfield, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
the just at the beginning of
this, it seems like there's kind
of a
A common theme that uh the
courts are concerned about the
uh about the pay bands for the
employees and also about the uh
Uh, jurors, the compensation for
jurors and uh, and it's my
understanding that we're going
to have a work group that's
gonna look, look over this,
these things for all of the
courts.
And I just wanted to
Uh, flagged that for, for all
the courses, for everybody that,
uh, uh, that's just what I'm
hearing for each court that
comes up, there's concerns over
employee compensation and over
your juror pay and uh
is my understanding we're gonna
have a work group that will uh
try to assess uh the correct
numbers.
And uh that's all I just wanted
to flag for uh for the, not just
for these guys but everybody.
Thank you.
Great. Thank, thank you very
much, regular member Chatfield.
OK, I don't see any other uh
questions. Uh, Mr. Chavez, can
you point the members to our
volume 3 so that as the
different uh chief judges come
up, they, we can see the
districts.
Um, er, yeah, yes, um, I
apologize for not mentioning
that. It's in volume 3 on page
49. You should see the map of
all the judicial districts
there. 42, my apologies.
OK, so
Amongst thank you very much, Mr.
Chavez. We'll have that open as
we come up.
And um.
Down in the southwest corner.
Thank you for coming up from the
Southwest corner of the state.
Hopefully, um, can bring back
some rain to that part where
Very close to where, where I'm
fortunate to come from. And just
one more quick question, uh,
Chief Judge, that what we heard
is these recommendations are the
same after we account for the
movement from pre of pretrial
services from your district
court to the
To AOC.
Mr. Chair, that is my
understanding as well. We had a
very modest request this year
and I think both agencies, I, I
also was very concerned when I
saw it at first and I saw and
did not understand where
pretrial services funding went,
but once I did understand that,
and we got comfortable as a
judiciary for, if that's the
preference of the legislature,
how we're going to handle it,
uh, that the funding will still
be there for our program.
Fantastic. Great. OK. Uh, thank
you very much. That puts my mind
at ease that we can ask for the
LSC recommendation knowing it
met the modest increase in is
the same.
outside of pretrial services as
the executive in this case. So,
uh, with that, um, we'll go to
our vice chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I would
move the committee adopt the LFC
recommendation. It's been moved
by Vice Chair Dixon, seconded by
Representative Garrett. Is there
any opposition to that motion?
OK, I don't see any. Thank you
very much, Chief Judge.
OK.
Now were.
Uh, asking Chief Judge Sanchez
from the 5th Judicial District.
From the southwest to the
southeast, uh, we'll start
again, of course, Mr. Chavez and
go from there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So for the
50 days district, um, it is
agency code 235 and in volume 2,
it's page 27, volume 2, page 27.
With that while you all look,
um, the differences in revenue
is the executive, uh, general
fund revenue recommendation
exceeds the LFC recommendation
by $247.3,000.
Um, here's a little more detail
on this one for the, the
executive recommendation exceeds
the LFC recommendation by
$371.5,000 in personnel services
and benefits. The majority of
that difference is because the
executive recommended the
pretrial services expansion,
which, of course, we're also
moving towards the AOC. However,
the um, the executive only
increases this category through
the expansion while the LFC
recommends funding to judicial
specialist position.
decisions in the bases.
And let me collect my thoughts.
Give me one second for the uh
LFC also exceeds the executive
in the contractual services
category because the executive
recommended partial funding of
security contracts while the LFC
fully funded that need. And then
the executive exceeds the LFC in
the other category because the
executive funds and IT refresh
while the LFC does not, and for
the expansions, like I said, the
executive funds this pretrial
services expansion, and we move
the
these requests over to the AOC.
And with that, I'll pass it over
to Mario for any comment that he
may have. Thank you.
Thank you, Felix.
Mr. Chair, committee members, I
don't have much to add there in
terms of the contractual funding
for law enforcement. It was a
265 request and I was able to
come in at 1:32.5 and um the.
Expansion for pretrial services,
like Felix said was moved over
to ASC, whereas the executive
made a priority when any new
judicial district asked for this
to run that fully before we
funded any other increases, um,
so with that, I'll hand it over
to Chief Judge Sanchez.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman. My
name is Mark Sanchez. I'm the
chief judge of the 5th Judicial
District, uh, which includes the
counties of Lee, Chavis and Eti
in southeastern New Mexico. Uh,
we have, um, 116 full-time
employees. We have 9 magistrate
judges and 12, uh, district
judges in my district. It's
better for judges, 4 district
judges in each county, Chavis
Leonetti, um.
So, um, we, um,
Will, uh, ask you to exercise
your discretion with respect to
uh pretrial services, we have no
pretrial services now. Anything
we get will be new and extra,
and we will appreciate it
greatly.
Um, we are asking for some
other, uh,
Um, positions. We also ask you
to fully fund our security
requests, uh, this would be for
the magistrate courts um
sheriff's offices are providing
adequate and exceptional
security, uh, in all three
district court, uh, courthouses,
we have good relations with
them, uh, with their staff, and
they cooperate with us fully,
and they take care of us. Um,
and so we're very happy about
that. The magistrate courts, we
have one in uh Carlsbad one in
Artesia, one in
Eunice, one in Lovington, one in
Hobbs, and one in Roswell, uh,
don't have that same security,
and so that's the reason for our
our request. Right now they're
um um.
Manned by a security officials
who don't have any authority to
do anything if something
happens, they just call the
police. So that's um not very
much security at all. Anyway, so
we're asking uh for our security
to get beefed up for the safety
of the people and for the safety
of our judges and staff.
I'm gonna hand this over to, uh,
Mr. uh Crowhurst, uh, he's my
chief executive officer for our
district, um, with the, he's a
man with quite a bit of, uh,
experience has appeared for you
before you many, many, many
times, many more times that I've
appeared before you. So, um,
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um,
representatives, I'd just like
to highlight just a few things
in our budget that we're
requesting, um, first, uh, I
would like to just greatly
advocate for the increases of
judicial staff. They, uh, I
mean, our our.
Clerks' offices, we are having a
great problem currently trying
to fill positions, especially in
area and this would, I believe,
uh, greatly help.
Be able to draw people to those
positions. I believe they feel
that that pay is just a little
too low for that our area. And
so those to
I'd like to also highlight the
two positions, especially in um
one for Eunice magistrate court,
which is a judicial special
senior position, uh, that court
has uh grown in cases, uh,
greatly, and so, uh, currently
we have 2 positions there and we
need this 3rd position to handle
the caseload. The other is a
judicial specialist too in the
Rossville Magistrate Court. We
workload study that says that we
need a
9.25 people there, and we
currently have 8.
And those would be greatly
appreciated to that, uh, that
that staff is doing.
And so, um, with that, uh, we'll
stand for any questions.
Great. Thank you very much.
We'll, uh, we're gonna go to
represent Pettigrew for
questions and then we'll make
sure that the mics are on, you
know, for the answers, Pettigrew
and then represent Lohan.
Thank you, chair, and thank you,
Judge for being here today. Um,
I appreciate the request for
security and the magistrate.
Officers of, of
Been in there in most of them,
so definitely all of them in Lee
County, not because I had to go.
Uh so just to be clear, just to
be clear, um, um, but it's
easier.
It's harder to get into our
schools than it is into this
courtrooms.
And it's, you know, half the
time.
I forget to take my pocket knife
out and it's not caught.
So, then I have to walk back out
and feel guilty and hand it to
him anyway, so I, I appreciate
the requests there, um.
I applaud all the work that that
y'all do the.
You handle down in our neck of
the woods. It's amazing. I would
tell you to tell Eunice to quit
being so efficient, and maybe
they won't get as many court
cases, but but uh and and so,
um,
Chairman, I just want to share
one story.
Um, and with respect to uh being
on, being selected for sitting
through jury trials and stuff
like that.
Um, we do need to fund you a
little bit more. So when we go
through an eight-hour pre uh
jury selection. They actually
have some money to be able to
buy 100 people that are sitting
in that room, something to eat.
It's giving you a hard time, it
was a great day. The judge did a
great job, uh, Cortez did a
great job, but with respect to
that, um,
I appreciate everything that you
guys do. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, next we have
Representative Bohan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm just
basically looking at um
Volume 2 and um page 27, if
anyone wants to look. I'm
looking at your number of active
cases that are pending and it's
quite substantial as I'm doing a
comparative to other uh
districts, even to my own, uh,
district district one, which we
have a large case load here, um,
but it's, it's, it's, it's
comparable, so is that due to
what with your request and
asking for all those additional
positions or just not having
enough staff.
Mr. Chair, it's run by Mr.
Chairman, it's run by caseload,
yes, that is a significant
factor in the request for
additional personnel, um, Mr.
Chairman, um, our district is
the 2nd largest district by in
the state, um, and so, um,
We do have quite a little bit of
traffic in our courts. Uh, I
wanted to add one other thing
that um may not be germane to
your question, um, but, uh, we
lose, uh, workers to the oil
field, especially in Carlsbad,
uh, which is, um, um, a
difficulty for us. So that's one
of the reasons, that's the other
justification for uh requesting
additional funds for um
personnel, but yes, our
caseloads are heavy and we try
to clear them as fastly, as
quickly as we can.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yeah, um,
I'm this is a little, yeah,
concerning. Is there, um, are
you getting influx from other
districts or other areas.
To your district, Mr. Mr.
Chairman, yes, we are, and so
Hobbs is is has historically
been a transient community, uh,
with workers who come to work in
the oil field for high paying
jobs.
Um, Carlsbad is now seeing that
Carlsbad has problems with its
main thoroughfare being used to
with my tanker trucks, uh, and
much to the disturbance of many
of its citizens, uh, and there
is a, uh, uh, an influx of
population there that is
stressing the courts and the
schools. Um, so yes, uh, as long
as the price of oil remains at
the price it is now, we will
have that uh.
Uh, sometimes difficult, but I
always enjoyable problem.
Understood, uh, as, as we move
through our budget. Thank you so
much, Mr. Chair, for the chance
to talk. Thank you.
Thank you. Next, we have
Representative Herndon and then
Representative Garrett
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
presenters. So I just want to
understand your request for
additional uh personnel and to
make sure that we can assist in
the way that we can most
effectively. But as I look at
your FTE positions, I see that
you are, there are 138.
And uh that had been recommended
by the LFC.
And I heard you say that there
are 1016 right now employed, so
are you fully funded for 138
physicians right now?
Uh chair represented her
uh, the 116 is purely non I
apologize, so 137 is our total,
the 12 judges and the
Oh, with the 12 judges, district
judges, I mean.
So you said uh Mr. Chair, um,
Mr. Brazil, you said 137, not
138. 0, I'm sorry.
I correct myself, 1:38.
And so, uh, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Presenter with respect to the
two security positions that
you're asking for.
Is that included in the 138 or
is that in the, in addition,
you're asking for an additional
amount, Mr. Chairman, we are
asking for additional, and that
would be 5 additional that we've
asked for in our request.
I'm just trying to make the
numbers balance, Mr. Chair, and,
um, so Mr. presenter,
I'm still go ahead Mr. Chairman,
part of the confusion may be
that the recommendations of the
LFC and EFA may uh provide for
fewer uh personnel than we asked
for.
Uh, go ahead and fully fund it
if you would. That would be our
request.
Thank you and uh we're just
trying to balance the numbers
and I can't quite balance those
based on what you presented, but
that's OK, Mr. Chair. I'm sure
in our committee will figure it
out.
Thank you very much,
Representative Hernan. We have
Representative Garrett and then
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Judge Sanchez, what is the
average magistrate judge's
salary.
In the 5th by statute, I think
it's $137,000 a year.
Thank you, by the way.
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Garrett. Next
we're gonna go to Representative
Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
Chief Judge, it's good to see
you. Thank you for all the work
you do for this judicial
district. You've been doing it
at a high level, very with
excellence for several years
now. So thank you for that. Um,
I do have a couple of questions,
Mr. Chairman, and, um, could
someone just, whoever wants to
field this question. Tell us
what the job functions of a
judicial specialist are, Mr.
Chair.
Uh,
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Brown.
Wow,
um,
So, uh, many years ago, uh, I
was a judicial specialist too.
I, uh, although that has been
probably 15 to 20 years ago. Um,
it has changed greatly.
It is a very
Difficult job currently.
We have gone, although we are
moving away from paper, and we
have moved in all of our courts
to a mostly paperless process.
It is highly takes a high skill
of.
Computer knowledge.
To do the data input. So you're
not just sitting there just
Putting in numbers all day long
and easy stuff. You have to know
what that piece of paper is
telling that clerk.
To do next.
Magistrate court, they get the
um paperwork they have to know,
do I, uh, quash the warrant.
Have to send that to the jail.
We can't violate someone's
rights. We have to make sure
that the disposition is put in
correctly. So it is
It, it requires
Great computer skill and focus
to be able to do these jobs.
And, and it is, um,
Amazing, sometimes the amount of
work that some of these clerks
do on a day to day basis.
Thank you, Mr. Crowhurst for
that information, uh, Mr.
Chairman, I, I'm looking at the
salaries here that are on our,
um, the judicial sheet and I'm
just questioning, quite frankly,
whether they're high enough.
Um
Mr. Chair and Mr. Gris is a
specialist required to have a a
degree, a college degree.
Oh
Chair small and represent a
brown no a judicial specialist
to a judicial specialist senior,
uh, lead workers, uh, those
positions are not required to
have a 4, a 4-year degree.
Thank you. And Mr. Chairman and
Mr. Crowhurst again, um, as was
mentioned, the higher cost of
living in Eddie Lee County is,
uh, I just don't see these as
being real competitive salaries.
How hopeful are you, um, that
you can find someone for these
positions, uh, should they be
funded, Mr. Chair.
her small uh representative
Brown. We are hoping to
We have found that we are
several.
Well, we're quite a bit behind
other agents.
Not that I am actively
recruiting from other agents,
government agencies, but if we
were able to raise our pay, I
believe we would have a chance
to draw.
Uh
People who were seeking to move
positions to the courts. Also, I
believe we would have at least a
fighting chance to uh draw some
people uh from those entry level
positions to our clerk positions
or our and Mr. Chairman,
I'm looking at the pre-to
pretrial services personnel
request.
Um, and I believe we all heard
it mentioned that there
currently are no pre-trial
services in this judicial
district.
Um, have you all talked to the
powers that be, uh, Mr. Chair.
Either one of you, um,
Make sure this will get funded
because I, I think we do need to
have it, uh, we need to have it
all over the state and every
district, in my opinion, but uh
what, what do you think about
that one, Mr. Chairman, uh, and
then Representative Brown, um, a
very good question, and so we
thought, uh, we heard uh action
earlier in the day, uh,
approving, um.
The LFC recommendation for
pretrial services to move to
AOC, uh, and we were pleased
with that, as I said, we don't
have any services now, so any
services we get would be great.
And so, um, we leave it to your
discretion. We ask that you fund
that so that we can do that so
that we can fairly um
Imprisoned those people who need
to be imprisoned, uh, and then
put impose a fair and adequate
conditions on those people who
um are um
Eligible for release, um.
A very careful process that we
undertake to make sure that the
people are safe.
Mr. Chair, thanks for the
indulgence here. I have just 2
more questions.
Um, one is regarding, and this
is for the Chief Justice, the
performance measures that have
been uh stated here in our book.
Uh, do you have any particular,
I'm looking at some big number
changes here, um, if you could
just give us your opinion, uh,
Mr. Chair, Chief Justice Chief
Judge, where you think he's a
realistic or not.
year.
Um, our caseloads have ridden
risen significantly uh this past
year, and we continue to do, to
deal with those cases, uh.
Judge um
James Jones in in Eunice uh has
a docket that is just exploding.
And it's attributable to the
changes, the demographic changes
that I, um, uh, described to you
earlier in the oil field, um,
the magistrate courts of of any
kind are also pretty busy. We're
all busy, and so that's um, um,
we, we think we can meet the
challenges we're, we're.
We're not afraid of work, we
like it, we enjoy our jobs, uh,
we try to take care of
everything that we can, um, and
so, uh, yes, there, there are
significant numbers we try to
keep up with our cases. This is
my, this is today is February
1st, January was my criminal
jury month. I had 5 jury trials
last month, um, and all the
other judges have experiences
the same, um, and the cases just
keep coming.
Keep coming, they keep coming,
they keep coming, and we have to
find ways to to deal with them.
Try them or set them.
Yeah, thank you. And finally,
Mr. Chair, excuse me.
Uh, the Eddy County courthouse
will be undergoing some
renovations. The county
commission has agreed to fund
that.
And I understand that the judges
will be getting some secure
parking really for the first
time.
Uh, so I share all of the
security concerns, um, I've been
talking for a number of years
about, especially our magistrate
courts needing to be beefed up
there.
But um
I, yeah, I guess I'm just saying
thank you to the Eddie County
Commission for uh taking uh
these renovations seriously, the
need for them, and I just hope
that I know there's some.
Plans on how to get judges out
of there if need be I measure,
but I'm just glad to see that
we're gonna see, I think, an
improved facility for the courts
there in in Eddy.
Uh, so anyway, thank you,
that's, uh, that concludes my
questions. Great. Thank you very
much Brown,
uh, OK, uh, we'll, let's go back
to Representative Brown was for
the, or uh we'll ask for the LFC
motion for now from either Brown
or represent Pettigrew from the
area.
Mhm
Mr. Chair.
Some reservations, I moved the
LFC recommendation. OK, there's
a motion.
It's been moved and seconded and
with, I, I appreciate ranking
member of Chatfield's comment at
the outset of this, which is, I
think noting the committee's
strong interest in meeting to
the greatest extent possible,
um, the, the requests that are
being made.
OK, the motion has been made by
Representative Brown, seconded
by Representative Pettigrew. Is
there any opposition to that
motion at this time?
Seeing none. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chief Justice.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
OK. Next, we're gonna uh ask uh
Judge Hawkers.
And Ms. Ramos to come on up. Uh,
we are now in the 3rd judicial
district.
The
question is, what's the best
judicial district and why is it
the 3rd
Just kidding. Just kidding. Um,
so, uh, great, thank you very
much for being here, Judge, uh,
Mr. uh Chavez will go to you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee for the 3rd
Judicial District. It's uh
agency 233 again behind tap 2.
And then your volume twos, it's
on page 25, page 25.
Well, you look, I'll start the
uh difference in revenue for for
this agency is the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by $875.9,000 in
general fund revenue. This
difference is shown in the face
because the executive exceeds
the LFC recommendation by
$850.5,000 in the personal
services and benefits is where
the majority of the difference
lies, the executive recommended
funding a business specialist
specialist.
Excuse me, and funding to
permanently fund positions
temporarily funded by child
support, uh, child support
services division, CSSD.
And both of the recommendations
fund security bailiffs, the
remaining differences is due to
the LFC recommendation
transferring pre-trial funding
to the AOC.
And with that, I'll pass it over
to Mario for any comments. Thank
you.
Thank you, Felix, Mr. Chair,
committee members, uh, like
Felix said, my the executive
recommendation funds 2 new
security bailiffs, a new
business specialists and
fulfills the agency's request to
move child support hearing
officers from term to perm, that
was for a total of 3, so we, uh,
we definitely wanted to make
sure the personnel services, uh,
was lined up with the agency's
requests, um, I wanna thank Mr.
Ramos and Ms. Oliveri for
inviting me.
their district and, uh, showing
me what the the day to day is
there and I.
As you set downana County is
represented here, so I'll pass
it off to the judge.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you. Good
afternoon. With me today is uh
Ernest Ramos RC.
He
And Amanda Oliwari, our chief
financial our CFO. My name is
Richard Hawks. I'm a district
court judge. I'm here filling in
for Chief Judge Spadea. He
couldn't make it today and asked
that I fill in and I'm honored
to be here.
Members of the committee
chairman small uh.
Our priority has been echoed and
it's been talked about. I'll be
brief to it is to work with the
judicial compensation for our
employees.
Our 3rd judicial district has
worked hard over the year to
bring down our vacancy rate to
about 4.86%.
Historically, it's been around
10%.
However, when we
Bring down those vacancy rates
and we have a problem retaining
those employees.
Uh, just in the last, uh, couple
of months, we've received 3
resignations.
Because of employees choosing to
leave our court to other
agencies, both the executive.
And also the federal branch of
government.
Some of the accomplishments that
our court has uh during fiscal
year 24 with our district court
and magistrate court have been
busy. We've had a clearance
rates over 100%.
One thing that I'm very proud of
our district is our self-help
center has assisted over 8400.
clients, 8400 individuals from
Donana County have come in and
gotten help from our self-help
center.
Our district held 73 criminal
trials.
Uh, 60 of those jury trials were
held in our district court 13
and our magistrate Court.
As I indicate while we brought
down our vacancy rate, one of
our challenges we face is
recruitment and retention or
monitors and judicial
specialists choose, as we've
talked about our court clerks
are two of the lowestate
classifications in our court.
We usually have to extend
postings and repose those
positions. It's hard to fill
those positions at the current
pay rate, we ask that you
strongly consider our unified
budget request to increase those
salaries.
Our top priorities for fiscal
year 2026 for the third judicial
district court as the both
analyst had indicated we're
asking for funding to move our
domestic relations hearing
officers and an administrative
assistant in our certified corps
monitor from term to firm
positions.
while our domestic relations
filings have increased a little
over 7%.
Child sport enforcement cases
have gone down.
And they decreased. We are
requesting general funds to
support these positions so they
can utilize those specific
positions to help the domestic
relation judges with other
matters right now when they're
funded through the healthcare
authority, uh, for child support
only, they're limited on what
they can do. So we're hoping
that by turning them to
permanent positions, we can then
utilize their skills to support
our domestic relationships and
our domestic violence cases.
We're also asking for additional
funding.
for 3 additional full-time
employees to security bailiffs.
As we've indicated, we've been
busy with jury trials in Boanna
County and, and bailiffs are the
uh right hand there for our
judges in our jury trials. Uh
they help our jurors get in and
out of the courtroom. We make
sure they're safe and secure.
Make sure they have a snack.
Water
And we need those, we're also
asking for one business
specialist to to support the
continuing work of our core.
Uh, with that, we respectfully
ask that this committee approve
the DFA recommendations, and we
stand for questions. Thank you,
Chairman. Thank you very much
for the, uh, first we're gonna
go to representatives so please.
Thank you, chair. Uh, thank you,
Judge. um, good to have you all
here, um, nice to see friendly
faces from Donian County.
Um, so first I want to say full
disclosure, my mom works for the
3rd judicial court. So I just
wanted to name that Lucy
Jimenez. Um, and so, um, we
don't have a process for
abstentions or refusals, but
full disclosure. Um, my other
question is I know that there's
like staffing for attorneys in
particular has um has been an
issue in the new district
attorney, um, hired several new
attorneys, so I just wanted to
see like
What, what that impact has been
if there is one so far that you
can tell in terms of case load,
um, and some of these numbers
that we're seeing. Thank you.
Thank you, chair. Mr. Chair,
works of Silva I, yes, there's
been a change. The new
administration with our district
attorney's office, they brought
in a lot of new attorneys, and
they are
Striving to be fully staffed, I
think, uh, district attorney
must see us, uh, Reverend so we
made a commitment to have be
fully sat by the end of the
month, whether he's reached that
goal, I'm not sure, but I've
seen it in the courtrooms. I
handle it
criminal docket, and I see those
attorneys more and more
attorneys, and we've seen more
and more filings just in the 1st
31 days of the
here. So yes, it's gonna
increase and I expect a higher
increase in criminal cases in
the 3. Thank you. Thank you,
chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative, uh,
Representative Han please.
Mr. uh, thank you for being here
with us. Um,
In regards to your, your child
support.
positions and making this term
and, and your family court in
general. What
What, what is the, um, I guess
the process of
And, and, um, them not being
able to, is it them not being
able to complete the caseload
that you have or, or what is,
where does that need to find.
Mr. Chair Representative on.
Good question.
When they are funded through a
healthcare authority, they're
bound to work on child support
cases, specifically, they're
limited in their role under the
contract of them paying part of
their salary.
By turning them completely
funded by the court.
Then we're able to have our
domestic relations judges
appoint them as a special
masters or have them take on
different parts of the case for
the judge to assist them.
Proficiently and expeditiously
working through a domestic
relations case or domestic
violence cases.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Is that
happening in any other
districts?
Not that I'm
I would assume it is, um, I'm
not sure what the funding is for
the others, Mr. Chair, I don't
know what the funding is for the
other districts regarding those
positions, uh, we have two
domestic relationsarian
officers. One is fully funded,
um.
Permit position, one is a term
position. So we do have one
person who were able to utilize
and have the judge support the
judges. We'd like to have both
of those individuals fully
available to our judges to
support them and help them.
Thank you, thank you for that.
I'd be curious, Mr, Mr. Chair,
to find that out because
Um
It's
I wanna say it's a mystery, but
the way that we have these,
these different positions in our
family courts and what those
positions do and how that's
defined is something that I'm
very interested in, in
understanding uh a lot more. And
with that, Mr. Chair, my second
question goes to your specialty
courts, your drug courts. Do you
have a, a medical position
involved in, in your drug courts
like uh
A PA, a nurse, uh, doctor or
anybody that's in
It's uh it's integral to the the
process of what they, how they
um
The integrates the behavioral
health component and those sorts
of things for your drug court,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Jarrett Khan.
To the best of my knowledge, I
don't believe any of the
treatment courts have a member
on the team that's medically
trained.
I know we do have behavioral
health therapist.
I am the presiding judge for the
juvenile treatment court in the
in the 3rd judicial district,
none of the support staff that
we have on our team is medically
trained to that effect, uh, so
my answer would be probably no.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'm
bringing this up and thank you,
uh, that is true. Uh, district
one is the only um district that
does have a medical provider as
part of the process, Mr. Chair.
And what we are looking at
The type of policies that we're
moving forward and giving funny
people look at that AOT in the
in the process of of integrating
uh AFT through uh the, the
different, the different court
processes, we need to, there
needs to be some kind of um
discussion of what we have a
medical provider that is, is
helping and making
recommendations if you will and
understanding, especially when
there's substance use disorder
involved in how
Those medications are in uh
Uh if they need to be on
medication, um,
Providership, you need to have
that, that person in place.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's all
I have.
Thank you very much,
Representative Mohan. Um, I
wanna really two things. One,
first to pick up on Wuhan. Thank
you, Judge. Uh, thank you, Ms.
Ramos. Thank you, Mr. Lobari.
Um.
AOT. How is that going, given
that that was one of the
investments that was made during
the special session. And do you
have any feedback on uh how I
can representative Muhan asked
sort of the integration of
treatment partners with the
funding flowing through you all
in the judicial side. How is
that working? And how do we make
that work better to serve more
New Mexicans. Mr. Chair, members
of the committee.
My understanding from talking
with uh Judge Robert Latta who's
presiding over the AOT court. Is
that the program's going very
well. I remember correctly, we
have 40 participants currently
in AOT in the 3rd judicial
district, um, however,
Those numbers go up and down
based on the availability of
treatment providers for the
program. So it's, it's an
important part, uh from what
I've heard and, and I'm familiar
with a lot of the individuals in
that uh program because I see
them through our work in my
criminal division. Um.
And a lot of the issues that are
addressed in AOT we're hoping to
solve those so that they're not
continuing through the cycle of
appearing in court. Thank you,
Judge. Thank you for giving us
those numbers. Can you share
with, if you have it now, great.
Can you share with us and with
LFC sort of on intervals and Mr.
Chavez, director of the maybe
this is something that we'll
track as we go forward. What the
reporting for increments for
AOTR because I'm curious, just,
this is a program that's been up
and running. What sort of, how
is the recidivism and justice
involvement. Is that changing
when folks are in treatment is
the same rate as before they
were in treatment.
have any numbers on that.
Which is OK, Mr. Chair members
of the committee, we don't have
those numbers yet, but
We will work on getting those to
the committee. OK, great, and
that's something I know we'd
love to try. Uh, secondly,
really wanna think that LFC
staff for the performance
measures. Um,
The
A of acting uh uh age of acting
pending criminal cases and days.
Um
The
We're looking at a
recommendation for 215 days.
Yeah, is that something that's
you see as workable from your
end judging this, you know,
members, we hear all the time
that swiftness and certainty are
two of the foundational pieces
to increase public safety. So
the higher this number is, the
less swiftness there is
basically, right, Mr. Chair,
members, I agree, uh, the lay
justice is no justice delay
court proceedings.
there's providing justice. Yes,
I think we can reach that. We've
implemented a case management
rule from the Supreme Court.
Um, I
I think it's working very well
and it's assisting us so I have
no doubt that we can meet that
performance measure. OK, thank
you. And is that something over
time that we
We and you, mainly you and your
colleagues will be working. Is
there a way for us to further
sort of uh top that number down,
reduce that time.
What do you see sort of over
time there as we try to, you
know, really to your comment
just as delayed is justice
denied. How do we get that
number as low as possible, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
I think we continue to to look
at things outside the box, um,
settlement conferences,
uh, ga,
hopefully buying from our
Justice partners, whether it's
the loss of the public defender,
the district attorney's office
to try to work cases earlier in
through our magistrate courts.
We have 8 judges or 77
magistrate court judges, um, all
the criminal cases get filed
through magistrate court on a
rare exception, they'll take it
directly to district court.
I think that's an avenue that's
available in this process where
a case doesn't have to just sit
around for 60 days pending a
preliminary hearing and then get
indicted and filed in the
district court.
Uh, but I think it's something.
You know, I'll tell you, adding
another judge to our district. I
think our district is in need of
a judge. We're working right now
with the County commissioner of
Donna County, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee to uh add on
and annex to our courthouse, we
are in need of a a room because
before we can come and ask for a
judge, I need a place to put, or
we need a place to put a judge
an administrative assistant and
uh other staff needed in the
courtroom.
courtroom that can hold jury
trials. So I think all those
things we can work with to get
that number down. Great. Thank
you for laying that out. Thank
you for continuing to, you and
your team and of course, Chief
Jud but I, uh, I know you, Judge
Martin is here today, which is
great to see. Thank you for
continuing to raise that bar,
and, but that's what we have to
do. Right now, I'm gonna ask the
uh vice chair to move the LFC
recommendation, uh, yeah, as we
continue to work through things.
Uh, Mr. Jared moved the LFC
recommendation. Is there
It's been taken by
by by some Garrett, move by
advice to Dixon, excuse me, is
there any opposition to that
motion?
and we've adopted that.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you.
OK, uh, our next three members
are gonna be the 12th Judicial
District, the 9th judicial
district and then the 10th
judicial district.
So as uh Chief Judge Schneider
from the 12th Judicial Justice
District is already headed in.
Chair, members of the committee
for the 12th judicial district
have to again, agency 242 in
volume 2, there on page 34,
towards the end, page 34.
The differences in revenue, the
executive recommendation exceeds
the LSG recommendation by
$254.5,000 in general fund
revenue. This difference is
solely because of the transfer
of pretrial services, the
agency's request was funded,
fully funded, including an
expansion for a part-time
program coordinator for the
district's upcoming or existing
uh young adult treatment course.
With that, I'll pass it over to
Mario for any comment. Thank
you.
Thank you, Felix, Mr. Chair and
committee members have to talk
to the district Court, Lincoln
and Nataro County, like feel
like said the main differences
are gonna be the pretrial
services, uh, isecutive
recommendation supported a part
time surveillance officer
supported in terms of parent
part-time program coordinator
and the treatment provider
contract for adult court, I'm
joined by Chief Judge Angie
Snyder, and I'll let her
introduce herself. Thank you so
much.
members of the committee, good
afternoon. Um, I'm Andy Snyder,
Chief Judge of the 12th Judicial
Districts, Lincoln and Otero
counties. I'm going by Huari,
who is our CEO for the court.
I'm also joined by our incoming,
uh, chief, uh, Judge Dan Bryant
is also with us.
Thank you. Um, as you can see on
the, on the handout, uh we've
got a, a modest minimal uh
increase that we're requesting.
Um, we've got the uh some uh
positions that need to be filled
uh for our young adult court.
We're calling it the reach
court, um, that will be a, a
quote that will be um uh we'll
have participants who are age 18
to 25, um, focusing on that,
that unique um writing chemistry
and, and, and different maturity
level of that age group.
Uh, then, then older adults in
the system. We also have an
adult treatment court that Judge
Bryant runs and a veterans
treatment court. So this will be
adding to our, our therapeutic
courts. Um, you can, you can see
the other, the other increases
that we're requesting, uh, I had
a, um,
Words to say on on the uh uh
employee compensation or cut a
bunch of that out that given,
given what was said, but I do, I
want to turn to Audrey um Mr.
chair if I may, she wanted to
just highlight a couple of
things that we think are
important as to the 12th with
regard to the employee
compensation.
Thank you.
In the 12th Judicial District in
response to Representative
Garrett's question earlier this
morning. We have almost 14% of
our employees who are um
employed with additional jobs.
Some of them have
3 jobs out on two other jobs on
top of what they're doing for
the Jewish the, um, and just
this week we lost a highly
valued employee who was working
2 jobs and just completely
burned herself out and was able
to move into a position.
With a different agency um at $4
an hour more, um, and so it was
the right move for her, uh, but
it was, she was a bright star
and it is disappointing that we
were not able.
Mr. Cha, thank you, and I, uh,
members of the committee, and
I'll just add to that that I, I
always tell people that you
can't go anywhere on the
weekend, uh, in Alamoorra
without running into employees
going on for a second job, so
it's, it's really is a, a, a
Serious situation. So thank you
for that and I'm uh with that, I
will stand for questions, sir.
Thank you judge. Thank you for
your staff, um, we'll go first
to, um, we're gonna go to
representative Vincent and then
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
welcome Chief Judd. It feels
like showing films today.
I
I, I'm always proud of this
group here. I talked to, I
talked to the chief judge quite
a bit, and she's got a very
aggressive initiative in Lincoln
and Otero counties.
And um
Just pull this closer whenever
you need to hire a district
aide, I usually, she's already
kind of told me to leave her
staff alone
But that's the ones that I go to
and uh she always keeps a very,
very good staff on board, and my
question is, Chief Judge, how
does your
Has your backlog look? Are you
keeping up with caseloads?
Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, um, first of all, thank
you for not poaching our
employees and um uh but as to
backlog, I'm gonna turn that
over to Audrey. It's a
challenging thing to measure. We
were really aggressive during
COVID and had
More trials than anyone, and we
really, we really didn't stop
and so um and much to a lot of
people's um
dismay, I think, but um we
really we had all the
protections in in place, but I
don't feel like we came out of
it with a backlog, um, but I
want to go to Audrey to see if
she wants to add anything to
that.
Thank you. Um, chair and
representative, I would agree
I'm we are currently sitting at
about 101% disposition rate
really at 100% is where you want
to be, you're closing as many
cases as you're bringing in, um,
so I, I believe that we are
keeping up with our backlog, um,
I also think we have some of the
most dedicated judges in the
state. No offense to our
colleagues in the room, um, they
work tirelessly and um we
monitor our performance measures
closely. We talked.
about them as a group, we talk
about them, um, about them to
identify any potential problems
early and had those off at the
at the pass, so um, I don't
believe we have a backlog right
now. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
thank you for your comments.
And, you know, just one last
statement I'd like to make is,
you know, they, they do the 12th
always makes
time to talk and they're
completely transparent with
Lincoln and Otero counties on
their caseload and uh their
employees and I really do
appreciate and I know the
counties do too. Thank you for
the time, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Repent Vincent. Next we'll go to
Representative Silver.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
Chief Judge and Ms. Kari, uh,
and Judge Ryan, um, I met you
recently, so, um, and thank you
for making time to answer all my
questions as I understand, um,
the situation in Otero County.
Um, and for the folks that live
on the Otero County side of
Chaparral. Um, I, I do wanna say
that, um, I, I hear the um
The excitement and the energy to
try and get more access to uh
justice and to the courts out in
uh Chaparral, so I really
appreciate that. We talked about
safe surrender events and
creating justice stations like
virtual stations where people
can have court out there since
we know that internet can be
unreliable. So thank you so much
for having those conversations
with me and um this might be a
long um representative of
Vincent.
questions on, uh, the number of
days to disposition for criminal
cases in FY 23, it was 266 and
then in 24, it jumped to 325.
What was that?
Increase, um, like, what caused
that increase and then the
FY 26 recommendation is 320 and
does that feel doable?
Thank you, Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Silva, Audrey is gonna look at
the, I think at the base of his
position because it actually
decreased and there may be an
error in here. I think it was
240 something, but she can
address that. I, I want to take
the opportunity to thank you
very much for um
The focus on access to justice
in in Chaparral, and it, it, it
absolutely is um a major
concern, you know, now with,
with post COVID we do so much
virtually that that has opened
up justice to to so many people.
It's unbelievable that we didn't
go there before that, but um
there's more we need to do and
address the internet issue and,
and so, and I know there's a lot
of conversation happening
because of you raising this
issue, so, um, and, and um
thanks for the
conversation on it, I appreciate
it very much. Let me go to
Audrey on the de disposition.
Mr. Chair Representative Silva,
um, I'd like to double check
those numbers and follow back up
with you if that's OK. Yeah,
absolutely. Thank you so much.
um, and I'll, I'll just close by
saying, um, one of the issues in
Chaparral is that there is, uh,
if you get a, a, a citation or
something and you have to go to
court in Almogordo. Uh, it's an
hour and 10 minutes at best to
get to Almogordo from Chaparral,
and um there's a border
checkpoint in between and
whether you're
undocumented or not, um, going
between those checkpoints when
you might have a bench warrant
or um tickets can get really
scary. So again, thank you for
just thinking of all the ways
that people can access justice.
Thank you, Chair.
Thank you, Representative Silva.
Uh, we're gonna go to
Representative Garrett, then
Representative Bohan. Thanks,
chair. Thank you for being here
today. To just quick questions
on your young adult court, I see
that both um
Budge approve the part-time
coordinator. How, how many cases
are you hearing in the young
adult court?
And is there any concentrated
area where you find the most of
them concentrated.
Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, our program we're we're
in the stages of developing it.
We are almost there, we've been
visiting, we visited the program
at the 2nd. There's one in the
13th that we need to get our
team up to visit and we look to
start taking participants in
April, and where our matrix to
begin with will be 10, until we
get comfortable and we'll see
where we go from there. Um,
we're, we're
We, we want to wait, we've got a
lot of materials that we're
getting from the, from the
second judicial on the way they
run their program and, and we
want to look at the way the 13th
does before we set the
parameters generally a a a
treatment court program will
accept participants who have um
substance use and mental health
issues, um, and there are some
restrictions on serious violent
crimes. Um, so we'll, we'll be
talking about what's what's
appropriate for a
community-based treatment
program through that lens, and
then, um,
Uh, additionally, we will, um,
uh, we're having conversations
about pre-adjudicated and
pre-adjudicated track as well as
a post adjudicated track, so as
a part of a sentence or as an
opportunity to keep something
off their record, so I will be
very excited to report back, uh,
next year or, or at some point
once after the session as we get
started.
Great, thank you. And then a
second very quick question. Do
you have an active criminal
justice coordinating council in
your district court.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, we do, we, I believe.
Uh, by, of course, the Supreme
Court ordered, we do what they
say, but we, we, um, uh, started
it, I believe it was 2016. We've
got a great group of people, um,
this, uh, I think every
stakeholder um group attends,
they've got representatives, we
do them virtually and it's a
robust group. In fact, we got
funding because of our CJCC
through the sentencing
commission grant to to start our
um reach our young adult court.
That was our kind of seed money
through them and that was.
That those grant that grant
money is only offered through
CJCCs and we're seeking more
funding through them through our
CJCC for a program that will
focus on juvenile competency
issues that we want to kind of
test, test pilot. So thank you.
Great, that's really good to
hear. Thank you.
Thank you, Lujan.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair. What
prompted me to ask a question
was just how you've been, um,
Leading in in the the
accessibility and the
mobilization of accessibility
for your courts, um, thank you
for that. Um,
I do have a piece of legislation
that is going into the digital
accessibility, so I'm wondering
if you're having any issues with
that or you needed extra
support, um, to, to, to that
matter and how um how you're
operating, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Wuhan, thank you for that and um
I'm hesitant to comment on on
any specific piece of
legislation. I, I think that
would be a little inappropriate,
but I, I, I, I really thank you
for your support, anything that
you all can do that can increase
access to justice helps all of
us. I mean, it's just, and I
think sometimes it, it, it seems
like it's a, a matter of um what
resources are always the issue
or um like take for instance the
the chaparral,
we one of the barriers to
Um, setting up our justice
stations is finding safe space
to have it. So sometimes it can
be kind of something that seems
simple, but that's a major
barrier, so, um, uh,
So I don't mean to evade your
question. I apologize for that,
but thank you for anything you
all are doing to ensure that
there's access to justice. Thank
you, Mr. Cha, that there's no
evasion of, of, of the question.
I, I respect your, your position
and, and your, your comments to
to it. Thank you, thank you,
thank you.
Thank you very much for Lohan.
Uh, great questions, members.
We're gonna go to Brooks Saint
Vincent for the motion to adopt
the Elis. Oh, sorry, Mr. Chair,
just a quick clarifying question
I'd like to ask, uh, looking at
the performance measures and
when it uh in
On the page, it states that the
number of jury trials, this is
not applicable. What does that
mean, Mr. Terry?
Uh, Mr. Cha, Representative
Herndon.
I, I believe we did more jury
trials this last year than than
anyone in the state, so I have
maybe the number was so high it
just wouldn't register. I don't
know how.
Thank you,
that, that, that's super
impress. Thank you, uh thank you
for the question. We're gonna go
to uh Mr. Chavez for the
explanation. These are the this
is for the LSC explanation, so
it's, yeah, no, no, and no
deficiency or no um
Sort of judgment, judge on your
end, I think this is an LFC, uh,
staff. This is a choice that
we've made in LFC and great
question, Mr. Chavez. Mr. Chair,
just before he responds, I just
want to say this is the 2nd time
I've seen this performance
measures, so perhaps the
explanation will make it clear.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, Representative
Herndon, basically the ones that
you see with an NA next to it.
They are explanatory measures,
meaning that we're not.
Giving them a target, it's more
for them to show what is going
on, but we're not placing a
target on it, it's just
informative for you all and
decision making.
Well, Mr. Chair, I don't know
how NA is applicable, but you
can ask, uh, we can talk about
it later and representative, Mr.
Chavez, so let me ask this to
follow up there, um, will we see
for an FY 25 act, so next year,
will we see an FY 25 actual.
That is to say, sort of the, the
number of jury trials.
Mr. Chair Representative, yes.
Got it. So I think for members,
great question Representative
Herndon. This performance
measure will stay on this sheet.
It's not gonna have sort of a
target for the for the judicial
districts to meet, but we will
see, looking back a year and 2
years, what they've done.
So we'll be able to compare the
past performance, there's not
gonna be a recommended
recommended target.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Feron, the courts report this
quarterly to DFA and LSC, so I
think if you not to speak for
Felix, but um you can work with
the analyst if you have.
Inquiries about more up to-date
data, but because of the way the
table prints with the BFM
system, it only pulls out ones
that have targets and goals, so
the data is there and it's being
collected. All right, thank you
very much, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Ali. Thank you,
Representative. OK, we'll go to
Representative Vincent for the
motion for LFC for right now and
then represent Silva for the
second.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thanks
for coming back with a win on
that one. Stay, stay up there in
the top. Uh, Mr. Chair, I move
that we accept the LFC
recommendation for the 12th
Judicial District.
It's been moved by Reent
Vincent, second by
Representative Silva. Is there
any opposition to that motion,
seeing none, thank you very
much, man.
OK, we're, uh, I see, uh, Chief
Judge Mauer, uh, coming up.
Front in this members is the 9th
judicial district.
Roosevelt.
Curry and Roosevelt counties.
One of, one or all has gotta be,
I see curry to our.
All right, with our, our ranking
member. OK, uh, please, Mr.
Chavez, go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We are on
the 9th judicial district Agency
code 239 pages in volume 2 is
page 31.
With that for the uh differences
in the in the revenue, the
executive recommendation exceeds
the LSC recommendation by
$59,000 in general funds.
This differences in the base
because the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by that
difference in the personnel
category, that's where the
differences is coming from. The
executive recommendation funds
positions to pre-trial like a
broken record, we're moving into
AOC and the difference there is
reduced further because the LFC
recommends a financial
specialist that the executive
did not recommend. With that,
I'll pass it over to Mario for
comment.
Thank you, Felix, Mr. Chair,
committee members, uh, like
Felix said, the executive
recommendation supports $65,000
security contract with Roosevelt
County, a $50,000 security
contract with Curry County, and
the pretrial services supervisor
and pre-trial officers, the new
FTE, which as we know, are
moving over to AFC now. So with
that, I will hand it off to
Chief Judge Maurer, thank you.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman
Representatives, thank you for
allowing me the opportunity to
be here to brag on our district.
We are home to Cannon Air Force
Base and the NMU Greyhounds I
know representative Vincent is a
former greyhound. Um, we are
good stewards of your taxpayer
dollars. You should note that we
had $0 in reversions last year,
um, we have looked at ways to
use our money more efficiently.
We do things like we've
consolidated our jury panels for
magistrate and district court.
That saves jury costs, and it's
a more efficient use of those
jurors so that they don't feel
like the members of our smaller
communities are being summoned
in repeatedly for jury service.
Um, we're proud of our access to
justice initiatives to
anticipate anything that
representative Silva might ask,
we pilot to the scribing program
that's now statewide, are
scribing program has now helped
everything from domestic
violence victims to grandparent
adoptions, um.
And also to anticipate some of
the questions that
Representative Dao had had
previously, we work well with
our justice partners and in
fact, we do remote proceedings,
um, very frequently to ease
burdens with our justice
partners for transportation,
security, or shortages at the
law offices of the public
defender and offer shortages, so
we're good stewards of your
dollars, and with that, we'll
stand for any questions.
Thank you very much, uh, Chief
Judge. Um, we're gonna, I don't
know if there's any questions
from members, we'll go to um
ranking member Pepsi.
OK, bring remember Chatfield
moved the LFC recommendation.
There a 2nd, 2, OK, uh, 2 by a
number of members, uh,
Representative Sanchez, Garrett
and Lujan all split second,
we'll go review the tape, but
move by ranking member
Chatfield, seconded by
Representative Sanchez in the
opposition to that motion,
seeing none.
That's enough.
OK, um, we're on to, uh, Chief
Judge Rose in the 10th judicial
district.
I think there's a very good
restaurant in the 10th Judicial
District.
Yeah.
That's right. They're in
Mosquero, New Mexico. That's
right.
You just go, uh, Mr. Chavez,
please start us off.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So for the
10th judicial district, agency
code 240, volume 2, it's page
32, volume 2, page 32.
Um, for the differences here in
revenue, the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by $61.1000 in
general fund revenue. This
difference is solely in the
personnel category. The
difference is in the executive
recommending the expansion
request. Other than that, both
recommendations support the
agency's based requests and
talking about the expansion,
that expansion relates to
pretrial services, which has
moved to AOC so both
recommendations.
I have the same increase.
Thank you, Felix, Mr. Chair,
committee members, the uh
Uh, new funding that we both
agreed to the LFC and executive
rec is uh $56,100 for a new
security bailiff FTE and like
the aforementioned pretrial
services officers.
Um, so with that I'll pass it on
to Chief Judge Timothy Rose.
Thank you.
Excuse me, thank you, Mr. Chair
and members of the honorable
committee.
Um, thank you for the analyst
and the budget committee for the
judiciary and the Supreme Court.
It's uh reviewed the modest
request and, and it's agreed and
approved, and I'm glad that
there's a consensus, uh, with
that. I just point out what we
are requesting a um
Uh, a new bailiff. It's not
really a new bailiff, it's a
bailiff.
Um, for, for our courts, so
it'll be the first we do not
currently have a full-time
permanent physician.
Um
Places.
In uh Harding County.
And where you can still keep
your doors unlocked.
And park your vehicle and, and
not worry about it.
And while we don't normally
worry about people coming in
with a gun and, and start
shooting places. It's starting
to happen, and as we all know
it.
It, um, we all need to take
security a little more serious,
even in our rural communities.
And for the protection of our
people. So I think we start with
the security bailiff.
Um, pretrial services officers,
the other requests we have, uh,
moving in and with the joint,
um.
Operation between the 9th and
the 10th.
Amanda Hammer joins me. Do you
have anything to add?
I would like to just mention
chair and members of the
committee, we have one clerk
right now that is a single
mother of 3.
herself and her 3 children all
qualify for Medicaid.
She also had mentioned to me a
couple of years ago, so this was
even before the in-depth
discussions.
That she gets her earned income
credit back off of her tax
returns every year, and she has
to keep that to make it paycheck
to paycheck throughout the year.
I asked her, what if you didn't
have that? And she said, I would
have to borrow money from my
parents.
So we highly
Ask for that salary study and
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Chief Judge. We're gonna go to
um ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. You know,
a lot of our remote communities,
we kind of run a bare bones
operation and, and, uh, you
know, we, we need the same
things in life that everybody
else needs. I think we're
already going back to look at
the pay scale, uh, we've already
agreed that that's something we
need to look at and talk about
and, and, uh, Mr. Chair, I would
like to flag the issue of a
bailiff for this court. And when
we go back and do that study.
And uh
If there's no other, is there
other questions?
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Uh, we're gonna go to
Representative Dow for a quick
question, we'll come back to
ranking member Chatfield for the
motion. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Just a real quick question for
y'all. How far is it to when
when the sheriffs are
transporting folks for state
facilities, what is the distance
for that?
state, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Dow.
Uh, state that you're talking
about prisons.
OK, so we're talking Santa Rosa,
which is uh
Uh, was it 60 months, 45, 54
miles.
It's the nearest one, but most
intakes take place in Los Lunas,
it's the central facility.
I think throughout the state,
people, sheriff's departments
are transporting to Los Lunas
from there, they're getting the
intake and, and uh distributed.
Thank you.
If we have a juvenile defendant,
they can be in hobs or Las
Cruces though. And so if a
juvenile defendant has to be
picked up.
It is, you know, 5 hours away at
least.
Thank you for that, Mr. Chair,
and I isn't, I heard stories
from my, one of my counties that
they have to go out of state if
someone's found, you know,
they'll have to go get them and
bring them back to the state,
and their statutorily obligated
to do so, and they've gone to
Louisiana and they've gone to
Alabama and they've gone
different places to, to pick up
someone and bring them back to
the state.
Um, and so that falls on the,
the county.
Uh yes, Mr. Chair and uh
Representative Doo, that would
be a county sheriff issue.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much
Representative down. Oh,
Representative Brown has a quick
question.
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair. So
I'm Representative Dao's
question, uh, brought up
something in my mind.
Which detention facilities in
the state except
Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair, Representative Brown
is fewer and fewer. Uh I was
elected DA for 14 years, uh,
prior to being appointed as
judge and
And Lee County, I think as a
juvenile facility, uh,
Albuquerque.
I'm missing one. I think that
we're down to 3, aren't we? Las
Cruces, Lovington.
Albuquerque and San Juan.
Thank you, Representative Brown.
Uh, then question from group or
about the ranking member chap.
Mr. Chairman, I move the LFC.
OK, it's been moved by Re member
Chatfield, seconded by
Representative Garrett. Is there
any opposition to that motion,
saying none, we've adopted the
LLC recommendation. Thank you
very much. Thank you.
OK, uh, we, uh, ask, uh, Chief
Judge.
Emilio Chavez.
To come down from the 8th
judicial district.
Yeah.
Go ahead, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, we are on the 8th
judicial district Agency 238 in
volume 2, there are page 30,
again, page 30.
So for the uh revenue side, the
uh executive general fund
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by $363.8,000.
This differences in solely, no,
not solely, my apologize, the,
the, the differences in the
base, the executive
recommendation exceeded the LFC
recommendation by $358.8,000 in
personnel.
The the executive recommendation
funds an attorney supervisor
that the LFC did not, and the
remaining difference is from the
LFC recommending moving existing
pretrial services funding to the
AOC.
With that, I'll pass it over to
Mario for his comments. Thank
you.
Mr.
The judicial district court,
this Taos Union in Colfax
County, uh, like Felix said, uh,
the executive supported the
125.9 for an attorney
supervisor, both the executive
and LLC supported 76.4 for a
financial analyst senior, and uh
the rest of the remaining costs
for the salary increases, so I
will pass on to uh.
Chief Judge Emilio Chavez, thank
you.
Excuse me, I've been a little
under the weather this week.
Chair members of the committee,
um, Pam May is with me also. Amy
Quintana, uh, they're the brain
trust of all of the tough
questions need to be directed to
them, um, I, I know we have a
number of new committee members.
I, I think I've been here over
the last 6 years, although last
year I think I had a murder
trial when you guys convened.
Um, the 8th judicial district is
our northeastern portion of the
state, Tao Colfax, and Union
Counties where the 2nd largest
geographic district in the
country, uh, the other one being
the 7th judicial district, and I
said yes in the country, um, so
geographically, we're a huge
district. Um, we're comprised of
approximately 61 employees, uh,
that includes 3 district judges,
6 magistrate judges, and 2
hearing officers.
Regarding our requests, um, I'm
gonna just focus on a couple of
things to show you that I've
been diligently listening to the
questions that you guys have
asked and really to key in on
the judiciary's main or or
central focus is employees'
salaries.
And chairs small, you did, you
did advocate or or ask, you
know, there has been substantial
increases, whether it was 26%
since 2019 or whether it was 19%
as Mr. Rice stack's internal
number indicated in an important
consideration that we're looking
for is also looking for parity
with the executive. And so when
you look at those numbers, I
would, I would suggest that for
the most part, the executive is
received comparable increases.
And again, the reason is
when we've looked at those lower
classifications, we are as best
as we can when we compare the
judiciary to the executive,
we're comparing apples and
apples and those employees
should be paid the same as their
executive counterparts.
Now, with that being said, in
the 8th judicial district, 34%
of our employees all under
45,000, and now we're Taos
County, Colfax, and Union may
not have the same costs of
living, uh, cost of living as as
perhaps Santa Fe, um, it's
still, it, it's something for
you to consider is the, the
qualify for free process in the
courts, you have to make 185%
under, under the, the poverty
level.
And or above the poverty level,
I'm sorry, 185%, which is
$48,000 a year for a family of
4.
And I try to conceptualize that
as how, with my family of 4,
would I live on 48,000? How
would I get housing? How would
I?
And, and I don't know how I
could reconcile that number. And
so when we're, when you're
telling me and when I'm going
over with Miss. Nay, 34% of our
employees are, are in that
threshold. It, it's hard to, to
understand some of the things
that they need, and we need to
raise, um, as a government, we
need to raise, you know, not
just in the judiciary, but all
around, um, those employees
then, and that's what we're
centrally focused on, that are
making 20 $22 an hour, um, for
representative chair and
representative Pettigrew, a fast
number that I like to always do
to figure that out, $22 an hour
times it by 2, and you add 30s
and you know about what they
make a year. Um, so $22 an hour
would be about 44,000 a year.
Um, the other big initiative,
um, you know, that you'll see in
our requests, um, and you see in
a lot of the requests is really
the security, uh, the security
piece isn't just for the judges,
um, and those of you that watch
the news and the chief judge
alluded to it. If we showed
video from the 2nd judicial
district of what happened in
their court this week.
Um, I, I think it's a no-brainer
on the reasons, and that's in
the district court, where the
statutory obligation of the
sheriff's office to provide that
support and all courts can
provide examples of that. And
that's where we're really trying
to pick up and, and ensure that
there's security for our
litigants and where you've heard
for the last several years,
magistrate courts in general,
although they're not as the
Chief Justice classifies a
felony court, they hear a lot of
the felony cases at the initial.
part when people are arrested
for arraignment, they have
people that are charged with
murders, rapes, other really
atrocious violent crimes come
into the magistrate courts, and
there's no mandatory security.
Um, so I, I, I think it is an
important consideration, and I,
I think I did hear, um, from
Representative Dao is just
asking how the courts are
reimbursing the counties and
And you know, there is a
statutory obligation, so there
isn't a need necessarily to
reimburse them, but a lot of the
courts around the state are
entering into various contracts
and trying to figure out those
mechanisms for the district
court, even if it's for domestic
relations cases that can be
highly volatile, um, or for the
magistrate courts, and we're
really trying to experiment and,
and figure out what that
solution it is. And as you heard
from the AOC presentation.
It's really having permanent
funding. So if we have a
permanent position that we can
pay a sheriff to, to secure.
That's gonna be the mechanism
and that's where that funding
that we're all, all of us are
universally requesting us coming
to you. Um, last couple of
things, I know you guys had a
very brief, uh, very busy
Saturday. I'm glad it's not
going into my birthday, which is
tomorrow, at least for our
presentation.
Um,
I don't think I'm going to
dissuade you in, in adopting or
at least initially the LFC
recommendation. Um, I have
concerns in the LFC
recommendation, and I don't
think it was explained by Mr.
Chavez, is that, for example, in
the 8th and many of the
districts that already have
pretrial services, we're pulling
out that funding. So last year
you gave us 3 positions in
pretrial services were about to,
we're about to implement those
programs in the 8th judicial
district.
And so they'd be pulled out,
they'd go back to AOC, AOC would
then reauthorize those three
positions to the 8th judicial
district, give us that funding,
and then theoretically their HR,
their management, would have to
do that, then we'd oversee them
again with our HR, our
management, etc. and those
positions are housed within the
8th judicial district. So, if
you're gonna adopt the LFC
recommendation, I, I, I would
suggest the modification of
pulling out those positions.
and giving them to the AOC
doesn't really make sense. And
sometimes there's confusion,
even though they're the
administrative offices of the
court. They don't administer
everything, um, internally our
own districts administer our
employees, and that makes the
most sense. So I, I, I would
suggest to the committee, no
problem if you believe the LSC
recommendations are appropriate,
at least as to those positions
now districts that do not have
pretrial services and may be
fine, which is
what we've done in the past.
Give them deoC then as those
positions get trained, those
districts take them over and
then they come before you and
ask for permanent positions. Um,
so that's happened historically.
Um, again, and I, I don't think
I'm gonna to dissuade you from
following the LFC
recommendation, um, but I want
to point out in DFA and, and
we've worked close with, with
Mario and and got to know Felix
in this recent time, but the
attorney supervisor is a high
priority for our district. We're
one of, I think, only 3.
districts that do not have a
staff attorney.
So it's not that we're just
asking for a supervisor over a
whole bunch of attorneys. And so
you guys may be aware, and I
know my
When I say being brief as a
judge or an attorney, it's not
that brief. Um, but
An attorney does provide
considerable assistance whether
it's helping our CEO go through
contracts, whether it's giving
advisory um research and and
opinions with working with
judges on their decisions. So it
does help us to that access to
justice, peace. I'm just
advocating in both LFC and DFA
did recommend a financial
analyst. Um, you've seen that
from the Supreme Court, Court of
Appeals, AOC, um, our increased
responsibilities, whether
they're
Um, through treatment courts,
whether they're through manage
the consolidation with
magistrate court has put strain
on our financial, uh, our
financial analysts and, and we
do desperately need that other
position.
Um, with that, I think I've
given a, a general outline the
last uh, as I will say, we've
been good stewards of the money
that you guys have provided us
when we ask for something, we
use that money for some, for
exactly what, what we've told
you we've allocated it for, um,
the 8th is, is kind of been on
the in some respects on the
forefront on treatment courts.
We were one of the first gold,
we were the first gold certified
treatment court. We have one of
the few rural family violence
courts. We've done
Consequential intercept
modeling, um, to be either on
the forefront of either mental
health courts or AOT or seeing
how the behavioral bill bills
pass out through this
legislative session. So with
that chair, uh, I will stand for
any questions that the committee
may have.
Great. Thank you very much,
Chief Judge. Uh, we're gonna go
first to represent Garrett.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thanks for
your reporting, and those last
points about the treatment and
real family violences. I have a
question.
Are any court proceedings, um,
done through Zoom still.
So that that is a great
question. And so we, you know,
we started utilizing Zoom and
Google and and other platforms
during the pandemic of
necessity, and we found in
particular, what I'd advocate in
rural areas.
We, we're still using Zoom to
answer your question around the
state, the courts are using
them, there's proceedings that
can be either wholly remote and
be a hybrid, some people in
court, some people, uh, some
people on Zoom, um, in rural
areas, one of the big things on
access to justice, it allows
attorneys to appear from
Albuquerque, to appear from
Hobbs or wherever, um, and also
cuts down on the costs, um, to
litigants or even to those
attorneys and traveling. So,
yes.
We are doing a lot of remote
proceedings still, um, I would
estimate probably about 50% to
70% of hearings are still
remote.
Uh, Mr. Chair, thank you for
that and and also it snows a lot
in Raton in that area. So I was
just, thank you. And, and Mr.
Chair, I'd I'd like to know from
the AOC later how pervasive that
is around the state. Uh, thank
you, Representative Garrett, and
thanks to the ALC staff who are
still here, I think they see
that they got that. OK, uh,
next, we're gonna go to
representative uh Pettigrew and
then keep going from there.
Chairman, thank you. Thank you
for being here today. I
appreciate your comments with
respect to what you said about
how we should look at funding
from one way or or the other
whether or not AOC should
control this or it should be
moved in, uh,
In a different direction and
chair, I just hope that as we go
through these judicial con
concepts and these discussions
from within the district courts
that we, we revisit the comments
that were made specifically in
this one because I feel like,
um,
Our judge made some points that
the other judges.
Thank you very much, uh, next,
we're gonna go to Bohan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I, I
just like to follow up, um,
afterward.
Representative Garrett, um,
requested and asked for this
second that, um, also, um, in
regards to this this comments,
um.
With the new Americans with
Disabilities Act, the ADA rules
requiring state and local
government websites to mobile
and mobile apps to meet new
accessibility standards by 2026.
How will the courts ensure that
critical digital services such
as e-filing systems, virtual
hearings, and online case
records are accessible to
individuals with disabilities,
and I, I say, I asked this long
question and and a little bit
more, you know, with a little
more substance because you're
using Zoom and so, um, and
finally in fulfilling.
The obligation to be in
compliance with the ADA. How are
you thinking of moving forward,
um Mr. Chair and Representative,
I, I think that's a great
question, and that's going to be
an ongoing dialogue that the
judiciary and all agencies will
be developing, you know, we're
going to also have that dialogue
and working with our buildings
being in those full compliance
and, and analysis. So, um, you
know, it, it is on a case by
case basis when you're trying to
meet those standards. And so
depending on what that
disability is that we need to,
to handle. So, for example, on,
on the Google Meets, there is,
uh, you know, there's a captions
that allows for people that are
hard of hearing. And so some
litigants, even if they're in my
courtroom.
Actually like still seeing that
so that they can see the
captions and things along those
lines that are better than the
hearing assisted devices, and we
can, we can, we can provide one
we're personally present. So, I,
I think we're, we're trying to
take into account that, um, you
know, in the judiciary, we're
also seeing a movement to a lot
of people claiming disabilities
without telling us what that
disability is. And so it's hard
to, hard to address it, but so
representative as best as
possible on an individual basis.
Um, I will tell you, so,
personally, if I have a case and
and remote hearings don't meet
those disabilities. So for
example, a lot of times people
of a certain age don't want to
be on remote. And, and, you
know, they, they attribute it to
hearing or not. I'll say in my
courtroom.
No problem, we're gonna have an
in-person, um, the best that we
can do, and even if that's not
necessarily always an ADA issue.
We can always accommodate
through in person. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much for Mohan.
Next we're gonna go to ranking
member, uh,
Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh
Mr. Chair, Judge.
I just wanted to take a minute
to tell you that we're
constrained by process to take
the lower.
And uh
Any adjustments that are made
will be made later on. It
doesn't mean you didn't get an
adjustment. It didn't mean we're
gonna not gonna change anything,
but we'll get together with
staff and, and people that, uh,
Or standing up and fighting for
you and uh people that they care
about our courts, and we will
decide what adjustments we're
able to make within this
constraints of the budget and
within the constraints of what
is agreed upon by
The group and, and there we will
make the adjustments, and I'm
not gonna make the, the motion
because I share uh you guys with
my very good friend, uh,
Joseph Sanchez, Representative
Sanchez, but I just did want to
take a minute to tell you that,
that we have a process and that
process is to take the lesser
and then go back and look at
things that have been flagged,
and I'm sure you probably
already know that, but
Just wanna make sure, uh.
Um, Mr. Chair, yeah. No, sorry.
Uh, thank you, thank you
remember Chatfield and thank you
for that explanation. I have a
quick question, um, Chief Judge,
uh, in terms of the, so
Uh, the pretrial monitoring is,
you began that this year with
the employees, uh, in the sort
of the funding that was
provided, uh, last in the
current fiscal for the current
fiscal year last legislative
session.
Correct. So, so we were approved
and so July 1, we got that
funding, we've hired, hired
people.
Yes, we did. We, we hired a
Uh
Uh, we hired a um program
manager, in fact, um, we hired
two program managers, um, the
second one is now um um back on
track to start the program, um,
by the end of this, um, or
early, um, June, uh, or early
July,
and so let me clarify we didn't
get and just a quick reminder
the going through the chair, the
only reason we do it, it sort of
keeps everything smooth and
flowing, that's.
The only reason. Sorry about
that, um, just on that question,
we hired a program manager, that
person left. We hired a new
program manager that's been
implementing our program, um,
along with those other two
positions that were authorized,
were ready to start.
If it was, and, and that was my
point. If it was approved this
way, then we'd pull those 3
positions that you guys
authorized last year, put him
back to AOC, then AOC would
Theoretically send those 3
positions back to us and so it,
it seemed counterintuitive.
mechanism that it, it's
suggested in the LFC
recommendation.
OK. Uh, thank you for that. I
think
it'll be an area that we
scrutinize further to make sure
that we're getting this right,
both now and for, for areas that
have just starting up.
Oh, and um we're and we'll go to
represent Verea real quick for a
question. Um,
Yeah, I think it's an area that
we need to scrutinize. There's
um
And, and that's why we go
through these hearings and, and
we're doing it early this year,
of course, Verdo. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Judge. I'm,
I'm very curious about the
family violence court and how
that works and what, what your
results have been.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
um, so we have again, I, I think
there's only 3 family violence
courts, and we're one of the
only districts in a rural or
smaller district. And so, you
know, I, I'd like to, you know,
I'd like to advocate that our at
least the numbers of uh for
recidivism and domestic violence
are down.
Um, but, you know, I can't, if
you looked at our statistics,
and I'll have to be blunt, we
have had um some um some recent
domestic violence homicides in
the 8th judicial district. Now,
fortunately, they weren't, I
don't know, fortunate is the
right word, but they weren't
people that were in the program.
So the idea is again, creating
education, um, also it, it, what
we've seen from the participants
is they really do like the
family violence court is it's
not a program designed to, to
shame them, um, but to educate
them and to to create better
outcomes in those situations.
And I know we don't have time
today, but representative, I'd
be happy to share with you some
of those success stories and,
and really even just anecdotally
what participants have shared
that have
prevented them from getting in
future domestic violence
situations. So, something that's
not generally covered from the
treatment courts. Um, if Judge
Blankenhorn, who's the judge
that presides over it, was he or
she really just advocate the,
the tremendous success that
they've had in in our small
district.
Um, Mr. Chair, I'm really very
intrigued and impressed by this
idea, and I'm wondering, um, the
families that are involved.
Uh, we know that
For royal families don't have
internet access, so, so do they
have to drive to the court or
can they go to the nearest
school, and can they be on Zoom?
I, I'm just curious how you
handle that.
So Mr. Chair and Representative,
so again, what we want to do
again, access to the courts,
whatever is the easiest way. So
if we're bringing them to the
court, if they're getting at a
public library, they're able to
get on their phone. I think
you've heard some districts have
started to do these justice
stations that are providing
access in a Walmart parking lot.
Um, anything that we can do, so,
so we work with the
participants. It, it's again,
usually on a case by
Thank you, Judge. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much for
representing Verrera. OK, we're
gonna go to, uh, Representative
Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
move the LFC and I ask that we
uh take a closer look at the
differences between the two
recommendations that judge
brought up.
Hey, it's been moved by Sanchez,
seconded by a ranking member
Chatfield, any opposition to
that motion. I don't see any.
Thank you very much, Chief
Judge. Thank you for your time.
OK.
Uh, now, we'll ask, uh, Judge
Murphy.
From the 7th judicial district.
Right.
Mr. Chavez started us off. Thank
you. Um.
Alma said good morning, um Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
we're on the 7th Judicial
District, which is agency 237 in
volume 2, it's on page 29, on
page 29.
But for the 7th, the uh the
differences in revenue is that
the executive General Fund
revenue recommendation exceeds
the LFC recommendation by
$171.9,000.
The difference again is in the
base because the executive
recommendation exceeds the LG
recommendation in personnel
services for that amount.
And the majority of that
difference is because the
executive recommended the
pretrial services expansion that
the agency requested, which
again, the LFC is moving to the
AOC. However, this difference in
this category is further reduced
because the LFC fully funds
judicial pay increases,
workforce, investment plan
initiatives and GST premium
increases while the executive
partially funds that.
With that, I'll hand it over to
Mr. Smiglia for his comments.
Thank you, Mr. Chavez, uh,
committee chair, committee
members, like Felix said, uh,
the executive recommended 232.6
for the new pretrial services
program 3 FTE, which has been
moved to ASC. I wish I'd known
that. I could have used that
money elsewhere. But um so and
uh we partially funded the
increases in remaining judicial
salaries, that I will pass it
off to Chief Judge Murphy.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Mercetus Murphy. I'm the
chief judge of the 7th Judicial
District, it's comprised of
Sierra Socorro, Katrin and
Torrance Counties, we are the
largest judicial district in the
continental US. Uh, we have 3
district judges and 4 magistrate
judges. With me today is Jason
Jones, our CEO and CFO.
And um,
Some of the things we'd like to
highlight, um, like to think um.
The Legislature for their um
matching funds, we were able to
use those last year or currently
still using them in this year to
replace windows in our
courthouse in the Socorro
County, um, also to make other
external improvements to that
courthouse, um.
Additionally,
We would
Fully endorse um the increases
for staff pay, um,
It is most definitely needed. We
do have several employees who
Um
have second jobs because
They need them to make ends
meet. Uh, we also do not have
our bailiff positions.
filled because
We can't get anybody to apply
for those positions because the
pay range is so low.
Um, as a result, our drug court
probation officers pull double
duty as bailiffs.
Um
So
We are asking for the.
2
$32,600 to implement our
pretrial services program, um,
Whether it's
Through the executive.
Recommendation or through LFC.
We'll get the funding either
way, however, I think Chief
Judge Chavis made an excellent
point that come next year, we
may be right back here asking
you to fund the FTEs.
So that we can
The district can have the
positions, so.
With that, we will stand for
questions.
Great. Uh thank you very much,
uh, Chief Judge. We're gonna go
to represent down and I might
have a few questions and we'll
go to Brooksendal for the motion
once we get there. Thank you,
thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Judge. Thank you guys for
being here today. How closely
are you all involved in?
Partnering with or observing
what's going on with the RIS
projects. I know you have
several in your district.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Doo, we have 3, are you
referring to the treatment
courses through the RISE program
or the RIS programs run by the
counties.
Both either if you want Mr.
Chair, Judge, if you'd like to,
whichever one you'd like to
speak to. So, Mr. Chair
Representative Doo, um, we work
very closely with um each of the
county rise programs. I know
Sierra County's got a very
active one, Socorro County has
got a very active one, and we
work extremely closely with
those programs.
In connection specifically with
our treatment drug courts are
drug court programs, um, they're
very intermingled and um.
Those rise programs.
Provide lots of services for the
treatment court participants. So
we work very closely with both
of them. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you, Judge. Do you,
have you, you may not know this,
but I would be very interested
to know the recidivism rate of
the folks who are participating.
Are, are you seeing a reduction
in the recidivism rate?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Doo, um.
I don't know the rates. I don't
know the numbers, um, but I can
certainly reach out to.
The two counties in particular,
um, that we work with to get
numbers for you because I don't
know.
Thank you very much. Um, I, I
have to brag on, well, both,
both the programs on Socorro
here are pretty incredible. They
took different approaches in
Sierra County, they chose 6
months of housing
post-incarceration for folks who
are compliant with their, their,
their plans, um, and then in
Socorro, they, they've got
partnerships with the Mexico
Tech for workforce, and they're
even participating in welding
and different courses during
incarceration.
And a lot of those guys are
getting hired. It's pretty cool.
It's pretty cool to watch. I
like the program. So anyways,
um, thank you for what you guys
do, and I heard a rumor that the
juvenile justice advisory
council might be getting started
back up in Sierra. I hope that's
true.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Do, I hope so as well. Thank
you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Next we're gonna go
to Representative Silva.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you, um,
just for being here. Just a
quick question. You are the
largest, um, district court in
the continental US. Do you have
the need or the desire to have a
circuit courts or um other just
physical places in, in the
district. Thank you, chair.
Mr. Tay, uh, representative
Silva, thank you for that
question. We have a district
courts in each one of our
counties, we have, we had two
circuit courts, one in Torrance
County for their magistrate and
one in Catron County for the
magistrate and.
They just weren't cost
effective, and so we ultimately
had to close them, so.
We don't really have a need for
circuit courts.
However, for additional
information, the district court
judges do ride circuit, um,
fortunately not on a horse
anymore. Uh, we do, we, we use
vehicles, uh, but we do, we have
a set schedule where we each
ride.
Throughout the 4 that's great to
hear. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Silva,
um, I have a quick question for
the analyst, uh, so looking at
our um our difference worksheet,
what we're in Mr. Chavez
mentioned this.
And this is sort of some of the
challenges and it's clear focus
for the committee to work
through this, but what I
understand from here, um, the,
the LFC recommendation fully
funds judicial pay increases,
workforce investment plan
initiatives, premium increases
while the, the executive uh
recommendation partially funds
those, so there's a difference
where uh pretrial services are
And separate from that, the LFC
recommendation in this case, uh,
it seems like addresses maybe
some more of those workforce,
um, challenges in, in desires
that we're hearing about.
Mr. Chavez and of course, Mr.
Simba, if you want to add
anything.
Mr. Chair, that, that is
correct.
And he allow Mario to elaborate
on his end. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, the, uh, those three
things, the rates and insurance,
the uh whip, and the remaining
HP 141 salary increases, all the
district courts asked for it
because they all have those
needs, uh, with this one I had,
you know, it's no surprise that
Felix and I are constrained by a
certain percentage increase that
we can recommend without it
getting kicked back and asked to
to do it, so I was prioritizing
the pretrial services at that
232 number.
So I had to kind of take a
little bit from the HB 141 judge
increase rates and others in
hopes that they could make that
up with the um
Uh
Vacancy savings, uh, if my
recommendation got accepted,
but.
Understood. Thank you both and
thanks for the very clear
explanation. I think that's
great for us. Uh, we'll go to
ranking member Chatfield and
then we'll go back to
Representative down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, my
question is probably for, for
LFC and I, I noticed that the
pay increases are in the LFC or
we just, we're just heard that
talked about, uh.
Does LFC have a certain
Rubric certain level.
That uh these employees would be
brought up to, in other words,
uh, or, or across the board type
of
Um, pay scale, that's what I
would call it a pay scale that
is equal across the board for a
different ports.
According to the
Responsibilities of that
employee.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Chatfield, the LFC
recommendation in a separate,
uh, part of the general
appropriations Act.
We'll have a compensation
package for judicial branch
employees, as well as the
executive branch employees,
public schools and higher
education. Public schools will
be in the SCG.
Higher education agencies and
the judicial will be in section
8 of the bill.
And that will provide funding
for an average of 4%
compensation increase.
It will be up, if that's adopted
and implemented and signed, that
will be up to the individual
agencies to take that pot of
money and allocate it out as
they see fit. So if they think
that they're lower paid
employees need a 6% bump, and
their higher employees, uh, not
as much, they would have the,
the flexibility to do that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks,
Charles. You know, the reason
for the question was, uh, my
fear is that the, that the
raises rise to the top, you
know, uh, one me make sure that
we're taking care of those
people who are not making quite
as much money, so, uh.
You know, 4% across the board is
great
or
averages.
Probably not as great because it
uh I know they need flexibility,
but, but I'd like to see it
where
Where everybody shared in the
In the
Mr. Chairman a little bit,
yes, Mr. Chairman Representative
Chatfield, if you were to do an
across the board.
4%
In the highest paid employees
would get a larger dollar share
of that.
That could have been otherwise
allocated to your lower paid
employees. So there's trade-offs
either way, Mr. Chair Charles,
you are right. Well taken. All
right. Thank you, bye. Thank you
very much for member Chatfield.
Thank you, Director Sali. OK,
uh, we don't have any other
questions. We'll go to
Representative Dou for the
motion. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
LFC recommended budget.
It's been moved by Dow, seconded
by Representative Duncan. Is
there any opposition to that
motion? I don't see any.
Thank you very much, Chief
Judge.
OK, uh, now we're on to the
11th, 13th, and 4th judicial
districts with the 11th, uh,
Chief Judge, uh, Peterson.
Go ahead, Mr. Chang. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, um, for the 11th
judicial district. It's an
agency code 241 and the uh in
volume two, it's on page 33,
Volume 2, page 33.
Um, for the differences in
revenue for the 11 judicial
districts, the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by $1.3 million
from general fund revenue.
The executive recommendation
exceeds the LSC recommendation
by 1.2 million, I believe in
person with the majority of this
difference due to the LFC
transferring again existing
pretrial services funding to the
AOC and the remainder of the
difference is in the executive
supporting and their
recommendation to judicial
specialists. The executive
exceeds the LFC recommendation
in contractual services and in
the other category by $59,000
and
$10,000 respectively. That
difference stems also from the
transfer to the AOC.
With that, I'll pass it over to
Mario for any comment that he
may have.
Thank you, Felix, Mr. Chair,
committee members, uh, the
executive recommendation
supports a number of new FTE for
the 11th Judicial District
Court, which is San Juan and
McKinley Counties. Uh, we
support a new financial
specialist at 72.2, a new
judicial specialist too in the
Aztec Magistrate Court at 65.7,
and a new judicial specialist
too in the Farmington Magistrate
Court.
For the same amount. And we also
support a $53,000 security
services contract for a
courthouse security, that was a
priority of the executive when
uh those ads came through to
make sure we're funding those.
So with that, I will pass it on
to Chief Justdge Peterson. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of HFC it's very nice
for me to be back. I, I left
this body 25 years ago after
serving 8 years, uh, most of
that time cheering house
judiciary, um, back in those
days, they didn't allow lawyers
on any of the money committees
because we were told that we
were notoriously bad with our
money and everybody else's, and
so, um, yeah, so I never served
on, on, on this committee.
Uh, I want to thank, uh, both of
the analysts for, for their hard
work. They, they've done
excellent jobs for us. Uh, the
11th Judicial District were
basically the Northwest County,
uh, northwest corner of New
Mexico. It's San Juan and
McKinley, um, there is a minor
mistake we made on our, our
little handout, uh, we, we, we
don't have 8 district judges in
uh San Juan County. We have 8
district judges total. There are
5 in San Juan County and 3 in
Kindly, and
God willing, and the creek don't
rise within the next 2 weeks,
uh, the governor hopefully will
fill my last vacancy on the
district court bench, um.
Uh, and we will, uh, if she
chooses one of the two attorneys
who we recommended, it will be
the first uh Native American
woman.
District judge in the 11th
Judicial District in the history
of our district. I'm kind of
proud of, of that based upon our
composition of our two counties,
uh, uh, ethnically etc. um, the,
the two counties are, uh, we
have about 200,000 people total,
roughly, uh, as you can see the,
the incomes are, are, are pretty
different though. uh, San Juan
County has a much higher median
income than McKinley. Um,
Our budget increase itself is
very modest. It's a 2.8%
increase over, over the previous
year, uh, and I, um, I am here
to echo what all of my fellow
chief judges have said is that
we are hearing unanimous support
of the unified budget
recommendation in our key
proposal is indeed for
increasing compensation for our
lowest paid, uh, judicial
employees, um, are comparable,
uh,
Uh, people are, are underpaid
compared to the executive by
about 10 to 12%, um, that's just
not, that's just wrong, OK?
People doing equivalent work
ought to be paid equivalent uh
compensation. And like many of
our other districts, um.
Our, uh, employees, our lowest
paid employees, um, 52%.
Of our employees qualify for
government assistance.
More than, more than half.
Uh, a lot of our employees are
single parents.
Raising families and indeed,
many of them are working 2nd and
3rd jobs. 11 of my
administrative tasks, I, I get
to approve a request for outside
employment.
And I bet you I approve one of
those a week.
Uh, just for people to get by,
and I would also reiterate, you
know, what has been said
previously, we, the judges were
extremely grateful.
At the generosity of the
legislature over the last couple
of years and and the governor's
office for agreeing to uh
increase compensation, uh, for
us, because it will allow us to
recruit and retain judges um.
In the last 2 years, I've lost 1
half of my district judges.
The average district judge who
retired had 16.5 years of
experience on the bench.
Every one of my brand new judges
started out with 0 years of
experience and in our 9
magistrate judges.
4 of them.
are brand new.
Um
So, uh, we've had quite a bit of
turnover, uh, on the bench, but
we, we are hoping that we're
gonna have some real long term
uh stability. And, and the
increase in compensation and
what you were considering uh
with the judicial retirement Act
and the magistrate Retirement
Act, I think we'll also allow
people to consider serving.
Uh, for longer periods of time,
because being a judge is kind of
a funny job. I, I've practiced
law in northwestern New Mexico
for 47 years.
I've been a judge now for 5.
Uh, and I will tell you that
being a trial court judge.
The only analogy that I can
really see, it's like being a
surgeon.
Now you can get all the training
in the world, about all the
techniques, etc. but it really
is something that you learn to
do well by doing it, and so the
longer we keep people um on the
bench, uh, the better off we
will, uh, uh, we will be, um,
Uh my uh CEO Jody Schwebel is
here. Our, our CFO, uh, Roberto
uh Waitto Jones is over here,
and my deputy CEO John Guadrama,
and as one of the other judges
said, if you have any really
hard technical questions, please
refer them to them instead of
me. I'm, I didn't come to the
benches any kind of a bean
counter kind of guy. Uh, I came
to the benches an old trial
lawyer, and that's what I love
to to do and uh this is indeed.
Uh, the best job, uh, that, uh,
small town uh boy from uh Dusty
town in northwestern New Mexico
could have ever had. So, uh, we
will be happy to answer any
questions that you have, Mr.
Chairman. Uh, thank you for
allowing us to present. Uh,
thank you very much, uh, Chief
Judge, um, and welcome back to
the Roundhouse. We're gonna go
first to uh representative
Hernandez and then
Representative Duncan.
Thank you Mr. Chair, and uh and
uh justice like and, and, and
staff from Northwest New Mexico
to 11th Judicial Court. Thank
you for being here and giving
your presentation. My, um, uh,
Mr. Chairman, my 37 years living
in Salon County, I'm glad I've
never had to meet you.
You, you're, you're welcome,
Representative Hernandez. I hope
that continues at least in our
official capacity, unless you
get called for jury duty.
Thank you. Thank you Mr. Chair.
Um,
Access to justice. Uh, that's
something that I'm, I'm starting
to hear a common denominator,
uh, today.
Um, the, uh,
The San Juan County is 60% of
San Juan County is Navajo
Nation, uh, tribal land.
And so, um,
Mr. Chair, what one
Concurrence, uh, uh, that I hear
from my constituents is, is a
reality of having to, to travel
to Aztec to take care of of
their services and, and I, and
I'm really glad to hear about
the, uh, the use of the uh of,
of, of having transportation
services, um, how is that, uh,
Mr. Chair, how is the
transportation services working?
And do you get um
need from uh from the tribal
communities in the district.
Miss German representative
Hernandez, uh, you really hit
the nail on the head and that's
a great question. You know, our
part of the state is very much a
reflection of what New Mexico
is. We we're very actually,
we're very sparsely populated,
but we're concentrated. Most of
our counties have 1 or 2 small
cities, and then the rest of our
people live in relative.
remote rural areas. Um, one of
the things we're really proud
about is we were one of the uh
first judicial districts to
pilot uh judicial stations and
those little kiosks that we have
successfully installed in a
couple of Navajo Nation chapter
houses, and in a couple of our
public libraries have been
really successful. It's, it's
the idea of that instead of
making people come to the
justice, we're kind of taking
the justice to the people
because much
of also what you say, uh,
representative uh Ernest, Mr.
Chairman, uh, is the
Large distances that people have
to travel to do, to do things.
We want to minimize that as much
as we possibly can that
transportation, uh, component of
pretrial services has been
really successful because we
have very little public transit
in our, in our areas. And we
have people who have, uh, you
know, live in remote areas and
they, uh, when I was a
representative, I had
constituents that had to drive
20 miles before they got.
to a gravel road, not a paved
highway or a paved street, and
so just just that and what if we
learned anything, Mr. Chairman,
and representing Hernandez Good
from the pandemic, it was to
take better advantage of uh the
technology that we have to do
remote hearings, and instead of
insisting that people travel for
a couple of hours for a brief
routine procedural matter.
They can appear uh either by
telephone or by computer, uh,
screen, and it's another thing
that it helps everyone. It, it
minimizes the time that lawyers
have to spend going to and from,
but the real benefit is to
litigants, though the citizens
of our communities are our real
customers in the court system.
You know, sometimes we kind of
forget about that. Lawyers and
judges, we kind of think it's
us. And, and so all of that is
really beneficial and I think we
are
really trying to make it easier
for our citizens to avail
themselves of the necessary
services that we provide in the
judiciary.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and um
and uh
Uh, also went on uh appreciate
that validation because for
Navajo, New Mexico is Mr.
Chairman is the 2nd um growing
community on the Navajo Nation
and Navajo, New Mexico to Aztec
is 2 hours and 4 minutes, and uh
Shiprock as you know, Mr.
Chairman, is a largest Navajo
community and uh I, I would like
to go offline and and continue
to work on improving access to
justice. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you very much
forernandez.
we're gonna go to Representative
Duncan, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'd just
like to draw everybody's
attention to the average
attorney case load.
For the 11th
judicial district, it's 1,799.
Now
Is that through all of the
judges or is that her judge?
I'm attorney, yeah, I'm not sure
what, uh, uh, Representative
Duncan, let me ask the analysts
if they can help flush that out
for you, Mr. Chair, are you
seeing that and representative,
are you seeing that in volume 2?
Yes, page 52.
I think you're looking at the
district attorneys,
um,
but, but to get, to answer your
question, that that's only the
division 2 of the 11th District
for the district attorneys, the
11th is split into two
districts, I think you're
looking at that division. So
that would be um the 3.
In Gallup, right?
Mr. Chairman, uh, and, and
Representative Duncan, now, um,
I, I think if we're talking
about district attorney case
loads, uh, you know, we have an
anomaly. We're the only judicial
district that has multiple
district attorneys. We have an
elected district attorney in San
Juan County and an elected
district attorney in in McKinley
County, um, and, uh, they both
have their own uh robust uh case
loads, um, you know, San Juan
County always has had a larger
case load because.
It is a much more populous, it's
about a.
You know, maybe not 70/30, but
about a 6, about a 60-40 split
in population wise and um so the
the those caseloads are very
high. Well, uh, you know, I, for
many years, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Duncan. I worked
both sides of the street when I
was a private attorney, I
private attorney. I was a
defense attorney for many years,
and I've served as the chief
prosecutor in my home county
twice and a deputy district
attorney and an adjoining
county, uh
one tour and uh and and it's uh
the caseloads are very, are very
heavy.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. As I was
looking throughout the rest of
them they're 200, 300, 400, 500,
800, and then you get to this
one, it's 1800 and I thought,
holy smokes, these guys are
really, really efficient. So
thank you, Mr. Chair. That's all
I had. Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Duncan. Thank
you, Chief Judge, and that'll be
something that we're gonna, when
we come back to um or when we
get to our district attorneys in
the public defenders, you know,
the justice system is, you know,
obviously very connected.
And so I think it's wise for us
to be looking into different
components uh in this of course
is our first, our first stop
along that journey. OK, we're
gonna go to Representative
Hernandez to ask for the LLC
recommendation for right now and
representing Duncan for the 2nd.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I would
like to ask for the committee to
take in consideration the LFC
recommendation and I do consider
um, the, uh,
The request that was, uh, what
that we discussed further on as
we look at our budget to make
adjustments. Uh, great. OK,
there's a motion to adopt the
LFC with further work.
I'll take him back. OK, and it's
been seconded by Representative
Duncan, there any opposition to
that motion?
I don't see any. Thank you very
much, Chief Judge. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
OK, we're gonna ask uh Judge No.
Great to see you. Come on down.
All right. Go ahead, Mr. Chavis.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, the 13 judicial
district is uh agency 243 in
your uh binders and in um volume
2, it's page 35, page 35.
Um, so for the differences in
revenue, in the revenue of the
executive recommendation exceeds
the LFC recommendation by
$389.1,000 in general fund
revenue, that difference is
because of the pretrial
transfer and uh both
recommendations support the
agency's request. With that,
I'll hand it over to Mario.
Thank you, Felix. Mr. Chair,
committee members, uh, like
Felix said, we both agreed on
giving the agency their 2.5%
requested increase, so I will
hand it off to Chief Judge Noel.
Thank you. Great. Thank you very
much and thank you, Mr. Chair.
Madam Vice Chair and members of
the committee were delighted to
be here, uh, this afternoon with
you. Um, I'd like to start out.
My name is Jim Nolan and I'm the
chief judge, uh, for the 13th
Judicial District with me, I
have Philip Romero, who is our
CEO, we also have our CFO right
behind us, and, um, where I'd
like to start on this is just a
brief overview of the district.
Many of you already know what
what we look like. Um, we're a
three-county district. We have
Sandoval, Ciel, and Valencia
County.
We have 142 full-time employees.
We have 9 district court judges.
We have 8 magistrate court
judges.
And then I want to talk a little
bit about, um, our success
stories, but I think before I do
that, I want to do, um, at least
one thing and that is to um
reiterate that we support fully
the, uh, the unified budget
priorities, uh, the priority
number one is to make sure that
we have adequate, uh, salary
levels for our staff. Uh, that's
number one. the second thing
that's extremely important for
the 13
judicial district and for the
judiciary as a whole.
is to make sure that we have
adequate security funding, and
what I'd like to do flip
forward.
Um
Someone had mentioned a video of
what happened in the 2nd
judicial District court if if
that was um if they could see
that, what I'd like to show you
is what happened, um, in the
County courthouse in the 13th
Judicial District court in April
of 2024. And so I think
So what you're seeing is the
entryway to the district court
in Cibola County, you can see a
sheriff's deputy.
To the right, now you see
someone coming in the door, you
will notice that he has
something in his hand, that's an
ax.
This is an individual.
Well, I'll let you watch.
So the good thing here is this
was resolved without anyone
getting hurt.
The problem that we had with
this is that we had someone who
wanted to do this and was
actually able to get into our
building with an ax.
There are 2 important things
about this. The first Mr. Chair,
is that this individual was not
even a litigant in a case in
Cibola County. He was
peripherally related to it, but
somehow it upset him.
He doesn't live in grants. He
doesn't live in County. He
actually lives or was in
Bernalillo County in
Albuquerque.
One of the important things is
that we had deputy sheriffs in
the courthouse at this time.
And
Well, normally we don't get in
situations like this is advanced
notice. We did in this instance.
This individual went by, um, a,
a, a law office in Albuquerque,
saying that he wanted to kill
our judge.
Um, that law firm, fortunately,
called our offices in County.
Let us know.
And so we were able to take
security measures to make sure
that we were prepared if in fact
he did arrive. And as you can
see, he did arrive. So we were
fortunate.
You don't normally get noticed
like this in the 2nd judicial
district court, when that
erupted, there was no notice on
that. It just happened. We were
fortunate in this respect.
One of our requests here, um, is
for 182,000, is it for, um,
additional security, it's not
actually in district court, it's
for our magistrate courts,
because the sheriff's
departments do provide us with
security. We don't have security
in magistrate courts. So that
182,000, which I think is
supported by both the LLC as
well as the DFA, um,
recommendation, we need to have
that. Um,
The other thing that we're
asking for is a special request
for 1700 for, I'm sorry, for
$1,755,000 and that is to
improve our security
infrastructure, um, security
access controls, video
surveillance, intrusion, panic
alarms, and those sorts of
things. One of the other things
that I would like for you to
note with this, this is a good
resolution video.
Um, and that's due to the fact
that this is fairly new, it's
advanced, um, and it's important
for us to have this level of
security coverage.
Without going into details and
exposing potential um
limitations in our security, we
need to make sure that all of
our courthouses, including our
magistrate courts have adequate
video surveillance, and they
had, and that we have it in
important places throughout the
inside of the courthouse as well
as the outside.
Um
So I think with that, I, you
know where we are on this, um,
I, the only other thing I would,
would share with you is that we,
as I said, we have 9 district
court judges, 5 of them are
housed in Sandoval County, um,
and the problem that we have in
Sandoval County is we only have
3 chambers and we only have 3
courtrooms. We're going through
and we're working very closely
with Sandoval County um
management there, uh, county
administration.
And we're looking at expanding
the courthouse, if you could
just move forward on that.
I won't go into any of the
details on this, but we're
looking at expanding, uh, we've
got money, um, we haven't asked
for additional, uh, capital
expenditure for this. I know
that the county as a $14 million
request, um, as part of their,
um, ICIP their infrastructure,
um, capital request, that's
necessary money to make sure
that we're able to do this and
to make sure that we have the
security that we need to have
right now, one of our judges is
not even in the.
secured hallway.
Because we're so we're we're the
building doesn't accommodate
what we have anymore. So with
that Sanford questions, thank
you very much. Thank you, Chief
Judge, and thank you to your
staff who's here today as well.
I don't see, yeah, I don't, I
don't see any questions. We'll
go to um
uh representative Vincent, do
you want to make the motion? Oh,
OK. You ask a question, that's
just fine. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Whenever I see videos like that,
it infuriates me.
What's the end result of doing
something like that? What,
what's the punishment of that?
Um, Mr. Chair and uh
Representative Vincent, the
individual was charged with
attempted murder, and I think
there were some other lesser
charges that were involved, um,
that's as much as I know, I
can't really get into the
details of an ongoing case I can
tell you what he was charged
with. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. We're gonna go to
Representative Dow for a
question and then we'll go to
Representative Little for the
motion. Thank you, thank you,
madam, Mr. Chair, and thank you
guys for the presentation. I, I
just want to understand, we're
going to appropriate funding for
the magistrate courts to provide
security, and they're not
statutorily required to, but
we're going to provide that.
Which I, I think we should. I
mean, it looks like it's
necessary.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Doo, I'm not sure if I was
following exactly what you said.
Right now, there's a statute
that lays out that the sheriff's
departments, um, are supposed to
or asked to provide security
services at district courts.
The magistrate courts don't have
any um similar kind of statute
that says the sheriff's
departments are required to
provide security services that
magistrate courts. So we as the
district court, since there's
been a consolidation with
magistrate and district courts,
we provide the security at
magistrate courts, and I'll, for
whatever it's worth, we just had
an incident at the Sela County
Magistrate Court where we had an
individual that was
Waiting for our magistrate
judges behind the building where
they enter. And that just
happened 2 to 3 days ago.
Yes, Mr. Chair and presenters,
I, I agree that it's needed. I
just think we need to fund it
all.
Instead of just statutorily
mandating it. I mean, it's, it's
not your issue, it's just more
conversation for. I have one
more question. Is it Ebola or
Cibola? What is the correct
name?
Mr. Chair, yeah, it depends on
where you are geographically.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
One of the three most important
New Mexico questions on.
Uh, OK, thank you very much,
Representative Dao. We'll go to
Representative Little for the
motion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move
that the committee accept the
LFC recommendation.
With the flags. OK,
uh,
motion to accept the LLC
recommendation with continued
work, uh, seconded by
Representative Vincent. Is there
any, uh, uh, any objection to
that motion, seeing then. Thank
you very much, Chief Judge.
Thank you, Chairman.
OK. Uh, now,
Big thanks to the vice chair for
keeping us on track. We have,
uh, Chief Judge Gallegos from
the 4th Judicial District.
OK.
Great to see you, Chief Judge.
We'll, uh, start with Mr. Chavez
and then go from there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, um, we are on the
4 of District agency code 234 in
your volumes, it's page 26 in
volume 2. I apologize, in volume
2, it's page 26.
Um, on the revenue side, the
executive general fund
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by $248.2,000.
This difference is mostly in uh
personnel, that difference of
personnel is because of the, the
move for pretrial services over
and um what the another part of
the difference is outside of the
pretrial services is that the
executive recommended the um
recommended uh plus of $5000 in
the other category for cell
phones for the agencies
forensics, peer specialists.
They see did not have that in
theirs because it was a $5000
Difference, we believe that the
agency could find some sort of
funding for that. But with that,
I'll move it over to Mario for
his comment.
Thanks, Felix, Mr. Chair,
committee members, the 4
judicial District Court, which
is Moura, San Miguel, and
Guadalupe counties. Uh, we, the
executive recommendation.
Recommended $140,000 for
security contract with local law
enforcement.
46,000 for software procurement
licenses, $5000 for cell phone
state vehicle uses and office
supplies, and then the standard
salary increases and whip, uh,
workforce investment plan
increases. I will pass it on to
Chief Judge Gallegos now. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, and
representatives, uh, and I
appreciate being able to present
before you today, um, with me
today is our CEO, uh, Jeff
Romero.
And like our, like our, like my
colleagues, I would ask again
that this body considering,
consider increasing compensation
for our employees, our employees
in my district.
Um
So they are loyal to the courts
and do wonderful work for us and
make sure that our courts run
well. We continue to lose
employees to both to the New
Mexico Behavioral Health
Institute to the university and
college in our area.
As well as to other state and
local agencies, and since 2023,
we've been losing employees to
FEMA as well.
Uh, because we just cannot meet
the same uh pay scale that they
can.
Uh, and we want to be able to
hire qualified people and just
as importantly, we want to keep
qualified, trained and
hardworking employees working
for. Um,
Our request does include uh and
which was not in uh in either of
the recommendations. Um, one new
FTE and that's for an
administrative assistant to
assist our hearing officer, who
is also our staff attorney, uh,
with filing, monitoring,
scheduling, um,
And helping them take care of
pleadings that come into our
court, uh, that she handles on
behalf of all three of our
district court judges.
As we would ask that the um that
you all consider funding that
position. Um, and in line with
the unified budget, we are also
asking for 140,000 to be used to
contract with local law
enforcement to provide
additional security both our
district and magistrate courts
currently are sheriff's offices
in all three counties are unable
to do that on a regular basis,
and so we we have our own
bailiffs and security officers,
uh, but none of them have level
3 security training at this
time.
So though they may be able to
scan people who come into our
courts, they may be able to turn
folks away, confirm that they're
not carrying any weapons on
them, that is the extent of what
they can do.
And with that, I will stand for
any questions.
Great, thank you very much,
Chief Judge. Uh, we're gonna go
first to represent Lujan.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
thank you for being here, um,
earlier we heard from AOC or
from uh.
The justice about the um
diversion program AOT um
programs that they're they're
initiating, and I know you're,
you counties, your district are
listed as, I think you were the
primary, um, district that that
started the programs if I'm not.
Other than Dona Anna doing it on
their own, but how is that
going, Mister Chair, uh, Mr.
Chair Representative, uh, we
currently have a, the competency
diversion program, we do not
have AOT, uh, we do have
participants already enrolled in
that program with some other
participants who are awaiting
their referrals to be confirmed,
um, part of confirming them into
the program as they have to
volunteer to be part of that
program, and of course, defense
and the prosecutor have to agree
to that as well, uh, but we've
already contracted with the
providers, uh, and it seems to.
be going well, but we've not
been doing it long enough to
actually have numbers that we
can provide you in regards to
recidivism rates or how that is
working.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So you
don't have, uh, you can't tell
us how many have entered into
the program, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I believe we
currently have 5 in the program
with 5 awaiting entry into the
program.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
through that that that diversion
and competency division, where
are the facilities where where
are they set to to receive.
treatments and
Mr. Chair. So Mr. Chair and
Representative, we currently
contract with a with a treatment
provider called Crossroads there
in Las Vegas, they also, we also
work closely with NMBHI and
their outpatient uh providers to
provide the medical uh services
that they need, uh, and if they
need physical, and if they have
to address items in regards to
physical health, uh, I believe
we generally work with local
providers, including El Centro,
um, and then we work with the
city and the county in regards
to attempting to help with
housing as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And
because you have the, the, the
hospital there, um, do you feel
like, as we're looking.
To expand the the programs, do
you feel like you're going to
have more um a higher numbers
than anywhere else, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair and Representative, I
believe that's why we were one
of the um districts chosen for
uh one of the pilot programs was
because NMBHI is there, and as
you all know, when people leave
NMBBHI when they receive the
treatment that they need their
many times they are released
into our um community, they live
there, they live in some of the
boarding homes there, and we're
hoping to provide them with the
services and the support they
need so that we can keep them
out of the criminal justice
system. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and how are you
you, um, ensuring that we're
gonna have this infrastructures
for for those um.
For those uh your new community
members and for the the other um
Other programs as they get set
up where you're going to be a
focal point, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative, um.
We've been working with our,
our, we have a behavioral health
court, we also have an adult
treatment court as well as a DWI
treatment court. Uh, so we're,
we've been working with local
providers in regards to those,
uh, some of those we've tapped
into in regards to the
competence diversion program.
As well as trying to um get
additional community support um
within the area, so that we have
the, I guess infrastructure, but
the, the persons who are going
to provide the services the
services that folks need in
order to keep them out of the
criminal justice system.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, my
biggest concern is the housing
component transportation, as we
heard from other districts that
they're they're leveraging
dollars or they're leveraging
services for transportation and
also um housing is just a huge
issue all over and within your
district, I'm, I'm highly
concerned, um, that we're gonna
have these provisions in place.
I hope we're working. I know you
are, but we here on this side
are working with our your local
governments there as well to
make sure that we're gonna have
those provisions because I do
have a
concern uh already of some of
those that
They go through some of the
process or are released and they
have nowhere to go and the
transportation is an issue.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Luhan. I don't
see any other questions. Um,
we'll go to the representative
from Colfax Curry Harding Quay
Union, San Miguel.
For the recommendation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll move
the LFC.
It's been moved, uh, seconded by
Vice Chair Dixon. Is there any
opposition to that motion,
seeing none, there isn't, and
she just, thank you. I think the
same questions that we've asked
around some of the AOT and some
of the other uh programs. Thank
you to Representative Muhan for
bringing those up. Very much
appreciate your feedback on that
as we focus on that in this
legislative session for the
whole state. You're welcome.
All right. Uh, we're down to our
final two districts.
And then, of course, we have
Metrocorp.
Uh, and thanks to the vice chair
for keeping everything again on
track. Uh, we're gonna ask, uh,
Chief Judge Ward to come on
down.
We're close. That's right. Let's
make a deal.
Um
Thank you and thank you for
being to you and your team for
being here today. We very much
appreciate it.
Well they uh pull up the
presentation, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, we are on the
2nd judicial district agency 232
and in volume 2, it's page 24.
This will be a little longer of
an explanation. This is the
biggest court that we have, um,
as in for requests. So it'll be
a little more, but anyway, in
revenue, the executive
recommendation exceeds the LSC
recommendation by $2.4 million
in general fund revenue.
This difference is because the
executive recommendation, most
of that difference, I apologize,
is is in personnel because the
executive recommendation exceeds
the LSG recommendation by $2.3
million in that.
And that, um, personnel
category. And um outside of
that.
Excuse me, apologizes, long day,
but um let me just gather my
thoughts. So basically, the
biggest difference in that
personnel category was because
we moved pretrial services over
to the AOC outside of that, the
executive recommended funding
judicial specialists not related
to child support services
division.
Administrative assistants, court
clinicians, and a gun violence
program manager, the LFC
recommendation prioritized um
positions formerly funded by
CSSD or the Child Support
Services Division to expand
their scope of work and support
the agency's family court.
The executive recommends funding
to previously funded county and
AOC pretrial services officers,
well, again, like I said, LFC
transfers it over to the ANC and
um finally, the executive
recommendation includes $7.5,000
more in the contractual
services.
For existing pre-child services
related contracts. I moved that
over uh LFC moved that over and
finally the both recommendations
fund a ICWA peacemaker contract.
With that long explanation, I'll
pass it over to Mario.
Thank you, Felix, Mr. Chair,
committee members, as Felix
said, big portion of the
differences would be with
pretrial. Um, I wanna flag that
the agency requested a 9.8%
increase and the executive was
able to
Do an increase of 7.2%, which is
about $2.56 million. We funded,
uh, importantly, the uh term to
term gun violence program
manager at a 101.1, uh 563.4 for
seven administrative positions
and funding to fill a financial
specialist senior position, uh,
like Felix said, this is the
biggest court the state has, uh,
their fiscal operation is
massive and.
I always use more support.
Um, with that, I will pass it on
to Miss Chief Judge Marie Ward.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Vice Chair
Dixon, and members of the
Honorable Committee. My name is
Marie Ward, and I am the chief
judge of the Second Judicial
District Court with me today, I
have my colleague who's the
presiding judge of our family
court, Jane Leavy.
Katina Watson, our CEO and
Darela Melina or CFO.
I want to recognize and
appreciate the work of both um
Felix and Mario and and they um.
always been willing to to meet
with us and and discuss our
budget needs and, and we're very
grateful.
I also want to express my
gratitude specifically to um
this body for funding um
critical positions with our
court as well.
Um, in addition, the increased
judicial pay we are already
seeing a significant benefit to
that.
Recently, within 3 months, we've
had um
vacancies in the um
on our be
on our match
on our most senior judges
retired and we were able to see
really positive educations in
recruiting seasoned attorneys,
and so we're very, very
grateful, um, that's so critical
as we um
Um
have more and more people um
retiring with the judiciary.
Um, I'm not sure if you all
received hard copies. We did
provide uh electronic copies of
our handouts, our intention was
um to get you the hard copies of
our handouts, uh, yesterday
morning, however, because of the
security incident that you've
heard about, um, our travel to
um
Santa Fe was delayed and so I
apologize, we do have them if
you would like them.
2nd judicial district court, um,
is the largest court. Um, we
have, um, just under 400
employees, 30 of those are
judges.
We make every effort to be
fiscally responsible in this
chief now are always says we are
extremely mindful um of our
obligation to be good stewards
of taxpayer dollars. Last year
we did not revert um any funds.
Currently
Our overall clearance rate is um
approximately 97% are criminal
division is clearing over 100%
of cases are family court
division, however, is clearing
approximately 96% of cases, and
that will be part of the
discussion in terms of our
budget. We are the largest court
in the state with the largest
caseload per judge. We have some
of the best employees, I believe
in the entire judiciary and the
entire state. They have a real
sense of pride in working for
their community and the
It's just gonna join my
colleagues in emphasizing the
importance of increasing
Um, their salaries increasing
their pay helps us with
retention and improves
efficiencies in the judiciary.
Um so while we, um,
Desperately need
A number of new positions, I
think retaining the people that
we have really will go a long
way in terms of helping with um
as others have said, um, our
employees, uh, many of our
employees, um, qualify for.
public benefits. Um,
33% of 1/3 of our employees,
like less than 41,000.
Live in Albuquerque and the cost
of living is challenging.
And as others have noted, and,
and I know many, many of these
employees, a lot of them are
single parents, and it's a
challenge.
Um, I've had more.
More people than I can count,
come to me and talk about the um
not wanting to leave the
judiciary but having to because
they, they have to beat their
family obligations and or their
personal information.
Um, many of our employees are
working right now as you know,
servers and baristas, um, in
cleaning and janitorial, um,
just leave you just signed um a
permission last week for her
bailiff to start working at Red
Robin.
This is something that
frequently our employees have to
do just
In addition, um, as the Chief
Justice noted this morning, and
I think you've heard.
Um, a number of our, our judges
who have seen the, the video,
um, regarding the security
incident. It's not the first
security is and that we've had
this year, um, unfortunately.
These are issues that arise.
Um
Or to
More frequent than, than they
should. So our employees are
also operating in a very
stressful environment.
They deserve to be um um
protected.
At the very least they
absolutely deserve to be
appropriately compensated, and
so I appreciate as to the
specific request of the 2nd.
Um, we have provided you uh the
information and the electronic
handout we've outlined our
original requests, CFA's
recommendations and LFC's
recommendations.
Um
I would like to to formally ask
you would you all to adopt the
DFA recommendations to
adequately fund our core
operations. Um, I'll make a
request to, to make some
adjustments to the LFC
recommendations respectfully.
Um, I'm not gonna go into detail
on all of our various requests.
I'd like to focus on a few
priorities.
Uh, one of our major priorities
is the program manager for the
community gun violence
intervention program.
The psychoeducational program
individuals from the age of 14
to 21 qualify to go into that
program. They are court ordered
into the program as part of
their term of probation. We
began this program, um, um, in
the 2nd judicial district, um,
with staff that we already had
back in 2019 with the
collaboration of the DA's
office, LOPD.
Juvenile probation, um,
community advocates, including
gun violence intervention, um,
um, advocates and and mothers to
develop the program.
We've had 168 referrals into the
program since its inception. It
started in the middle of COVID
and it started virtually and
it's moved in person, um.
81% of our program graduates
have never picked up a new
felony charge.
They're not only not picking up
a gun charge, they're moving out
of the system. It's a really
impactful program.
Last year we were able to get
one time funding from the county
to expand the program. We hired
a program manager, and we've
been able to open up additional
tracks for that program.
That funding will run out at the
end of this fiscal year. And so
we're, we're really pleading
with, with this committee to
please run that program, um,
our, our data is strong and it's
evidence-based and we appreciate
your consideration. It's
important to have this program
everywhere, but critical in
Berkeley County.
In a moment, I'd like to um um
Ask permission to have Judge
Levy, um, come up as one of our
experts to talk about our
request for family court judge
position before I turn it over
to her, um, uh, with your
permission, Mr. Chair. Um, I
would just like to, to point out
our request for um in the
specials regarding our security
hardware.
Um, DFA has recommended that LSC
did not recommend it.
That request came out of another
security incident that happened
at the court, where an
individual is able to break into
a judge's chambers, this
individual threat threatened to
shoot a judge, this individual
got into chambers and was able
to be undetected and left things
in the judge's chamber.
Um, we've taken some
Taking steps to secure that
area, but we need additional
cameras, we need the card
readers. Right now what we have
is kind of a makeshift um
process in terms of
Security at the courthouse and
that's why, um, ask.
This time with your permission,
um,
uh,
likes of the committee very
briefly, um.
I'm the presiding family court
judge.
didn't know how to use the
microphone by now. Um, and
The uh, um,
We're asking for a family court
judge. The family court expanded
to 4 judges when the addition of
a domestic violence judge in
1998.
Um, and I remember 1998 was a
good year, uh, but it's been a
long time, and since that time,
Buro County is expanded by about
150,000 people. Our caseloads
have increased significantly.
The complexity has increased
significantly, for instance, we
no longer have a domestic
violence judge. We all do
domestic violence cases. Um, we
are on call.
3 month intervals for taking
calls day and night for
emergency restraining orders, of
which there are usually 55 per
month.
We have a very heavy docket that
needs hearings immediately.
We have kinship guardianship
cases, uh, extreme risk firearm
protection order cases, um,
Domestic violence cases. So we
need help, and we're here to ask
for that.
As of right now, while we have
huge caseloads in the second.
the family court average is
about 2440 cases assigned to it
per year.
And that's per judge. Thank you.
Thank, thank you very much,
Judge Le.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. With that,
we would stand for any
questions. OK, uh, great, we're
gonna go, uh, thank you all.
We're gonna go first to
Representative Herndon, um.
We have represent Wuhan and
represent Garrett and keep going
from there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, uh, presenters for for
bringing all of the great work
that you do in the second
judicial district before us
today and explaining to us, um,
Mr. Chair, what I would like to
do is to point out the uh the
Turned out that was presented to
us and it talks it shows the
family court traditions
positions that the second
judicial district court is
asking for and the cost of those
positions.
The DSA no LSC uh recommended an
amount for either one of those
positions despite the fact of
the 200,440 cases that are
handled by the, by this court,
specifically looking at domestic
violence cases. I would point
out, uh, Mr. Chair, that it's
important for us to look at the
fact that our colleague
representative Dave Hotman B.
Hill has filed um House Bill
147. It's shown on this, on the
handout and in that request, she
made a uh she asked for
$360,008,100 for a family court
judge, but if you look at the,
the ask is a little bit more. It
looks like it's about 468.1. So
of course we'll be talking to
our colleague about maybe
amending her bill, but also Mr.
Chair, I wanted to just bring
that to your attention so that
we could flag it and Mr. Chair
and
purpose of the, of the panel,
you know, looking at domestic
violence cases is incredibly
important. There's been lots of
conversation about maybe having
a pilot program in the 2nd
judicial district, the largest
district number of cases,
looking at how we make sure that
an attorney is present for
indigent people at in domestic
violence cases, you talked about
red flag cases and you talked
about extreme risk cases. So Mr.
Chair and members of the
Um, panel and present uh
presenters today. I, it would be
great to look for you to look at
that a little bit closer, as
that is being presented by this
legislative body and Mr. Chair,
I just want you to know that
it's incredibly important that
we have these major women here
who are now uh piloting this
issue. So I thank you very much.
Thank you very much,
Representative Herman. Uh, we're
gonna go to Representative Lohan
and then represent Garrett,
please. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
um, briefly again.
As, as many of you have been
hearing my comments, my
questions, uh,
throughout the day, uh,
regarding AOT. I know that we're
looking 2 district is looking to
implement and and do um.
Do more with, with, with that
and you just give us an update
or some comments on that, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative Lujan. So the
second judicial district in
partnership with the city of
Albuquerque, um, several years
ago had an AOT program is funded
by the city of Albuquerque.
Um, when that program was up and
running, um, we had some um
Pretty incredible results.
Um, that, that committee, sorry,
that court is um
Run by Judge Brickhouse, um,
during the, um, periods that
that program was in operation.
Uh, we had a 79% adherence, um
to medication by the
participants. We had a 71%
adherence to appointments by our
participants and um
Um, hospitalization decreased to
22% of all of, um, and I'm sure
you've heard the data in terms
of how effective these programs
are nationwide. Um, I have
information on that that I could
um share, but, um, what I would
like to, to note is that um,
Um, during the pandemic, the,
the city had challenges with um
retaining the uh provider.
Um, and we, and we've been
working with the city, um,
consistently, and they've been
working hard to get a provider.
Last late last year, the city
agreed to um let the court take
over the majority of that
funding and work to contract
directly with the provider.
We've been working so we we we
worked on this uh contracts with
the city, um, we finished the
contracts with the provider and
we began
Last week or the week before,
excepting um referrals. So we
are up and running, um, and
looking forward to to reporting
back more on um
But I, I assume it's going to be
very similar positive data from
the second.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that update. Really
appreciate it and look forward
to the information. Thank you.
Thank you, Represent Mohanex we
have represent here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
judges for both being here, um,
and alerting us to both the
economic realities of Lord P
court members.
Um, court staff, um, I really
want to put a plan for covering
the community gun violence
intervention program in
Albuquerque two days ago, 17.
Um, were arrested. They had
guns, they were aged 12 to 17,
the 8th 1 was actually killed.
They attacked a man and woman in
a car to rob them, the woman was
shot. She's OK, but it's, it's
things like that that deal with
the root causes, the ACEs, the
childhood trauma, and I think
The experience of this program
shows that it's effective, it's
a model for the rest of the
state.
And I feel we need to make sure
we fund it, so I would really
like to ask.
Um, a team to look into that.
I, I think it's really vital and
then the issue is Judge Levi
said with the family court
judge, you know, 2200 cases per
judge.
Um, I think it really calls for
another judge, so I just want to
thank you for really alerting us
actually to the realities of the
needs of the 2nd district
judiciary. Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Garrett. Uh,
next, we're gonna go to Vice
Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you for the presentation. Um,
Mr. Chavez, I'm wondering, um,
If it's possible to do um
You know, to get some sort of a
performance metric or a way to
measure uh the impact of the gun
violence uh program.
Um, that would be
Um, you know, I think for, for
the second judicial district, it
would be interesting to sort of
follow those and see.
Um, the statistics. I think what
we heard is very impressive,
but, you know, if we could get a
little bit more detail in the
future, I think that would be
wonderful. Um, Mr. Chair, um,
and, um,
Felix, I think this also goes to
you, um, for family court versus
criminal and civil. How do we?
Is there a breakdown, uh, within
performance metrics of the types
of cases. I see civil and.
Criminal, um, but I don't
actually know where family sort
of fits in with that, but you
know, as we're talking about a
request for an additional.
A request for funding for an
additional judge, it would be
helpful to know.
What type of, um, you know,
number of days, um, and things
like that.
So
Um, um, chair, um vice chair,
Vice Chair Dixon, great
question. Um, the AOC provides
us a metrics for the uh
quarterly for all treatment
courts that exist in the state,
I get them quarterly and report
out them on them on the report
card. However, what you're
seeing here in front of you in,
uh, what we generate in BFM is
just the culmination of all the
courts, but I do have breakdowns
quarterly of.
Various measures including.
Um, costs and I can't remember
from the top of my head, but
there's recidivism rates and
stuff like that on there that I
could share with this body, but
yes, the AOC shares that with us
every quarter for our report
cards.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
um, uh, for letting us know that
it would be lovely to see that.
Um.
Felix, um, am I correct also
that uh there there's funding
and grow to support some of
these programs.
Great question. I, yes, I
believe so.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Felix. Um, it'd be great just, I
think, for members uh to get
some confirmation on that. Um,
since it's clearly um an issue
of, you know, significant
concern for, especially for
those of us in Bernalillo County
that um see the um impacts on a
daily basis. Um,
Mr. Chair, um, and I think this
question is for our um chief
judge, um, little bit.
Of
topic here but relating to
budget.
Um, you mentioned that there are
400.
Or so employees in the 2nd
judicial. Is that correct? Yeah,
just slightly under. I think it,
I think the total is 396 and 30
of those are judges.
And that, yeah
Thank you. Um, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, um, Judge
Ward. Um, given that, uh, you
have more than 50 employees,
that means that you, the second
judicial district is already um
providing some sort of unpaid.
Parental and family leave. Is
that correct? You have a, you
have a policy for that paid or
unpaid. You have some sort of
policy. That's a statement, but
I'll let Katrina Watson, our CEO
director.
Great.
Thank you, Chief Judge Ms.
Watson, please. Representative
Dixon, there is um a statewide
paid leave policy, paid parental
leave policy.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Ms. Watson. That makes sense
that um it would fall under the,
the state policy. Um, I was just
curious about that with regard
to if there were gonna be any
changes in costs. Um, and then,
uh, Mr. Chair, uh, final
question, um,
About the Bernalillo County
coordinating.
Counsel for the
Criminal justice coordinating
counsel. Um, is that, um,
Robust right now. Is there a lot
of um coordination and
collaboration between the
different entities, you know, as
we're looking to expand funding
and behavioral health services.
Could you just give us a
Update on that. Absolutely, Mr.
Chair, uh, Vice Chair Dixon, um,
yes, I'm um happy to report that
our coordinating council is very
robust. There's participation by
all of the stakeholders. Um, we,
we regularly meet and then we
have about 5 work groups, um,
made up of our stakeholders that
are working on various topics,
uh, we have, um, in, uh, Swatson
can speak to the committee on um
uh reentry version.
because that's a that.
committee really focuses on
behavioral health. Uh, we have
work groups in terms of
streamlining processes, um, uh.
Talking about our, our, uh, um.
Used to be called Warrant
roundups, but like say, you
know, safe surrender. Um, we've
had many of those over the last
year that have been prior year
in 24 that have been very
successful. So it's very robust,
it's currently being chaired um
by Judge Cindy Laos, and I also
attend. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you so much for that, uh,
information. I don't have any
other questions. Thank you very
much, Vice Chair Dickson. Uh,
Chief Judge, I want to ask a
couple of quick questions. One,
actually, this is first for Mr.
Chavez.
The, one of our quirk sort of
core performance outcomes,
number of dates to disposition
for criminal cases.
Is that a question of charging
what constitutes disposition.
Mr. Chair, um, great question. I
like to pass it over to the
judge to explain it a little
better for this position than I
can.
Disposition, Mr. Chair, um,
members of the committee,
disposition would typically be
completed upon um the
sentencing, um.
OK. Uh, thank you very much,
Chief Judge. So when we see
this, um, disposition, that
means sentencing or some other
deci or acquittal or something
else that that's a final sort of
a final decision.
Got it. OK. And is that from
Charging to, uh, what is, what,
what constitutes the starting
point.
That would be from the the the
time that the charges are filed
or the the indictment.
Got it. OK, thank you. Um, and
then moving into age of acting
pending, thank you for that,
very much appreciate it, helpful
for me, hopefully helpful for
other committee members. Um, the
age of acting pending criminal
cases.
For us, it looks quite high.
Our measurements, uh, the
numbers were given at FY 24
actual was at 438 days, although
that was a decrease from FY23
actual at 492, our target is
365, um, how does that strike
you and just appreciate your
feedback there.
Chair, members of the committee,
um, as you will know, there is
also kind of some additional
information there.
We've been working on a, a
cleanup project and, and in
fact, we were just um talking
about, um, we were able to run a
report with updated numbers, and
we've been able to, to identify
there's a number of cases that
actually had um dispositions
that should have closed the
case. They they they are
completed and we're going back
and and reviewing those in close
closing those from those closing
events. And so we, we actually
believe that that number is, is
definitely much lower.
Um,
but that, that's a big task we
found one, quite frankly
recently that was still assigned
to a judge that um retired more
than 40 years ago. Um, and the
case was dismissed. Um, but it
was still, um, digging into our
numbers. So I, I have no doubt
that that number will greatly
improve, um, the next time you
see this data.
OK. Uh, thank you, Chief Justice
Ward and um yeah, I appreciate
that very much. We'll go to the
vice chair for the LFC motion
and while I think acknowledging
as with a great number of, of
our uh districts. There's,
there's continued work that
we'll be looking at doing.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, I would move the
committee adopt the LFC
recommendation.
OK, it's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by
Representative Garrett, there
any opposition to that motion.
I don't see any, uh, thank you
very much, Chief Judge, and
thank you to your team as well.
OK, uh, we're gonna
uh stay here uh in Santa Fe.
Thank you, Judge Chief Judge
Biden side for uh truly thank
you to you and your team for
being here. We know you've been
here, uh, uh, as long as we
have, which is great.
As long as all of us here.
right.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and the
final countdown, um,
um, so we're on the first
judicial district agency code
231, page 23.
And Volume 2, my apologies.
Um, the differences between our
recommendation the excuse me,
from the revenue side, the
differences are the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by $527.9,000
that difference is from the
pre-trial transfer, both uh both
um both recommendations fund the
agency's request. With that,
I'll move it to Mario.
Thank you, Felix, I have nothing
to add, but I will introduce
Chief Judge Beachy Bee Eyed
bee-eyed. This, that's just the
challenge not only are you well
moisturized, but you, you have
very good attention to detail.
No one ever can say that right,
right. So, uh, we Kathleen
Bhill, the CEO, the first
judicial District Court, uh,
that court is Los Alamos, Rio
Riva in Santa Fe Counties. Uh,
I'm Brian Beechey, the chief
judge of that district court.
Um,
So, I, I know we've been here a
long time and no need to thank
me because actually I find these
hearings to be a tremendous
learning experience, frankly,
about what's happening in other
districts and things that we
could think of in ours. So, I
mean, in a way, think you allow,
you know, for allowing me to
loiter in your, your, uh, room
for so long.
Um, so I, I'll try to cover some
other observations or other
angles, uh, to some of the
things you've heard many times
over today. First of all, with
respect to the compensation for
court staff.
Um, Mr. Chairman, you, you
raised a very good point. I
think it's been touched on by
others, which is
Since I've been chief at least.
All of the payroll increases
have been by percentage. So it's
been across the board, 3%, 5%,
things of that nature. And so
you're absolutely correct, I
think that those benefit or most
benefit, the highest paid
employees, and that's where this
request is different. And it is
very much targeted and looking
to help those that are in the
lower pay bands, uh, in addition
to all the other competitive
issues. I mean, Santa Fe is
different.
You've heard a lot about our
cost of living, and it is
certainly true. Uh, but beyond
that as well, we are somewhat
awash with other branch jobs,
and you don't need to leave our
court and
You know, go to work in an oil
field or do anything that is
notably different than what
you're doing. You can cross the
street and apply your same
skills and experience, uh, in
another branches, uh, office and
get a significant raise for
doing that. Um, so we will still
be competing with National Labs.
I'm not saying this will solve
everything, but I am saying it
will be a tremendous advantage
to us. So please uh consider uh
doing that. One other angle on
this, which is
Retention of these specific
workers is so helpful to our
court because as has been
brought up a lot today.
In some ways, it's a, it's
another access to justice issue.
I say that because it takes a
while for people working in the
clerk's office and, and those
that are dealing with the public
most often to get a feel for
that position to understand what
challenges out there and the key
is to understand ways we can
improve our interactions with
the public. That's not something
you learn within the 1st 6
months or a year. That's
experience taught, and
And just last week, I had people
that are in these pay bands come
to me and say, we see people are
having trouble with certain
forms.
Self-represented litigants
aren't.
Certain aspects of this and
asking me questions about how we
might improve it. That's not
something you get from someone
that rotated through because
they went and got a raise across
the street. Um, and so I do
think that this will have
consequences that are positive
and beyond what's even been
discussed prior to, to, you
know, prior in the meeting
today.
Um, with respect to uh
You know, our request, it, it
is, as you've heard from other
districts, uh, to please adopt
the executive recommendations. I
understand what you're going to
do and and why. But please know
that with respect to pre-trial
services, uh,
Because that that department or
that that
Service touches on so many
different aspects of the court
and different justice
stakeholder partners.
I probably spent, I think you
spend more time with pretrial
services, uh, staff talking
about issues that I'm being,
they're being brought to my
attention by law enforcement and
other community members, and
also that they are having with
other courts and various issues
with respect to warrants and
their enforcement and various
things. So having them
Continue to work for us, as
opposed to having it be AOC
centric. AOC is an amazing
resource, but I will say
sometimes it's not, it's not the
same as having your own employee
and having money to pay them.
It's definitely a sort of
bureaucratic process in some
ways to work with them. So it's,
it's key that they remain in our
courthouse, working for us as is
currently set up.
Um, so please consider that.
Uh
I also want to let you know a
few things, uh, you'll know we
have a very, I think,
responsible and modest budget
increase request.
Uh, but part of that is because
we have significant needs that
are being addressed by requests
of other agencies, and most
notably the Supreme Court
unified budget and AOC.
Uh, one of those that is very
significant and very much needed
is a capital request for $17.5
million so that we can construct
a new magistrate court in Santa
Fe County, um, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Lujan, I very, we
appreciate our support, but she
went to a, you know, recent
legislative breakfast that we
had at that magistrate court,
hoping that it would be worth a
million words, uh, for me in
terms of the need for that new
facility.
And uh I, I hope that uh
She came away agreeing that,
that it is a very necessary
improvement in the community.
But that's a huge one. and
that's not in this request, but
please know that we beyond
supported.
Uh, another piece, uh, that I
want you to please keep an eye
out for, is actually
non-budgetary, but it's
legislation, 35, 124, that would
statutorily allow us to move a
magistrate court from Chama,
where it's in a very unsecure
sort of prefabricated building,
uh, to Tierra Maria, where it
could be co-located with
additional district court
facilities. That's both needed
at the district court level.
Because Rio Reba, I think, needs
more trials than it gets. And we
have one
ab beautiful historic courtroom
up there. We love it. We're
grateful for it, but it's one,
and having another one where we
can hold those uh trials and the
like that are needed. I think
that is going to be necessary
and a great benefit to the
community.
Um, so please consider doing
that. Uh, where that project is
at, just so you know, Rio Riva
County has been a great partner,
as we've considered, uh,
That project in ways to, to fund
it, ways to have it designed,
but at the moment where the
statute requires it to not be
moved from where it's at.
They're taking a very reasonable
position that, yeah, how about
you make it legal, and then
we'll work further on it. So,
uh, that's a very necessary step
in that, that direction. Um,
I think, let's see, with respect
to that, I think we've covered,
again, I'm not trying to retread
all the ground. So if you have
any questions, I'm happy to
answer them, and I hope that I
haven't left anything on the
table, so to speak, in terms of
issues. Uh thank you, Chief
Judge Beach. Aology for my uh
incorrect pronunciation. We'll
go straight to questions. It's
very common with Representative
Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Judge, uh, I noticed a lot of uh
district courts are asking about
security.
Uh, for, uh, magistrate courts.
Uh, and I know we just saw a
video of an incident.
And maybe uh I've been around
stuff that like that too much in
my life in Rariba in the last
year, they actually had two
incidents with guns and uh
probably over 20 incidents.
So, do you have any requests for
security for the
I just speak in Espanola, uh,
yes, $85,000 is of of our
request that's been recommended
by believe both the executive
and LFC is for security services
recurring uh monies that will
allow us to keep that going for
that magistrate court. Uh, and,
and one of the things that I
neglected to, to say, but I do
want to make it clear, which is,
in terms of major things our
court's been working on, you all
have said and heard about AOT.
All day, but I was a little
concerned throughout the day
because
Uh, it, it keeps being described
in our district as a Santa Fe
program, and I just want you to
know that we have taken very
great pains to emphasize that it
is a district-wide all three
counties program we have in the
5 months we've had to work on
this since funding came through.
We've developed MOUs with all
three counties, and the reason
sometimes it gets referred to as
a Santa Fe program is because we
realize talking with
stakeholders,
all of the participants or
alleged eligible participants
would be transferred from other
counties to Christa Saint
Vincent or another.
Facility in Santa Fe and so
that's where it funnels into,
but I do want to make it clear
that it is very much uh all
three county programs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Sanchez. We uh
next we have Representative
Herrera.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, chair,
and uh thank you, Judge, and I
will, uh, gladly carry that
legislation uh on uh the uh
magistrate court moving it from
uh
Uh, uh, from Chama to Tierra,
um, Maria, I have been in that.
I've been in that court. It's,
it's
It's kind of just uh what what
it's kind of a temporary
building. I mean, it's not even
a, it's not even a real
building. It's one of those, um,
uh, what do you call it?
Portable. It's a portable. Yeah,
it's really very dangerous
actually. I will, I will gladly
carry that for you and I, I have
to say that the overriding theme
for me today has been salaries,
uh, and safety. And, and I think
we're all in kind of agreement
here that that's where we have
to go, I think what I've been
I'm really impressed with today.
Uh, is how much innovation there
is at the district court level
because
Because everybody looks at first
judicial and they look at Santa
Fe and Los Alamos, and they, oh,
it's so rich people we don't
have to do anything for the
first judicial and, and I want
everybody to know that that when
you look at the numbers, you
know, we have 18, almost 19,000
people in poverty in Santa Fe
and in Rio Riba, we have about
8000 people in poverty. So, so
you think of Santa Fe as this
wealthy district and certainly
it is.
But they actually have like
double the number of poverty,
uh, families living in poverty
as as in Rio Rivas. So, so, and
unfortunately, like um, like
student achievement scores.
Cases in the criminal justice
system are kind of aligned with
poverty. And what I've been
impressed with today is that
district courts are really
seeking innovative solutions to
turn those numbers around. I
think that's been my
My most uh
Impressive takeaway of today. I,
I'm, I'm really astounded at, at
what is happening and, and I
don't know what brought this
about, but it is, it is truly
remarkable and, and, uh, Judge,
if you could just brag a little
bit about uh the drug court that
was started in Espanola years
ago, uh, by, by Judge Lydiard.
Uh it's, it's just an example
of, you know, reading a case in
the paper where I remember an
emergency nurse was saying.
in the paper 20 years ago, uh,
we're not going to jail our way
out of this problem.
We've got to find something else
to solve it, so I would ask you
to just elaborate on that. Well,
absolutely, and uh Mr. Chair and
Representative Ferreira, um, I
guess a couple things. First of
all, uh, Judge Lydiard is like
flat out amazing, um, both for
his expertise, uh, but his
energy and his commitment, and
he is set up, uh, very
successful and innovative uh
drug court program up in Rio.
Riva, uh, and
I just want you to know beyond
bragging about that particular
program.
He has agreed to and been a
driving force behind AOT and
competency diversion.
Because of his success with that
program.
Um, so that, you know, I think
goes to show that where wherever
we're seeing, you know, real
talent, unfortunately, it's
rarely brought by me, but, but
when I see it, I, we're
absolutely trying to bring that
into these new programs. And
also want to add, quite
honestly, when you're asking
about to somebody that you don't
know where some of this AOT
momentum came from and the like.
I think this body can actually
be very proud of the leadership
that it's exercised on that.
Because it was special session,
you know, dollars that were, we
were asked at that point as a
district, would you please step
up and do this? And we said yes.
Um, but it was not something
that I otherwise had on my radar
or something to do. Um, and
because of Judge Leader and
because of Miss B Hill and their
abilities to, to pull in so many
stakeholders.
Uh, that's what's made it work.
And one other thing too that,
you know, it's been some of the
most fulfilling.
Some of those fulfilling
meetings that I've been a part
of, um, on the AOT front. And
it's been because once we get
the counties all in the same,
and we have the meetings in my
large courtroom. We've got the
counties, we've got treatment
providers. We get those people
in and they start talking about
some of the things that you all
have raised today, like, what
could we do with housing? What
could we do with things that,
that are not within the judicial
orbit or ambit, but are
necessary considerations. And
that has been
something happening in my
courtroom because of what you
all put in place with the funds
to to get it started and
hopefully, we're gonna be able
to show you it's very
successful. Um, it's so new, I
can't represent that I know that
now. But I hope we're gonna be
able to show that and come back
and say how about some recurring
funding for that, so that we
have treatment providers that
know they're going to ramp up
and continue to
Thank you, Mr. Chen and Judge I
just want you to know that, um,
when we uh when the county
constructed uh Darren's place in
Espanola, the first thing I did
was ask all the judges in the
first judicial uh uh court to
come on a Saturday morning at 8
o'clock. I'm sure they had a lot
of other things to do and check
out this facility because I knew
if they didn't know that this
was open and they could, you
know, it wouldn't happen, and 8
judges showed up that morning. I
was as
it and did a tour of the
facility and immediately
started, so, so I just wanna
congratulate you on a on a great
team and great leadership and
thank you for all of that. Thank
you. Thank you.
And you represented that we're
gonna go to uh Luhan and then
Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
Thank you, Judge for being here,
um, again, yes, I've been in.
Probably a little more contact
than others with you and with
your, um, with the district here
in Santa
offices here in Santa Fe. I'm
quite familiar with those in
Riba and in the Salmons as well.
And with the um
The addition additional funding
that we got for the AOT program
and in uh putting that together.
Are we paying, are we able to
pay uh our peer service
providers or the the pure
coordinators that are, we are
seen in the other specialty
courts like in our drug court
and so on, are they getting
paid, Mr. Chair?
OK, uh, so, Mr. Chair and
Representative Leon, I
At least from the perspective of
AOT and diversion. Um, that I
think has been quite a bit less
about, maybe not at all about
peer, uh, support, or rather
bringing in treatment providers
that, you know, will provide a
structure. I mean, as I
understand, the idea behind this
is, uh, for instance, our Santa
Fe County jail, they'll get
someone stabilized, they're on
their medications, and then at
that point, they're released.
And they go back into the
community without any support
and lo and behold, they wind up
not being stabilized for very
long. And the idea is to provide
that support. And so it's been
very much more about lining up
MOUs or for pay with treatment
providers as the most essential
element of that program. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, uh, you please
look into the model of making
sure that you have those peer
supports in place.
As a
The harm reduction model that we
pride ourselves here in our
state. That is part of the model
and that is part of the work
that we're asking you to do and
also to look at how we are, uh
how they are, they're, they're
to my knowledge, all um
volunteers so far, um, we do
have some, some, uh,
Gaps are going to continue to
have some gaps, but I would as
um the first district and, and
really getting them having the
motivation and really getting
involved in implementation of
this model, I would really
highly suggest that you look at
that harm reduction model and
our peer support services and
really integrating that.
Why, maybe structurally as we
are dealing with the the drug
court.
Um, it's important, um, and that
may not go into the competency
part with the AOT but maybe
prior inversion. And so, um,
we're still looking in how we're
putting this all together, but
those are, those are two
separate areas, so you have the
diversion and, you know, and on
pretrial and all those, those
components there and then you
have what we're really focusing
on and implementing and using
more of the AOT model through
um.
The competency and redirecting
competency issues through legal
terms and whatnot, um, but I, I
just urge you to really look at,
look at that harm reduction
model and look at our our peers
that are involved in the process
because we know through those
models when you have that in
place, there's there, um, there
are better um outcomes. Mr.
Chair, I, I thank you for the
time and I wanted to just cause
you put me on the spot in my
support for me. I do support our
capital requests.
Um, I think, uh, having us there
uh in person and and really
looking at what the, you know,
what's constructed, what is is
needed and some of the stories
we heard about just the, the
how, um.
The cameras and the technology
and all those sorts of things,
which I didn't really quite hear
you bring up, but I know I see
it through the request
throughout this budget, uh, it's
really important, especially for
the for those updates and and I.
I think I told you that and I do
support you and I look forward
to uh knowing how, how we
progress into these uh these new
programs, Mr. Chair, thank you.
Thank you. Next we have
Representative Hernandez, then
I'll have a couple questions.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair,
uh, quickly, um, I wanna thank
your, you know, that the, the
initiatives that you guys are
taking there. Uh, it's, it's
really important to me what's
happening, uh, not not only in
in your district, but all
throughout New Mexico, um,
Chairman, I used to be an
adolescent. I used to work at an
adolescent youth treatment
facility in Colorado and uh we
had many clients in New Mexico,
uh, including in your, uh,
district, uh, so Mr. Chairman,
my question is, um,
Um, do you guys still utilize
the services in San Juan County
for the juvenile detention
center and uh what is the cost
of that like very much, Mr.
Chairman.
All right. Uh, so,
Mr. Chairman, uh, and
Representative Hernandez, uh,
and by the way as well, I didn't
mean to put you on the spot,
Representative Lujan. I, I
mostly was trying to acknowledge
the commitment that you showed
in being there so early, uh, but
Representative Fernandez, uh,
yes, as to the use of that
facility, uh, in San Juan for
juveniles. I
I'm not, uh, I will say I'm not
aware of what the cost is for
that, only because I believe
that's born by other agencies
and the like, so I don't have
that figure, but uh, I could
certainly make a note and look
at that if that's something
you'd like me to do.
That concludes my questions.
Great. uh, thank you very much
for Hernandez. um, and good that
we've circled back I I know the
uh focus on the um.
Juvenile, um, facilities. I know
that's come up a few different
times during this, uh, Judge, my
question and I've uh provided a
volume two up there. The age,
the and the average age of, of
criminal cases.
FY 23 and 24, what are those,
those are our numbers. Can you
share those with us and do those
sort of match what you all see.
Uh, well, I will say in terms of
the
Uh
The
Very high numbers for those
years and then the significant
drop, I guess I'd like to say
two things. One, I think a lot
of that's been data cleanup that
we've been working on quite a
bit, uh, in terms of cleaning up
some very old cases and the
like, similar to, uh, what some
other districts have described
today. Um, but the other thing I
wanted to let you know is that
we've also, I think we're very
much a work in progress in terms
of trying to further bring those
numbers down. And please know
that we've been working within
our branch, uh, to explore case
management orders and things.
of that nature that might
further streamline, uh,
increased efficiency. So I think
those are unnaturally high. I
think that's why you see, I
would love to tell you because
we became 3 times as efficient
in one year, but I don't think
that's it. A lot of it's data
cleanup, which I appreciate our
staff for doing. And then we are
still working to bring this
down.
Got it. Thank you, Chief Judge.
So the number, it's, it's over
900 days for average active uh
criminal case, which obviously
is
Extremely high, um, the
Uh
I will look for some more
analysis. We don't need it right
now.
It, the, the two
In, in two of our more populous
counties, um.
And and where there are
obviously there are different
challenges that exist.
Some of the, so far the feedback
is focused on sort of data clean
up and sort of essentially the
numbers are higher than they
should be.
I'm, I think we have to be super
or I am very worried that the
longer that time is, but we know
the longer the time that time
is, the less safe citizens are
at basic level. And so there has
to be other explanations, and we
can't, yeah, I, I think those
numbers in across every single
judicial district or numbers
that we'll scrutinize closely.
Uh, there are a backward, you
know, looking backward is
understanding what we do moving
forward, uh, particularly
acknowledging challenges that
exist.
And collectively working to
address those challenges has to
be the focus of, uh, I know I
know is, is all of our shared
focus. Um,
OK, uh, that was it on my end.
Um, let's go to um a number of
leg we're gonna go to represent
Verrera for the motion, uh, and
then we'll go to Representative
Luhan for the 2nd.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
I just want the judge to know
that Joseph Sanchez and I have
agreed to co-sponsor your
legislation. And uh with that, I
will move that we accept the uh
the LFC recommendation. Thank
you.
Second, Mr. Cha.
OK, it's been moved and
seconded. Is there any
opposition to that motion,
seeing none.
Thank you very much, Chief
Justice. Thank you Mr. Chair.
Thank you all.
Um,
we'll, uh, invite up the
Uh, our final, um, or Bernalo
County Metro Court.
Please go ahead.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, final countdown is
over. We're on the last one. Our
an agency 244 on page 36.
Well, you guys look, uh, the,
uh, differences in the revenue
and revenue is that the
executive recommendation exceeds
the LFC recommendation by $2.4
million in general fund revenue,
those differences are attributed
to the transfer to the AOC.
Other than that, both um both uh
recommendations fulfill the um.
courts um requests with that,
I'll pass it over to Mario.
Thank you, Felix. Thank you
committee members and Mr. Chair,
uh, like Felix said, we both
fulfill the agency's request
here in terms of what they eat
it for their fiscal 26 ask to
joined by Judge Rodriguez and
the instead of the chief judge
today. Thank you.
Judge Rodriguez, please.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, um,
yes, as was stated, I'm clearly
not chief uh Judge Joshua
Sanchez. I'm Judge Christine
Rodriguez. I am one of the, uh,
criminal judges with
metropolitan court, um, I also
preside over our courts, uh, DWI
recovery court, which happens to
be, um, I believe I can say
this, the oldest uh treatment
court in the state.
Uh, founded in 1999.
Uh, the chief sends his
apologies for not being here
today. He's attending, well,
actually it's his birthday. I'm
kidding. He's attending a family
function and, um, so I am here
to represent him today as well
as our uh CEO CEO Lisa Quintana.
Our CFO Erika Perrine and our
budget analyst, uh, Nick
Steckler.
So thank you for having us
today. Um, before we begin our
presentation, I would be remiss
if I didn't, um, do as the chief
requested of me, and that is to
share his message of unequivocal
support for the court's employee
compensation initiative.
Ensuring fair and competitive
compensation for judicial branch
employees is essential to
maintaining an effective and
well functioning court system in
New Mexico.
Judicial employees handle
complex and sensitive legal
matters. They manage operations
and provide essential services
that impact the lives of
countless New Mexicans. However,
without competitive salaries,
the court system faces increased
turnover, difficulties in
recruitment.
And the loss of experienced
staff to higher paying positions
elsewhere.
The strains, the courts, delays
justice and ultimately affects
the communities that rely on an
efficient ju judicial process.
Many court employees take on
side of hustles or secure formal
second jobs to help make ends
meet as you've already heard.
This add its financial strain
impacts well-being, reduces
work-life balance and can
ultimately affect job
performance.
By aligning judicial branch
branch compensation with that of
executive branch employees and
private sector roles, New Mexic
New Mexico can build a stronger,
more stable judiciary,
competitive wages will improve
morale, increase efficiency and
ensure that our courts continue
to serve the public effectively.
We urge support for this
initiative to ensure that
judicial branch employees
receive fair compensation.
that reflects their dedication.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. OK, uh, uh,
very much appreciate that. Um,
are there any questions from the
committee?
OK.
Uh, we don't see any, so we'll
go ahead and ask for the LSC
recommendation.
Mr. Chair, I move the committee
adopt the LFC recommendation.
There's a motion. It's been
seconded by Representative
Garrett. Is there any opposition
to that motion? I don't see any.
Please give the Chief Judge our
regards, uh, and a happy
birthday and we have uh it's a
judicial and our, our very own
Amanda Bri, who's our house
budget director, a former
judicial analyst at LFC. It
happens to be uh Miss Riding's
birthday tomorrow, so.
a uh a weekend of birthdays.
OK, uh, thank you all very much.
Uh, we've adopted that. Members,
thank you. This is great. Uh,
we're, um, ahead of schedule in
order to be on time with our
budget. You all are working
extremely hard. I want to make a
quick announcement here, um,
Uh, we do have additional agency
catch up and work group meetings
that's on the agenda today
because we just finished the
subcommittees and staff is
working at the direction of
those subcommittees, uh, we, we
don't have any ketchup today.
So, uh, uh, we will, I'm gonna
announce, there we go. I'm gonna
announce some work groups, uh,
we're gonna hold up on that
catch up cleanup work from the
subcommittees until next
Saturday, which is still 2 weeks
before we've had it in the.
past, so it comes, uh, catches
us up, uh, in our analysts. I
want to thank them for
continuing to work closely.
We're gonna announce our work
groups. You'll get a, a hard
copy which our staff can go
ahead and please start passing
out now. Um
and uh it'll also be emailed to
you. Uh, they, the agencies that
aren't in work groups yet.
Some, you know, we haven't heard
the majority, particularly most
of the big agencies. Those will
be sorted into work groups, uh,
with one exception, uh, with the
public safety, with the
conversation we've had today,
more to come around the district
attorneys, uh, public defenders,
and of course, DPS will announce
another public work group uh
around public safety on Monday.
Um, and let me just, uh, you
know, obviously there'll
probably be a lot of interest in
these are direction is to have
these work groups work in
public, uh, that will take a lot
of staff coordination, a lot of
your time, which again, thank
you members for doing that.
Thanks to our staff. I wanna
just go through those, these
really quick right now for our
education work group, we have
Representative Joy Garrett,
Representative Pamela Herndon,
representing Susan Herrera,
represent uh Debbie.
Deborah, Debbie Saana
represent Baca.
Representative Jack Chatfield,
ranking member, and uh
representative Brown.
For our early childhood ECECD
work group. We have
representative Meredith Dixon,
Representative Joseph Hernandez,
Representative Sarah Silva, uh,
with Representative Mark Duncan
and Representative Doll.
Um, public health representative
Pamela Herndon, Representative
Charlotte Little, Representative
Joseph Sanchez represent Harlan
Vincent, Representative Jack
Chatfield, ranking member,
Natural Resources representative
Susan Herrera.
Representative Tara Lohan
represents Sarah Silva, Debbie
Sareana, Representative
Catherine Brown, Representative
Randall Pettigrew from Saint
Harlan Vincent.
And, and economic development
representative Dixon,
Representative Garrett,
Representative Sanchez,
Representative Lujan,
Representative Brown, represent
Baca and represent Pedigree.
Um, so, uh, again, we're gonna
add one
public working group to that
around public safety on Monday.
And I just want to say again,
members, thank you very much. We
had a very valuable in-depth
day. Thank you to all the
presenters. Most of all, thank
you to the staff. Give them a
hand.
And we're adjourned.
