trained we have a common to
facility it holds about twenty
or twenty five students that
share that facility they share
their showers there the your
nose and and still some things
in that comment for somebody.
Members of the committee that
saw the conditions the last
summer realize it's it's a very
big need for us to provide a
quality of life for those
students there there ten months
out of the year and so those are
major projects would appreciate
the help can for any specific
questions on the lead into the
thank you very much and was
there for going into that that's
very helpful let's go to
Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr chairman good to
see you general I just thought
you might want to tell us a
little bit about the success you
have in in athletics
hi recently I think people would
be interested in hearing that Mr
chair.
Here thank you Representative
Brown we've very proud of that
success I I believe the
successful athletic program
helps to have a successful
school and our cadet for just as
much involved in the cheering
the athletes for this athletes
are participating with a
tremendous year last year we won
the national championship in
football or volleyball team was
second in the nation both my
baseball team and
Basketball team made it into the
regional playoffs all the junior
college level at the high school
level my the baseball team won
the state championship soccer
team came in second in the state
if we had a tremendous year the
if I might if you can speak
directly into the money yeah
we'll get him to point directly
that's great thank you thank you
and the baseball team won the
state championship soccer team
took second in the state in high
school so tremendous here that's
leading force and we're looking
forward to kicking off the new
year the spring practices going
on now with the general public
needs and we're into the
baseball season for both high
school and junior college thank
you ma'am for asking that
question.
The chairman the general right I
really applaud you for all the
success as well as for academics
and it's a great school for that
too but just wanted everybody to
know us how how will you will be
doing thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Brown next
representative of the.
Thank you chair and thank you
general for being here today
always a pleasure to see you and
have any questions I just wanted
to speak and continual support
for what you do what your school
does I thank you for continuing
to host the different committees
that come the wrongful.
In part and
everything that they all do for
use I think continuing tying
everything together as general
and chairs you're you're aware
we had conversations with
respect to how best to engage.
Some of our young that have
graduated
High school that are looking at
ways to go into the military and
how best to do that and I just
appreciate the team or everybody
in your facility in Europe
Representative all the different
branches.
There and the effort that they
put in to make sure that when we
when we bring somebody in
somebody who wants to go in the
military making sure that the
right fit and I'm just so
thankful for that thank you
chair thank you for the
opportunity to say that very
well said thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew next
representative thank you Mr
Take a minute to to let people
know you've never experienced
life unless you're standing
about two or three feet away
from that how what you're when
the institute makes a touch down
and then let it bark because it
will make you job there this guy
I don't know if you guys still
celebrate ever touched down by
far a firing off your house Sir
but is a startling experience if
it's your first time there.
Thank you for Representative
Chatfield unfortunately we don't
and both of the RCC schools
around the nation do not because
it was an accident of the cadet
command ask is to return all of
our how witcher's and so if the
schools doing it they've somehow
choir that capability on the
roll but what we're doing it
through our ROTC program we had
a seventy five millimeter French
can and and and it was it would
make quite a no if if.
Thank you Mr chair it's been
quite awhile back so it was
before the thing got bay and
jobs.
Thank you very much
Representative Chatfield the
general we're gonna go now turn
to slide through Dixon for the
motion thank you Mr chair I
would move the LFC
recommendation.
I see a second up motion from by
your Dicks and second from
Representative daylight crews
there any opposition to adopting
that motion that we've adopted
the LFC recommendation for New
Mexico military thank you very
much.
Mr one final comment in regard
athletics I think the majority
of the people certainly from New
Mexico state know that day will
Pavia was our quarterback that
took us to the national
championship and of course took
to Mexico state to the bowl game
and then he was partially the.
But the thing that we like to
share with everyone is intimate
might as the only school in the
nation that offered him a
scholarship out of high school
and he came to us for for for
two years and then of course now
is and he was in the Heisman
voting if you weren't aware of
that as well so in these a four
point oh students he's a
remarkable young man we're very
proud of him thank you very much
general is are we are to we're
gonna be asking the chancellor
to to offer some of their
capital as partial payment for
the quarterback.
Thank you for your.
Thank you okay
members we're gonna now it's
staying within the same thing
with the special schools turn to
HSD nine seven nine.
And
Start off again with the sounds.
To to start us off.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee thank you
superintendent Chris all we now
have superintendent Beecher of
New Mexico school for the blind
and visually impaired
I also I I do apologize I think
you all have on the issue at
this point but I had pointed out
that this is where we were out
so for New Mexico school for the
blind and visually impaired
again we have a five percent
increase for the general fund
base for the school and the LFC
recommendations for FY two four
both the LFC and executive
recommendation also include
funding slightly increased this
year for their early childhood
centers envision clinic programs
and we also agree on an
additional appropriation of one
hundred one point four thousand
for instructional materials for
the school that's all from the
general fund and I'll turn it
over to the call.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee we came to
consensus on performance
measures and I have nothing else
to add to what Mr.
presented I'll turn it over to
superintendent because.
Superintendent.
Mr chair members of the
committee I want to thank you
very much for your support and
MSP VIP is very grateful for for
this part of the state of New
Mexico as our our students and
our families I just want to
remind everybody that we have
two schools one in Albuquerque
one in Alamogordo but we also
statewide programs and we serve
over sixteen hundred students
within the state last year and
provided over twenty six hundred
pieces of
of at a depth of materials for
students throughout the state
we have looked at all of the of
the budget recommendations and
we would like to request the LFC
recommendation and one final
note animus BVI also has sports
and our global team is the goal
to winter again in a tournament
last weekend up at the Colorado
school for the deaf and the
blind so I stand for any
question thank you very much as
superintendent and please pass
our congratulations on to the
team okay we're gonna go first
to Representative pedigree.
Thank you chairman and thank you
for the presentation
I didn't get a chance to prepare
for this one at first say this
when I got here so chairman.
What I'd like to understand.
And I may have missed it.
I really need help with.
yell speaking into the
microphones were missing about
seven million between now let's
see and the executive and then
like in detail on that.
Mr chair representative is this
that and the the total
recommendation not general fund.
So there were some different
ways that we evaluated other
state funds and that's the
source of that discrepancy so
our other state funds gives them
budgeted forty that includes
their base budget and we also
included the state investment
councils estimate for FY two for
which increases their permanent
fund and that increase wasn't
included in other state funds
from the executive for act I
thank you Mr chair
representative and I don't know
if Nicole wants to add anything
there as well
Representative Pettigrew that is
correct and we did have a you
know correction issue technical
correction and you know for the
LFC just for the other revenues
and federal revenues her numbers
are the ones that should be.
for the for the special school
pardon me.
As the number that should be
correct so as a technical issue
it was due to a Google
spreadsheet that we received and
so we resolved after when we
reconcile the differences and
self.
That's my only on justification
for that one thank you.
Chair and presenters I I
appreciate that but but.
Let me ask it a different way.
What is twenty seven million two
hundred and two dollars and
three cents thirteen thirty
cents.
Versus twenty million two
hundred and fifty four dollars
and twenty cents mean
differently to
to the school for the the black.
What.
What is seven million do for you
that the twenty the the other
one doesn't.
If I could Mr chair
representative answer briefly
out of superintendent features
up please do so this that that
difference stems primarily from
with.
Okay it's it's in your your
volume three page one thirteen
and you can see exactly where
our differences flowed out from
that discrepancy is that there
is an and the executive directly
did not include the state
investment councils estimate for
other state funds coming from
the permanent
the permanent.
The land on my goodness the land
grant permanent fund land
maintenance fund so we included
that we also included beginning
balances and other state funds
because that was part of the
higher education department's
request another state funds.
So it's more how those funds are
illustrated how they're shown
not that the executive is giving
them less or we're giving them
more it's not helpful of as a
clarification Mr chair.
Chairman and presenters I.
Okay so what you're telling me
is it doesn't matter the seven
million that doesn't show up on
my spreadsheet.
Is this still covered for the
screen by.
Thank this is the test will be
updated as they left out some
of.
Thank you for making that direct
thank you chairman thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative.
Okay seeing no further questions
will go to vice chair Dixon from
us.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
superintendent of I have the
privilege of having one of the
two locations in my district
Mr chair I'd like to move the
LFC recommendation is motion see
motion from vice chair Dixon
saying from Representative seven
hundred and Representative Brown
there any opposition to adopting
that motion thing we've adopted
that motion thank you very much
and the features you very much.
I would like to invite a doctor.
For oil.
And members are gonna turn to
the last of the three special
schools.
HSD code nine eight zero.
In the same package.
And it sounds if you can start
off and as vice chair Dixon was
noting there might have been
similar issues as far as
inclusion of of different
revenue sources if you want to
note that please feel free to
certainly they you Mr chair
members of the committee we have
with us now superintendents are
both from the New Mexico school
for the deaf
for their recommendation as well
as in general fund based the LFC
recommendation includes a five
percent increase in base we also
just note that
we both recommendations include
thirty thousand for
instructional materials for
school for the deaf and we've
continued their appropriation of
two hundred fifteen thousand for
outreach services as the chair
noted that there's the same.
Distinction that you'll see and
not other state funds is
different for the executive and
for LFC staff to the tune of a
few million and that is again
because of the difference in how
the executive recommendation at
first Representative
the permanent fund distribution
versus the current state
investment council estimate for
this this coming year
additionally we included
beginning balances and other
state funds which the executive
recommendation had not that have
been recommended by the higher
education request for this
agency with that I will turn it
over to Nicole.
You
chair members of the committee
we did come to consensus on
performance measures and I'll
turn it over to the
superintendent thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
I just wondering what
superintendent Beecher.
As well as a superintendent
result I had commented of just
being extremely grateful for
your support and your ongoing
support we're doing wonderful
things at the Mexico school for
the deaf as you know we are not
just a school we are a statewide
agency.
We serve about eighty to ninety
percent of deaf and hard of
hearing children medically to
babies here in the state of New
Mexico.
And it's a far higher percent
percentage than any other state
and this is a figure that we're
very proud.
It seems sports is a theme today
our students are currently are
high school students are
currently in a tournament in
Iowa and they're playing against
seven other schools for the deaf
state schools for the deaf and
so far we're doing well we're
winning so we'll see how this
results the two championship
game is tomorrow.
I'm also very proud to say that
in the last fifteen years.
We have reached at least around.
Round of sixteen.
Out of sixty schools programs
for the deaf across the nation
for our academic bowl programs.
So our students are very very
well prepared academically.
And part of our support.
Albuquerque public schools for
example will send a few teachers
to our school on February
seventeenth to observe our
school and receive some training
from some of our instructors.
We work very well with different
school districts and we work
with all one hundred school one
hundred percent of the school
districts in the state of New
Mexico from a funding
perspective.
There are a lot of bills on the
table that could potentially
impact the school for the deaf.
The insurance and health care a
proposal in pain creases for
teachers.
A variety of the bills.
The increase to school hours.
And none of the funding will go
directly to the New Mexico
school for the deaf we do have
the land permanent fund.
And the projections have been
higher.
But I do want to take the time
to remind you that this year
this projection was fifteen
point eight million.
And we actually received fifteen
point one million.
If the trend continues for the
remainder of the year.
Next year the projection for us
the seventeen point two million
and if that actually were to
happen then we will be covered
for all of the potential bills
that are currently in discussion
if not
it would be different.
So we do ask for the LFC is
recommendation of the five
percent.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you very much support.
herbal okay we're gonna look for
any questions I don't see any
questions from committee members
but superintendent to you and to
your team thank you for your
statewide services for your
incredible work and good luck as
as your students continue to
excel with that will turn to by
your next.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
the LFC recommendation.
Okay a motion by vice chair
Dixon second by Representative
brown is there any opposition to
adopting the LFC recommendation
saying none thank you very much
superintendent thank you.
Okay members for now gonna
switch over.
To.
Nine fifty.
And you look in your books we
have a fairly large packet of
the.
This one here.
Right great to see you Mister
Jorgensen we're gonna ask you to
kick it up madam secretary great
to see you thank you for being
here today to you and your team
will start off with Mr Jorgensen
I thank you Mr chairman members
my name is Connor Jorgensen the
LFC analyst for higher education
institutions and the department
with me as a secretary Rodriguez
of higher education department
and the call Misia's of the
department of finance and
administration
we're gonna be working off of
this hand out.
And I want to go through it
pretty briefly will.
Start a little bit of context
and then get right into the the
actual high level differences so
the first thing I'd like to.
Point out of the higher
education subcommittee of the
LFC met several times throughout
the inner interim
some of the trends that were
discussed the dominant theme was
around enrollment opportunity
enrollment declines we've seen
over the last decade
you can see those on your volume
three page one fifteen by
institution if you're interested
but I think long story short
we've had a dramatic did
decreases of around thirty
percent over the last decade and
that is turned around in the
last year fall twenty twenty two
enrollment was up by about two
point nine percent on math to do
basically around four point
three percent on a head count
basis I think a lot of large
part of that might be related to
the opportunity scholarship that
was enacted last year.
Gonna talk a lot more about that
that's the single biggest
difference between these two
budget recommendations are here
today the opportunity
scholarship
Was initially costed out of
around a hundred million dollars
it looks like right now
The annual cost on that
scholarship is probably going to
be closer to one hundred thirty
six million dollars a year when
we look at that
I'm on a per student basis with
the new enrollment we're
probably looking around at
twenty five thousand dollars per
new student that is to say this
is a major investment
in.
The success of students in the
state of New Mexico going to
higher education and so that's
why I think it it's going to be
the the centerpiece of most of
the most of the discussion
around hi read budgets in
general.
I just want to get a couple
things cleared out so we're all
on the all on the same page with
the rhetoric that we're gonna be
talking about
a couple different types of
appropriation types within
higher education the first one
is in instruction and general
instruction in general is the
biggest single type of
appropriation to higher
education
and that pays for pretty much
all your classroom expenses
there are also research and
public service projects you're
gonna hear a lot about those two
those are single line item
appropriations that are made to
to the institutions and we have
all of those
shown later on in the package.
One note I would like to give
zoom back fill
there's a couple items of
backfill that I think the
committee ought to be aware of
the first is that last year.
Employer pension increase
pension contribution increases
were passed.
That legislation required a one
percent increase in FY twenty
three a one percent increase in
FY twenty four without an
additional appropriation those
institutions would have to pay
for that increase that's
automatic out of their current
operating budget that's number
one the second is the
Legislature provided fifteen
million dollars to expand the
nursing programs across the
state that was nonrecurring
revenue and it was sent out to
institutions over the summer
A fair bit about money was used
on recurring expenses as as we
knew it would be bought those
faculty and staff costs need to
need to either be paid for with
new money in this upcoming
budget or just like the pensions
the institutions would have to
absorb them in the current
budgets.
I also like to make one note on
the funding formula.
Those I. Angie appropriations
those are directed the.
Through the funding formula the
funding formula for higher
education deals only with new
money so this is a base plus
funding formula so what you'll
see is the last couple years the
prior year base has been
protected it doesn't reduce
because of the formula you're
going to see that again this
year so we're talking only about
new money being distributed
through the formula no
institution is receiving cuts.
if you could turn to page seven.
This is the the one page high
level overview of funding for
all of the institutions and the
department in the state.
I just want to.
Point out real quick on those
brought three lines which you
can see the LFC recommendation
is for about one point one
billion dollars or five point
five percent.
Overall increase for higher
education spending the executive
recommendation is for a one
point two billion dollar or
seventeen point nine percent.
Overall increase so now let's
take a look at where those
differences are so if you go up
to the very top the third line
down you'll see percent of new
money in the formula the
executive recommendation
includes two percent new money
that's fourteen point three
million dollars that's running
through the funding formula the
LFC recommendation includes a
one percent increase to the
funding formula that's a seven
point two million dollars.
Now
where these.
Recommendations got a little bit
different take a look a little
about the middle of the page non
formula adjustments the entirety
of the
I NG budget for the executive is
run through the funding formula
where is the LFC has for non
formula adjustments you have
seven point seven million
dollars of backs to pay that E.
R. B. increase that was passed
last year
there is another seven million
dollars that is for targeted
faculty compensation and I would
say that's another item that was
noted pretty consistently
throughout the last interim was
particularly faculty pay at New
Mexico high rated education
institutions is lower than
our peer states.
I mean you'll see student
support services those are going
to be a wraparound services at
and it and I think those were
prioritize mostly because again
when now that we have the
opportunity scholarship I think
it's incumbent to sort of do
what we can to protect that
investment and make sure that
the students who are getting
that scholarship are able to
stay in New and higher education
and complete their degree
program and there's a million
dollars on per student equity
funding
that is funding to equalize the
budgets of eastern and western
New Mexico university's that's
what five hundred thousand per
so when you add all of that up
the LFC recommendation goes to
three point three percent that
I. N. G. base it's an increase
of twenty six million dollars
and again the executive
recommendation is at eleven
point nine million or one point
five percent our PS P.
that is those recommendations
were very very close there
within one percent the executive
recommended ten point four
percent increase on our PSP
funds where the LFC recommended
nine point four both
recommendations targeted
particularly that health care
area and that nurse backfill but
I spoke about earlier as
particular points of emphasis
and tried to make those programs
whole so there won't be any
interruption and those and the
increased this class sizes will
be able to be carried forward
into the future
now we get down to the higher
education department and the the
thing that really jumps out
opportunity scholarship on that
bottom line there's a hundred
thirty five million dollar
difference between the LESC and
the executive recommendation.
If you could turn with me to
page eight.
I want to talk a little bit more
about the opportunity
scholarship and what that.
What's really driving that
difference so this is document
that LFC DFA and AGD have worked
on to try to wrap our arms
around exactly what is getting
paid out of opportunity
scholarship and from where
and also track how that's
changed over time.
So the first thing I'd like to
point out of if you look down at
the
The first box you can see those
bottom lines opportunity funding
we're showing you all the
opportunity funding sources hi
you can see there's a FY twenty
three operant to seize six
thirty projection.
And I'm pointing that out so
after the bill was passed higher
education institutions were
asked to estimate the cost of
the opportunity scholarship as
of June thirty.
They reported they reported this
data back to hire at and it
looked as though the cost was
going to be ninety three million
six hundred seventy eight
thousand dollars you can see
that on the uses box in the
opportunity scholarship line
that was what the assumed cost
of opportunity was going to be
and FY twenty three.
Go one column over you'll see FY
twenty three one slash thirty
one update
and you can also see that same
that ninety three million
dollars turns into a hundred
thirty six million dollars more
last the question is what was
the discrepancy what was the
discrepancy between the ninety
six million in a hundred thirty
six million.
And so staff have got together
and we try to work out exactly
what drove that and what you can
see is that we have a few we
have a few line items we have
prior year tuition and fees we
have enrollment growth tuition
increases be increases in bridge
semester and when we started
looking at what has happened
with opportunity a few things
jumped out first enrollment
growth the first initial
projections was for about two
percent enrollment growth
couple things happened first we
went to about two point nine
percent on that F. T. E. basis
but probably a bigger deal than
that was new students first time
freshmen were up by just a
little under ten percent so
there was a a really big uptake
and that rules.
The second thing that happened
to wishin increases the initial
projections assume to their be
about five percent growth in
tuition.
The independent boards of
regents all eight not all but
mostly increased tuition and the
average about increase came out
to be about eleven percent for
this last year so projected I
got a letter and then the next
thing and the from the largest
component was the bridge
semesters so we talked about
those first time those first
time freshmen coming in the way
opportunities structured a
student who's gonna receive a
lottery
does not receive that
scholarship until the second
semester but the opportunity
scholarship can cover that first
semester so.
The the cost of the bridge
scholarship turns out to be
about twenty million dollars.
For FY twenty three
and so when we look at all of
that and we and we look at all
those costs subtract out the
revenues that we have available
you can see that for FY twenty
three there's a deficit of about
thirty six point seven million
dollars we're gonna be talking
about
today in the recurring side is
FY twenty four and there's two
significant differences there.
FY twenty four you can see there
is an executive column and LFC
column side by side the
executive.
recommendation is estimating
total cost of about a hundred
forty five million dollars well
the LFC is anticipating eighteen
are a hundred nineteen million
the difference there is that
currently the LFC recommendation
has some guard rails on that
opportunity scholarship and the
guard rail specifically you're
dealing with.
that bridge semester saying that
if you're if a student is
receiving that bridge
scholarship and they're gonna
receive lottery that opportunity
does not pay that first semester
this is important I think
because
Institutions are generally
responsible for using their own
funds to pay those Bridge
scholarships
And so that and so that's what's
reflected in the LFC
recommendation so when you look
at those two that's that's
really what it is is that that
LFC recommendation first was
based on a lower number we
assumed a hundred million it
wasn't until later that the but
we got better numbers and then
it also includes a prohibition
on using lottery opportunity
money to cover that lottery
cost.
the last thing I'd like to touch
on if you'll turn to page tax.
Page ten is nonrecurring general
fund these are your special in
supplemental appropriations you
can see there the the some
totals.
At the top by institution the
LFC has recommended about one
point five million dollars in
additional nonrecurring funding
to institutions the executive
recommended a hundred forty five
point five million
this dynamic it's switched a
little bit when we look at the
higher education department
recommendation where the
executive recommended a hundred
fourteen point seven million and
the LESC recommended a hundred
sixty nine million you can see
all of them.
Actual individual items are
listed on this sheet that'll get
you to those totals some of the
some of the bigger.
Items that we're gonna see in
the higher education department
building renewal and replacement
this comes up a lot this is you
can pick it is routine
maintenance for college campuses
the executive recommended about
twelve million dollars the LFC
recommended twenty million the
LFC recommendation also includes
a number of endowments that were
not included in the LFC
recommendation so there's a
little bit of difference there
and you can see for example
there's twenty million dollars
in the LFC recommendation for
endowments for
social work students these are
masters level students there is
forty million additional dollars
for research matching funds
these are funds that research
universities primarily can be
used to leverage federal grants
And then the last two I'd like
to point out are also on that
page
Some other big differences the
executive has recommended twenty
eight point three million
dollars for health provider loan
repayment the LFC recommended
this program but it five million
dollars the executive
recommendation includesd request
for a supplemental appropriation
for FY twenty three for that
opportunity
Deficit of fifty three point
eight million dollars the LFC
recommendation includesd sixty
million dollars in non recurring
revenue for FY twenty four for
the opportunity scholarship.
Mr chair I think that covers
most of the highlights of the of
the recommendations for the
higher education institutions
I'd also like to point out very
quickly that
On page.
Nine
there's of an overview of the
higher education department
again.
The the big difference that one
is on line forty four
opportunity scholarship it was
just the LFC recommendation
includes I significantly last
recurring funding where is the
executive recommends fully
funding the opportunity
scholarship in the opportunity
scholarship program of the
higher education department
And then.
LFC and executive staff have
reached consensus on performance
measures and targets you can see
those on page twenty three of
this package.
I think that will conclude that
LFC presentation and.
Like to turn it over to Mr
Misia's thank you Mr chair
members of the committee there
are a couple of points that I
would like to highlight for the
higher education department
budget but the executive had
increased included there's about
two point two five for the
indigenous education technical
assistance centers this will
excuse me and then we also
included four hundred thousand
for tribal college dual credit
and three hundred thousand for
adult education materials and
high school equivalency vouchers
and then we also included one
additional FTE for the financial
a division within the department
there it they need assistance to
help process everything as it
relates to financial aid and so
we would greatly appreciate your
support for that and then I
would also Mr.
Give me a second.
One other mentioned that I would
like to make as it relates to
the higher education
institutions
fort as far as the nursing back
fill the executive recommended
about six point five for the
nursing expansion backfill and
then a lot of the remainder that
was the difference between me
and LESC was put and
nonrecurring before a lot of one
time costs for equipment and
technology and so that's what
the executive did and so
One more.
I have one more point
And then we we're as far as
nonrecurring for the executive
recommendation we also included
about seven these are these are
seven point five million for the
bureau college for a policy of
Pathak medicine and then at
funding for those indictments at
the institutions and I will turn
it over to Secretary Rodriguez
to give her presentation thank
you Amos process then secretary
thank you Mister chair and I
want to thank my colleagues
Connor and Nicole good afternoon
chairman and honorable members
of the committee it's a pleasure
to be for you to be before you
today I will first be presenting
the executive budget
recommendations for the New
Mexico higher education
department and this encompasses
our financial aid programs such
as our scholarships and loan
forgiveness programs and other
education services the agency
administers like adult education
and all credit Mr chair I did
time my remarks it's five
minutes and then we can jump
into Q. NA please note that
after this recommendation will
have an opportunity to go over
the higher education
institutions budget
recommendations both the LFC and
exec so if you have questions
for that we are going to be
available for that second
presentation so I'm going to ask
you to actually in this briefing
document to page four.
We're starting a little
backwards today I'll show you
what it looks like.
Right here.
The higher education department
agency budget will account for
approximately two percent of the
general fund at two hundred
twenty three million dollars and
higher education as a whole is
about twelve percent of the
state's general fund at
approximately one billion
dollars in addition to managing
that billion dollar budget you
will notice in the gray box on
page four we also administer
state financial aid programs one
hundred fifty million dollars in
capital and ten million in
federal grants with only fifty
two FTE so let's talk about F.
T. in vacancies because I know
this is something that the
committee always wants to
discuss compared to our sister
agencies fifty two FTE ease
accounts for seventeen percent
or less of the work force that
exist at each of those agencies
however we oversee twenty four
public colleges for tribal
colleges three special schools
and the university of New
Mexico's health sciences center
breaking this down even further
thirty eight of those FTEs are
supported with your state funds
when I came before you my first
year as cabinet secretary the
HSD had a vacancy rate of nearly
twenty five percent this past
December it was fourteen percent
and this month it is that
seventeen percent but rest
assured all nine of our open
positions are in the hiring
process for interviews reviewing
or asking people to accept job
positions now I'm gonna ask you
to change to switch over to page
five which looks like this to
discuss its politicians that are
HSD when I presented to you last
year we discussed that we as an
executive and legislative chair
of a legislative Francis
governments need to work
together to drive policy
solutions to address enrollment
decline and understand the
students we can recruit right
here in New Mexico because we
have a lot and with bipartisan
support of the legislature and
the governor's signature we are
proving that there is no wrong
door to higher education.
Over thirty six thousand New
Mexicans are benefiting from the
opportunity scholarship this
semester now the math is simple
if you take that thirty six
thousand dollar number divided
by the total number we spent
this fall semester that's only
about two thousand dollars per
student that semester with
enrollment increases we can be
sure that these graduates will
eventually yield positive
workforce development and
expansion especially in rural
communities with critical
regional enterprises the
opportunity scholarship third
received thirty I'm sorry sixty
three million in recurring funds
and twelve nonrecurring funds
and twelve million in recurring
funds meaning to sustain the
most flexible scholarship
program in the state we are
coming before you and it
requesting approximately a
hundred fifty million dollars of
recurring funds that is less
than two percent of the overall
state budget another thing for
us to be proud of on page six is
our loan repayment programs for
teachers and health
professionals I know many of you
call me during the interviews
programs because of an increase
in application submissions for
state loan forgiveness programs
by four hundred seventy seven
percent thank you for
encouraging your constituents to
apply the higher education
department is requesting ten
million for the teacher loan
repayment program and thirty
million for the health
professional loan repayment
program in addition to
enrollment gains in the higher
education sector we are
experiencing increases in
enrollment within our adult
education programs with the two
hundred fifty thousand dollar
increase to the agency's adult
education last year thank you so
much enrollment in these
programs increased by from over
eight thousand students to ten
thousand one hundred fifty seven
adult learners in New Mexico
additionally one thousand eight
hundred eighty New Mexicans are
a high school equivalency
credential in twenty twenty two
with the two point two million
dollar increase this year for
adult education.
We'll be able to ensure more
direct funding to our programs
professional development
training for our educators
instructional materials for
students which was
an intentionally eliminated
eliminated the public education
department's budget in twenty
nineteen testing vouchers to
cover the cost of exams which
can be very costly to estimate
and of course constituent
services which is a critical
thing and most important thing
within my agency on page seven
you will see.
Our last three initiatives that
will discuss to you today over
sixteen thousand students
benefit from the state's dual
credit program each year still
credit is important because it
adjourns student success when
students can continue on to
college and another key factor
is addressing enrollment
challenges in New Mexico our
colleges and universities we
have approximately nine million
dollars in tuition and fees to
administer this program with a
small two million dollar
investment we can support higher
education institutions in
providing more targeted academic
and college advisement for these
high school students something
that is equally important is the
tribal college dual credit
program we are also requesting
four hundred thousand dollars
for the dual credit program at
New Mexico's tribal colleges and
universities to create equity
with non tribal schools because
they are not credited in the
funding formula the last thing
I'll talk about on this page
before we turn to the last one
are indigenous technical
assistance centers we are asking
for two point two five million
the concept is quite simple
you've heard of regional
education cooperatives however
what do we have that really
targets native American success
these technical assistance
centers will do that we will
establish to in the state of New
Mexico that will be able to do
relevant curriculum and language
in the classroom for the
students.
On the last page it promise I'm
almost done Mr chair a small
investment of a hundred thousand
dollars will allow the higher
education department to purchase
a centralized curriculum
management system to ensure
information and data for COVID
course numbering system and
general education courses is up
to date and one last initiative
I will share with you today is a
longitudinal data system which
will help agencies and
policymakers identify student
challenges early on make
targeted interventions and
investments and determine what
educational practices and
programs Dr student success from
the early years all the way to
their career we have made
significant process and we are
almost seventy eight we are
seventy eight percent complete
with our first face going to be
deployed in summer twenty twenty
three final plays December
twenty twenty four with that I
closed my presentation but
please note that I included in
your briefing document a leaflet
with the agency's
accomplishments this year in
partnership with you all and an
agency funding status report
which includes the faculty
endowments nurse expansion food
security and more thank you for
your time today and I will yield
the floor back to you Mr chair
thank you very much secretary
thank you for your into your
team
let's go to we're gonna just
this is just be on the higher
education department will be
going to our institutions here
in just a little bit first and
madam secretary we're gonna go
to Representative Trujillo
Representative Montoya than
Representative Petr
Representative Trujillo chair
of.
The secretary answers questions
asked the.
There.
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman
Madam secretary on page seven of
your presentation you mentioned
targeted faculty in creases how
how I'm sorry not on your
presentation on the LFC
presentation.
there is a targeted
Raises how how do we determine
the targets of of those races.
thank you Mr chairman and
representative
So all of the.
The targeted faculty increases
as well as student support are
determined based on the
proportion of the overall
funding that the institution
gets so for example if an
institution got five percent of
the overall general fund
appropriation they get five
percent of of that particular
part of money.
And that's why it wasn't run
through the funding formula to
make sure that that was to make
sure that everybody every
institution was entitled to bear
proportionate share of those
dollars.
Thank you Mr chairman second
question
Mr chairman on page eight of
that presentation.
looking at the tuition.
It says tuition increase from
under
Million dollars FY twenty three
up to over fifteen million
dollars what what was.
Explained that I've here we went
through that and I did not
understand the explanation of
the.
The certainly.
Mr chair and and Representative
so.
When we look at the first column
FY twenty three six thirty
projection
At that time we didn't
anticipate that large it tuition
increases as shown by that eight
hundred seventy three thousand
when we actually got the the new
data at the.
Basically a couple of weeks ago
That included all of the tuition
increases that had been
taken by every institution.
overall institutions of the
increased tuition by.
The tuition and fees thank you
by about eleven percent and I
have a detailed and volume three
but.
But that was the so this is our
attempts to try to attribute
The the impact of tuition and
fees on to the lottery or the
opportunity scholarship cost
increase.
Thank you Mr chairman that
actually is my concern.
I at I'm afraid that when we
start to make something free.
I'm I'm concerned that the.
Institutions.
Are able to increase.
Tuition.
And I'm not exactly sure how we
pull that back that's just a
pass on to the taxpayer.
so I I'm not sure whenever
institution wants to increase
fees for tuition is there a
process Mr chairman or do they
just determine within the
institution I'm going to
increase fees because that now
we have the lottery scholarship
we have the opportunity
scholarship
that are.
Piles of dollars that we are
putting out there I I'm not
exactly sure what would keep an
institution from raising.
Tuition and or fees if they just
want to increase revenue so
Mister chairman is and madam
secretary is there a process
that all the institutions have
to go through if they decide to
increase tuition.
Mr chair representative monthly
I think you for that question I
kind of want to talk about the
first part of your question
which is what is that process in
typically what are higher
education institutions will do
is come together and determine
how have their operations at the
institution increase and do they
have enough appropriate revenue
sources to cover that increase
once they do that they then talk
about tuition increases to do
the rest of the back fill which
then of course you know falls on
our students and our scholarship
programs as far as moving
forward into the session it is a
conversation that we are
exploring with our partners in
the legislature we are not
thrilled as an executive branch
of government about the tuition
and fee increases either and we
do agree with you that it's
something that we need to
discuss and figure out a
solution moving forward in this
legislative session thank you Mr
chairman and madam secretary so
what would go into a to wishin
increase I mean we know we know
there's overhead for
buildings there is
Maybe increase costs for energy
I I don't know but there's what
if somebody if they're
our increases to faculty Hey
could that going to.
Okay so so Mister chairman I I
I'm getting a she's had shakes
over there for everybody that's
a concern.
I because I I don't these are
dollars that
just increase every year and and
Mr chairman I'm I'm just I guess
I'll make my statement now that
I've been making almost every
day and that is I've been voting
against I'll budgets
throughout this process and it
may or may not even be to the
merits of the presentation of
the budget request but
Mr chairman in the last four
years we've increased year over
year spending.
Our state budget has gone up
from a little over six billion
dollars a year to over nine
billion dollars a year and now
we are looking for a substantial
increase whether it's the
whether it's the staff budget
increase for the administration
and we cannot continue this
right of a state increased two
year over year spending.
And Mr chairman I and and madam
secretary I would like to work
with you on if we can come up
with a legislative answer for a
process for tuition increases
Mr chairman this is just a
little bit too much of the
fox guarding the hen house.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much Representative
Pettigrew please take care of
yeah please madam secretary the
Mr Jorgensen Mr chair
representative please remember
that my colleagues are here
today and they'll be presenting
to you right after me so you can
have some of those targeted
questions I do also want to just
flag for you instruction in
general if we don't increase
instructional instruction in
general typically higher
education institutions have to
make decisions to increase
tuition fees but that's a
conversation we can have with my
colleagues when we come up here.
Yes and also related Mr
chairman.
Tuition and fee increases over
time are detailed on page one
ten year volume three I'll give
you the by institution
percentage increases I'm in the
current tuition and fees are
shown on page one a lot of.
I was also
Remiss in the earlier
presentation.
There is a compensation package
this year the LFC is
recommending a five percent
increase and the executive is
recommending a four percent
increase I bring that up because
Related to your point.
Only a certain proportion of
that increase is paid for by the
general fund in this case it's
eighty percent the institutions
are on the hook for the other
twenty percent with
institutional funds and that is
a one of the things that
sometimes drives tuition
increases.
Great thank you very much thank
you for those Representative
please.
Thanks.
Thank you Secretary Rodriguez
for.
Presentation I've.
I have to admit there's so many
frustrating parts with respect
to the presentation I really
don't know where to begin.
I guess the first one for me is.
The issue with respect to the
opportunity scholarship.
Take away the the concept of
whether or not we should have it
or not.
The reality is.
We have it right now.
There's no rules for getting in
other then you can't be.
Eligible for the lottery.
And there's no rules to tell you
the.
You have to stay in the state
afterwards.
So we have somewhere around
forty four percent of the people
in the state of New Mexico
paying for people with the
school.
For some version of free.
With no obligation to stay
within the state.
Whatsoever.
That's this is so totally
frustrating issue for me and
then as I go through.
Chairman.
Madam secretary
The presentation and then for.
I go through that but I hear
this is this is the expense but
we didn't take at the cap that
our schools and I get that their
tuition is there their tuition.
But we didn't take into account.
The level percent tuition rates
increase.
So many things about that so
many questions for me.
And
I didn't have the honor I didn't
have the blessing of being able
to sit through LESC I'm not
gonna sit here and question
entire group of people that went
through this process then came
to the best solution that they
could and I'm not challenging
that in any way I'm just voicing
my opinion on it I get you know
I still have the opinion that
the you know when when the
largest employer in the state
The New Mexico's a college we
probably are in the best
position in the state.
When we compare ourselves to
across the country so
Again madam secretary that's not
specifically your issue but as I
go through the budget it
concerns me that we're looking
at some expenses that.
Yes there's there's a gross
receipts return yes there's this
return yes Sir is that but we
have no obligation with this
opportunity scholarship to
ensure that these people are
staying in New Mexico for any
period of time.
So.
We go through this chairman and
madam secretary we go through
this process.
I think I heard the number the
average was a somewhere around
two thousand dollars for all the
students to apply for this and
if you add that together and you
go through the number of years
six to eight years maybe to
complete a degree.
By the time they've expense that
by the time they've gotten that
they can leave the state of New
Mexico and not return any
investment back to the state of
New Mexico.
That concerns me.
So.
Assuming everything else was
perfect and everything else this
committee did and now the hard
work that this committee did
through the summer
LFC is work DFA is working
everybody's work as hard as all
your work together at the end of
the day.
The opportunity scholarship is a
disaster.
In my opinion because we have no
guarantee we have nothing that
ensures that they give back to
the state of New Mexico.
If we're going to yes we want
our kids to come back and stay
in New Mexico or stay in New
Mexico we made them we did not
put in any way kids adults
whatever it is we didn't put any
obligation on them to stay in
the state The New Mexico
chairman I can't support a
budget that we're going to
invest we asked for no
investment that.
I appreciate it thank you for
the presentation.
In no way do I want this come
across in any way that I'm
trying to to to bring down any
of the hard work that everybody
else is doing this just the
issue I have with the return on
investment that we're getting
thank.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew next you're gonna go
to representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman on on page
nine.
Of the handout on line thirty
two.
What seeing this you have help
professional payment to go from
one point six up to four point
six million.
My question is.
Go up on nine twenty six what
time veteran scholarship fifty
one of eighty eight thousand.
And if you wanted further up
it's a Vietnam veteran
scholarship of forty eight
thousand can you justify paying
loan repayment for that much
money that our veterans are
getting nothing.
Well I had a discussion with
the.
Raffi the state wartime Vietnam
veterans are getting old how
many veterans will go to school
for that amount Madam go to
school.
You know if I want to go to
school and and a couple of
veterans you want to go to
school.
They're only there for the.
The needle what what's the
justification on that.
Where a million from.
A million and a half off of what
we we pay more for students and
yet our veterans are not getting
any benefit of anything this
state can you explain that to
me.
Mr chair representative thank
you for that question the reason
why that one is relatively low
low is because many of our
veterans qualify for the GI bill
benefits which include
scholarships at the federal
level so taking that into
account and then looking at our
other population that may not
qualify forty eight thousand
dollars as what we suspect is
the left over that we can
provide as a state if someone
does not qualify for the GI
bill.
Mr chair meditative what do mean
left over are you give our
veterans the leftovers of
kissing no no no so if we cap we
calculated the amount of
students that receive the GI
bill and then there is an
estimation of how many do not
qualify in the state of New
Mexico and that's where the
forty eight thousand dollars
number comes from Mr chair no
madam secretary to get in the GI
bill is almost impossible
a Vietnam veteran and for me to
get the GI bill it just didn't
work.
You know I don't know where you
get in numbers from of qualifies
and who doesn't qualify.
But these numbers just don't
justify our veterans question
with.
Mr chairman I might add
The recommendations also do
include and are PSP's there are
too many veterans centers that
are funded
there is one at western and
another at eastern New Mexico
Roswell those were requests and
funded they're not in the in the
higher end budget but I would I
just wanted to point those out
of those are going to be new
newlyestablished veterans funded
those two institutions and Mr
chair and representative we also
have folks that do not qualify
for the Vietnam veterans we have
more time veterans program as
well which is two hundred eighty
eight thousand dollars.
The settlement Mr chair and
madam secretary even at two
hundred eighty eight thousand
dollar for wartime veterans your
including all the recommended
rooms although the word after
Vietnam how does this viable.
The money what you just doesn't
make sense you know here we are
we giving of almost two million
dollars a repayment loans for
people well yeah we can the
approved budget for veterans
there's something wrong with the
system.
You know and I'm a strong
advocate for veterans and this
is not it'll be very well to me.
Miss you know excuse me.
Remember keep reminding all if
it wasn't for veterans we will
be here period none of us we
will be having this committee
meeting Mr chairman madam
secretary that's what we need to
keep in mind that we're not
doing it because our veterans
are not getting left out.
Mr chair representative yes you
are strong advocate I am so
appreciative what you've done
at New Mexico State University
requests I've been able to
toward that facility that you
funded so thank you so much as
far as this is concerned I would
love to sit down with you and
maybe we can have a better
analysis at the higher education
department that we can share
with you and if we need to
increase that that is something
we can definitely look into but
I will follow up with you
representative Mr madam chair
that would be fine
you know the Representative all
want us to we have a nine
billion dollar budget and we're
giving investors two hundred
eighty eight thousand dollars.
The trough I just want thank you
Mr chair thank you
Representative Garcia next we're
gonna go to ranking member.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for your tell your presentation
there's a couple of things and
the one of them is probably for
Connor on page seven
the the per student equity.
we have a million dollars in
that can you just explain to me
where that goes and what it is
used for.
Yes Mr chairman and
representative Armstrong so.
You'll recall of the LFC hearing
in Silver City and analysis was
presented that compared.
Western and eastern New Mexico
university is our
appropriations pool full time
equivalent student to other
institutions and
in their sector and what it
showed was that on her F. T. E.
basis those institutions that
receive less funding so this one
million dollars would be split
five hundred thousand dollars
apiece for western and eastern
I'd say there's
One other point that's probably
important to mention is that.
F. T. enrollment in general is
not in the funding formula
student credit hours are the
funding formula and they account
for around twenty percent.
But the big driver is awards so
this this funding is meant to
recognize that there is a
discrepancy in the poor FTE
funding and catch them up
meanwhile the awards based
mechanism of the funding formula
over time show to help close
that gap.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Conor for that I.
I would like to work with you
offline just so I can understand
that a little better because I I
want.
You know just to equity for all
the colleges okay I was just
curious about that and then
Madam so feel yes I believe the
secretary wanted to add to that
I believe yes madam chair thank
you Sir for that I will say that
the institutional base has
remained relatively untouched
over the last ten years and we
promise this committee that we
will look at it in the in term
to adjust some of those basic
issues that you have been
bringing to our attention at the
higher education department
thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair thank you madam
secretary and then madam
secretary on your
table one on page six I was just
kind of glancing at that and I
see madam chair that on the loan
repayment for the teachers you
know it's almost a hundred
percent applicants were awarded
these numbers on the health
professionals there's a pretty
big discrepancy there and so is
that what I'm seeing as on
Connor's page nine the
additional four million.
Going into that health
professionals professionals loan
repayment.
Is that correct madam chair that
is and if I can also
point out some of the LFC
recommendation includes three
million dollars in with her in
funding for health professional
loans if you look at page ten
this is our nonrecurring sheet
down towards the bottom there's
another.
Twenty eight point three million
in that executive recommendation
for the student financial aid
program of hiring part and that
is for the same purpose.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Connor I wonder.
So I see on the LFC it's five
million and on the executive
it's twenty eight on this page
does that five million in the
LFC.
In addition to the other page so
it's a total of around a little
over nine for the LFC yes ma'am
that is correct.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
do you do we have a certain do
we pay a hundred percent Mr
chair do we pay a certain
percentage how does that work
madam secretary madam chair SO
for doctors medical doctors it
is twenty five thousand over two
years for other health
professionals it is twelve
thousand over two years with the
ability to re apply after those
two years so long as you are
employed full time in the state
of New Mexico and we verify that
with the employer.
Thank you
Mr chairman and and secretary.
I'll have to do some math on
what we were putting in there
and what to how many applicants
were getting in and see if if
that's good but I I I I
personally like the recurring
just because I think if we're
going to recruit and retain
health care workers here in the
state of New Mexico.
We need that that was really all
my questions thank you Mr
chairman thank you remember
Armstrong next for percent of
the cruise.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Senator tell you talked a little
bit about tuition increases I'd
like to have the expandable more
on how our universities colleges
are decide how that.
One that I have been calling on
to happen.
How is that money that's raised
use can you expand a little
because it's been a bit of a
concern for me long before I was
provided.
Mr chair representative
typically the process takes
place in the spring and which
the university presents budget
recommendations to the board of
regents and oftentimes those can
include tuition increases such
as a full compensation of their
faculty and staff also other
operational things that have to
occur on campus increases in
their budget things like that if
I can Mr chair representative
the higher ed institutions will
be joining me in the next
presentation and I think it
would be really meaningful for
them to explain that process a
little further for you and why
they do that just because they
have a little bit more in depth
knowledge on the process thank
you madam chair material all
week till that period us a
question action of another one
that I think would be a deal at
that time to ask as well however
I do want to take a moment to
commend the state of New Mexico
or universities for the success
of the opportunity a grant I see
it as us investing in ourselves
thank you Mr thank you very much
Representative Cruz I want to it
now will go to Representative
Lujan meal the representative
press.
Thank you
Mr chairman and madam secretary
so I'm looking at the health
professional loan repayment
program so I want to go back to
that page ten
as a seventeen year old with a
baby who went to New Mexico
State University with the allied
health loan repayment the paid
for my my schooling which then
form the health care company and
I work throughout the pandemic
with that baby who is now thirty
two years old providing health
care services my concern is that
that up five million twenty
eight million is nonrecurring
and every committee that I sit
in we hear that we do not have
health care professionals.
And so we need to make that
investment in health care
professionals and I know with
this loan you must work in rural
areas to to get this loan and so
I.
I just you know I know that that
we have three million on this
page which is not enough and
then we have this nonrecurring
five million and if we're going
to invest in health care
professionals we need to invest
in health care professionals
that brings me to
Mr chair and madam secretary to
another concern on these Page
ten nonrecurring general fund
summary.
I noticed that it the executive
and the LESC the LFC
recommendation is giving to two
universities.
The executive is giving to all
universities can you tell me
why.
Hi yes Mr chairman and
Representative how to meal.
So the LFC recommendation.
We prioritize funding generally
speaking for statewide
initiatives so what you can see
on on that she is building
renewal and replacement for
twenty million
equipment replacement for twenty
million in doubt nursing faculty
for for ten endowments for
financial aid for social work
students.
That's twenty million
Public health colleges that's
the only two universities and
then Research matching funds so
what all of those have in common
is that they are going to affect
multiple institutions
there are two.
Two other with appropriation
you're looking at five hundred
thousand dollars in the U. N.
and this is on page eleven for
the human papillomavirus pap
registry which is a statewide
service out of health sciences
center and the other one is one
million dollars for in doubt
educator profitable to positions
at Dona ana community college
and the reason that one's in
there is because
I doubt it teaching faculty
money was appropriated last year
and Dona ana community college
was an in advertisement we left
out of that distribution so that
one million dollars in the LFC
reckons playing catch up for
last year's and the human
papillomavirus registry is again
another statewide project so
that's the sort of thinking
behind the LFC recommendation is
that we really do want to take a
statewide approach and make sure
that there's an application
process and that all of the
institutions we could qualified
can apply and receive funding
through the LFC rack.
Thank you.
Thank you very much of Madam how
to me next Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
secretary I'd like to talk a
little bit about campus safety
so Mr chair and and secretary
you're asking for eight million
dollars for various measures for
campus safety and the first
question I have is did you do a
needs assessment before you
arrived at that eight million
dollar for dollar figure Mr
chair.
I'm.
Representative on on page I'm
looking at the little packet
this.
Mr chair that's actually The
presentation that's after me
that B. three associations will
be presenting before you are
recommending that okay I will
wait until that thank you be
ready okay I guess I I read a
little bit so I threw chair that
means Representative Brown is
excited for the new right.
Thank you very much we're
looking thank you Representative
Brown will now Representative
Lujan please.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
everybody for being here
looking at.
I think a little bit with of
this was discussed in the the
dual credit program if I can
just get some clarification
looking on page nine.
Line thirty one.
So there.
There's that's a blank line but
then you're going
Madam section Secretary Mr chair
you talked about the the tribal
college dual credit the four
hundred.
Can you can I just get some
clarification what how these
are.
Being reported here stir up Mr
chair so the two million in dual
credit that we are asking for is
a special appropriation request
so that is why it's not
appearing in the document before
you however tribal college dual
credit program has always been
administered through our agency
operations budget.
Okay Matt and Mr what about the
deal overall dual credit program
line thirty one.
Mr chair I am hearing from my
colleagues right here that that
is a typo.
Okay.
Thank you okay and then okay
next would we have your.
So.
This may be for the next
presentation but I'm going out
to I want to address the
behavior health outreach in line
item and investments for states
in our our education schools a
second address later in the next
presentation more.
Where is it indicated in our
budget Mr chair.
Behavioral health outreach
services.
in traps thank you
Representative Lujan maybe in
some of the wraparound services
with students after other other
components you Mr yes that's the
student support service okay the
other way to call back and
you'll also see that sort of
scattered throughout the R.
those wondering too as well
thank you I'd like to get a
consolidation on that and and
see what that all of us relates
to Mister chair Mister chair
representative we actually have
that number and I'm sure that
you get it this evening I
appreciate that thank you and I
think yeah one one last question
as we're talking about in his
opportunities coach another
funding do we have anything do
we have any conversation just in
other types of scholarships our
students are getting that
contribute to the bottom line so
to speak Mr chair.
Mr chair and.
Percent of Lujan yes so on page
eight.
When we look at.
From the cost opportunity
scholarship is a little bit
difficult because as you related
to.
At the scholarship dollars
staff.
And so what you see on the
sources is we have our our
lotteries we have our total
tuition amount that would be
eligible we have to reduce that
down by lottery and then we have
to reduce that down by other
other state aid which would be
things I students incentive
grant and so that's what we've
done on the sources on the on
the top of that that first box
on page eight is taking to
account those other scholarship
amounts.
Mr chair Senator could also
sheeter just state funded type
question I'm I'm a little.
It's
Mr chair and representative
state scholarships okay so there
are other sources another
scholarship that our students
are receiving where do we
account for that Mr chair.
That would be elsewhere when we
look at total tuition
but.
For example let's see Stafford
loans would be a big component
any help that will show up in
the overall tuition but we're
not counting it against
opportunity because it it isn't
stacked prior to award of
opportunity is that Mr chair
because of the the timing or how
I mean I think that should be
accounted for as well and we can
talk more about it but I think
this is part of the equation
as we're looking at budgets
thank you Mr chair thank you
very.
On that Representative Garrett
than Representative Baca thank
you Mr chair thank you Secretary
just in regards to the
scholarships for veterans of
madam secretary wouldn't most
veterans be eligible for
opportunity scholarships.
Mr chair yes that is true they
would also receive that for
state financial aid okay thank
you for that clarification
that's one question thank you
Representative Garrett next we
have Representative send Jana
then excuse me I.
Representative Baca please then
Representative setting and thank
you Mr chairman and thank you
Secretary for your presentation
I was very simple
straightforward question on page
eight.
Of the back of the head of.
the second call from the right.
On the LFC
We have a total revenue of I
believe it's eighty two million.
At the we're looking at the
of the total cost of roughly a
hundred nineteen million okay.
What are the reasons for the
difference and how are they
would house that could be made
a.
thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Baca so.
I think there's there's a couple
things to contact so yes you're
absolutely right there's eighty
two million dollars in the LFC
recommendation right now it's
split twenty two of it is
recurring sixty million of it is
in nonrecurring
at the time of the LFC
recommendation was made we knew
a lot less about the actual
cause of this program that's the
number one
so you can see that now based on
our current estimates if you
were to take that eighty two
million we'd be left with a
thirty seven million dollar
deficit for opportunity so I
think there is absolutely
They're different for this
committee to decide
on what if anything needs to be
altered in the LFC rack to I to
address that
and then I think there is
another question that's.
For the policy makers which is
how do we find this
the LFC recommendation.
Split it between recurring and
non recurring and part of the
reason for that split is that.
I think we as staff of kind of
sharpen our pencils on the on
the actual opportunity
scholarship projection of think
we're closer today than than we
were
a couple months ago.
But we don't actually know how
this is going to play out
because we don't have a full
year it updated yet we don't
know how many of those students
are going to continue on how
many of them might lose
eligibility how many of them
might I.
Change from one institution to.
So.
The LFC recommendation is sort
of reflecting that and it's
building a little bit of
flexibility by relying to to a
great extent on non recurring
revenue as it incrementally
boosts up recurring revenue and
hopefully in the future once we
have a.
Idea of how much of this program
actually costs
it can be paid on a recurring
basis through the operating
budget.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much for some Baca next
representative Lente Jana then
Representative turned.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Secretary presenters I'm I'm I'm
on page ten of your of the LFC.
College so you're giving seven
point five million at reach
minority students and program
enhancements.
Minority students you currently
have.
You know any idea.
Mr chair representative I do not
know that number off the top of
my head but we do collect that
data from our private schools
and I can get that for you
tonight.
Thank you.
so thank Mr chair representative
and I also want to make a
mention for this specific
appropriation it's supposed to
be expended over the course of
five years and that's why this
thing now but it wasn't the
language wasn't added to this
spreadsheet to thank you.
Mr Chairman from.
So from actually from New Mexico
can you tell me that.
Mr chair representative when
having preliminary conversations
with your all college about that
it's estimated that forty two
percent of their students are in
state residents however I can
get that confirmation from you
but that was one of the driving
factors to support this and
these dollars will specifically
be for in state residents not
for out of state residents.
so how long do they have to be
in state to be in state
residents.
Mr chair representative that's
something that is verified from
the institutions such as
graduating from a New Mexico
high school living in New Mexico
X. amount of years and they look
into do you have that sort of.
People I'm sorry that the
institution determines that.
Thank you very much process
sending out a Representative
Lujan.
Thank you Mr chair of.
And madam secretary so I I just
have one question for you as I
listen to our presentation and I
look at your we versions from
twenty to twenty one and twenty
two your increase of four point
three million so tell me what.
Just tell us what programs were
affected by this reversion and
do how did it affect students.
Yeah to the conversation.
Mr chair the reversion of the
time in FY twenty two we had
restrictive language related to
the opportunity scholarship in
which not all funds were paid
that was the amount of us
approximately four point.
Three million four three point.
It was three million dollars so
that's primarily what our
version once but that once again
that was before the opportunity
scholarship act was approved by
law and we had the restrictive
language in house bill two.
So you had madam chair Mr
Chairman sorry madam secretary
then we have the about a one.
A one million dollar rivers and
again.
So you had one and the one in
twenty twenty one and you're
telling me the three billion was
up because of
Three million of the four
million in twenty twenty two was
because of restricted language
in the opportunity scholarship.
Mr chair that was for both years
there was restrictive language
for the opportunity scholarship
which date because there is a
reversions the first year was
full time students who are
seeking an associate degree the
second year it was low income
need space in which now all of
our institutions with their
allocations were able to spend
that.
Low income thank you Mr chair
thank you very much of Madam
Herndon Representative Derrick
rose for a second time thank you
Mr chairman.
Based on what I was hearing from
representative Garcia I thought
it might be helpful to the
committee for a little bit of
clarification the opportunity
grant who qualifies for that for
that is it anyone that wants to
go for breast doesn't have one
yet veterans or who are out of
state people could you please
verify that Mr chair
representative absolutely and
it's on page five of your higher
education package it's for an
established New Mexico resident
at pursuing a certificate
associate degree or bachelors
degree you have to enroll in a
minimum of six credit credit
hours and you have to maintain a
two point five GPA so so long as
an individual is a veteran and
in New Mexico resident and meets
that criteria they could qualify
for the opportunity scholarship
and our other programs Secretary
Stewart.
Any veteran of any war or of any
capacity if they served in the
armed forces.
Would qualify and get the school
paid for.
Mr chair so long as they qualify
for the program absolutely thank
you tremendously thank you Mr
secretary Mr Chairman thank you
very much.
Thank you very much for Santa
Cruz okay I don't see any other
questions I guess I just have a
quick two questions first madam
secretary how long has it been
since we've seen both overall
enrollment increases and and
then could you detail the front
the the first year student
increase and take us back to
maybe when we saw that
percentage jumped last in the
state Mr chair for both
statistics it's been a decade so
ten years and for full time
first time degree seeking
freshmen it is nine point eight
percent that we have seen that
increase we have actually
historically seen that number go
down over time in people not
enrolling New Mexico public
higher education institutions
but I think with the push of the
lottery an opportunity
scholarship being fully funded
thank you to you all this is the
first time that New Mexicans are
saying I want to go to school in
New Mexico and I can do that
free great thank thank you madam
secretary and I actually see it
the there's a lot more to affect
the longitudinal data system
which you said that should go
online this year.
Which is great because that'll
finally give us the ability to
track and the C. as folks are
attending using the various
types of financial aid and
scholarship where and how and
whether they're staying second
madam secretary you indicated a
strong executive willingness to
look at guard rails are
guideposts or whatever we want
to talk about so that
opportunity remains sustainable
into the future is that right Mr
chair if I could clarify after
conversations with the governor
we are going to stick with
supporting the opportunity
scholarship act which is a
bipartisan bill that was passed
last year the LFC recommendation
does include guardrails which
they hope to impose an house
bill to the budget bill however
we see that opportunity
scholarships Act is the law of
the land and we hope that you
support that as well thank you
madam secretary I think there's
a lot of room around sort of
fine tuning what we did last
year we see success we see some
financial challenges were in a
strong fiscal place right now so
it makes sense for us to fine
tune in the earlier conversation
where there is a willingness to
do that I think is great but
very exciting to see the
increase in numbers something
that we haven't seen and at
least a decade and so that's
very exciting we're gonna go
ahead we know there's a great
deal of work that has to happen
continuing to sort of bring
these two recommendations
together last for the LFC
recommendation now there is a
higher ed workgroup will go to
by two Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
the LFC recommendation okay
there is second for the.
Yes the motion by by your Dixon
second by Representative delight
Cruz their opposition to
adopting the LFC recommendation
is so Representative.
With the show amongst those are
here Representative Montoya
voting in opposition to that.
Okay thank you madam secretary
now we're really excited to
Invite up.
presidents we're gonna go to our
final piece for the day members
this is our higher education
institutions.
And I if we want to have our
analyst if you want to stay and
then we'll invite up president
shepherd
Mr president how and.
doctor rally.
And what.
How the increase money thank you
for you know next.
Forty.
Thank you Kanye.
From
here.
I don't think this is.
Maybe I'll do my presentation
offered yes the council of.
The I think we're going to the.
You.
Okay we're gonna go ahead now
and.
I have we're gonna go to our
higher education system
we really please have present
separate with the council
university presidents drive out
drive rally I don't know the
order in which you all would
like to proceed we we Sir the
for and this of the members
these are all of the various
institution budgets of will have
a chance many of the questions
including about tuition and
others this will be a an
opportune time to yes are
steamed higher education
leaders.
Thank you chairman small.
In the past once upon a time we
used to present separately
several years ago the
associations came together and
how we're all in higher
education together so this
presentation will be shared that
you should have a.
Power point presentation on your
desk there and you'll see thank
you you'll see that as we go
through it all do some slides
and my colleagues will do some
others some of the other side so
be a joint effort and that way
if you ask me questions and I
don't like it's gonna be one of
my colleagues and if you ask
them the same holds true.
For the new folks here my name
is Joe shepherd I'm president of
western New Mexico university
and I'd like to because we have
a lot of new people on this
particular committee Mr chair
allow me to make some
introductions in terms of my
colleagues in the in the
audience also we also have some
new chancellors and presidents
as well for you to get to know
at eastern New Mexico university
Dr James Johnston and he's very
new coming to us from midwestern
and starting his first year
here.
Also of from
northern we have Hector Balderas
I know for some of you he is not
new but he's new to this was the
Attorney General did a great job
there so now we're happy to have
me here to help us out.
From New Mexico highlands we
have of a president Sam Minner.
From New Mexico institute of
mining and technology we have Dr
Steven wells from New Mexico
State University with Dan are
yes to and from the university
of New Mexico we have Dr Garnett
Stokes Mr chair before I moved
to the community colleges we as
universities also have a number
of our regions here if I could
just the regions who are here
from the version versus please
stand to be recognized.
Thank you all very much for
being here today and I turn it
over to my colleague
chancer of.
Well.
The one that said.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to address you today
I'm showing how preservation
Mexico university in Roswell and
I'm currently the president of
the New Mexico association of
community colleges and I'll go
ahead and introduce our members
as well from in in your route
Ruidoso we have president Ryan
trust for.
From.
NMSU Dona Ana we have doctor
Monica Torrez from NMSU grants
we have more range of those
trevan.
Minimus you element Bordeaux we
have doctor mark called.
You inTaos we have doctor very
good to us.
From you and Gallup we have
doctors of rain as who's unable
to be with us today but you
Valencia is represented by Dr
Samuel assumed and you and Los
Alamos is doctor Mike postal.
And I would turn the floor over
to thank Dr Ali thank you
You Mr chair.
Thanks for having us funded
thank rally I'm president Santa
Fe community college and also
the chair of the New Mexico
independent community colleges
I'd like to quickly introduce
our members to from central New
Mexico president Tracy Hartzler
from Clovis Community College of
acting president robin Jones at
Luna community college president
Edward Martinez at mace lance
community college president
correct bush New Mexico junior
college president there more
at New Mexico military institute
you already know very well Major
General grizzle and also
northern New Mexico college is
part of our secretary to so and
president Hector Balderas from
San Juan college at present
twenty Pendergrass from
southeast New Mexico college our
new college we have president
Kevin beard more and then also
Joe shepherd is part of our
secretary to because western
also has community college
mission so I will return the
back to jail thank you very much
Vicky so over the next four
hours we're gonna go through
this I'm teasing.
Alright.
It is lost all kinds of funding
that statement.
I'm on the next page and we've
had some conversations already
hear some very good
conversations about I NG funding
and I want to tie into this I'm
going to adjust the slide just a
little bit because our some
questions on tuition Mr chair as
well because they are linked
keep in mind for most of our
universities and community
colleges our only sources are
our only major sources of
funding are I NG intuition and
what we have done as a state as
you know as we have provided
more money to higher education
in the sense of from your
perspective but from our
perspective what we've done is
we shifted the cost called
tuition for the student to the
state at least for New Mexican
residents and what that does is
there's a little disconnect
there you ask question or you're
about how we go about our
tuition and how we go about our
fees they're different processes
with with some slight nuances on
the tuition side we take a look
at what we get in appropriations
so the I. N. G. piece in so keep
in mind for every one percent of
online G. is equal to on the
university side about two and a
half percent equal of tuition
would take just two and a half
times but that one percent of
the I. Angie and on the
community college side that's
about a three to three point two
percent depending on the
community college for everyone
percent so for example right now
the LOC a budget is recommending
a one percent and so therefore
that would mean if I wanted to
have two percent on I NG that
would would equal to
approximately a five percent
tuition increase so the more I
need side the less tuition
increase and so forth the other
question that was asked is is
white white is tuition go up
often times we do unfunded
mandates we'll talk about that
in a moment we deal with
compensation Mr chair where
you might find this at an eighty
percent level as is being
proposed where are you E. R. B.
side an eighty five percent
level that means we have to come
up with the twenty percent on
the compensation which is about
one point seven million dollars
from our own funds.
Work on the E. R. B. side would
have to come with about one
point one million dollars based
on the budget being proposed so
far how do we get that if we
only have one other source of
funding you have to get it from
someplace and so the tuition
comes up now here's a
disadvantage for both of us on
the one hand we have the
unfunded mandates on the other
hand you are the the Kaufer so
to speak you are the
appropriators and you're you're
saying but wait the regions are
the ones who have the
constitutional authority to to
set the tuition rate and that is
indeed true so you go along with
your appropriations and all of a
sudden we let's see westerner
whomever increase your tuition
come March and April you're no
longer in session so we need to
we indeed need to come to terms
with how do we how do we manage
that how do we create the courts
we're we're being fair about
this that means for on the I.
Angie side as well as well as us
being fair on the tuition so and
that's an important conversation
Mr chair so in in our particular
case we know that that a five
percent increase think of it
this way a five per percent
increase in I. Angie would
almost to get our need to raise
tuition no that's not true at
all every institution but at
most institutions that would be
thirty five point nine million
but on the LFC budget side of
seven million dollars or one
percent right so that's how you
get your thirty five five times
the seven percent gives you that
thirty five point nine million
but the LFC budget keep in mind
also some other generosity to it
right it has the the
compensation piece I want to I
want to really give us just a
great
Piece of accolades to the LFC
staff to Connor to director Avid
and so forth for recognizing of
moving that that eighty percent
and eighty five percent up
because it used to be in the
seventy to seventy five percent
for making some movements are
there some recognition in the
working very well with higher
education I I just want to
applaud them they're doing a
great job over there in terms of
our base adjustments
now I haven't even talked about
inflation I haven't talked about
utility costs and talk about
anything else and funded but
that's again what's happening is
when the Judy side is not going
up the tuition side in the past
you never really felt that the
students felt that will now
you're paying the students
tuition so you're the you're the
mom and dad and you're saying
Hey wait a second we got to keep
that alive.
The next page views on
compensation in a compensation
flexibility have already kind of
gone through that we are
strongly in favor of
compensation increases I can
tell you at my university which
is a comprehensive meaning we
don't have the Ph.D programs we
go through the master's programs
two research institutions to the
community colleges we literally
have people coming in and cherry
picking our best faculty because
they can't.
Because you're going to pay a
lot more in Texas in Arizona and
California than what we're
paying here many of us are
anywhere from sixty to eighty
five percent of the median of
the median below that in other
words.
That many more schools out there
are coming along and we have to
support our faculty and staff in
terms of their livelihoods in
staying here in New Mexico the
same is true with your be
insurance costs are going up and
so often times you'll see well
we have to raise ERP
contribution to two percent or
one percent etcetera in all we
ask is whatever you do you fully
fund as to the percentage on
compensation in here be just
real quick to understand that
peace why is it that that as a
state you only fund eighty or
eighty five percent and by the
way that's a fair question and
there's a fair answer to it and
the answer is because we as
universities and community
colleges often times have grant
positions that are not part of
the state that their past
throughout the through the state
but we'll have a grant funded
position and it's a
responsibility often times of
the grant or of the auxiliary
entity to fund that that's we're
other fifteen to twenty percent
comes from but nevertheless at
the universities and community
colleges I for one am not in
favor of saying this group gets
a gets a five percent increase
in the competition and this
group does not we try to fund
everybody so there's a a some
two quick answers I think to
some previous questions.
Next page.
The final slide that I have that
will turn it over to my
colleagues is on the reserves
closing fund a year ago.
The legislature wisely selected
to have funded a research fund
of around forty five million
dollars we're asking for another
forty million on top of that and
why that's important and you may
say well research fund how does
that how does that benefit the
state of of New Mexico what it
does is it allows.
Universities to attract research
companies are in do and so forth
and even existing companies to
relocate here or to put their
money here it also allows us to
go aggressively after the
federal funds oftentimes the
federal funds requirement into
closed a deal when we're
competing against us first the
other states out there and I
always pick on taxes and so
forth remember all competing for
the federal funds and so when we
can say well we will we will
find two million toward that
research if you find eight
million toward that research now
we get ten was before we got
nothing so that's what this fund
helps us to do it's it's it's
very powerful also keep in mind
that when we bring in these
companies etcetera it's an
economic development stimulation
we saw and in a previous state I
saw this occur we're actually
truly changed the state of
Florida it was when they created
a fund like this and now the
reserves with flooding down four
we want that research go flying
to New Mexico in a primary
insurance will primarily benefit
are three research institutions
but that's not to say that the
others can't do reserves are.
We have also we're asking for a
ten million dollar
endowment fund and that's just
to continue to to to fund this
indictment so that we can build
that up the provides the reserve
residuals back to the
institution with that Mr chair
of turning it over to Becky to
continue on with campus safety.
Mr chair committee members the
next thing on our
recommendations eight million
dollars for campus safety I
think that's pretty
straightforward request I will
tell you that the origin of that
was a study done by the New
Mexico the
you know New Mexico state police
force to come up with a figure
for our request and this would
include funds for training
campus safety personnel
including robust mental health
training I think that we've
heard conversation already about
the need for mental health
training for everything that I
can hear and all the
conversations I'm part we simply
can't get enough of that right
now but we needed to be done a
highly qualified way also safety
technology which includes things
like electronic locks safety
cameras more surveillance
cameras license plate readers
and other kinds of monitoring
software things that we all need
to keep our campus is safe
because I think we can all agree
that one our number one priority
is to keep our faculty and our
staff and our students safe of
the the next thing that our next
the next part of our request is
these are three support for me
student success and the first
one of these is six million
dollars specifically for mental
health services
Every single one of us has had
an increase in students coming
forward in needing mental health
services even even our faculty
and staff on our campuses who
have been in need of these kinds
of services so we need to have
been an increase in funds for
being able to hire additional
counselors being able to hire
additional staff for this and
also to train a lot of our
personnel that are not direct
service providers on a day to
day basis but still need to be
able to do this and then the
other part of that requested
three million dollars for
wraparound services we've we've
talked about this concept many
times especially over the last
couple of years this concludes
this includes additional support
beyond just straightforward
academic support for students
that would include things like
housing advising assistance in
locating food affordable housing
transportation services but it
also includes services such as
tutoring we know that often
times when our students don't
succeed a lot of times it's
because of a lack of
Representative services that
would help them to have the
additional support that they
need to be successful in their
classes is often not just
directly academic and in the
classrooms where they are.
the next part of our request is
dual credit and I want to thank
secretary Rodriguez for
mentioning dual credit in her
presentation and knowledge
sharing that all the colleges
waive tuition for dual credit
and so we give up about nine
million dollars in in revenue
all together for dual credit I
can tell you that dual credit
students persist at a much
higher rate than our regular for
non dual credit students I guess
we'll call generally at about
eighty five percent that is
extremely high it is not only a
feeder into further higher
education but it really does
give students an equal footing
as they come to various high
schools around the state so are
requests for fifteen million
dollars to help us offset the
cost of the tuition waived and
also to be able to help us
expand so that we can hire more
faculty in those areas and be
able to accept more students and
also to provide the wraparound
services for those particularly
high school students I think
that we as as hired institutions
have to take a lot of that on
instead of just assuming that
that's all going to be taking
care for them at the high school
level and so now I will turn the
presentation back to Sean.
Mr chairman committee members
again thank you for the chance
to speak with you today what
we're looking at on the next
slide is workforce training and
we talk about workforce training
this is non academic training
usually it's shorter term it's
much more quicker to initiate a
program on our campuses in order
to get the community needs our
regional needs met with our
local businesses and so we're
asking for ten million dollars
and workforce training to help
out with things like short term
retention other programs are in
demand by employers and then the
other ask in terms of workforce
training is to establish the
endowment fund and this would be
for ten million dollars to allow
workforce training to continue
into the future this is an
important part of our mission to
in addition to meeting student
needs to to help us meet
community needs and business
needs in our local areas and
with that I'll turn the
presentation back to Joe.
Appreciate that on this
particular order a slide of a
building replacement renewals
what we used to renovate our
buildings there's there's
nothing glamorous about fixing
or of but if you don't fix or of
the rest of the bill is going to
be in pretty bad shape
we're asking for twenty five
million and that is just a drop
in the bucket in terms of the
overall deferred maintenance
that universities and community
colleges have it's it again is
to fix things like the roads the
potholes the roofs the all those
things that have to be done and
this is a good time to do it
So we're we're we're looking for
that I can tell you for example
right now deferred maintenance
just at western is well over
thirty million dollars and we're
asking for twenty five million
for the entire tire state so
there's a lot to do out there
but this is a year to year thing
the other piece that I think is
and we think it's very important
is cybersecurity you seen it
using the fishing you've seen
the ransomware you seen on that
fact whatever institutions not
to become too much with you want
more details highlands a couple
years ago was smack dab in the
middle of that only a few months
ago if it wasn't for one of my
I. T. people western would been
smack dab in the middle of a
ransomware we have to have our
IT guy you happen to be
in there on a on a Sunday for
whatever reason so I suspicious
activity quickly shut it down
but had that not occurred they
they potentially they're trying
to get into some of our our our
our our our systems that would
have been critical in terms of
being able to manage it so we're
looking for eight million
dollars in terms of cyber
security for higher education
John back to you thank you and.
We're we're all one or almost
done.
you talked about the lottery
scholarship an opportunity
scholarship earlier as college
presidents we would encourage
you to the support of students
through scholarships I will tell
you on our campus in rules well
we had about eleven hundred
fifty students to use the
opportunity scholarship this
past year and the cost of that
is intended to be around that
one million dollars the.
The
lottery scholarship also has the
bridge scholarship which helps
students I know there's been
questions about various
categories of individuals it
over there veterans or whether
they're in state out of state
and I can just tell you that
enrollment has increased because
of the opportunity scholarship
and also the continuation Water
scholarship so thank you and
with that alternative actions
for a raft.
Yes very quick.
So again just to recap a couple
of our most significant
priorities and the request for a
minimum of five percent
increased I NG I think Joe gave
you a lot of details about the
how I. Angie funding works for
us in on compensation to fully
fund the request of five percent
I want to thank Connor for his
analysis and explanation for the
essentially unfunded mandate
that becomes part of part of an
in a cost increase to all of us
when the conversation is funded
at eighty or eighty five percent
and the colleges have to pick up
that remaining part and build
that into our budget for next
year which is often a struggle
but you have the rest of our
request before you I want to
thank the committee for the
support that I I'd also like to
thank Secretary Rodriguez for
all her support and her
assistant and also our analyst
Connor Nicole for helping us we
can always go to them for
assistance and I would really
like to recognize that with that
we are happy to stand for any
questions thank you very very
much thanks for remaining up
we're gonna go straight to
questions first of them Baca.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
guys for your presentation I'm
gonna ask just to you know do
some two general orders about
campus safety I did kind of
bring up other concern so remind
me how many higher education
institutions that we have in in
the in New Mexico with.
Mr chair members it is at twenty
nine public higher education
institutions.
Okay so twenty nine.
And all than the eight million
dollars is to address the safety
and security of the twenty nine
institution is that correct Mr
chairman.
Representative Mr chair
representative Baca yes that
would be divided amongst the
institutions.
I I'm not gonna see about doing
the math here but.
The city with the.
That's that's about thirty
thousand what do you what as far
as per institution.
School three hundred three
hundred.
Three hundred thousand dollars
Mr chairman so my question about
it so how how these funds be
allocated to the universities
and the amount is it can be the
same one size fits all amount of
three hundred thousand.
Or how those funds be diverted
or sent out Mr Chairman.
Mr chair representative it would
be a methodology that The New
Mexico higher education
department would determine based
on enrollment probably campus
square footage how large the
campuses I don't know we would
determine that but it isn't a
one size fits all we do take
into account the size of the
higher education institution and
what they have on campus Mr
chairman.
I just added to the.
Block I think another
consideration might be the
status of the campus for example
in Roswell we had a big project
it's just getting ready to be
wrapped up to increase the
exterior lighting and also
security and surveillance
cameras so I think that might be
a consideration as well
depending on where the campus is
in terms of the security
measures.
What you know Mr chairman and
the panel you know as what I
what I'm in my eye in what I'm
in the my district advocate for
my district what I sit in this
chair advocate for all of New
Mexico a secondary students and
and Mr chairman I I do think
that up judging take the size
the UNM even New Mexico state
there's a lot of money this in
regards to by those institutions
which is going to leave a lot of
other smaller institutions
without a lot of money I mean
we're talking about that so
that's that's my concern I want
I do want to say that I think
that needs to be addressed
because Mr chairman every time
we have a tragedy every time we
see what's going on around the
country you know is me as a
parent it mixes it should make
us all of the concern and I
think if we really are ours are
serious about making our schools
better given more people to
rules schools and attend we also
need to provide for safety of
students and staff and visitors
to our campus Mr chairman that's
bluster about.
Is the dual credit
so yet on the on the floor early
this week and I forget what day
it is I I was told it was Friday
My colleague of Representative a
Romero had talked about the dual
credit brought the issue for to
do credit so this fifty million
dollar allocation Mr Chairman
can you tell me
what exactly is gonna be done
because I know that this the
costs are actually shared
between K. twelve and higher
education so can you tell me.
What this money is going to be
used for or the additional
monies are we for us he presents
the so I think I. shaking ahead
of the so can I thought we don't
think we see a pandemic without
but we do see us others some
German so can you just tell me
what this fifty million dollars
and I will say this I totally
support dual credit I think it's
a great opportunity the move the
better we know Mr chairman that
if our students graduate with
college credit.
That they're chances or their
opted for graduating from
college because much greater so
I just want to know is how these
funds are with you sponsored are
intended for and how will that
kind of.
Increase improve the
communication and collaboration
between K. twelve and secondary
or higher it was Mr chair
representative Baca thank you
for that that question because
contrary to popular belief
oftentimes University who's
sharing the majority of the
community college is having the
majority of cost not the
minority of cost even those
school districts part of that
here's how how that works so
under the statute if you're due
credit student you do not have
to pay tuition in under the
statute the school district is
supposed to pay for your text
books now under the statue also
I is University have several
ways to offer that class I can
deal with excess capacity I have
extricity rope that does not
have a cost increase for me but
normally that is not the case
normally have to add an extra
section which means an extra
faculty member so why the same
cost as I would for somebody
who's a regular student money
the biology is biology is
biology.
Sometimes we do the and many
times we do the actual class in
the school district for example
in the high school so we may not
have the building cost but we
still might have a factly costs
are factored member goes are
physically or sometimes we find
a qualified faculty member
within the high school that has
the necessary eighteen graduate
hours and we either augment
their salary and sometimes we
have districts that are generous
in the cover that salary but no
matter how you slice it the
universities are educating the
students and what we get in
return get ready for the number
is about two dollars a credit
hour because we don't get
tuition we don't get the same
reimbursement as we do in terms
of the base in terms or native
students.
Thank you for those answers I do
I do know that the legislation
of the legislative education
study committee will be
monitoring over the next an
obsession so thank you Mr
chairman for the after the
Representative Baca next
Representative occurs.
Thank you Mr chairman.
What is the average cost for a
freshman data complete twelve
hours.
Two semesters at one of our
highly
of NMSU UNM.
Mr Mr Chairman representative so
the average cost varies based on
institution and but I'll give
some examples of from my
knowledge if that would be
helpful on the tuition and fees
side at my institution it's
about sixty four hundred dollars
a year thirty four for example
sake let's so let's just talk
about and I miss you and you and
for they're the they're the big
board and Mister Jorgensen do
you.
Operative this is page one of
eleven of your volume three and
it looks like
Undergraduate.
In district and U. N. M. as
forty six hundred dollars and
MSU is.
Four thousand.
Wirth Mr semester.
Thank you so.
As I have stated earlier when
the secretary was at the desk Mr
chairman.
My concern and I I imagine much
of the committee is concerned is
that it seems that tuition
increases have been steadily
rising and in fact seem to be
outpacing inflation and and I
want to talk about ancient
history almost a gentleman.
When I enrolled at UNM nineteen
seventy five I'm aging myself
big time.
It was under six hundred dollars
per semester but even if you're
wrong about that six hundred
dollars per semester that would
be twelve hundred dollars.
For a year basically.
If you adjust for inflation
clearly what we're charging our
students today far outpaces
inflation and that's what I have
my truck that's what I have
trouble wrapping my mind around
and I I would like to know how
that's happening.
Is there an explanation that you
can find the public because
we're on TV folks.
Mr Chairman representative yes I
can't when we look at inflation
we look at it across the nation
might say it's seven percent
remember we're having to compete
in our sector I'll give an
example of that a finance
professor for an AC is B. school
like are you an Amazon or like
New Mexico status will cost you
straight out of school run a
hundred forty two hundred sixty
thousand a year if you want to
be competitive that price has
since the days that you're in
school has dramatically
increased and by the way person
is the biggest portion of our
budget and so from a sector
perspective you take a look at
Arizona what they pay for their
in state tuition we take a look
at Texas and others we are one
of the lowest in the nation we
might be the lowest in the
nation for tuition.
There are some other factors
involved in that but over in
Arizona if you would like to go
to northern Arizona university
orders under state or our
university of Arizona you're
looking at tuitions that are
pushing fourteen thousand
dollars a year or seven thousand
dollars a semester so that's the
secretary there were and so
therefore they take that money
and then go out and pay those
high salaries etcetera and.
To be competitive we're having
to increase our our tuition
Charmander arrive at the.
That notion of the concept that
you're describing Senator also
factor in the economy of that
individual state whether it's
Texas Colorado New Mexico
California.
So it isn't necessarily apples
to apples is that correct that
is correct you do have to factor
that in so for example
California you have some higher
cost of living you have higher
home prices and so forth but
what we're finding in terms of
factory in where they choose to
go it it is not as as elastic as
what the economics might be and
there.
People tend to resonate if I
offer somebody a hundred fifty
thousand dollars in California
even those higher cost of living
and I offer them and I can only
offer them hundred thirty
thousand they're not willing to
forego that twenty thousand and
they'll go to California at
least what we Fund.
Sherman.
As we move forward and I'm new
to this process but as we move
forward I would like to try to
do the very best that we can as
a body to ensure that that that
those rates of increases are
commensurate with where we are
as a state because otherwise.
You know all formulas is that
it's a formula you can find it
this way and that way.
And it can come out with the
outcome that you kind of wanted
to so I just want to be mindful
of the Mr Chairman and lastly
and I don't know that this is a
question Mr chairman for now but
I would like to have a
discussion later at some point
around capital improvements to
our facilities and growth of the
institutions themselves the
footprint that is being created.
But I'll reserve that for
another day Mr chairman thank
you thank you very much for
percent of the cruise next
remote Representative Trujillo
than Representative Brown thank
you Mr chairman thank you
presidents and chancellors I
really appreciate our meeting
yesterday is really important
for me to listen to you
individually of New York Mexico
but I also appreciated the the
efforts to talk deeply about
what's going on in our
institutions of higher education
of course you heard me say
yesterday Mr chair that my
biggest issue is compensation I
I see you all struggle to try to
pay your your employees but I
see employees also struggling to
to try to keep up with the pace
of the cost of living and one of
the issues of point of concern
that I've had again is how do
you make sure that it it I know
that you're offering five
percent across the board.
And I guess my question is it
does that include
graduate non tenured part time
and the at Jim faculty.
And if it doesn't why not.
I'm Mr chair in the
Representative it does not
typically include particularly
the adjunct you can include non
tenure but it typically would be
a.
It would be a full faculty
position is what that number
includes and so to your point
that is an area that needs to be
addressed.
Mr chairman and and the Dr
shepherd I think it needs to be
addressed in the session and the
reason for that is because.
I've been around a long time and
I've worked as a as a.
As a you representative for the
American federation of teachers
and for the and then for the AFL
CIO and many of the cuts
conversations I've had with
universities when they try to
bargain there there
Issues with with their employees
what ends up happening is they
hire union busting attorneys the
pay enormous amounts to make
sure that supposedly the
university gets the best end of
the deal but the reality is
that.
They don't ever resolved
anything because the tourney is
a one walked away with a lot of
money.
The the issue for me is that
And I've heard it many many
years that and I just faculty.
And so you know the it's like a
constant turnover because you
can't keep them because they
don't know how to make that they
can't make a living the cost of
living in the areas that they're
at.
Fluctuates and you know I've
I've had friends who have had to
go Mr chair to receive food
stamps and help with paying go
their bills and and it whether
they're working five hours or
whatever the amount is that they
work at the at the institutions
it's still not enough to make a
living a lot of the make less of
a living.
Then a than a and educational
system in a public school
classroom and and I'm imploring
you to please let's all figure
it out how do we work you want
to retain and attract these
folks let's make sure that we
pay them a hundred sixty
thousand dollars for a full time
faculty and thirty thousand for
non tenured is is just
unbelievable I I.
I really would like to work with
the Mr chairman online offline
whatever it takes to ensure that
these folks are compensated for
the work that they do they
should not be struggling in an
institution of higher learning
where they're in if you know
with their helping other people
and they themselves are so are
homeless so I appreciate your
listening to me and thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative
next up the brown please.
Thank you Mr chairman so now
we'll get back to campus safety
just a little bit more
this is a topic Mr chair that
has been top of mind for me and
I think a lot of other
legislators were we're all
concerned about people's safety
so you vast Mister chair and and
panel for eight million dollars
and I just want to delve a
little deeper into where you got
that number so
Mr chairman and I the question I
heard that there was a study
done by someone and I think
director really mention that.
Question is was a needs
assessment done where the twenty
nine higher ed institutions each
had the opportunity to tell
whoever did the study what these
institutions think they need for
increasing their campus safety
Mr chair Dr rally Mr chair
Representative Brown I'm not
sure if that was done that that
individual institutions were
surveyed like that that
something that that can be done
and we we actually do have to
report we have to report
national data on safety figures
and we also do we are monitored
by HB do but many of us have had
capital requests in the past few
years that are focused on safety
upgrades and so I think that
does kind of go to the question
I think it was as Shawna
mentioned that we're at varying
levels in terms of what we've
been able to do to make our
campus is safe relative to
technological increases and even
the number of people that we can
hire to be campus safety
officers and that sort of thing
so I I think that obviously that
the need is not the same
everywhere and so we would have
to be very careful to find out
what the need is on our campuses
and I think that looking at
looking at the numbers of
incidents that we report right
now should also be part of that
equation in terms of looking at
what we have to combat as we go
forward and and try to make our
campuses as safe as we can.
Thank you for the information
yes Mister chair Mister shepherd
Mr chair
Representative so to Becky's
point for example.
My campus's upgraded a lot of
the lighting and so for the many
other campuses have of many of
our campuses have a police force
money has six officers were
small campus and so how this
money would work is it go to the
higher education department in
that ask for are fated request
of us to say okay what do you
need in it evaluate that so my
case I might say I know I have a
number of cameras on campus I
know there's some dead spots
might would probably go in that
direction another campus may
have no cameras so they might
actually get more money even
though they might be a smaller
institution in western simply
because of where were
respectively at in other words
we're not at a blank spot
fortunately but we are at a high
needs spot on that but I do want
to put in a plug and I I said
this the other day I think in in
the luncheon I do want to put in
a plug for mental health we can
put all the cameras in the world
that you would like on campus
could all the technology world
if we don't address the mental
health issues a shooter can come
on campus and you're looking at
the re run as opposed to the
prevention.
And Mr chair representative we
do have the law enforcement
retention and recruitment
provide in existence it was
funded at a hundred million last
year although and intentionally
it's only for just holidays in
counties such a sheriff's office
and not state entities because
of that higher education
institutions safety of police
forces are not included in that
however secretary bowing at the
public safety department is open
to exploring that language to
our higher education institution
police departments can indeed be
eligible.
Thank you thank you to the panel
for all that information.
I I did a little research into
some of the safety technology
that's available now I've talked
to police for zoom in my
district and I'm familiar with
license plate readers from my
time on the house transportation
committee so I know a little bit
about that but I also took a
good look at gunfire detection
equipment is very expensive and
there's a license involved and
all that so I bring all of this
up Mr chairman because I really
want this to be a the grass
roots meeting the institutions
saying what they think they need
and I knew they probably do
safety audits and all that but I
just kind of wonder if eight
million is going to be short of
what's really needed at this
time maybe this is the first cut
Mr Chairman there will be of
course more availability of
funding later but I just wanna
make sure we're doing the best
we can with the the eight
million dollars that you
requested so thank you Mr chair
thank you very much from so
Montoya very Representative
Brown Representative Montoya
please.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
panel
One of return to a discussion in
the previous panel one secretary
when you were
representing and I'm gonna go to
Follow up some questioning that
Representative Pettigrew.
Had about our.
Return on investment.
Mr chairman
And then panel
Representative Baca said that
you know what we're sitting in
these chairs were advocating for
students beyond that we're
advocating for the taxpayer.
Especially on probation
so I I would I was
Looking at one of the ways that
return on investment that we can
get other than specifically
saying you need to stay in the
state or how or you can recover
money if you took a job in the
state.
Its programming that we have no
control over we we write a check
to the institutions and
institutions determine.
Programming.
And what is what what are we
going off of what what programs
we can offer
you'll find across across the
panel across the legislature
all of the smaller institutions
that are more close to home.
That do a lot of the work force
training the very specific
training for what.
Our local community is needing
it those those we love our
little institutions because they
are responding to a lot of the
local concerns the larger
institutions
I understand there's things you
can do there we can't do it that
the smaller institutions some of
that is
focusing in on on research and
development things like that
but but I would see Mr chairman.
Some of the programming that's
offered is.
I I would just I hate to say
this way but widely on useful.
There's a lot of degree is that
somebody can attain in New
Mexico that the taxpayers are
going to pay for that there's
really no job not just in New
Mexico but across the country.
There's a lot of programming
that's that's offered at that
unfortunately there's there's
not work at the end of that
rainbow
and and we're asking the
taxpayers to pay for that so I
personally would like to see Mr
chairman I I'd like to see a
little bit of I would like to
see S. actually give you some
discretion.
On how pay is distributed I
don't like across the board pay
raises I don't believe everybody
deserves across the board pay
raise I I would rather see the
institutions have some
flexibility and prioritize and
this is from my standpoint I'd
love to see you prioritized
programming that first off
there's a job potentially in New
Mexico or in the state of the
industry is burgeoning in New
Mexico for along with as was
stated earlier we're recruiting
business to New Mexico and we're
trying to get that business to
locate here that we put
programming in place that would
that would go to go towards that
I'm and and please do not get me
please not miss my efforts here
my questions may seem a little.
Pushy but the first piece of
legislation that I pushed
through was the common naming
and numbering system that
representative right we had a
half past nineteen years before
but had left it open ended as to
let the different institutions
work together and come together
I came in and put a deadline
that's all I did was take his
legislation and put a to be done
by date so that had to happen
that was that was great for our
our our local students who were
staying at a local institution
for two years staying at home
keeping those costs down and
then being able to transfer
those credits this is the one of
the second the things that I did
it wasn't legislation but it was
a priority for me was going and
getting the full time funding
for our nursing consortium so
that that would be fully funded
so that innovative program would
go away which was dependent on
a federal grants or grants from
from benevolent institutions.
I believe in our New Mexico
system but.
I am concerned and I and I think
you've heard it from
Representative Cruz.
That we write a blank check to
the institutions and other than
sitting here before us now and
going over at our budget request
we don't have any any real time
to express concerns.
And so
I do believe that met madam
secretary might have a potential
solution so I'd like talk off
line about the tuition issue.
But.
It can't be from our standpoint
just a blank check we don't
really have any oversight after
that.
All the oversight once we Fund
budgets.
Is the next year.
And so
to that to that end I why do I
do plan to getting together with
you offline then secretary but I
have one more issue and this is
a this is a Mr Chairman last.
Point
We had a a a push
Across the country that we allow
individuals to be addressed how
they want to be addressed.
so when it comes to personal
pronouns and all of that we we
we have allowed people who.
Want to be addressed a certain
way the freedom and not only
that the responsibility of those
around them to try to address
and that way.
We've done the offices with a
particular term equipment and
I've heard it mostly in higher
education.
And it is a widely unpopular
terms by a lot of by a by a
group of folks not by everyone
in the group of those don't get
me wrong Representative will
will try it we I we have I'll go
get another five people on them
I'm closing in on my point and
the term is Latin extra takes.
And it is a widely unpopular
name that is placed on a group
of people.
And among that group of people
who would rather not be called
something individually.
We've done the opposite of what
we've done with personal
pronouns which is personally I
want to be referred to as well
if you're now a a Hispanic.
Or or the Latin for Chicano or
Chicana and Latina whatever you
want to call yourself.
We're not able to call ourselves
that because the institutions
have taken upon themselves to
use this broad term Latin next
renting so just wanna let you
know there's going to be
interesting legislation
basically suggesting that any
institution that is saving state
dollars can't place on an entire
group of people a term.
Or or have or purchase books or
whatever that would use that
term broadly for a group of
people thank that's the opposite
of what we've been doing and
others thank you may think
chairman Representative huh.
Representative earned.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
panels first of all I wanted
thank you each and everyone of
you for these programs is to
present it and I want to just
talk and emphasize really
quickly Mr chair three of them
the first one being your
workforce training in the ten
million dollars that you're
looking at with respect to that
everyone of us has look for plum
are a contractor like tuition
and we don't have they're not
enough of them here but what you
did recognize that there are
fifty one percent of the women
in this us fifty one percent the
population of the state is made
up of women so I want to lift up
and highlight president Tracy
Hartzler who's into has been
putting into place women in the
trades to make sure that we are
looking at women to fill these
positions because they can do it
and not only it can they do it
but they get paid very well so I
am asking you specifically how
do you determine that you know
you said that there was a a
funding mechanism but how much
money is going to go I would
like to see it in the in to say
in them because of the program
that they're putting in place
right now.
I'll I'll look for that for that
for that list the second item
I'd like to look at is very very
absolutely
mention mental health on more
than one and how more than one
occasion and how important it is
to have mental health and to
train a mental health providers
and health providers so one of
the things that you have the
opportunity to do is to have
internships for your those
students who are studying
psychology sociology of psych
and psychology behavioral health
in our middle schools and high
schools because we're looking to
put mental health rooms in every
middle and high school in the
state of New Mexico so I'm
asking you specifically if you
look at that six million dollars
the to make sure that you put
that into mental health
internships that we are training
the students in the areas of
mental health and then been
hopefully they will stay in the
state of New Mexico so with that
we will grow our mental health
providers and then finally Mr
chair members of the panel you
look you talked about an
increase of forty million
dollars for research and so my
question to you is are you
bringing students into this
research that you want to and
engage in and where is the list
of the research that you're
doing and so that we are paying
our students in terms of the
reserves and growing our state
in areas in which we need to
grow it so Mister chair members
of the panel hope you will
consider my recommendations
strongly.
Thank thank you Representative
Vernon let's go now to
Representative.
Thank you thank you
Representative heard thank you
Mr chair
I'm I'm happy to follow you in
your because it lets you what I
want to commend you on and and
in support of what you're doing
Mr chair in your budget is is
point for student success in
that six million dollars in that
three million dollars that
you're putting towards those
efforts specially behind
behavioural health asset little
prematurely to the secretary
Looking to do with the.
But the budget money towards
where we really need to meet our
students where they are so I
wanted to add to that Mr chair
and ask about
were you with the housing and
child care for our students
especially with our returning
students who need to have these
needs Mr chair.
Mr chair Representative Lujan
primarily housing course are are
at the universities of course
you heard from our military
academy that all their students
are housed that's a little
different of a deal that that
we're referring to
Primarily most of our student
housing is for your fresh out of
college kind of kid who is
single does not have children a
number of us have what we term
as as
Koox Mexico occupancy housing as
opposed to Mary housing because
you may not you may have a child
but not be married or you may
have be a couple and have a
child to those more apartment
settings but primarily the the
private market handles a lot of
that and I in and I say that
because the primary the the
private market I don't think is
doing a good job with that
market I mean I think that's a
fair question but I think that
is an area that is underserved
in terms of housing and Mr chair
and representative if I may I
think also one thing to consider
on the second part of your
question regarding child
development many of the campuses
have child development centers
that are also tied into early
childhood programs that are
creating the future generation
of teachers and educators so
there are some campuses around
the state that do have the
service and as a matter of fact
Mr chair and and Representative
at again it and ours particular
school number of other schools
our students we talk about fees
our students pay a fee that
actually goes to allow students
to have their children for free
or at a very reduced depending
on the income level in our child
development center so we do have
programs like that and we also
find also find the the family
mental health component because
it's more than just simply
having a kid come up and show up
and the baby sat for six eight
hours often times there's some
other issues that we need to
make.
Chair representative sorry just
one more thing one of our
institutions the flagship
university the university of New
Mexico did a student basic needs
survey we're now doing because
of your health the legislature
and the governor and state wide
food security and basic needs
survey which will include
housing because we need more
data to answer your very
question in the executive budget
recommendations there is a
hundred million dollar proposal
to go towards housing and this
survey will be part of those
findings.
Thank you thank you at just one
more thing Mr chair thank you
for those answers I think
there's the expansion of of
those needs for success for two
for students especially those
that want to come back to finish
their degrees is really
important and I'll just remind
our our
R. or Santa Fe community college
about the guaranteed income
program that we have been
waiting for act for information
again on that program and and
how successful it's been
the other thing I want to a flag
on here the centers for
excellence or talking about
research institutes and I don't
I'm trying to find here how NM.
And I want to say thank you for
the research institute and
sustainable agriculture that
we're looking at as a program at
northern New Mexico of college
and I I think we have
Hector Balderas our president
here we haven't seen before but
thank you for being here Sir I I
want to commend you on that
program that you have there and
how that is reflective specially
I guess I'm a target and I miss
you and talk about and M. D. a
house in the NM dust budget
reflected because it is.
It is a cabinet level
HSD organized under NMAA used to
where's that reflected in the
budget Mr chair Mr Chairman
representative Lujan of you turn
to page fifteen of your packet.
One oh six
One of seven one way that is
Department bag agricultural.
Representative.
Those are all component units
within NMAA you Department of ad
specifically under the record
got about a three percent
increases that was
designed to be commensurate
overall I. Angie increases that
we saw in the for the rest of
the institutions I NG.
Thank you Mr I really appreciate
that I want to just maybe talk
off line a little bit about that
their budget how this this is
really unique and some of the
things that they're doing their
that are integrated into
intimacy would have
relationships with that budget
is reflected thank you Mr chair
accretion time thank you very
much Representative Lujan next
Representative Garrett than
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
everybody for being here I think
we should have things so this is
a different departments come in
we play their music just.
here's my question Mr chair
your questions but then I
realize my real question is how
are you doing grant writing to
all universities and colleges
have a central office working
with broadband we realize that
there's millions of dollars that
we haven't gotten because
there's not someone with their
you know down to the polls so
we're talking about campus
safety mental health service
wraparound services is there a
central high level clearing
house in H. U. D. or any place
that's really looking at all the
requests that can be to help us
provide funding streams trailer
to try early childhood education
funding streams for all our
higher education institutions
and needs.
Mr chair Representative Garrett
also take a stab at that so now
it's it's really not very
centralized there is some
collaboration and that the
higher education department very
often will send us
announcements for requests that
they think different colleges
would be uniquely suited or that
all of us would be eligible to
apply for there are also
different organizations within
all of our regions that have
regional type requests and they
will send out grant grant
announcement but I will admit
that this is a very I'm even
effort depending upon the
capacity of the college of
course you know large university
has generally a large staff that
are just dedicated to that
I I would say that that's an
area that it would be good for
us to collaborate on and I would
say that the and I within the
community college secretary and
our chess organization grant
writing collaborating on grant
writing offices one of the
projects that we have discussed
with a lot of seriousness and I
expect that we'll be able to
leverage something in in the
near future.
Mr chair representative the
department of finance and
administration is the one who
notifies the higher education
department about grants that are
higher education institutions
are special schools can be
eligible for but like president
rally said I'm as far as the
institutions are concerned not
all of them have the capacity or
centralized office that can do
that for them thank you Mr
chairman every but I think we
really have to develop that I no
Representative Dixon had a bill
that needs to be expanded and
also our congressional I mean I
love my congresswoman it's like
every day I see we got all this
money but I'm sitting there okay
there's a lot of money that is
discretionary for our senators
and Congress people just like we
have little small pots of money
so it just seems like we've as a
state need to focus on that
thank you thank you that's my
only question you very much for
your Representative Pettigrew
please.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
appreciate you offered me an
hour for questions.
With our focus on over the
remainder of the there you go
there and go over the remainder
we live in February seventeenth
Chairman that again I I'm not
sure how to approach some of the
things
I guess I'm gonna go with the
easy one first.
Chairman presenters page ten of
the handout higher education
priorities have eight million
dollars for cyber security.
What Chairman like to ensure for
sure get some level of currents
that.
That money was.
The great apply and and.
Targeted very specifically in
conjunction with conversations
with Raja.
With the department would do it.
Which is the head of cyber
security for the state of New
Mexico.
Can you thank you Representative
Pettigrew it the coordination
for with the department of
information technology around
cybersecurity there's two parts
of the coordination we have a
group called checks which makes
a all the universities and so
forth and they come together and
develop these very strategies
including the community colleges
and then we work closely with
our secretaries wells with the
secretary of do it to make sure
that that that maintains its
symmetry.
I.
Chairman I have thank you for
the answer a I'm pretty.
I'm not sure how to get to this
one but if none of the four to
five million to clean up the
river I'm a you however process
of paper real quick so we can
that will come Representative
Sierra Representative Pettigrew
we are gonna do twenty minutes
of public comment after but
let's keep on this so you to
please.
Back great for the last
infiltration here the agency
that got infiltrated
without where because forty five
million dollars to fix so you're
asking for eight million for all
your institutions is that
enough.
Remember It because fortify
millions to fix but it could
cost far less to prevent those
are two different pieces there
you are correct that if we don't
do something about it multiply
four to five times twenty nine
and we have a completely
different problem and so what we
want to do is is fix it also
keep in mind that universities
and so forth are separate to a
certain extent from from do it
do it is handling it the state
agency level we're our own
constitution by each of us have
our own I. T. departments and
security apartments and so forth
but this is by no stretch of
imagination is this enough but
we have to start somewhere this
is the bite of the elephant as
opposed the elephants off.
Thank you chairman thank you for
that answer.
Really not a simplistic thinker
but I can at I have a.
Concept of keeping it supple I
would put the person in charge
of cybersecurity for the state
of New Mexico.
Chairman presenters efficient
didn't have a seat at the table
I have a problem with that.
So.
The take that for what it's
worth but
that's a concern for me.
chairman.
During the Representative boxes
questions yes Pacific question
about the capitol security and I
and safety and I I and and then
Representative Brown followed it
up with some other ones.
I think that's one of the
critical things that we can look
at
I had a concern with the answer
I the I heard.
I think it was from secretary of
reduces the the answer would be
with respect to how that would
get allocated maybe based on
size maybe be solicit student
population I don't know.
And that concerns me because
that.
Chairman and presenters that
tells me that that number just
could be a pie in the sky number
the I will start with a million
but tells us on.
and and if that's the case I
have a problem with that so when
I hear an answer that comes from
a budget number we're asking for
this part of the answer is I
don't know that concerns me.
So and I'm just gonna leave that
at that
We did talk a little bit about
law enforcement in I think one
of the statements was the from
the passed legislation that we
had that we unintentionally left
out of the school no I read the
bill trust me those intentional.
It was intentional so yes maybe
we need to go back and fill that
in we we discuss that and so but
that was intentional and and
in this when a bill that I wrote
so I can just tell you I went
through the discussions I listen
to the debates.
Finally chairman the one that
really kicks me.
We talked about our I heard
testimony that a new qualified
finance instructor.
Would be were somewhere between
a hundred and forty two hundred
sixty million and and basically
our.
Chairman this is the one
thousand.
About million thousand.
I felt that up to
German this is the one that in I
truly want to dive into because
then it gives me a picture of
where we're looking at from an
instructor basically standpoint
so qualifications for somebody
to come in.
At a base salary of a hundred
forty thousand.
Mr Chairman representative.
In in the world of higher
education you have different
levels for example an AACSB
accredited business school is
that is the gold standard of the
business schools and so they're
going to attract a far higher.
compensated faculty member
because you're competing with
Wall Street they're competing
with the the private sector the
corporate finance people and so
as a result of that that's what
the market is doing they're also
competing with the university of
Texas for the community
university California and that's
what those institutions are
paying and that the
qualification is a PhD typically
in finance or of that field.
Chairman.
I appreciate that answer so what
you're telling me is that as an
eighteen year old I can graduate
high school negative four year
degree.
And the defense more I can
determine masters in one year
actor my PhD I can be out by
twenty six having no education
ever have no real world
experience and go teach the rest
of the children that are coming
to school about finance yes Sir.
We're gonna pay them a hundred
and forty thousand dollars a
year to because that's what the
market is is is and remember I'm
sorry my apologies Mr chair
thank you.
And I apologize for that and so
there's.
A little bit.
I hope besides me hopefully
there's several people in this
room that have concern with
that.
Chairman
presenters I'm hoping that we're
we're we're trying to find a way
to focus some real world
experience in there
I can hire somebody to crunch
numbers.
This fresh out of school.
Chairman I can't hire somebody.
To teach something that the only
thing they've ever done those
experiences from a book and that
concerns me and if we're doing
that chairman presenters are
higher education system there's
a flaw so more than that concept
thank you chairman are you about
thank you very much
Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll make
it real quick of the shepherd I
have one question if I give
money to I'm gonna use my own
branch college grants if I give
a couple of the money does that
have to be good okay the main
branch of the college what can
we do.
Provided me back up Mr chair say
we need a building.
We get enough funding for.
The branch of to go to the main
branch.
Some in the mail because to do.
The gate okay so Mr chair
representative Garcia I'd be
glad to answer that question
from the branch campus
perspective and I would say
between eastern New Mexico
university you and and and New
Mexico state there may be some
differences I can give your
example so that funding would
come to our campus for the
project and we would be the ones
responsible for it on our campus
we would consult with the main
campus in terms of expenditures
that go over the amounts of the
branch campus present is allowed
to spend so there is some
collaboration with the money
does in our instance come to the
branch campuses.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
want to clarify.
The process you know.
I would like for my community
called mycology branch to give
the bigger but I wanna make sure
that if I get funding for a the
there are right with the.
President that branch or we're
running the ranch to make sure
that that money doesn't go
somewhere else due to the fact
that the main branch din of
COVID thank the thank you Mr
thank you very much
Representative Garcia I don't
see any other questions thank
you all very much and so I I I
have a couple of I have a couple
of quick questions first madam
secretary going back to
something that brought up by
Representative Lujan we have a
number of state agencies that
are attached through higher
education so we that's
department of agriculture your
of the geology there's a number
that are attached to a number of
different institutions around
the state.
do are those is the pay or are.
Can we look at what the pay
rates are for those state
agencies.
So that we will we're taking a
look at at.
Mr chair we can absolutely look
into that we can work with that
because I state agencies we like
to call them that are higher
education institutions and ask
him what the compensation cost
compensation increase would be
to them and then deliver that to
the committee thank you madam
secretary very helpful we have
constituents all over the state
that depend upon the department
of agriculture that work with
the bureau of geology that are
engaged with institutions with
the extension service that works
with the number of folks so I I
appreciate that second
The to the institution has have
you all seen enrollment inclines
increases since opportunity was
instituted Mr chair the answer
is yes right now I I think it's
a point that bears repeating
we've got a decade
without seeing declining rates
of higher education and whether
that's a a two year degree
a certificate or a four year
degree we're we've seen a
significant rebound madam
secretary.
With the ten point nine percent
first year increase and you said
that was a first year no college
it was that right the so these
are is essentially New Mexico
fresh new students Mr chair it's
full time first time full time
so you're absolutely right a
freshman student with no college
experience great thank thank you
madam secretary and with the
longitudinal data system kind of
coming up online will we be able
at least by this time next year
if not sooner to be able to sort
of ask questions about for those
new students are they they are
are they staying in state are
they taking jobs here in the
state are they expanding their
case their class that are they
decreasing it will be able to
ask you those questions in the
have data on some of those areas
Mr chair there will be about
forty to fifty data samples in
the summer of twenty twenty
three this year one of them
include financial aid from the
higher education department and
with that data looks like I
think we also have ten other
title tiles in our agency PED
has the most given that they
have three hundred thousand
students but we can give you
some preliminary information
based off of those tiles and
then in twenty twenty four after
the next legislative session is
where we can really dive into
the nitty gritty of those
questions that you're asking and
sinking them together thank you
madam secretary and I think
to the institutions and and has
been and I think we appreciate
that you're presenting to us as
associations even as you
Representative diverse areas and
very different areas of the
state.
The more data we have the better
I think
so we'll leave that madam
secretary I know we have our
research institutions here the
graduate students who are in
these some of the research
institutions they have some of
the highest potential sort of if
you will economic viability
economic opportunity economic
maybe even responsibility they
can offer to the state they're
at the end of their education
very highly trained is it fair
to see those graduate students
is sort of core parts of our
economic growth and economic
diversification.
Mr chair I think the general
answer from all of us would be
just that great I I I certainly
share that and seen it so madam
secretary and and this is
especially for research
institutions we we have I think
we've heard a few of the stories
yeah we have graduate students
perhaps with families who are
unable to pay bills while they
are researching some of the most
important areas whether relates
to water to food to energy
they're a key part of our
sustainable successful future
yet they're having to maybe work
two and three jobs in addition
to doing all of their graduate
responsibility so madam
secretary and Mister Jorgensen
if you want to add anything
here.
Do we have opportunities
statewide to sort of look at
support for those sort of key
areas graduate students being
one that's in of particular
interest.
Mr chair yes there's two there's
two places you'll find in the
LFC recommendation that I think
speak directly to that
one there's twenty million
dollars in and down funded that
would cover
scholarships particularly around
master's level social work
we talked a lot about mental
health and that is that is a big
part of this record the other
area you'll see there's a five
million dollar nonrecurring is a
special appropriation
and that is directed for
masters level students who are
graduates of New Mexico high
schools who are studying stem
and health care fields and and
so I'd say those are the the two
main graduate education
components in the and the LFC
budget right now.
Thank you Mr during cement
secretary Mr chair in the
executive budget recommendations
there's a graduate scholarship
act which has nearly half a
million dollars in it currently
in that recommendation also
there is a special appropriation
request from New Mexico State
University that the executive
supported in the amount of
fifteen million dollars for a
graduate student endowment thank
thank you madam secretary thank
you Mr Jorgensen sounds like
there there there there are
significant expenditures
slightly different although
complementary approaches from
the executive and the of the LFC
so that's clearly an area
hopefully a of additional work
President separate thank you Mr
Mr chair a recommendation is
also you might want to take a
look at for your support of both
the the research fund allowing
more flexibility to the research
institutions to use that toward
their graduate students and in
their support thank thank you
for that
the.
Okay and I think panel
I think this is a question as we
look to the future at here in
New Mexico yeah our our bureau
of geology just taken coming
back again to New Mexico tech
they do extraordinary work we're
now the second largest
petroleum producer fastest
growing that there is a huge
sort of intersection of
opportunity and challenge
is it fair to say you know with
the last ten years we've seen
enrollment declines we finally
saw that rivers this past year.
Higher education has absorbed a
significant amount of the cost
cutting that the state is had to
engage in.
Preview no previous to this
administration and so.
If this is more for the council
university presidents president
is there opportunity to sort of
look statewide at institutions
and asked the question in
addition to our formula dollars
in addition to opportunity and
lottery.
Taking a look at the mission and
and and and sort of strengths of
institutions and us do we have
to do a little bit more if we
have a little bit more to to
sort of support them in their
key areas of expertise Mr chair
thank you for that question the
simple answer is absolutely if
we take a look at other states
and so forth they tend to look
at you universities uniquely for
example we have New Mexico tech
who is uniquely engaged in
technology we should look at
them in that way in engineering
and so for that are far more
costly than let's say my
programs over western New Mexico
university in the humanities or
business similarly will flagship
institutions should be uniquely
look at in terms of other
flagship or land grant
institution and so forth so I
think that is an endeavor
because when the formula was
created or changed in two
thousand and twelve keep in mind
your performance pieces only on
about five percent in the base
is is what it is I think
sometimes needs to be looked a
little closer.
That thank you very much I I
think I I I tend to absolutely
agree and I think it's great
that we're looking at we're
looking at it from a statewide
perspective finally there's been
a an emphasis on a sort of a
really good conversation around
tuition and fees with our
increased state support.
As you made the point
the opportunity scholarship
really shifted the the part of
the financial burden to the
state and and that burden
perhaps being lifted off of
families allowed many more to go
into higher education but it
didn't necessarily this the
instruction in general the I.
Angie it sounds like that's a
key area of long term
sustainable support for your
institutions is and so I I guess
I will look forward to how we
balance the two madam secretary
I think a bit of it comes back
to.
The the the some of the whether
we want to calm guardrails
guideposts or others with
opportunity that's clearly I
mean.
Different ways to look at it but
for the first time we're
starting to see New Mexicans go
back in the higher education and
with the guidance of many on
this committee the workforce
certificates for tracking for
welding for others those are now
credit bearing instruments that
bring resources to the
institutions who offer them
while at the same time training
those New Mexicans and get those
certificates to go right into
the workforce so this is a point
of of light of hope but one
where we have to be very.
Your closely balance our costs
with that we know there's work
to do we do want to look at the
the LFC recommendation although
there's seeing a lot of
crossover in areas.
Correct.
But with Mr chair I would move
the LFC recommendation.
Okay there's a motion for the
Aussie recommendation second
from Representative daylight
Cruz thank you all very much we
want to transition right into
public input.
If folks out yes sorry.
Is there a please raise your
hand if you're in opposition to
that motion.
Great please reflect
Representative month in
opposition thank you
Representative Montoya I
apologize.
State.
Hey as you we're we're gonna go
into public input.
If folks want to stay.
Now your fund.
Hey.
Clear it again you're not
required to get public input I
think.
But if if you're intended to
leave please head out of the
room so that we can make sure we
know what's going if you want to
get public input please come on
up to the microphones we've done
this for two minutes.
And
Please go right ahead and just
tell us your name.
Chair if I may the I. if you
wouldn't mind sitting at the
microphone please.
Good afternoon legislators my
name is Ian may the
undergraduate student body
president at the university of
New Mexico I'd like to briefly
speak on what opportunity means
for UNM students opportunity for
our students is being able to
stop working their second jobs
so they can go to bed at a
reasonable time before their
eight AM next morning.
Opportunity is for the students
brought into our institution in
recent enrollment increases to
finally be able to afford
college I cannot pretend to
understand the breadth of what
opportunity means to the
students studying at UNM and
learning in our state except
except for simply a lot.
In conjunction with many of the
efforts included here in nine
fifty of like mental health
housing and other basic needs
the scholarship and the lottery
scholarship mean real
opportunity and access and can
change the lives for a student
learners in our state.
Legislators I would love to
follow up with any of you with a
joint letter from myself yes
UNM's vice president NMSU
student body president and New
Mexico tech student body
president expressing similar
sentiments finally I would be
remiss if I didn't put in a good
word from my students at the
crowd in graduate school for the
graduate support scholarship who
had to have back to Albuquerque
thank you Sir thank you very
much.
All right
I I don't necessarily see any
other public input thanks to
everyone who's here today we
deeply appreciate it thank you
committee members for your
incredible work we'll see
everybody with Brett will have
breakfast burritos and coffee
