Representative Baca.
Representative Brown.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Dell.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Garrett,
Representative Hernandez,
Representative Herndon.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Little.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sariana.
Representative Silva.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Chairs small.
OK, uh, thanks, everyone. We're
gonna go ahead and get started,
uh, first with.
Department, thank you for being
here. Sorry we had to
reschedule, but glad we can do
it when everybody's fresh. We'll
start uh with Kelly and um
Missaer, great to see you, uh,
Kelly, take us away. Tell us
where to look.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Kelly Clar
with the Legislative Finance
Committee, were on agency code
670,670.
The Veteran Services department
with me today is Secretary
Herrera, and my counterpart from
DFA, Miss Laurie Sciacca.
With that I'll begin the
presentations, so they're is.
For all, almost a $2.2 million
difference between the two
recommendations in all revenues,
in general fun though, that's
slightly higher at about $2.4
million.
Almost all of that, uh,
difference is for two things.
Um, the executive recommendation
was higher to uh
Pay for additional pay
increases. So of that 2.4, about
1.5 is for pay for current
personnel.
And then the rest of the 2.4 is
for an expansion for the Tao
Cemetery, I would note that that
was not included in the LFC
request or the request from the
agency to the LFC, so we were
unable to analyze that or put it
in our recommendation just
because it didn't come into the
request. Um,
The executive also has language
regarding the Veterans Cemetery
expansion that that money is
contingent on the federal
government.
Um, approving that, and
I will note that the LFC did
have an expansion for personnel,
um, of $110,000 which was not
included in the executive
recommendation.
If I could turn you to page 5 of
your packet, page 5, which is
the differences between your
non-recurring revenues. Again,
you're not acting on the special
supplementals or deficiencies.
This is just an information item
for you to consider.
Sorry.
Can't breathe.
Um, so in these non-recurring
revenues, um, both
recommendations included 881,000
for deficiency that
The department has had on their
books for several years now, so
both recommendations include
getting that off the books and
paying for that.
Both recommendations include
$200,000 for traditional housing
services and the executive
recommendation includes 250,000.
For outreach for rural and
underserved veterans, and with
that, I will turn it over to my
counterpart for any additional
comments. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
thank you, Kelly. I would like
to just reiterate that $11
million for the Tao Cemetery. It
is a governor uh priority. The
agency provided a
An approximate breakdown of how
that would look, and it would be
about 400,000 in the 200s
category, which would be to
support the necessary additional
staff should this um not be
covered by the federal
government, 100,000 and the 300s
and 500,000 in the 400s, um.
As Kelly mentioned, the majority
of the difference is in the
200s, um, about a million just
shy of $1.1 million of that is
for the VSO um reclassification
that has already taken place in
an attempt to prevent the
federal government, the VA from
Poaching
Or yeahSOs, um,
With that, I will pass it over
to um Secretary Herrera for his
presentation.
Uh, good afternoon, uh, chair,
committee members. Thank you for
the opportunity to, to brief you
today.
Um
Again, just want to reiterate a
few of the points that were
brought up. I know already some
the inconsistencies between a
couple of the budgets. The uh
difference between the exact
recommendation and the LFC was
almost $2.2 million. And if you,
the presentation we provided you
on page 4 is basically a quick
breakdown on that presentation.
Um, which, uh, sees the salary
and benefits, contractual
services, and the operational
costs of, of what is not.
Gonna be covered. And as uh Miss
Saka, um,
Alluded to, we did a complete
realignment of our VSOs last,
uh, when I first came on board,
that was a, a mandate from
everybody that we do something
to assist our VSOs with the, uh,
fair and equitable pay. We got
them uh completely reclassified
into their own uh classification
and upgraded their pace
significantly.
This year we are are diverting
funds to cover that. And it's,
and it's an imperative that we
get made whole on our, on our
payroll.
To ensure that we are continue
to maintain that, and I've been
included
The rest of the agency in these
realignments for the last 5 to 7
years, the realignments of many
of our positions were not.
Taking care of and if we're
gonna continue to have the
specialty personnel in some of
these very difficult jobs we
have to.
Continue to pay and retain these
these employees and um it's an
imperative that we, we, uh, be
made to hold there.
Or the cemetery, um, the point
of contention and the contingent
language for the Tao Cemetery of
$1 million.
The federal government will not
will not be making that a VA
funded cemetery.
Because it falls within the
concentric circles between angel
Fire and Santa Fe. They've made
that determination and it's been
appealed and they've upheld
that.
Because the Tao Cemetery was uh
uh continued it, it's, it's, uh,
the, the, the build out with
with state funds and we did
consult with them to ensure that
they did meet all the federal
requirements should the VA.
Uh, vote for that, but at this
juncture, the VA is not going to
undertake that as a VA funded
cemetery. So it will
Either state county cemetery as
it is right now, and they are
looking at about a year and a
half of feasibility to continue
to run that, uh, without any
assistance from the state.
And I believe now before we open
the doors officially, that um
that the state
Take this over as a state
cemetery so we can set the stage
for and the foundations for
On the proper operation from the
get-go, and we get the employees
properly trained and certified.
Um, for the services that they
would be accomplishing, and
allow us to then move forward
with uh with the
Complete assumption of the land
and the operations of that
cemetery.
Um, I know a million dollars
seems like a lot of money right
now, but that will not be a year
to year.
Uh, recurring costs once we get
this established and make sure
that everything's in place.
We're looking at about a
$450,000 operations costs year
to year, which is comparable to
the cemeteries that we currently
run.
Um, so I, I think it's, um,
an opportunity for us to take
care of our, our veterans in New
Mexico and and continue to keep
that in an operational capacity.
And with that, um, I do.
Um, highly request that the
executive budget
Be considered here.
Based on the personnel and the
uh assumption of the operations
of the of the town cemetery and
the services that we provide.
We've taken on new programs in
the past. I know that a lot of
people think that we've grown
very quickly, and I'm glad for
that. Last year we had a 22%
growth because of the efforts of
our legislative body and giving
us the additional uh veteran
service officers and I will tell
you that um.
With the reclassification and
the authorizations that you have
authorized us to do, we have
gotten some very high quality
candidates that have applied for
our positions and are, are
moving our agency forward in the
direction that we all intended
for our veterans.
And with that, I stand for
questions.
Great. Thank you very much, Mr.
Secretary. We're gonna go
straight to questions starting
with Representative Herrera,
then Representative Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you so much for your
presentation. I was at the grand
opening of the of the veterans
cemetery. It is one of the most
beautiful.
Places I have ever been to, it
really is. They did a
spectacular job, and I just want
to say the community of Taos.
And the and all the veterans in
the North really worked on this
for I wanna say 20 years they've
been working on this, and to see
the culmination of that effort
was extraordinary. There must
have been 2000 people that
turned out, every veteran in the
north came there and I just
can't tell you, it sits in the
middle, the land was donated by
the county, and then, and then
gradually they've been building
this up over the years, and it
is, it is really um
A place of reverence as the only
way I can explain it, you feel
like there's nothing.
But you standing in the middle
of a circle of mountains.
And this beautiful ceremony,
this beautiful cemetery that
You look off in the distance and
all you see are mountains and
it's like.
It's like you're isolated from
the whole world. It's, it's just
this incredible place, so I
would, I would really encourage
this committee to vote for this,
um, it's, it's been a struggle.
It's, uh, but it has been built
and supported by community
members and, you know, we have
in the north our communities
have.
Uh, many more veterans, really
in rural communities, than you
do in, in urban areas. I, I just
want to say it's um percentage
wise, it's just really uh
As a commanding presence and um
It, it was an extraordinary day
and it's an extraordinary feat
uh for the people who built
this, and I, I hope we can
support the executive on this,
Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Sanchez. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I just also want
to bring up the cemetery. I
know, uh, the cemetery in Santa
Fe is filling up. I know this
was an issue, the top cemetery,
uh.
Mr. Francis Cordois from Taos
and a lot of other veterans have
uh.
Really made this a huge
initiative. It's been going on
for about 5 years now or longer?
So I, I think it'd be great if
we can help get this over the
fence and uh finally get this
piece done. Uh, second thing,
Mr. Chair, I'd like to ask about
the VSOs. I know in the past,
uh, myself and uh Ref Garcia at
the time, probably 34 years ago,
maybe 5 years ago. We have to
tell your predecessor to come
back and ask for more money for
VSOs.
Uh, how many VSOs do you have
now compared to what you had uh
4 years ago approximately.
Well,
uh, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative Sanchez, I'll
just take a swag. I wasn't here
4 years ago, but based on some
of the historical references, we
were at 17 to 20 VSOs and we are
currently at 33 with all
supervisory personnel that we
have now.
Um, and so it's been a, a huge
undertaking and we appreciate
the support.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'd also
like to uh ask uh.
I know at the time, uh, there
was concerns with some of your
VSOs with their uh.
Response time and just uh
getting back to people, but I
haven't got complaints in a
while, so I'm, I'm hopeful that
it's gotten better, uh, Mr.
Chair, I'd just like to, uh,
As that we do uh help them out
on this or look at it, uh.
It's a critical resource for our
veterans, especially the ones
that come back from combat that
have issues, uh, these are the,
the frontline people that helped
them.
Get those services they need, so
I, I hope we can take a look at
that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Sanchez. Next,
we're going to Representative
Saraana and then represent
Little. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
and thank you for your
presentation. Um, I'll just
piggyback on what um
Representative Sanchez said as
far as VSOs right now because of
the pact act, there are even
more important than ever, right?
They're getting even more work.
Can you explain that a little
bit?
Mr. Chair, a Representative
Sanana,
the, the, the, the pack Jack
that was uh put, put in place
two years ago and obviously,
that was a lot of presumptive
conditions, which provided for a
lot of our, our, uh, older
veterans, Vietnam veterans to
come forward with some uh
conditions that had previously
been um not supported for their
disabilities, the PACA made
these presumptive and were able
to be moved forward and since
then they've had several
different uh versions of that
fact that that are adding on for
either
medical care or for
compensation. So we continue to
have a steady flow of of
veterans coming through and with
our outreach efforts, which has
been imperative for us to
continue to educate our
veterans. We've seen an uptick
in in our number of, of touch
points and that is depicted, um,
If you do have the presentation
numbers there, I will tell you
that is on page.
10 of your field services there
and you'll see just in quarter 1
and quarter 2, the number of
touch points we're having with
veterans up to this point. And,
um, I, I, I think that uh the
Incidents of of continued
outreach is, has certainly
increased our numbers and the
necessary
Oh
Interactions with with our
veterans and
I will say that our, our VSOs
don't just start with a, a quick
cursory review and submit the
first claim they can to get any
rating. They do a very
comprehensive approach, and
we're getting back from very
high ratings on our, on our
first shot here, you know, uh,
60, 70% versus um when we're
doing it too quickly just to
Check the box, essentially, we
were doing a very comprehensive
uh job and making sure that our
veterans get the, the most
benefit and we're getting a
comprehensive return.
Oops, Mr. Chairman, so it's
really important you have them
because once they get really
good at their job and can help
all these veterans that are
coming forward. We don't want to
poach. We, we don't want them
taken by any state or other
federal federal agency, right?
Correct.
Uh, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Sarata, that is
correct. And that's why we
worked so diligently to get
these, these new classifications
done, we are competitive or more
uh better compensation now than
some of our federal
counterparts, and I believe
that's had a, a, a very good
impact on the quality of our
applicants and the people who
are coming to our jobs right
now.
Mr. Chairman, and he can helping
them stay, that's what we need
to have a consistency in our
VSOs. So thank you, Jenna.
Thank you very much, uh, Roel
Sareana. And next we're gonna go
to Representative Little, then
represent Pettigrew.
Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Uh, good afternoon
and thank you for your
presentation. Uh, I will admit
I'm not familiar that much uh
with the veterans cemeteries.
Uh, so my question is, Mr.
Chair, uh, whether there are
other cemeteries in this state,
uh, and, uh, it briefly how they
were established.
And then I have a question for
you offline, a separate issue.
Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
uh, Little, um, our state
cemeteries, we currently have,
um we have Angel Fire.
We have Gallup
And we have uh Fort Stanton.
That our state cemeteries
currently, and those are VA
funded cemeteries.
And so they are uh augmented by
grants through the, the Veterans
Administration to, to assist in
establishment and continued um
Uh, operations.
And these are each cemetery is
established under the same
federal guidelines under the
National Cemeteries Association,
the Cemeteries Act, which
basically makes for every
cemetery to basically be a
50-year project.
I, uh, how, how they're
established, so there's no
different from the Federal
cemeteries in Santa Fe and Fort
Baird.
With the exception that their
state operated. And, and that
gives us some diff different
authorities where we can
actually vary some of our
National Guard and reserve
veterans who may not meet the
federal requirements, um, to for
internment in the federal
cemeteries, they can be interred
in our state cemeteries based on
the Equity Act that was passed a
couple of years ago. So it gives
us some more flexibility to take
care of our New Mexico veterans
and their and their survivors.
Thank you very much. I
appreciate that, um, the
information. Um, I think Mr.
Chair, that will be it. Uh, I
will just let you and your staff
knew that um uh I'd like to
touch base with you later on how
an individual can request to be
uh buried in that, in that, in a
state facility, so that can
wait. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative
Pettigrew, then Representative
Garrett, please.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you secretary for being here
today. Um, sorry that I missed
the good portion of your
presentation.
I do have some questions.
Chairman, my first question is,
with respect to the honor guard
program.
How
Below funding level are you with
respect to being able to provide
that, and I asked, I, I see your
numbers on, on page 7.
But, uh, I
Very seldom talk about personal
experiences, but last March, I
buried my 97 year old father
that served in World War II and
Korea.
And I couldn't get somebody.
To do this.
So, my question is, how far
below funded are you to make
sure that you have the people to
do that.
I mean, we played it on a
microphone and we had, we had
some Boy Scouts.
Oh, Mister Char uh
representative Pettigrew, first
of all, I'm sorry for your loss.
And that uh you were unable to
get the, the appropriate
services.
Or such a a decorated veteran
and your family member.
Second is uh the funding
mechanism for, for, for these
are our, our veteran service
organizations, our American
Legions, our VFWs, and I believe
in Lee County, we do have some
uh Vietnam Veterans of America
that, that assist as well as the
Marine Corps League, uh, down in
southern New Mexico.
We don't have enough teams
throughout the state. We've done
an excellent job of increasing
that from 26 through.
40 that are eligible.
Currently for services and 29
that are active and 2 that are
pending coming on, on the rolls.
Um, that should have been
staffed through.
The uh
Casualty assistance center out
of Fort Bliss and the funeral
home that you worked with should
have gone through those
procedures to get a military
team out there and uh uh and in
the, in the future, I guess that
if, if that is not done through
the, the uh casualty assistance
center out of Fort Bliss. I
would recommend that anybody
here and, and they'll love me
for this, but then we contacted
the Mexico National Guard to
find out if we can't backtrack
it the other way for their
military funeral honors teams
to.
assist with, um, and, uh, I say
that.
Because we're gonna need more
teams because the federal
government is also looking to
cut the federal, the funeral
honors funding for military
members to continue to do this.
So we are running into a
position in the state of New
Mexico where we are going to be
short of resources. But as far
as underfunding,
Last year we executed $189,000
we requested 200,000 for this
year. We were funded at 150, and
we're well on track to exceed
that, that amount this year
again for our funeral honor
services.
Um, so I, I anticipate that
we're, this is gonna end up
having to be a state funded.
Uh, project to continue this,
and I think it's gonna end up
being a uh partnership between
us and the Department of
Military Affairs actually pay
guardsmen and reservists on
under the state payroll to
accomplish these efforts, uh,
through the state to continue to
provide the proper services for
our veterans.
Chairman and secretary, I, I
appreciate the answer, and our
request, our family requests
were no different than the rest
of the residents in the state of
New Mexico.
Um, my concern is that that
means.
That we're having this problem
elsewhere.
And, and, um,
Chairman, I hope that that um
through the interim our interim
military and veterans Affairs
Committee works on that.
Chairman, one of the reasons why
I no longer sit on that
committee as it got very
frustrating watching our
committee.
Unanimously approve.
6 to 8 different bills.
Because it's for our veterans.
And then have them shot down in
the first commit and uh that's
very frustrating thing when it
comes to something that should
be bipartisan.
So I hope and I wish you well
with respect to that as you go
through the interim.
Um
German representative Sanchez
talked about this during those
two years that I sat on that
subcommittee myself and I'm
pretty sure Rep Saignano was
knee-deep in the middle of this
one as well with the request for
getting more VSOs and increasing
the pay.
Um
Looks like we're still not where
we need to be. Uh, I looked at
your list of where you have your
VSOs.
Uh, at least in the southeast
part of the.
one in Carlsbad.
So I'm hoping that we're, we're
able to continue to move that,
Mr. Chairman and secretary, as
you're well aware, you live on
the eastern side of the state,
you're getting served by Texas.
You're not getting served by New
Mexico.
And uh
You know, there was a time, Mr.
Chairman, when one of the
secretaries that was in front of
us in military and Veterans
Affairs, didn't even know. And
so if you're, if you're in
Roosevelt or Curry, you're going
to Amarillo if you're south of
Roosevelt, um, you're going to,
to Big Springs and if you're in
Carlsbad, you're probably going
to El Paso.
And it's sad that in this state,
we can't serve our own people.
Chairman, I am very grateful for
the clinic that we rebuilt the
new clinic that we built.
And in Hobbs.
The chairman
The person that was there.
For the ribbon cutting was from
Big Springs, not from New
Mexico. So we do need to have.
A little more focused with
respect to that.
Um,
Chairman, I've never been to the
Tufts Veterans Cemetery.
That I would suggest that if the
federal government is looking
at, at uh potentially removing
some of those funding that we
find a way to provide an
alternate resource.
Yes.
Necessary to take care of that.
I go back
At the end of the day.
And I look at
The mission of our uh this
department to build healthier
communities by connecting all
veterans and their families to
the highest quality care
services eligible in eligible
benefits through advocacy and
collaboration.
If I continue to go through
everything that that aren't in
Mexico Department of Veteran
Services does.
Out of all the excess that we're
gonna talk about today in
specials. Surely.
We can find a way to put aside
$721,000 just in case.
Uh, there's some other parts and
pieces of this that, that
concerned me, but at the end of
the day,
When you decide
Chairman
To sign up for the military.
Whether you serve overseas, you
served in a war-based
Situation.
By signing up.
You say, I'm willing to go.
And at that point in time,
The residents of this state, the
bureaucracy in this state should
sit there and say, and I'm
willing to take care of you.
Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you. Uh, next, we're gonna
go to Representative Brown,
please. Oh, yeah, uh represent
Brown and then represent
Garrett. OK. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and uh.
Mr. Secretary, it's good to see
you. I, I believe last year you
made a really strong argument
for getting a mobile unit for um
providing services in,
especially the rural parts of
the state. So I see here, um,
and I don't see the page number,
but uh there's a photograph
here.
It looks like that unit's under
construction, is that correct?
Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Brown, that is
correct. Those are, that is our
actual mobile unit being
constructed right now. Um,
there's just a couple of photos
to show that the money that you
entrusted us with last year is
being encumbered. Um, we're not
sitting on it and it's being
executed and we anticipate
delivery, um, April, May time
frame here in the state of New
Mexico to start uh undertaking
the services that we've promised
to do with that mobile service.
Very good, and I, it looks like
a wheelchair lift is and and so
forth, so I'm really excited
about this, um, I look forward
to seeing it in my community and
um I, I just really think it was
a really good idea, so, um, I
want to go next, Mr. Chairman,
to uh page 19
and there's a request here for
$5.5 million to do some
Mitigation work at the Gallup
Cemetery in Angelfire looks like
um
There were some issues with the
construction, is that correct?
And, and Mr. Chair, Mr.
Secretary, I believe I heard
that the Gallup Cemetery was
sighted.
On an old auto body um disposal,
um, area. Could you just tell us
what's going on there, please,
Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Brown, so the, the pictures
there are, are, are correct and
the construction that was
originally done.
Was not done to standard, and we
are in warranty, uh, work right
now. And because of the um
imperative nature of getting
this completed before it
continues to deteriorate any
further, the funding that we
were given this fiscal year, uh
$4.1 million was transferred to
GSD to initiate the, the uh RFP
and the work to fix this and GSD
will continue going after the
old vendors through their,
their, uh, processes and
procedures to make the
whole again, but we couldn't
wait around to allow this to
deteriorate any further. It was
a lot of compaction issues and
um some of the concrete issues
were not done to standard and
we're starting to see that and
we're not in, in danger of
anything.
Right now happening, but that's
why it was imperative we get
moving on this, especially with
some of the areas, and you are
correct the uh Gallup Cemetery
was, was, uh, built on a, on an
old auto body, uh, like, uh,
probably, I don't know what you
call it, a junkyard that was
there. So the excavation that
took place to
To do that, I think impacted the
lackluster compaction results
that we are seeing now and it
was not done to standard when it
was initially built.
And then finally, Mr. Chairman
and Mr. Secretary, I'm just
curious, we're waiting for the
Carlsbad Rural Cemetery to be um
started. Could you just give us
a status update on that, please.
Um, yes, this year we were 4th
on the list coming into this
fiscal year, the federal fiscal
year and uh currently the NCA is
prioritizing areas that don't
have cemeteries at all, or the
ability to do expansions on, on
cemeteries that are already
existing. So the amount of
funding that the VA has in this
program was not enough for all
the requirements they had and
they're continuing to relook
that. We are uh hopeful that
within the next year that we'll
get identification that.
Carl's bed will actually be
funded, and we can start uh
groundbreaking there to have
that Carlsbad cemetery
initiated.
Yeah, um, Mr. Chairman, I, I
remember well when this whole
idea came up and we were so
pleased to be put on the list
and uh we have veterans who are
really, really wanting this to
happen. So I hope it will, uh,
go smoother. Oh, thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Brown. Uh, next
we have Sagura.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Secretary. I wanted to get
an update on a timeline for the
Bernalio County uh Veterans
Cemetery.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Garrett, um, uh, in
collaboration with the, the um
VA and, and the Santa Fe
Cemetery, they are looking at a
groundbreaking here in the next
year or two and to have that
functional between probably FY
29, and that will align with the
Santa Fe Cemetery, probably
reaching initial burial
capacity, uh, and only being
available for seconds, uh, which
are basically
You know, a second family
members in, in the same spaces.
So they're, I think they're
projected well to, to move
forward and they have named that
the Albuquerque Veterans
Cemetery, I believe was the name
that they've settled on.
Um, much like the Santa Fe
National, so it'll be
Albuquerque National Cemetery.
And, uh, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Secretary, does the state have
any um, how do you say judiciary
responsibility for these
national cemeteries.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, no, we do not have any
fiduciary responsibilities. We
work very closely with the, the
national cemeteries. We trained
with them, um, and we ensure
that, that we are essentially
uh very consistent with all the
practices and procedures that
they utilize in our federal
cemeteries to ensure that we're
meeting the requirements of the
NCA.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Garrett, um,
Let, uh, I don't know that, I
don't see any other questions,
uh, Mr. Secretary, thank you for
the presentation. I have a few
questions. First, um, Kelly, uh,
can you walk us, so, well, how
many VSOs and things to
Representative Sanchez, former
Representative Garcia, the
entire committee, um, but uh
really honoring and appreciating
their leadership. How many VSOs
Have been added over the past,
say, 3 fiscal years. Do we have
that by chance?
and secretary, if you want to
answer, that's OK too.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, to my
knowledge, it's, it's been the,
the last 5 that we added last
year with the increase in BSOs
got it.
OK, thank you for that. And uh
right now, the um
We, the, the LSC has an
expansion recommendation, the
executive doesn't, for how many,
uh, is that for VSOs, Kelly?
Mr. Charis that's for one VSO.
That's for one, OK. Mr. Chair,
if I may, um, the executive
recommendation does also support
an additional VSO, but instead
of doing it as an expansion
because it's something they
already do. The executive has
just rolled that into the base
in the 200s category and we
provided about 103,000 for that.
Got it. OK, so thank you for
that, Ms. Tiacolo, um, I got it.
OK. Uh, and
Mr. Secretary, are you seeing,
are you seeing attrition right
now? Is it more that you fear
attrition. Walk me through that,
please.
So, um, Mr. Chair, what we, we
have had some attrition, we've
had some unmanageable losses,
uh, with, uh, people retiring.
Uh, so we've had people come to
the, you know, termination of
their careers and, and, and
moving on and we've done some
reorganization in some of these
areas to ensure that we have
coverage regionally. So, um, as,
as we continue to have some of
this attrition of the people who
had been here for quite some
time and the new requirements of
these jobs, um, we, we have had
some people move but the
The, I'll, I'll, I call it the
faces to spaces are, are
certainly landing uh as they
should with the qualified people
who are, are wanting to do the
job that is in front of him.
That's awesome. Thank you.
That's a tribute to you and your
team and, and obviously to the
folks who are coming into the
spaces and um the, I guess I
heard that there's a pay
differential now sort of
federally and state and in
contrast to what we usually
hear, which is that it pays
more.
to be a federal employee in this
case for similar duties are
folks, which is great, being
paid more.
Uh, in their state capacity, or
did I hear that wrong?
Uh, Mr. Chair, no, it's, we've,
we've made our, our VSOs
competitive. We are the same as
our VSRs on the federal side,
then that's where we were losing
a lot of our people. We were
basically training them up as
state employees and within 6
months they were going to a
federal position once we had him
certified. Got it. Thank you,
Mr. Secretary. So we're the same
as the federal, and is there um
is there, do we think that the
federal employees, uh, and I
know obviously sort of broadly
speaking, it seems like the
conversation at the federal
level right now is all about
attrition and and and fewer
folks working in the federal
system sort of across all
entities. Is there any move that
you're, that we're aware of
where the pay for the VSRs is
being raised at the federal
level.
Mr. Chair, not to my knowledge
that they are adjusting that pay
band, uh, within, within the
federal side, the classification
there, I, I don't think has gone
under a desk audit in in a few
years, and, um, given the
current climate, um, I'm not
sure that they would be looking
for more pay for those
individuals. OK, yeah, no, that,
that's helpful. Thank you. um,
uh, really quick last couple of
questions, um, looking to, uh,
well, for the uh the
legislature.
In a bipartisan way and with a
lot of credit to folks,
including former Representative
Alone who sadly has passed, um,
uh, income tax exemptions have
expanded. Have you seen more
interest from veterans who are
utilizing the services that you
offer, uh, sort of in that state
realm, is that part of what
folks are looking at or not
really? Oh, Mr. Chair,
absolutely, uh, the outreach it,
uh, was funded last year for us
to get out and, and, and, uh,
and inform our ve
of the of the benefits, uh, was,
has been, we've had an amazing
uptick in the property tax
exemptions going forward and
then now post uh general
election and with the bills
pending House Bill 47 pending
right now. Um, there's a lot of
energy there that we are
certainly going to see a, a big
plus up especially once we get
to the uh percentage-based uh
application uh to our property
taxes in Bernleo County alone,
we stand to process.
This is the total amount that is
available or eligible at this
current time is about 12,401.
new applications that will have
to be certified by us in our
office to assist the assessors
in the application of that tax
exemption, and we're working
closely with our county
assessors and tax and rev to
ensure that, uh, these are all
worked out and once this bill is
passed and made law, then we can
actually get out and start doing
the processing, so we understand
the full undertaking and that's
A big reason. Again, we're
expecting a lot out of our, our
people, and we keep taking on
more responsibility, and I want
to make sure that we're able to
retain those people who want to
be here and uh continue to, to,
to do the job that we're asking.
OK, thank, thank you very much,
Mr. Secretary. um, I, I just,
and also want here and I think
on sort of the conversation
around the Tao Cemetery.
It does seem like Mr. Secretary,
that sort of for all intents and
purposes, um, we expect for this
to be a state facility that,
that there's no sort of
timeline.
For it to phase into a federal
facility at this point.
Mr. Chair, that is correct. Uh,
we do not see the federal
government, uh, changing that
decision. OK, um, just, just,
it's based on their, on their
model of 75 concentric circles,
so Taos is within 75 miles.
It's, I think it's 68 miles of
Santa Fe, and it's, uh, within,
I think, 47 miles of Angel Fire,
um, as a crow flies, and those
concentric circles that they
would not support another
veteran cemetery there, or even
a satellite uh from the Santa Fe
Cemetery. Understood. Thank you
for that and
really deeply, um, so, uh, with
that members, I'm gonna ask for
the LFC. I think we clearly see
their strong support on the
committee around the Taos
Veterans Cemetery, um, recurring
funding is always the tightest
piece for, for our commit is
frequently and this year very
much the tightest piece, uh, we
can look at, um, particularly
around the uh the expansion, uh,
position.
I think maybe more information
is needed to see how, um, yeah,
I, I, I think right now really
the focus on the Tao cemetery
has come through from the
committee, which I appreciate
and so we wanna, let's make sure
that we can work to adjust that
in our catch-up cleanup, which
will be approaching very soon.
With that, we turn over to the
vice chair, or actually, uh,
excuse me, I turn it over to the
um
Uh, Representative Sanchez or uh
Representative Arrera, uh, for
the motion and then the second,
however you guys want to do.
Ah, Mr. Chair, uh, I move we
accept the LFC recommendation.
OK, uh, there's been a motion to
accept the LLC recommendations
second from Representative
Sanchez with more adjustment,
particularly around the
cemetery. Thank you very much,
Mr. Secretary.
Uh, excuse me, I apologize. Uh,
is there any opposition to that
motion?
Seeing and
That's been adopted.
OK, uh, secretary props, thank
you for being here.
Mm
All right. Uh, please point us
if you can to the correct
materials and then we'll get
started.
Of course, chair, members of the
committee, hello, good
afternoon. My name is Emily
Hiller. I am the LFC analyst for
the Department of Finance and
Administration. We have
Secretary props up here as well
as Nicole Masius, the DFA
analyst, talking about the
executive budget recommendation.
We are going to be in tab 3 of
your binders business unit 341.
I will give you all a moment to
find it.
OK.
To give us an overview, chair
members of the committee between
the differences and the
recommendations.
Overall, the LFC increases the
general fund revenue for the
Department of Finance and
Administration by 5.1% or 1.7
million, and the executive
increases the general fund
revenue by 6.4% or 2.2 million.
This creates a difference of
$488,000 between the two
recommendations.
One thing I would like to turn
your attention to is that
overall across all revenue
sources, the executive
recommendation is 1.9 million
above the LFC recommendation.
And this is attributable to 3
different things. It's
attributable to the tobacco
program settlement funds to the
opioid crisis recovery funds and
to the county supported
Medicaid.
I would like to encourage you
all to turn to pages 72 and 73
in your volume 3s for more
supplemental information about
the LFC's usage of opioid
settlement revenue and tobacco
program program funds.
Other things to highlight, um,
if you turn to page 2 of your
high level.
And if you look towards line 39,
you will see that there is a
$5.2 million dollar transfer in
both recommendations, and this
is a transfer from the
Department of Information
Technology.
2 DFA for the share transfer.
And again, this is other state
funds. This is not uh a general
fund addition into the budget.
Other changes within the
recommendations, both
recommendations move 9 operating
costs into the dues and
memberships program P545, so
this would include civil legal
services being moved to P545 to
have its own line item to
provide additional budget
clarity.
For those non-operating pieces.
She remembers as Nicole and I go
through the differences in the
general fund recommendations,
you're gonna see most of those
differences coming from
personnel. Both recommendations
increase personnel but to
different extents to reduce the
agency's vacancy rates.
With that being said, chair,
members of the committee, I'm
gonna turn it over.
They get it started with the
first program.
Perfect. Thank you, Emily. um,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, if you go to page 7,
I'll just note the very high
level detail, um, for P541, I
would like to note that there is
a $147.7,000 difference, and
that's within PS need be, um,
the LFC being lower, also, um,
if you go to the next page that
I would like to note some uh
language differences, the
executive supports language for
the state Board of Finance to
use 6 million for disaster
emergency fund.
ending, whereas the LFC
recommended 4 million and we
would like your consideration
for the executive on that. Um,
I'll turn it over to Emily to
talk to uh P542.
Thank you Nicole chair members
moving on to page 9, you will
see a $70,000 difference in
program supports that is in
personnel, the executive
recommended 70,000 more than the
OFC the LFC recommendation
increases personnel by $80,000
whereas the executive increases
personnel by $150,000. With that
being said, I'll turn it back
over to Nicole to talk about the
local government division. Thank
you, Emily. Um, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, I will
go now to page 10.
Uh, P.
55543 um as you'll note, the
only difference is about
$8080.5,000 in PSEB, um, the
Recommendation also um both
recommendations supports
language or E 911 and local DWI
there were no differences in the
distributions and I'll turn it
back over to Emily for P544.
Thank you, Nicole chair, uh,
just real quick on P 543, you
might see uh a decrease in both
the LFC and the executive from
the operating budget, and that's
just because of the transfer of
civil legal services to the dos
and memberships program.
And so then chair members moving
on to pages 11 and 12 for the
fiscal management and oversight
program. Uh, this is where we're
going to see the biggest
differences between the
recommendations in general fund
revenue again in personnel, the
executive
It is $209,000 above the LFC and
personnel costs in general fund
revenue.
The LFC recommendation increases
personnel costs by 400,000 or
7.2% in general fund revenue,
whereas the executive increases
this category by 609.3,000 or
11%.
Chair members in this program.
That's where we're going to be
seeing that $5.2 million dollar
transfer from the Department of
Information Technology for that
shared.
Transfer that I mentioned at the
beginning of the presentation.
Um, I just want to point overall
across all funding sources, the
LFC increases personnel by
49.5,000 uh sorry, by 49.5%,
whereas the executive increases
personnel by 53.3%.
With that, I'll turn it over to
Nicole to talk about the dos and
memberships program. Thank you,
Emily. Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, just before you
change over for P544. I don't
know if you've seen the
difference, but, um, both
recommendations supported a
shift of county supported
Medicaid, tobacco settlement
fund, and opioid funding to
P545. And so I'll switch over to
the next page, um, on page 13,
um, overall, the difference is
about $1.4 million.
Um, you'll see in, uh, the other
transfers or other financing
uses you'll see that $1.4
million difference, um, the, the
other difference is that the LFC
recommended leasehold community
systems, uh, 36,000 above the
executive and then 5.7 the LFC
was lower for the national
governors Association, um,
and then as far as the other
financing uses, if you look at
page 4.
in the the packet, you'll see a
breakout of those, um, funding
sources that we mentioned, so
overall, um, for county
supported Medicaid, LFC is
899,000 above the executive and
for opioid crisis ones.
That will see is above by
$809,000. Um, I'll turn it over
to Emily for additional
comments.
Chair members, just the
additional comments, uh, while
the LFC is above the executive
and uh opioid crisis and county
supported Medicaid, the
executive is over the LFC, uh,
in tobacco program funds. That's
because the executive
recommendation uses fund
balance, uh, whereas the LFC
recommendation does not.
With that being said, chair
members of the committee to talk
about the last program.
Uh, moving on to page 16. This
is the infrastructure and
planning.
Program. This is a new program
to DFA which is currently being
operated through a special
appropriation.
There is a $10.8,000 difference
between the recommendations, the
executive recommended a 69.3%
increase in personnel costs,
which is around $7,010,000 and
the LFC increases personnel
costs by 66.3% or 679,000.
Additionally, the LFC is $25,000
above the executive in
contractual services, uh, with
that chair before turning it
over to Secretary Props. I would
just like to go through what is
left in the rest of your
pockets.
Pages 17 through 22. We have our
performance measures. There were
no differences in either
recommendation.
Moving on to page 23, we have
our personnel calculator and
moving on to pages 24 through
32, we have the differences in
new funding for specials, um, as
Kelly mentioned before, we're
not voting on special
recommendations. However, please
ask any questions that you may
have to point your attention to
the differences in the totals
between the special
recommendations.
Looking at page 32. The
executive recommends a total of
328.6 million across specials.
Whereas the LFC recommendation
includes $1.5 billion. This big
difference is attributable to a
couple different fund transfers,
including a 534 million transfer
into the government results and
opportunity funds, uh,
additionally, the LFC
recommendation has a 350 million
fund transfer that is contingent
on legislation passing creating
the community benefit funds, um,
the executive has around $100
million in housing and
homelessness initiatives,
whereas.
the LFC has housing.
Located both in DFA's budget and
elsewhere and other estate
agencies.
Um, I'll turn it over to Nicole
quickly to just talk about any
key points for specials.
Thank you, Emily. uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, just
to know like very high level,
um, there was a $100,000 for
disaster loan recovery that we
include in the executive that
the LFC did not recommend, um,
there were a couple of
initiatives for um housing, um,
and we are also requesting
additional funding as a
supplemental for
Uh, 500,000 for the uh financial
control division, um, that's for
personnel and then 160,000 for
uh programming expenses related
to administering a general
obligation um bond sale, so, um.
With that, I will turn it over
to secretary, thank you.
Great. Thank you, Ms. Hella and
thank you, Miss Macias, Mr.
Secretary, thank you very much
for being here.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman,
uh, members of the committee. My
name is Wayne Props. I'm the
secretary of the Department of
Finance and Administration.
Uh, pleasure to be here with
you. I want to start off by, uh,
acknowledging, acknowledging
Nicole, um,
Emily for their work on, uh,
with DFA uh throughout the year,
not only at this time of the
year, but for their support.
Uh, encouragement, uh,
direction, I am grateful having
been a former LFC analyst many,
many years ago. I know how tough
of an agency DFA can be because
I was the analyst for DFA those
many, many years ago, um, so.
Do, do appreciate that. Mr.
Chair, I'm gonna try to
accomplish two things today. One
is to be very brief because of
the executive recommendation on
a scale of 1 to 10 is a 10. The
the LLC recommendation is a 9.
I appreciate that, want to
acknowledge uh the LLC
recommendation as an important
funding in there continuing to
build out the infrastructure
division that was created just
this last year and in some other
areas as well. So I don't need
to talk to you a lot today about
our, about the differences. I
really actually have only one
that I want to discuss. And the
second thing, Mr. Chairman, I'm
going to do is something that I
don't think uh happens very
often when agencies appear
before this committee, and I'm
going to give you some money
back.
Um, you have a, uh, you have a,
uh, one page sheet here.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, the one item
that I would respectfully ask
the committee to consider is the
supplemental appropriation for
$500,000 to address a projected
shortfall in personal services
and employee benefits in our
financial control uh division,
uh, last year, the legislature
reduced that budget by 20, about
20% in PSEB, um, not sure if
that was necessarily
intentional, but it, it's what I
ended up in, in house.
too, uh this uh $500,000 special
supplemental appropriation would
fill, would fill that gap.
Uh, the only other things on
this sheet, Mr. Chairman, that
I'm gonna highlight one of which
is not on here, I would note
that because I know this is
always of interest to this
committee and maybe your, many
of your members, Mr. Chairman,
um, the executive budget
recommendation does fully fund
the requests from civil legal
services. Uh, it's my
understanding that the LLC
recommendation may be a bit
higher for civil legal services
if you decide to go with the
higher recommendation on that,
Mr. Chairman, you're not going
to get any arguments from DFA,
uh, but we did fully fund the
request for.
a civil legal services, uh, and
then in the second item under
special appropriations, Mr.
Chairman, we had requested a
million dollars for an audit of
our state human resources and
financial system, otherwise
known known as share.
2 years ago, the state auditor
issued a requirement that the
share system be audited.
Uh, that had never been done,
uh, Sierra's been around for
about 20 years, DFA strongly
supported the requirement that
that system be audited on a
regular basis, uh, because it
was the first time that we've
done it, uh, we weren't sure
exactly how much uh it was going
to cost. We knew it was going to
be expensive.
Um, so, Mr. Chairman, in July
when we submitted our request,
we asked for
uh for that audit.
Uh, we issued an RFP in
December.
Uh, and began receiving
responses in January, uh, and
Mr. Chairman, I'm happy to
announce that we now think
instead of costing a million
dollars, uh, that audit will
only be about $250,000.
leaving you with $750,000 Mr.
Chairman, if I may be so
presumptuous, maybe that would
help out with the cemetery in
Tao you uh begin your catch-up
clean up.
Uh, and with that, Mr. Chairman,
I don't really have anything
else to highlight uh in the
recommendations. Again, thank
you for your consideration.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Secretary. Uh, we're gonna go to
uh we'll have Representative
Sanchez on the list, uh, we'll
go to a representative Lujan.
Yeah, if you, if you're ready,
we can also go to
Representative.
So, and I know Representative
Sanchez is, there's a bill in
another committee, so thank you
for being here. Um,
representative Sanchez, if
you're, uh, we're at the
conclusion of the secretary.
Thank you, uh Mr. Chair. I just
wanted to ask about the SEA
commission budget, uh, I know
they were only uh.
But something like a 90k total.
That's not much to uh do, do
anything that was gonna see if
we can potentially look to just
increase that.
uh.
A little more just wanted to
flag that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, Sanchez.
Uh, next, we'll go to Lohan and
then represent Hernandez. Great,
thank you. Um, that was when I
was a cut to, um.
And
I just want clarification for
this civil legal services fund.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um,
Secretary,
Can you tell, can you?
Clarify that amount again from
the DFA.
I can. Um, thank you, Mr. Chair,
uh, Representative Wuhan, give
me a second really quickly.
Um, so the
For the recurring budget both
the LFC and the executive
recommended 4,286.1, um, and
that is on page 4 of your
packet, and that was exactly
what the commission had
requested, so we supported the
agency request the commission
request, and then the difference
is within the specials, um,
within the specials, the DFA or
the excuse me, the commission
had requested originally
860,000. The executive fully
support.
reported that request and then
the LFC recommended $4 million
in I'll let Emily kind of
expound a little Mr.
Chair, that was my question
because I was looking at those
two lines as well, so thank you.
That's, that's all I needed.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Uh, we'll go next to Rose
Hernandez.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, secretary props, uh, the
reason why Mr. Chair, of my
community calls you the Mr.
Money Man.
Um.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, I, uh, also
wanna echo, uh, Representative
Luhan's, uh, you know, uh, what
she's flagging, and I, I also
feel it's a critical, um, ah,
hearing from some of my
constituents, uh, mostly in the
Farmington area, uh, about the
importance of the civil legal
services if there's uh there's
um an opportunity. I, I feel
this is, this is, this is an
important.
opportunity for us to make a
good impact uh for our community
to
Try to reach that higher amount,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, we're gonna go
next to ranking member
Chatfield, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, going back to the shake yes,
recently we had some devastating
fires, followed by floods. It
washed out a lot of those essa.
Do we know?
Where the funding is to re
Replace them to fix them, where
they've washed out, is that
included in this budget, or is
there not a budget for doing
that or is that fall on the soil
and water conservation district.
How do we fund a repair with the
say yes, they have, they do it
theirselves just secure, how,
how, how does that get paid?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and uh
Representative uh Chatfield, I'm
gonna ask uh Cecilia Mamotis,
who's the uh director of of our
local government division that
oversees that, if I may, Mr.
Chairman, ask her to help
respond.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, and,
uh, Representative Chatfield. I
think the funding that you are
explicitly referring to is that
emergency watershed for the
Oseas, um, there is some funding
that is currently going out of
the door for those secs. We've
received a total application
amount of 110, um, and so far
we've completed 94 assessments
we can share with you what our
executive summary is looking
like in regards to those
programs and what projects have
been completed to date. I
understand that the Oseia is
part of that.
emergency watershed restoration
project were a little later than
the other entities that received
that money for the Hermit's peak
Caf Canyon, um, floods and and
other.
Consequences to that overall
there was about $268.7 million I
think for the emergency
watershed, uh, project and a
$160 million of that has already
been expended, um, and to date
for those seas we're looking at
a little less than $5 million
done in projects, so, uh, but
Mr. Chair and Representative, we
can get you more of those
details explicitly after this, I
would,
I would love that, uh, the money
does flow through you all.
And I would, I would just love
to see the funny stream and, and
how much there is there I could
understand it. Thank you.
Thank you very much, ranking
member Chatfield. Uh, next, we
have Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr.
Secretary.
So I, I do fully support funding
for civil legal services, but
I'm just curious to know what
the logic was.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Secretary, about
putting under peak code 545, um,
as I looked down the list of
what's
Covered under that pea code. It
looks kind of like a catch-all.
And I do see some things where
they they do do, but why, why
this one could answer that, Mr.
Chair Representative Brown, that
was a collective, um, kind of
decision between both the LFC
and the executive so that the
civil legal service providers
could actually see the line item
for their budget. It was kind of
buried within P543, and so it
was unclear, um, what was given
to them. So this was our effort
to clarify what was um earmarked
for that.
A specific program.
Thank you, and Mr. Chart makes
it easier for the rest of us as
well. Thank you.
Thank you very much,
Representative Brown. We're
gonna go to Representative
Silva, uh, when we got
represented Duncan and
Representative Silva, please.
Thank you, Chair. Um, I'm in
volume one, volume 3.
Um, on page 73 of the opioid
settlement revenue. I just have
questions on the non-recurring
appropriations.
It looks like there's
appropriations in FY 24 and then
less in FY 25 and then less
requested in FY 26, um,
Can you just explain that those
data points to me please so I
can understand.
Thank you, chair. Yes, uh, Chair
Representative Silva, um,
originally the request was 4
million, which then uh has been
revised since what you see in
the executive recommendation at
16 million for the use of the
opioid settlement revenues, um.
In terms of that difference, um,
opioid funding, I'll hasn't been
materializing the way that the
legislator had thought when the
fund was created because of
installation of payments into
the funds, um, and so you'll see
a decrease in the LFC
recommendation because of that
and not using the principle of
the fund because it is unstable,
um, with that, I will, oh yeah,
with that, I'll turn it over to
Nicole to talk about the
executive recommendation.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Silva, that is correct for the
opioid settlement, um, revenue,
um, the distributions haven't
been consistent from the 3,
major providers for that.
However, the executive wanted to
maintain the level of funding,
um, and that's why we have our
recommendation.
Thank you, chair, and thank you
both. So you're telling me that
the funds are unstable because
providers have not made their
installation payments. Thank
you, Chair. Um, Mr. Chair
Representative Silva, that is
correct. They aren't mandated by
the courts to, you know, provide
that consistent, um, payment,
however, you know, they could
potentially provide lump sums,
um, it's very complicated, but
I'm able to provide that
additional detail afterward.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
Representative Silva. Uh, we
have Representative Duncan and
Representative Barrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Sure, just one quick question
for uh I think maybe um either
secretary or or LFC can answer
it.
um P541, page 8.
Um
In the language that says the
executive sports language for
the State Board of Finance to
use 6 million in for disaster
and emergency funding, whereas
the LFC supports the use of 4
million. Can you tell me what
that money is used for?
A chair Representative Duncan,
that funding is used for.
In cases of emergency and
agencies or local entities will
go to the state board of
Finance, held at DFA to request
an a loan, and so that money is
to provide uh services in case
there is uh emergencies that
agencies or local entities don't
have the available funds to use.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Where else
can I uh municipality or a small
entity like you're talking about
flying the emergency funding for
that.
Mr. Chairman members of the
committee and Representative
truthfully, that's about the
only real part of emergency
money out there, you know, we,
it was raised to $6 million I
think 2 years ago, shortly after
I became secretary, uh, I
believe we've utilized all of
that money actually leads to the
director of the board of Finance
is here and can speak more to
the kind of requests that we
received, but they're usually
from very small communities. Uh,
they are, they're almost always
emergencies, a lot of them are.
Uh, related to water systems
that break down and communities
don't have.
the resources, so they'll come
to the board of finance for an
emergency loan, oftentimes, Mr.
Chairman, members of committee
and representative of the
emergency loans become emergency
grants because we understand the
communities can't always pay
those loans back.
So, Mr. Chairman, I guess I
would add one more request is
that perhaps we would keep that
emergency fund at the 6 million
that's been for the last 2 years
because it is, is utilized.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh thank
you secretary on that.
Um, I'd like to drill down a
little bit on those smaller
entities that come in. Can you
tell me who some of those were
and
And I guess the reason I'm
asking that, Mr. Secretary is
You know, we're not getting any
Class A counties coming in for
anything. These are smaller
entities.
Chairman, uh, Representative
Duncan, Ashley Leach, director
of the Board of Finance, um, in
fiscal year 24, some of some
examples of those communities or
the village of Basque Farms,
Kenata de los Alamos mutual
domestic Water Association, um,
there's a few others I think,
um, I made some notes we had
about 4, yeah, a city of
Portalis is another one,
So I can get you a full list.
We, uh, provided 9 awards in
fiscal year 24, 4 of those were
to small communities.
Sure, uh, thank you for that and
I would love to get that
information. Thank you.
Thank you very much for and Ms.
Hella, do you have anything to
add on that? Uh, yes, Chair
Representative Duncan, and I
just wanted to point out that um
in the departments of I 24
audit, it looks like with the 4
million that was uh appropriated
for use in FI24 ended with a
balance of $366,000.
Great. Thank you. Uh,
Representative Herrera, and then
Representative Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary. Um, I'm gonna go over
this, um, uh, the match fund
again, um.
Um,
I know how much how much did you
provide uh last year in, in, um,
in the match fund and how much
did that bring into the state
altogether.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee and
representative, um.
Trying to get to the details,
um.
I mean for FY 26, obviously, uh,
the executive recommendation is
110 million in the LLC
recommendation is
Um
75 million.
Um
The uh total request and
matching grants to date that we
received after the first tranche
was approved for this current
fiscal year of like 25 is 215
million.
Dollars, so
Uh, I would say, Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee,
the, the match fund has been one
of the biggest successes, uh, we
collectively have had, uh, you
all deserve most of the credit,
but um I think we have
administered it well at DFA
we've tried to get the money out
the door quickly. Uh, and I, I
think it's clear that the
leveraging of those funds is, is
working in the in the in the
manner in which the legislature
hoped it would.
Uh, thank you. Thank you.
Thank you for that, Secretary,
Mr. Chair, um, uh,
Representative Dickson and I
worked very hard on that last
year to make that a reality. I
can you tell me how much the,
uh, when you got the
The 75 million last year, I
think it was. How much did that?
How much money did that leverage
in federal grants. Mr. Chairman
and members of the committee and
representative, I, I don't know
if I have that number off the
top of my head, but I think
Rebecca Russ, she does.
Thank you, Harry.
Chairman members of the
committee, my name is Hayley
Brown. I'm the the deputy
director of the infrastructure
division. So for every $1 of
matching grants that went out in
FY 25, we saw $5.61 in federal
funds returns. So, um, it was a
great return on investment. Uh,
thank you for that. That was the
purpose of the legislation and
I'm, I, I guess I would, I would
recommend that, you know.
At the end of the day, we put as
much as we can into that match
fund because it will only return
uh by fault to our communities
and, and it really is the best
use of our monies, and these
are, these are local small local
entities applying for this
money, and they've been able to
do that because we created
grantmaking opportunities
through our local cogs, so
they're helping local people
write these grants to leverage
these federal funds, and I, I
just have to compliment you, um,
well, I had 2.
You know, it's not often I call
DFA and.
5 days later, the deal is done,
but that's how fast what a fast
turnaround time you had in a
matching those uh federal
dollars, and it was, it was
critical. Just in Rio Riva
alone. We got $8 million and,
and that's huge for for counting
that size, and those are the
ones I know, of course, I don't
always hear what the good news,
but I do hear the bad news. So
thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you Secretary.
Thank you.
Uh, next we have Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh and
presenters and Mr.
Secretary, I just want to, uh,
actually it's the LFC I would
just like to point your
attention to page 27, even
though we're not voting on this
today. I think it's important to
discuss it. So if we look at the
homelessness programs, there was
$50,000 in the executive
recommendation, and there is a
zero amount in the LFC
recommendation. Can you please
explain why with respect to
homelessness,
And that's 50 million in the
executive recommendation for
homelessness, the LFC has
various homelessness
initiatives, um.
In the recommendations for DFA
me.
Look for it.
As I will reference you to page
28, you'll see that there is the
Houston model of homelessness.
This is a 2 million
appropriation to the local
government division at DFA for
grants of continuum of care
organizations for housing to.
Help end with the homelessness,
um.
And then there is other various
uh appropriations in here
related to housing, um,
additionally, chair
Representative Herndon in total
across all agencies, the LFC
recommendation has 159.3 million
related towards housing efforts
and DFA's budget, the Healthcare
Authority, the public education
department, and administrative
Office of the courts, whereas
the executive has 105.2 million,
so it might not all be under DFA
chair Representative Herndon,
however, that is the amount that
is in the olive seed.
recommendation spread across
different agencies regarding
homelessness and housing.
OK
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair and
thank you very much, madam, um,
an analyst. And so Mr. uh
secretary, Mr. uh Mr. Chair, if
we go back just to legal
services again, everyone is
focusing on that, and the
difference with respect to the 4
million that LFC is
recommending, uh, for, uh, for
civil legal services. I just
confirming that right now what
we're looking at is legal aid,
for example, $1 million from the
federal grant has been cut from
their.
budget causing them to lose 13
attorneys and 28 staff people
and looking at the population of
the state, utilizing the
services of legal aid, it would
be imperative for us to make
sure that we are trying to uh
Uh, make up for that funding,
even if we're looking at our own
state resources. Is that
correct, Mr. Chair? And, uh,
Madam LFC.
Analyst Representative Herndon,
the LFC recommendation was made
before those federal changes,
both recommendations on a
recurring basis support 7.2
million across general fund and
other state funds. The as um
secretary props and Nicole have
mentioned.
The request came down to 860,000
originally to go into the civil
legal services fund. However,
the AI recommendation supports 4
million with 1 million to be
used in fiscal year 2026, so it
could be used towards that
efforts if the civil Legal
Services Commission, so chose.
OK. All right, well, thank you,
uh, Mr. Chair and Mr.
And, um, madam uh LFC analyst.
Thank you very much for Herndon.
Uh, next, we're gonna go to Vice
Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you. I, uh, I'm always impressed
with the incredible scope.
Uh, of work done by DFA, um, and
so I want to say thank you. I
know we send a lot of uh
programs, um, and funds your
way, um, Mr. Secretary. uh, Mr.
Chair, um, and secretary, could
you, um,
Provide, can you share a little
bit about the law enforcement
protection fund. You know, we
have a, a variety of different
funds.
That support law enforcement in
different ways. We have the
retention fund, we have the
recruitment fund, um, and the
protection fund. And I'm just
wondering if you don't mind
sharing with us the goals of the
um
This protection fund, and then
if I'm not mistaken, there's a
recommendation in here for 22
million, uh, from both the
executive and the LFC for that
fund. Thank you.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Dixon, um, for the law
enforcement protection fund. It
also includes um in other
sources, there should be a
transfer in there to the
Department of Public Safety. Um,
I
I'm not, yeah, and there's
additional language, so, um, I
and
Our director can explain a
additional more uh information
on that program, so.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Dixon, I'm gonna
briefly go over the recruitment
funds and um I think Nicole
pretty much hit the nail on the
head with the other one going to
DPS.
We have that firefighter
recruitment fund, as well as
that corrections recruitment
fund, you will see that there is
only a portion of that fund that
is um currently encumbered, and
that is because the way
And I see that yeah.
Give me 1 2nd.
chair representative as they're
discussing just one important
thing that I would like to note
for you all is that the law
enforcement protection funds,
any balances revert to the law
enforcement retention fund at
the Department of Public Safety,
um.
It's good if there are balances
in the law enforcement
protection fund. Um, I do
believe that.
The law enforcement protection
fund is there in case there are
any accidents or unfortunately,
if there are any deaths on the
line of duty, and that's there
to supplement that in case that
happens and so any reversions
are a good thing, um.
And that goes into the law
enforcement retention fund, but
that I'll turn it back over to
Cecilia for more of a breakdown
of the use of the fund.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and um
Representative Dixon, you're
right, we do have a lot of
protection funds and it does get
a little bit confusing, as
you've noticed.
Um, that law enforcement
protection fund does provide a
distribution of money to our
local law enforcement agencies
for the use of maintenance and
improvements of their
departments to enhance the
efficiency and effectiveness of
those services.
Um, and it does go a little bit
further with other expenses, uh,
historically that fund has been
used for non-recurring expenses
to assist those departments with
purchasing vehicles.
Training, law enforcement, um,
insurance policies are not part
of it, that has been brought up
to a by some of our local
governments, um, and they do
work through the DWI program to
facilitate.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, um,
and thank you, uh, for the
clarification on that. Speaking
of recruitment, um, efforts, um,
I am curious, um, you mentioned
the firefighter recruitment. Can
you give us a little bit of, uh,
how are the firefighter
recruitment fund in the law
enforcement recruitment fund,
how are we doing in terms of uh
spending those funds, getting
that money out the door.
I can answer that a little bit,
um, Mr. Chair and
Representative.
There is a methodology in which
we are breaking that out between
100%, 50%, and then the
remaining 25%. We opened those
applications, uh, I believe July
of last year for eligible
entities to come in and this
applies to both the corrections
and firefighter recruitment
funds, um, they came in and they
they had an assessed need for
those recruitment for that
retention, they applied. Now, as
we're gearing towards the end of
the year, that money that they
then did not end up using as
going back to the fund.
Which that fund we are also
looking at either expanding
those applications to allow more
entities to apply for
recruitment retention or to
increase capacity to those that
have already been, um, granted a
an award, uh, with the intent of
reauthorizing that so that the
remaining money we can keep
expanding on the outreach to
that and then providing either
supplemental or new um
recruitment retention funds for
our local communities.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair. I don't have any other
questions.
Thank you, Vice Chair, uh, great
questions, members, great
leadership from the committee.
oh down. Go ahead, please.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and I'm just on page 27 on the
Grow fund transfer 534 million.
Is that from the legislative
growth fund from last year.
A chair Representative Doo
that's appropriation is just
going into the into the base of
the funds.
Um
If Mr. Chair, um, is it high
secretary, is it obligated?
Chair Representative, I'm gonna
refer to Mr. Sale.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Dell, that's simply a fund
transfer, um, from the operating
reserve into the grow for future
grow appropriations, um, to
pilot agency, um.
The pilot agency projects in the
future. It'll spin off 25% of
its corpus into what's called
the program fund, and that's
where you're making
appropriations for those 3 year
pilots, and it's part of the
reserves. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. So just to be clear,
the, the 534,000 divided by 3
years, or is it equal per year
or they can spend it all in one
year some. No, um, Mr. Chair,
this is going into the uh trust
fund portion.
That will spin off 25%.
Of the corpus and the program
fund where you, you will then
appropriate money to agencies
for those 3-year pilots. And Mr.
Chair Charles, in this fiscal
year or in future fiscal years
fiscal years. OK, so then, thank
you, Mr. Chair, and the one
right behind it, the grow
operating transfer for 66
million and that's for, uh,
you're making appropriations
from uh that transfer this year.
OK, so Mr. Chair and Charles,
the money that was allocated
last year, uh, by per
legislator.
was obligated last year and
maybe carry over or whatever,
but it's not represented here
because it was fully obligated
last year. That's correct. OK,
thank you.
Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you very much
for sitting down. um, thank you,
Mr. Secretary. Big thanks to our
committee. Great questions,
great leadership, uh,
representedreta Dixon and really
the whole committee around the
match fund. Thank you for that.
Uh, Mr. Secretary, um,
And I guess for Miss Hilla, in
our different sheets were shown
in the Financial.
Controls the vision, a negative
17.17.5.
Uh, funded.
Uh, full-time equivalent FTE.
Does this sort of underline what
the secretary is saying that
there, there is a deficiency in
that.
P code.
Tear, uh, I would like to point
you to page 11, I believe that
shows the breakdown of the
actuals for that fiscal
management and oversight program
P544.
If I can find it.
Um
Um, I can't seem to find the
peach, but as you can see in the
actual chair, um, for, on page
11 of P 554. You'll see that the
actuals think you are 5.1
million versus the operating is
5.4 million, so they didn't. I
wouldn't agree necessarily with
the secretary that they received
a decrease. They received a
$300,000 increase, um, last year
you all gave a total increase of
2 million in personal services
and employee benefits, which
equates to a 12.3% increase in
addition to a 1.2 supplemental,
um, and so
the LFC recommendation increases
personnel, not to the same
extent as the executive for that
specific program due to previous
investment from the state and
DFA's personnel budget. OK. Uh,
thank, thank you for that. Um,
Mr. Secretary, I think offline,
it'd be great to to sort of
See a a bit more because
secondly, uh, I think that this
legislature again match fund and
others, it is fair to expect
that we will place additional
responsibilities on DFA both
fiscally perhaps
programmatically in large part
because you and your team and
it's great to see the team here
today. I think we see really
strong performance, um.
How do we, how do you think
about that as you, as we're sort
of approaching sort of our work
at the end of our initial work
on house build 2 here in HAFC.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, thank you for that.
I, I sincerely appreciate it. I,
I would, I would appreciate it
if we could do a little bit more
work on the financial control
division budget because that is
really the nerve center, not
only for DFAs for the entire
state. Uh, we don't want to
underfund the financial control
division.
at DFA which is led by Mark
Melhoff, who's the division
director and who has, who has
one of the most difficult state
government.
So thank you if we could work on
that a little bit, um, with
regard to our local government
division. Thanks to you, Mr.
Chairman, uh, as Emily noted,
uh, for the current fiscal year,
we did receive some additional
FTE for our local government
division that is responsible for
taking in a lot of these
additional programs and dollars
that are sent DFA's way that are
back of the envelope math for
this session alone, with more
than 30 days to go, as there's
another $5 billion coming our
way, if all of the legislation.
that sends money to DFA is
enacted, so long answer to your
question, Mr. Chairman, but I, I
would appreciate it if we could
look just a little bit more at
the financial control division
uh.
At DFA and LFC. It's not a lot,
but it would be helpful. OK,
thank you for that and thank
you, Ms. Hilla, for your work
there as well, and to see us, of
course, uh, um, the, the 2
million things of represent
Duncan for the flag on the
emergency. I think we all look
outside and, and see sun.
And, you know, mountains without
snow, and we can imagine a lot
of really tough things ahead of
us. And so that may be a place
where, particularly for smaller
communities, we may need to
increase that, uh, availability.
Um
Uh, and then secretary, I, I
know they were just up here. Can
you follow up quickly with us on
how much is remaining across the
3 recruitment and retention
funds,
you know, we want to know how
it's in Miss Hila if you have
that right off the bat, that's
great.
Yes, Cherry, if you would turn
to page.
33 with the reauthorizations. It
has that for firefighter
recruitment of the 25 million
initially appropriated 10.2 has
been expended and for the law
enforcement, uh, recruitments,
including correctional
recruitment of the 25 million
originally appropriated 13.8
million was expended, and so you
can see the balance is there and
that both recommendations
support that reauthorization.
Mr. Chair, sorry, just to add a
little more context to that,
those funds are fully allocated
just because they are not
extended because they are doing
the 3 year breakout.
Um, all of those applicants that
we did receive have asked for
that 100, 50, and then that 25%
to help them wean themselves off
of those recruitment and
retention funds and not to keep
them as operating or reliant on
this non-recurring funding. So
in theory, those funds are for
those entities that have applied
in our currently practicing.
That, uh, thank you very much,
Ms. That's helpful. And so if we
wish to support any additional
recruitment, does that need,
does that require additional
funding?
Mr. Chair, if we would like to
um expand the capacity of those
recruitment and retention funds,
those same appropriations would
need additional funds, yes. OK.
Um, thank you for that. OK, uh,
it sounds, uh, I think we've got
representative Hernandez who has
a question and then we'll go to
the motion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I, I
do apologize for going out and
getting over my uh runner's
cough.
Um.
Uh,
Mr. Chairman, I've been, I, I've
been, I've been, uh,
participating in our basketball
practice at 6 a.m. each morning.
So I asked for uh that, um,
volume 3, page 73, uh, I do see
here that uh we have uh
agency code 952 UNM Echo.
Um
Mr. Chairman, the Project Echo
is really uh important to all of
us, to all of our communities,
the impact that it has and uh
but uh and uh Mr. Secretary, Mr.
Chairman, uh, is, is there, I
understand that this is strictly
recurring for the opioid
settlement towards Project Echo
at UNM. Is there, uh, uh, uh,
opportunities, Mr. Chairman, for
um special appropriations to
help, you know, with
The services that they do work
on, uh, in rural communities.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee and representative, I
think the answer would be yes.
There's always an opportunity if
you wanted to augment what is,
what is being uh allocated from
the opioid settlement fund.
Uh, for Project Echo, you could
do that through a special
appropriation.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, and I
would like to work with your
team offline on uh getting that
done.
Great. Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Hernandez. OK.
Uh, I don't think we have any
other questions. We have a bit
more work to do, but thank you
to uh Mr. Secretary, and thanks
to your team who are here. We'll
ask for the LFC recommendation
and uh look for a little more
work.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I would
move that the committee adopt
the LFC recommendation at this
time.
OK, it's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by
Representative Garrett. Is there
any opposition to that motion,
seeing none that's been adopted.
Right. Members, let's go ahead
and take a 5-minute break. I
think we've learned our lesson
before. We're gonna dive into a
very long, um, so.
We're here at 3:13. We'll, we'll
start back up at 3:20 and see
everybody here shortly.
Yeah
All right. uh, thanks everybody
for allowing the time.
We're gonna go ahead and get
started, um.
Great to see Team DFA still
working hard at it there.
Um
OK. uh, thanks everyone,
members, uh, we're gonna go to
the next part of today's
hearing.
Which is our update on our
Our specials efficiencies and
supplementals. And then after
this members, uh, for those
folks who are a part of the uh
information technology work
group.
Um
You will still still be going.
Um, so, uh, the
members what we have here.
Everybody recalls last week, I
think it was last.
Um, we went through sort of line
by line on all the special
supplemental in deficiency
appropriations. Um,
Since then, we've had a number
of work groups meet.
Uh, we still have work groups
that are meeting.
What we're gonna do today and
members, we will be taking a
vote today to adopt the changes
up until this point. We saw sort
of a blank slate with only the
LFC recommendation from 2024.
What we're gonna hear today and
director writing, Director Sali
are gonna take us through the
adjustments.
That have been made mostly in
very close uh well,
At the direction of the
committee.
Following the work groups,
Uh, obviously, there are staff
who are tracking other member
bills that are not on this
committee, um, we've invited in
the mem the chair and the
ranking member from policy
committees to try to get a
larger perspective, but
obviously a lot of this falls on
us as a committee and so as we
go through this, many of the
different areas that members
have flagged, uh, are gonna be
reflected in the changes.
They, this, this last thing I'll
say, this is not the final vote.
We're taking a vote today that
will be to adopt the changes up
until this point. This is a
vital thing that we have to do
for LFC to move forward with the
bill.
Um, they're absolutely will be
changes after today.
You
in the special supplemental and
deficiency appropriations,
mostly in the specials, um,
including some sort of
corrections that uh will, will
be addressing. Does that sound,
go ahead, representative
Pettigrew.
Uh, uh, so, um, the
representative Pettigrew, um,
for ketchup cleanup, uh, we will
be in addition to uh recurring
adjustments which we haven't
really made up until this point,
except for just the subcommittee
piece, uh, and special
supplemental and deficiency,
that'll also be a point where
we'll be adjusting grow
appropriations in the ketchup
cleanup. Absolutely. Thank you.
OK. Thank you, members. Um,
please start us off and then
we'll go through this, uh, we'll
go through a couple of pages.
Again, they'll, uh, they'll be
taking us through the changes
and then we'll pause to see if
there's any questions.
All right.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good afternoon, members of the
committee. Um, the chairman
pretty much said my, uh,
everything that I wanted to make
sure I said, so that's awesome.
Um, I will say the HAFC scenario
in front of you really aims to
do a couple things, but I'll say
3 major things, um, and one is
what the chairman said, and
that's to address legislative
and in some area agency
priorities that you all have
been hearing about, and those
legislative priorities may
include bills.
Or, um, you know, things that
may come through this committee
after we're done with House Bill
2 in a couple of short weeks
here.
Um, it also tries to right size
some things with a sort of
overarching goal of focusing on
appropriating what agencies can
actually spend in a year or 2
years, you know, you've heard a
lot about reauthorizations.
You've heard a lot about, you
know, unspent funds. So some of
the work that's done in this
recommendation with the help of
Director Celi, um, and his
excellent staff is to sort of
right size some of those things,
so we're focusing on what we can
do in the immediate future.
Um, lastly, there is some
overall sort of rearranging in
this, uh, when I, when I first
started at LFC, the first thing
Charles told me is the only rule
is to never net. Always explain
what you're doing. Don't take a
net change, but unfortunately
with 300 lines, we will be doing
some netting here, but I'll try
my best to explain sort of where
things are moving around. So for
example, this committee brought
up some changes and concerns
with the behavioral health
appropriate.
So where we reduced those, we'll
try our best to track where we
increased in other areas.
OK. I'll go ahead and get
started, Mr. Chair, I think we
can go.
Probably to page 5. Yeah,
probably to page 5 for 2
changes. So we'll start on page
one, but I just mean we have
Basically only a few changes. So
starting on page one.
Um, we have.
5 on line 6, we have $500,000 in
general fund revenue for the
administrative office of the
courts, and that is for Casa or
court-appointed Special
advocates, uh, statewide. That
was a member priority for
recurring, as you all have heard
time and time again, are
recurring funding is very low,
um, our recurring capacity is
very low. So this significantly
increases the cost of program in
a one time to see the
feasibility of them.
growing that program.
So members, your next change is
on page 2.
And that's gonna be line 14
again for the administrative
office of the courts, that's 5
million for their hardware
software program you heard about
this during the court's hearing,
who, a couple of Saturdays ago,
and that's that speech to text
and translation services that
they're requesting, that was a
huge ask. I think it was around
$40 million. We've been working
with the courts to again figure
out what they can spend in a
year, and this gets you closer
to what they can spend in a
year.
Mr. Chair, I'll go ahead and
move on one more page and then
we can pause for questions. So
we'll go to your next change for
HAFC is on page 4.
And this is just a language
change, so maybe I'll actually
go to page 5 because it's tied
to something on page 5. So on
page 4, line 46 for the tax and
rev department, uh, the original
language here was authorizing
the department to use $3 million
from um from this fund, from the
contingency fund. This ups that
to $5 million after TRD had some
concerns with that original $3
million.
And then just we'll go to page 5
really quickly because this is
related, so line 48 on page 5.
This is our first reduction. So
we see in the LFC wreck on line
48, 3 million, and then you
don't see a recommendation in
the HAFC column right next to
it. We removed that
appropriation because you all
heard from TRD during their
hearing that corrections is
already doing this work for much
cheaper, um, and they don't feel
like they need the
appropriation.
So we went ahead and removed
that from your scenario.
Mr. Chair, if you'd like, we can
pause for questions or we can
move along.
Um, it will go to down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Amanda on page 3,
some of the concern that was
presented to us was from, oh,
I'm thinking DAs, never mind.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank
Thank you, chair, and thank you,
Amanda for
Your description.
Old specials.
Section 5, line 39 for tax and
Rev had provided a valid state
of identification card, da, da
da da da.
It does not look like even after
the conversation we had, HASC
is, is contemplating that. Would
that be correct?
Pettigrew, are you talking about
on on the new sheet, do you have
the line number? Is that line
46?
Looks like line 46 and 39. You
know, it's been really cool if
you'd had old line numbers with
new numbers. So, so we could go
back and forth, but yes, that is
line 46 on the new one.
OK, um, Mr. Chair Representative
Pettigrew, yes, that's what we
um mentioned that that 5
million, it was 3 million on old
specials. So we increased the
amount that they can take from
the appropriation contingency
fund to implement tax changes,
and I know Charles knows more.
Mr. Cha, it's not booked as an
appropriation. It's spending
authority with Board of Finance
approval out of our reserves. So
that's why you don't see a
number.
In the table, but you see the
legal authority in the language.
OK.
Thank you, chair.
Thank you. Back to, uh,
Representative Dow and then
Representative Herndon. Thank
you. Thank you, madam, Mr.
Chair. um, and I did find it.
OK, so on page 4, can you
explain to us what you've done
with the first
the
Yes, with the 1st and 2nd
district attorneys. Uh, what,
what happened there?
Mr. Chair Representative Doo,
there's not a change for the 1st
and 2nd attorneys from what you
saw in LFC in this scenario.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, um,
thank you, Amanda. So,
There was some district
attorneys that had some pretty
um high-level concerns about
what they had inherited. What
is, are we going to try to do
anything to address that or do
we know? We have, we'll go to
director uh for that. We already
have, Mr. Chair, that was in the
operating budget. OK, thank you.
Great question. Thank you for
that, uh, Representative
Herndon, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and for
clarification, if we're looking
on page 2, Mr. Chair, Mr. Sali.
Um
Number 5, with respect to the
second judicial district court.
So there were, uh, there was a
quite a bit of information about
security in the courts, and I
see that there was no
recommendation there made. Is
this a, uh, address someplace
else, Mr. Chair, Mr. Slee.
Mr. Chairman, on page 1 line 9.
The courts came in with a bunch
of small individuals, and those
were rolled up into one
appropriation for AOC to work
with the district courts to
prioritize.
Funding at each individual one.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Sali
and then one other question I
have for you, uh, the 2nd
judicial District court made a
specific request for an
additional judge. I, it's, I, is
it on here somewhere that I just
don't see it, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair, that's an operating
budget.
So that means no, correct.
It's not being considered and
just in clarification, uh,
Herndon and for all of us. These
are, uh, these are gonna be one
time spending.
This won't be, that's right,
exactly. Thank you. Absolutely,
thank you.
OK, uh, let's keep on going.
All right, members, we're gonna
track back to page 5 where we
where we last left you, um, and
we'll actually.
No, I will flag one more here on
page 5 just because it's um.
A language, a language change.
So if you look at line 56, um,
this is
Yeah, this is a brand new one.
So on page 5, line 56, uh, this
is $10 million to the Department
of Finance and Administration
for local public safety
infrastructure and capacity
building, you can see um a
couple specific items in there,
but those specific items, you
know, only add up to less than
half of the total appropriation.
So this item is in here because
we've heard a lot of concerns
about local public safety, um, a
lot of bills addressing local
public.
safety, whether that be, you
know, the cost that sheriffs,
local sheriffs have to transport
state inmates, um, whether that
be, uh, you know, sheriffs
having low capacity, so this,
this um block of money is meant
to address some of those
capacity issues at a local
level.
Great. Uh, send down.
Mr. Chair and Amanda, can you
explain what that 200 that $2
million for humanitarian
support. What is that?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Doo, it's attached to uh several
pieces of potential legislation
that those border communities
are requesting assistance for
women.
Mr. Chairman, do you know the
bills? Um, Mr. Chair
Representative Tao, I will get
them to you. Thank you.
We'll flag on that, uh, other
representative.
Uh, yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Amanda, but um, but
we just dropped it. There's
another bill to really do that
for all counties in uh in New
Mexico, but I don't think I have
the number on that yet, if these
are just for the um
The the southern counties, I can
tell you this is a this is an
issue for counties all over the
state.
Uh, for those of you who don't
know in the past years, uh, if
state police transport uh a
prisoner.
They are someone they have in
custody, um, and they take it to
a local county. The county has
to pick up the tab on all that
transport, even if they have to
go out of state or wherever they
have to go, that county has to
pick up that cost, and it's,
it's killing counties. We, um,
uh, set him down. I have you
just dropped a bill, I think the
day before yesterday, but it's
really to take care of that
situa it's a state situation.
It's, it's not just
Counties on the on the border.
I'll, I'll just say that and um
and I actually don't know what
the number is on that, and
we're, I'm trying to get the FIR
and that, so I just, I just want
to flag that it's an important
issue, not just for some
counties, but for all counties.
Mr. Chair Representative
Herrera, I'm sorry, I, I
misspoke cause there's a couple
different things going on in
here, the 500,000 for local
sheriffs is not restricted to
just those counties, so that
would be available to all
counties in the state.
Uh, and thank you, Mr. Turn.
Thank you, Amanda. I don't think
that's gonna cover the tab,
just, I don't know, but I kind
of know. That's all I know. Uh,
and thank you, uh,
representative for that. We've
got a few other questions, um,
uh, that's sort of part of the
process here, members, you know,
obviously there's never gonna be
unlimited capacity.
Uh, but we want to hear this is
a great chance for us to get
feedback on priorities and the
director, um, and, and all of us
are doing our best to sort of uh
To get those and the fact that
this is here really reflects
conversation and flags from
representatives on the committee
about that, um, about that. OK,
represent pedigrew.
Thank you, Chair, just for
clarifying question on 56.
The statement or the the
terminology in here, the
verbiage local sheriff's offices
to transport state inmates.
Chairman, I would like to
clarify that because I'm not
sheriff's office has made 3 or 4
trips to New York in the last
year.
Is that considered one of those
500,000.
One of those things that could
be funded inside that the county
for that 500,000.
Mr. Chair Representative
Pettigrew, um, we can definitely
look at the language and
research that.
Mhm.
Excellent. OK. Uh, let's keep
going.
Oops, and Mr. Chair, I
apologize, Director Seli
reminded me still on page 5,
there were 2 additional ads I
didn't mention, um, tracking the
spreadsheet a little weird
today. Uh, there's also two new
ads in the HAFC recommendation
lines 52 and uh 54. So line 52
adds 2 million to the Department
of Finance Administration for
housing assistance personnel and
programming. That was in
executive request, um, you'll
see big chunks of housing money
in this scenario as we go
through, so we found it
appropriate to have DFA be able
to build some capacity to get
that money out.
Similarly, on line 54.
There's $2 million for um
housing projects for senior
citizens living in manufactured
housing. This is a program that
MFA already does, uh, they
essentially help repair, um,
senior homes when they possibly
can't afford to repair them.
It's a really great program. So
there's 2 million there for that
as well.
Great.
OK. Alright, so moving on to
page 6, line 58. 0, sorry, uh I
think we have a question with
some little, please. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Before we move away
from this section, I was
wondering where the uh where we
might find the um uh
what was this, a sexual assault,
um.
The crime victims, uh,
The request was uh I'll get the
Sorry, uh, sexual assault
services.
Um, was that incorporated in
here anywhere. I maybe I just
didn't see it, Mr. Chair
Representative Little, I did
this also earlier, that's not
through DFA, it's through CBRC,
so you'll see it later on in the
spreadsheet.
Got it.
Thank you very much.
OK. Um, let's keep on going. OK,
so on page 6 we have a similar
the appropriation stayed the
same, but some language changed
on line 58. So this is 50
million for regional recreation
centers and quality of life
grants statewide, the HAFC
recommended language includes
language that says, including
communities with military
installations, so that would
open up those grants to
possibly.
cases or to communities like
Alamogordo, so that we can
improve the quality of life in
those areas, which has been a
priority for the veterans uh
committee.
Charles, am I missing anything
on here? I don't think so. The
additional language change, Mr.
Chair, is on 60.
Or, uh, earmarking 2 million for
capacity building grants and
including councils of government
is eligible.
Thank you. That was an important
one.
Yeah
Sorry, Director Slee, can you
say that line again?
On line 64. Great. Uh,
increasing the earmark for
capacity building grants to 2
million and including councils
of government.
OK.
Thank you, Representative down,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, line 558,
um, what, what precluded the
military installations before.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Doo, I don't think anything
included the military
installation or precluded
military installation
specifically, but I do think
having this language in there
helps flag for uh the
infrastructure office that those
um are a priority as well. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And
what was the balance?
The last time we put money into
this.
Was it 40 million?
Representative, you've made
about 90 million of
appropriations over a couple of
different fiscal years available
and that money has been going
out in the city. And then thank
you, Mr. Chair, on 64, the, the
one that, that uh you just
discussed.
And this word, OK, not all cogs
are created equal. And I think
that was proven by the handout
that we received or some are
producing a 50% and others are
producing at 100%. Um, when this
term here says technical
assistance providers.
Is this language broad enough
that the RFP could be responded
to by an economic like Las
Cruces economic development, or
Middle Rio Grande economic
development.
Yes, I could see that
interpretation. Thank you.
Thank you, Represented.
I guess I had a question on 642,
Mr. Chair, and, uh, Charles.
Um
$2 million it says for capacity
building grants to local
governments.
Uh, I think that I'll just go to
the cogs. I, I don't know why we
would give it to local
governments and then cos I, I, I
mean, I, I see that being split
up in different ways and, and I
had intended for that to go to
the cogs or technical assistance
providers who do a good job.
If, uh, if the card isn't
producing, so I, I think if we
do it to local governments, I, I
think it might get split up.
That's just my question. I don't
know that that would, Mr. Chair,
that would be up to DFA to award
that money to any of those
entities for the capacity
building grants and so they
would have a.
A due diligence process on um if
a county wasn't adequately
prepared to be able to do that,
and there was a, a competing cog
or a competing technical
assistance providers, they'd
have flexibility to be able to
award those other entities
instead.
OK, um, Mr. Chair, I know, I
know they did a great job last
year. I know DFA did a great job
last year of giving that money
out very quickly to the cogs,
and so hopefully that will keep,
so if that allows the
flexibility people need. I, I
guess I'll live with it, but um
Cospurs.
Awesome. Thank you very much
Representative Herera. um, OK,
let's keep on trucking.
Chair, members, so we are on
page 7, line 68. Uh, this is one
of the first really big
additions into this
recommendation, so this is a
$110 million to Department of
Finance Administration. This is
for transitional housing, the
expansion of housing, and other
behavioral health and
transitional facilities.
Uh, this is $110 million again,
uh, you can see in the language
that $80 million of that would
be for programs in Albuquerque
and Bernalillo, 10 million for
City of Las Cruces in Donana
County, and then the remainder
for those statewide projects
that you saw, um, in those
letters that were submitted when
we had our big housing hearing.
Great. I have a quick question
on that Director Slee, Director
Bryden, um, what is the STB
earmark that's going to MFA this
year and how much remains from
the appropriations made to MFA
last year.
Mr. Chair, I believe that
earmark runs around 38 to 40
million.
And they've been making good
progress at getting the awards
out um for projects.
Not necessarily money leaving
the bank.
Because they have a a long lead
time, but they've been, uh,
making a pretty good uh award.
Sending out the awards and
spending basically spending the
money, setting it aside. Got it.
OK. Thank you. All right, Mr.
Chair members, then we'll go
ahead and move on to page 8. so
there's a little bit of
rearranging here, so online 71,
you can see $2.5 million to the
New Mexico Sentencing Commission
for crime reduction Grant Act.
If you recall when we heard the
sentencing commission, um, LFC
recommendation had put that
grant money into.
EFA instead of the sentencing
commission, the sentencing
commission really wanted it
back, um, but there were some
concerns from LFC analysts that
uh the sentencing commission was
using it in duplicative ways to
the law enforcement retention
fund that it passed. So this
puts it back at the sentencing
commission, there is legislation
being either drafted or dropped
to fix the sentencing
commission's statute on this, so
we can avoid those duplicate.
cu t ive grants.
Um. Great. Thank you, um, Vier
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, Director Briding. I just
wanted to let everyone know that
I believe that's House Bill 286
so that everybody can support
that very important fix. Thank
you.
Good, good plug, Mr. Chin.
OK, uh, let's, um, down the line
72. Mr. Chair, we have a couple
more on this page. So your next
change is again on line 72,
that's for the Department of
Information and Technology. Uh,
this was a big priority for a
lot of members when we heard do
it and when we heard specials,
so this total number, um, for
cybersecurity initiatives
increased from 15 million to 20
million, and some of the
language that do it was
concerned about was
moved from that appropriation.
So that's a full $10 million
over the executive
recommendation there, as we
know, cybersecurity is a growing
concern.
Um, I have one more on my list,
and that's going to be uh item
number 79 for the ethics
commission, uh, that's $100
million with a little bit,
100,000 goodness. Imagine
We will be so ethical, Mr.
Chair.
OK, I'm so sorry. No you're
good. It's all you're good.
That's, you're good. OK.
$100,000 for the ethics
commission uh for operational
costs, contracts, security and.
infrastructure and equipment,
and that is authorized until
fiscal year 27, so I know that
um the ethics commission had
hoped for the uh the LFC
recommendation, which was a
little higher, but this will
give them some wiggle room for
some of uh those priorities.
Street.
Oh, sorry, uh, Representative
Brown and then Representative
Dall.
I just want to point out we
probably should add an S on
ethic.
Miss, just catch it while we're
there.
Thank you.
The work ethic is exceptional.
Uh, Representative Dale,
Mr. Chair and Amanda, I want to
thank you for not giving the
ethics Commission a $100 million
after 27 months of an open
claim, they probably assign a
full time tracker to me, so I
really appreciate that. Thank
you.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair.
We will move along to page 9.
So the first change I have here
is on line 85, and that's for
the tourism department. Uh, this
was a big priority for the
committee as well as for the
department, so $2 million for
the marketing excellence Bureau.
There is additional language in
there that says the department
shall work with economic
development to promote New
Mexico as a place of business.
So again, encouraging those
collaborations between agencies
and trying not to duplicate
funding, so trying not to fund
ED.
for marketing when we're funding
tourism to be the marketing arm
of the state.
Uh, your next change, Mr. Chair,
members is line 87, and that's
for creative industries grants.
This was another flag by the
Economic Development Department,
and that's $2 million which we
uh think bypassed, uh, past
expenditures they could get out
in a year.
The last one on this page that I
have is line 90, so your very
last one, and that is an
increase for marketing and trade
shows with the New Mexico
partnership for um economic
development that went from
750,000 to 2 million.
Right
We will go another page here.
So,
On page 10, uh, we're gonna see
some economic development
increases here in general. This
is one area I will flag as sort
of coming from the community
benefit fund, which is at the
very, very end, uh, the
Community Benefit fund is
proposed legislation. It is
currently in this budget as just
a fund transfer contingent on
that legislation, that
legislation has $40 million for
economic development and
consultation with the department
and with members.
We essentially removed that $40
million from the community
benefit fund and put it just
directly appropriating to
economic development initiatives
so that they're named and
they're clear. So the first big
one you'll see here, um,
Is item number 91, that is 15
million for the economic
development department, uh, for
operational support, including
incubators with 10 million for
Quantum Studios.
Your next one is right under
that line 92, another $15
million for physical economic
development structure, including
uh innovation hubs and quantum
space.
And then we'll just keep going
for this page to line 97, where
there's $6 million for the
bioscience Development Fund that
is contingent on legislation,
Senate Bill 119, um, and then
another big priority for this
committee was line 98, so $2
million for healthy food
financing program at EDD. I know
food has been a big topic of
both the interim and our agency
meetings.
Uh, any questions? I don't see
any. We'll keep on going.
Yeah
OK. All right. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, members, uh, page 11, uh,
your first change is going to be
on item number 101. Um, this is
a $100 million for trade port
grants, and that is contingent
on legislation that's House Bill
19, uh, this legislation came
out of commerce with a
bipartisan vote, no one in
opposition. Uh, these are
essentially trade port grants
for um, everything from
transportation.
to a road projects, I know, I
think.
I think several members of this
committee are on that committee,
but uh that's what that addition
is.
Another big ad is item number
102, which is an additional 25
million for the research,
development and deployment.
To economic development.
And then the last one here is
item number 107. This is a brand
new one, and this is for a study
of the fire insurance market.
We'll see on the next couple
pages as you all know, um,
natural disasters, fires in New
Mexico communities are becoming
more of a concern, and it'll
become um a national problem, so
this would support uh research
for that. Great. Uh, we'll pause
there, ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
wanted a one question about the
trade points grants. I know that
Santa Teresa is a major import
facility for Chinese goods. They
ship them across the ocean, put
them on a train, run them to
Santa Teresa, and they're open
and imported at Santa Teresa,
with this uh facilitate other
types of sports like that. I'm
just trying to understand what
it's for.
Mr. Chair, ranking member
Chapfield, absolutely, yes.
Thank you.
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Online uh presented line 91 and
2.
Could that be possible capital
outlay money?
that be attached to capital that
way.
Why are we funding that?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, um, I think this could
possibly fit into Capital Outlay
money. This would be, um, a big
chunk of capital outlay. It's
not uncommon for physical
infrastructure, if it's related
to a certain industry to be
in-house bill to like this, but
I can do more research on that
for you. Thank you Mr. Chair and
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, this would be for
basically a grant program, as
opposed to an individual project
that you would see in the
capital bill.
Great. Thank you, Representative
Vincent.
Um, although I don't see, uh,
representhampton.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
and, and on that note for
creating a new grant program.
Could it go under a different
grant program, or is this like
very specific Mr. Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative Lu
Han, in our conversations with
the economic development
department, they're very
prepared to deploy this. They
don't feel like it needs to be
looped into another grant
program, but I can also do
additional research there.
Yeah, I'm just, just for, just
because we're gonna, we're
seeing that, you know.
All over the place, a new
programs and new things and I'm
just wondering like,
How are we streamlining this,
uh, this, this type, the, the
grants and the and the types of
new programs that were we're
creating and I'm just, just for
clarity, I'd appreciate that.
And also, Mr. Chair.
Did we go, um, line item 102.
So
Um
OK. We're just doubling that,
Mr. Chair, I think it was in our
original LFC wreck.
And
I heard it, sorry, um, have
There's just a lot of grants,
grant opportunities, which is
not a bad thing, but I'm just
wondering if we, if it's could
be more streamlined. I think
that's kind of my focus here as
well. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you very much for
Mohan. Uh, we'll go back to
Representative Vincent and then
Rim Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and online
175.
Can
I'm sorry.
No, no, we'll we'll,
I'm sorry
you're ahead of
what
I, you're good. Yeah, 107107,
sorry about that. That was
almost as bad as your 100
million.
Uh, Mr. Chair, on the 107 uh for
the study of fire insurance
market.
$2 million?
Would you explain 2 million?
Why, why the study is so
expensive.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Vincent, I can, um, this is
essentially it it could
potentially be a very big study,
as you know, better than anyone
we've seen in California their
entire fair market program just
completely be wiped out. So I
think the idea was to do a
bigger, more comprehensive study
with the bigger price tag. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Garrett, please.
Um, Mr. Chair, I'm just flagging
101. The languages for trade
port grants contingent on
enactment of House Bill 19,
which is Trade Courts Act, or
similar legislation.
Could that include P3s.
Is that right Mr. Chair
Representative, that's pretty
boilerplate language. I might
have to look at the bills a
little closer, Director Seli
might have a better answer.
OK, yeah, we might have to look
at him a little closer for a
house bill 276.
Thanks. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Garrett.
Uh, let's keep going.
All right, Mr. Chair, uh, keep
on trucking to, uh, page 12
here. So our first big change on
page 12 is item 110 to the
Office of the Superintendent of
Insurance, uh, there was 49
million for this fair
marketplace, uh, program, and
that is preliminarily taken out
of the HAFC wreck, given that we
know it's a national problem.
Um, there's been demand for many
other communities to have this
fair market problem which could.
potentially be, you know, 150 to
$100 million. So that's where
that change is right there.
Um, and then your next change is
item 112. That's for the Board
of Veterinarian medicine, that
is for $125,000. I know that was
a big priority when we went
through specials the first time.
And then line 114. This is a
brand new one. This is pretty
cultural affairs department for
feasibility studies planning,
design, and improvement of
historic sites, including some
funding for 300,000. Um, that's
a total of 300,000 for Los
Luceros.
And then item 115, uh, this is
also a brand new item. This is
for cultural affairs to give
grants to rural libraries with
up to 50,000 per library, so I
know we've all heard about and
love the rural library
endowment, which is an excellent
fund that this legislature has
put a lot of money into, um,
this would essentially get that
money out right away without
appropriating an additional 2.
30 million to the fund. So to
get 50,000 for each rural
library out this year, you would
have to invest $30 million into
that fund. This says, let's give
these rural libraries money
immediately while we keep
working on that fund goal.
Excellent. Uh, we'll pause
there. We're gonna go to
Representative Vincent and then
represent Lujan. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
On the line 110.
Would you explain that to me
again why there's the LFC wreck
is 495.
49,500,000 and then why it's not
in the HAFC.
Yes, Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, um, again, this is
preliminary, but with the uh
with other communities looking
for this funding, this potential
cost ballooned up to upwards of
$200 million. So I think the
idea was take a pause, do this
study, um, and then revisit some
funding for those programs. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just, I
get.
I get a little twitchy about
that number right there because
Mr. Chair, there's only about 7
million in that. I think there's
only about 7 million in that
account to make it solvent and
we're, I'm still, so on the, on
the plane itself, you know, it
seems like there needs to be a
little bit of a backstop there
in case something does happen
because it would definitely turn
into a Californian be completely
wiped out and secondly, um,
And also is stating here in the
uh in the item.
Where it's still uh is still
looking at this as a pilot
project for Lincoln County. Is
that gonna remain like that, or
is it gonna be open to New
Mexico.
Mr. Chair.
This whole line will come out of
the book, so there won't be any
in. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Appreciate it.
Thank you very much,
Representative Luhan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
I think this is the same
question, and then if you, um,
line 110 and 111, you know,
there's
Um, we're talking about the fair
access insurance.
plan that we're we've been
have a lot of expansive and
extensive conversation
throughout the the past year on,
is there another solution or
another way we're we're
addressing this in the budget,
Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Lujan, I do think that's why we
have that $2 million price tag
on that study to take a
comprehensive look and
throughout the interim of what
could work for our communities.
I appreciate that. Thank you.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Mohan. Uh, great
flags. Thank you, Representative
Vincent Link. Thank you,
Representative Mohan.
Uh, Vedetta please.
Uh, uh, Mr. Chair, and, uh,
Amanda, thanks for the 2.5
million. I just want to say
there are kind of, I think
there's 60 year old libraries,
so I think that would be 3
million, just, just to catch.
Great. Thank you very much for
that, uh, Representative Doub
please
and Amanda. So 110, I, I think I
read it wrong. So 110 is only
for Lincoln County, line 110.
Mr. Chair Representative Doo,
that was the original language
that was in the LFC wreck, but
that has come out now, yes. OK.
And Mr. Chair Amanda, so then
the, with the, the other lines
around insurance apply.
To other high-risk areas.
Mr. Chair Representative Doo,
the very similar appropriation
request you see on 111, um,
would apply for other
communities around the state,
but that's also not currently in
the HAC framework.
All right, thank you.
Excellent question, thank you.
Uh, OK, let's keep going.
Great, Mr. Chair. All right,
we're on page 13, um, and we
have online 120, I was gonna say
it was my first mistake, but
then I gave the ethics
commission way too much money,
so it's my second mistake of the
day. So, um, this is the
livestock board. This is for
equipment for meat packing
facilities, including composers,
the LFC rec was 3 million, um,
that is removed in the HAFC
framework because the
appropriate place
to put that is NMDA, so you will
see that move at NMDA, but when
we get to NMDA, um, that number
is incorrect. So the movement of
the number should be 3.3
million. It's 1.3 million,
that's a technical correction
that we'll make, so I'll say it
again when we get there, but,
um, this is essentially just
moving money.
Our next one here is a line 126.
This is to Energy, Minerals and
Natural Resources for forest
health, $20 million and this is
again for uh for um
Fire prevention, forest
thinning, things of that nature
to, to get ahead of some of
these disasters.
Excellent. Uh, I don't see any
questions. Oh, I've had out,
please.
Not to be lad the point,
everybody, but in the cultural
affairs department for the
endowment.
Uh, it's, it's 0, and I, I hope
that can be 5 million because
what we're trying to do the the
request right now in the
legislation is very uh a bill of
26 million to kind of kept out
the endowment, but we're trying
to play it a little safer. So
what we'd like to do is give 3
million out in cash, $50,000 a
year to the 60 year old
libraries. What we'd like to add
a 5 million, hopefully every
year over a 5-year period to get
that endowment up, but we're
trying to do it in a much
I, I'm much more conservative
fashion, so it doesn't take such
a chunk out of the one time
budgets. So I would recommend a
5 million amount for the
endowment for rural libraries,
one time this year.
Thank you.
Uh, Representative Silver.
Thank you, Chair. Um, I'm on
page 13 also and a line 121.
To reestablish the in-state meat
and poultry inspection program,
just wondering why that was left
out. Um, I just have a concern
about increasing rates of bird
flu amongst poultry and uh cows.
Mr. Chair, you dealt with this
in the operating budget.
So we've been trained to
establish this for a number of
years now.
Uh, yeah, it's for we're adding
$721,000 for Seova uh recurring
so that we uh can support the
more in depth in in state
inspections. Excellent. Thank
you for the clarification.
Thank you.
uh, when I see the 20 million in
forest.
to the energy and minerals and
natural resources department. It
brings forth the question for
me.
Is this or have we anywhere put
some money into the
reforestation center up at Mora.
That's in the capital.
Uh, capital outlay question, and
you have put money into that,
and they've got enough to keep
getting going. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much.
Uh, OK. Let's keep on going.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
members. So we're on page 14
now. Um, I think our first
change is online 136 here, so
that's to Mner or geothermal
projects. This was of interest
to several members when we heard
uh Ener yesterday or the day
before yesterday, so there's an
additional 10 million there. Uh,
there was nothing in the
original LFC recommendation.
Right under that is line 37. Uh,
this is an additional 750,000 1
time to the oil control division
or um underground injection
control support. This is uh this
is to help them build capacity
for um the injection.
All right, Mr. Chair, I'll go
ahead and keep going to page 15
at least. So, uh, your next
change is line 139 for state
engineer. So, uh, we'll pause
there, uh, Hernandez. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I, I just got a phone
with cultural affairs. Um, I
just want to flag.
That they
They have a 200 and
Uh 2020, 15,000 for uh a uh
A, um,
Sculpture
That was supposed to be in
Socorro, uh, and
and in Valencia, New Mexico
Tech, and, and uh we're working
on, on creating a minor's
memorial National Minors
Memorial in San Juan County.
To honor, uh,
All, all types of, of, of minors
and so um I just want to like
that, Mr. Chairman, because
there's gonna be some
additional, um, I'm waiting back
from, from the director and I
just want to flag that right
now, Mr. Chair for Cultural
Affairs. OK, thank you.
OK. OK, great. So on to page 15,
um, your first edition is line
139. That's an additional $5
million for um interstate water
litigation and settlement under
the Rio Grande Compact that was
flagged by several members when
we went through specials as well
as when we heard the state
engineer budget.
Similarly, line 140, uh, this is
for non-Pueblo settlement
beneficiaries under Indian water
rights, uh, the HAFC scenario
adds an additional 5 million
there, bringing the total to 25
million.
Right under that line 141,
there's 1 million for regional
water planning. I know that
that's been a priority as well.
Um, and then line 143 for the
water security Planning Act
50-year water plan and
modernization, there's 5 million
for that purpose in the HAFC
scenario that was not included
in the LFC scenario.
We'll keep trucking to page 16,
your first edition is line 148.
So this is to be Indian Affairs
department, $3 million for
equipment and capacity building
for a sawmill in Mescalero.
Um
And then an additional line 149
500,000 for a comprehensive
community planning to Indian
affairs. This came up in their
agency budget hearing, um, as a
priority for them.
And that is all the additions
and changes I have on page 16.
Mr. Chair,
uh, Representative Little.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So, uh, this went from uh 2.5
million, uh, I'm sorry, 149, Mr.
Chair, uh,
And Amanda, um,
So, um, 149, so it, the initial
request was 2.5 or
3
Bubbles post the nation, uh.
Uh, chapters if I'm not
mistaken. So, um, and this is
500,000.
Can you explain why the
Help me to understand Mr.
Chairman, it's coming up from 0
in LFC.
Correct.
OK.
If you see in the LFC column, it
was 0. And so HAFC scenarios.
Increasing the allocation to get
closer to the executive. Thank
you very much. I just got some
additional information.
Appreciate it. Excellent. Thank
you very much, Representative
Little.
OK, uh, let's keep going.
Alright, great, Mr. Chair, we're
on page 17, uh, your first item
on this page, item 156, is for
aging and long-term services,
that's $4 million for the
grandparents raising grandkids
project. Um, this is a project
that uh has matching private and
uh grant funds for it, um, and
this funding is coming from the
Kiki Seedra senior dignity Fund,
so it's other state funds, LFC
did analysis on that fund and it
is able to support that for this
year.
And then if you go to line 159,
you have a new item for the
healthcare authority for a cost
driver study. Um, I know we hear
a lot in the interim about
healthcare going up, so this
would examine some of those big
pressure points.
And then you have line 164. Um,
this is another place where
we're gonna start seeing some of
those shifts, and we're gonna
try our best to explain. Um, so
first I'd like to talk about the
language online 164. So if you
recall in your original special
sheet, this was pretty long
language, um, it did not have
the word providers in there. It
just said counties
municipalities, and it had
language about requiring, um,
higher education institution in
the county, so this.
takes a lot of that language off
to broaden it and include uh for
existing CBHCs as well as
providers directly, and the
amount is going from 43 million
to 36 million, um, again, we
think that's an amount that this
that can actually be spent uh
this year or at least in 2 years
by the authority and then we
reallocated some of that funding
on the following pages.
Mr. Chair, do you want to pause
for questions or, yeah, we'll go
first to Representative Lohan
and then Representative Doo and
then representedrahan, please.
Thank you. Um, I just wanna
clarification online 156 and
158, you mentioned in 156 that
Or this this 4 million will go
to to the Kiki Savera fund or
can you, can you explain that,
Mr. Chair, there are balances in
that fund from prior year
appropriations that are being
Uh, appropriated from that fund.
To this particular project.
We know how much that is, Mr.
Chair.
4 million
For the whats being transferred.
Yes.
Yeah, is it the 4 million that's
what's being transferred out of
the Kiki wager fund for this new
project to spend on that
particular process, that
project, yes. OK, so then, as
we're looking at line 158,
there's uh 9500, so that is that
from the executive was
requesting to load that fund up
with more general fund.
I see. So
uh specifying projects that
would be coming out of it.
OK, Mr. Chair, I think I need
some more clarification on this
because I know there was a
number of us that that pointed
to this line item during our our
first look at this, that wanted
to make sure that we were going
to fund the Kiki Save to fund,
but if there's something going
on there, I think we should more
clarification would be welcome.
Thank you. Excellent. Thank you,
great flag, uh, great
questionhan,
uh, representative down and
represented, Mr. Chair and
Charles, my question was also
what, what would the remaining
balance of the Kiki Savera fund?
be
After the transfer and what it's
now being appropriated for.
It
with the transfer, there would
be a $5.5 million dollar
balance. Mr. Chair and Charles,
so they can still, uh, are we
still reimbursing at cost for
meals or with since post COVID,
are we back to those AAA rates.
Mr. Chair represented how I
would need to follow up on that.
OK. And then they would still
have discretionary fund if the
freezer goes out or tire goes
flat.
You appropriate all the money
out of the Kiki Save fund as a
body versus allowing the agent.
OK. So thank you, Mr. Chair.
Carl at this point, there's no
discretionary funds in the Kiki
Savera.
How many senior mill sites do we
have?
Um, Mr. Chair, I would need to,
to check on that, but you have
money in the operating budget
that goes out.
All the senior centers for those
types of costs.
OK, Mr. Chair, I maybe you can
explain it to me online because
I know I was out and during
COVID, we were reimbursing a
cost.
But prior to that, the
reimbursement rates vary by a
federal formula. I mean, some
programs are getting $15 meals,
some are getting 5.
So, OK, thank you.
To see what the current layer of
the land is post-COVID.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Doo.
Mr. Chair, um, thank you both.
I'm looking at line 164. I'm
just wondering.
Um
County has a um a nursing home
they respond, they did one.
You know, bond sale and and they
raised about $10 million with
costs going up, it's gonna cost
2 million. Could they get money
out of this one for them?
Mr. Chairman, uh, not for a
nursing home. It would be for
transitional.
facilities and certified
community. This is really for
the behavioral health. OK, thank
you.
Uh, thank you very much, uh,
Barrera. Let's go to page 18.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members.
So page 18 not a ton of changes
on this page.
Yeah, no changes on this page
besides, yeah, besides that
language, um, in all of these
appropriations, your old
language did not include the
word providers, all of this
language does include the word
providers, um, again, to make it
more flexible and not so
stringent.
We can keep moving to page 19
where there's also no changes,
right, Charles?
Great.
Keeping it moving.
All right, Mr. Chair, members on
page 20, we have um a change
here
online 183. Um, this is for
Workforce solutions for the
local news fellowship program.
Did I miss?
Line 183.
On page 20.
And then we can keep it moving
if it's all right to page 21.
So you have an addition on
online 189, um, the, the
recommendation goes from 500,000
to 650,000 to reduce the waiting
list for legal and guardian
guardianship services at DDPC.
And then this is one of our
additions here on line 192 to
the Department of Health for
Health councils. There's $3
million that was not included in
the LFC recommendation that was
a big flag for members. And so
when you see that big $46
million go down a little bit.
It's because they probably can't
fund that, uh, they probably
can't spend that in a year, but
it can go to health councils,
which is related to behavioral
health.
All right, we'll keep it moving
to page.
42. Right, uh, Representative De
please.
Mr. Chair and uh
Amanda, on on 185 on that
workforce solutions. Is this
where you're prioritizing
students who are choosing not to
graduate from high school.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Doo, um, for the local news
fellowship program. I don't know
185. 0, sorry.
Oh, this is not an addition. Oh,
OK. I thought you just said an
addition on.
What was the line item you added
in addition for Workforce? Yeah,
Mr. Chair Representative Dao,
um, it was 183 where the
audition for Workforce is. Yes,
ma'am.
OK.
22. All right, Mr. Chair, we'll
go to page 22, line 200, um, for
the Department of the
Environment, your first ad is
on, yeah, line 200 for $1
million and that is for the
implementation for PFOS rules
and litigation. This is up from
0 in the LFC rack.
And then another big money move
here uh is line 202 for
Department of Environment, and
that is for investigation and
remediation of neglected and
contaminated sites, uh, that is
the full 50 million in this
recommendation is funded.
All right, Mr. Chair, we'll keep
moving to page 23.
Also for the Department of
Environment, line 204. Um,
there's 1 million for drinking
water contaminants, um,
analysis.
And then line 207 uh funding for
Office of the Natural Resource
Trustee increased from 10
million in the LFC wreck to 15
million in this recommendation,
which was another priority for
committee members.
If you go to line 209, another
big priority.
Uh pause there, Representative,
please.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I
want to go back to um.
Line 201.
Uh, we currently have 75 million
set aside for uh the um brackish
water projects in uh local
counties and municipalities, uh,
obviously the bill is still
making its way through that we
had that set, and, and is that
taken away now? Or is that
somewhere else
that I don't know about
representative,
that was never in the LFC
recommendation, so there's no
change.
No change, but thank you for the
flag here. OK.
We're gonna need it.
I hope
We did. Thank you.
Uh, OK.
Um
Mr. Chair, we can go back to
page 23. I had one I hadn't hit
on that's an addition, so if
you're back on page 23, line
209, there's 250,000 to the
veterans Services department,
um, for services and outreach
for underserved veterans and
their families, another big
priority for the committee when
we heard specials.
moving.
Page 24.
The first edition on page 24 is
line 217 for Department of
Military Affairs, uh, if this is
for the governor's Summer
challenge programs, if you all
remember, this was the
differential between the
executive and the LFC
recommendations and the
operating budget, we recommended
one-time funding, so that's why
this shows up here.
Oh, so your other big change on
this one, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee is going to be
line 219 for the corrections
department, the original.
appropriation for hepatitis C
treatment and program monitoring
was a total of $40 million. That
included 17.8 million from the
penitentiary income fund. This
recommendation removes the
general fund for that and just
uses the penitentiary income
fund, again, because that is
much closer to the amount that
they will be able to actually
spend this year on hep C
treatment for inmates.
Um, and then we're at line 222,
uh, Representative Little, Mr.
Chair, this is where we see that
CVRC money for $1 million for
sexual assault services.
And just, uh, point your
attention to line 220 as well,
moving to the executive rec for
re-entry services at uh the
corrections department.
Uh, representative.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair,
and I would just like to go back
to to line 210 for the children,
youth and Families says for
training academy, one of the
things that was presented to us
yesterday was the need to have
more licensed social workers,
and they wanted to provide
training for them, Mr. uh,
Chair.
Uh, Mr. Sali, was this ever
considered by the uh LFC.
Yes, Mr. Chair and
Representative, you'll see that
in the grow appropriations and
Section 9 later on. All right,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Fernan.
All right, Mr. Chair, members, I
think we are on page 25 now.
I don't have any change,
just a small reallocation for
line 224.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, thank you,
Charles. Um, this is where my
highlighter ran out of ink. So
line 224, uh, for, um, for
Grants for emergency vehicles
for behavioral health, um, this
was 5 million, it goes down to
2.5 million, um, HCA is really
who would be buying those crisis
intervention vehicles, uh,
rather than DPS. So this leaves
some of that money there, but
reallocate some to HCA Mr.
Chairman, we're going to start
getting into uh public schools
and where we're recommending,
uh, just ignore those line items
since those will be dealt with
with the public schools, uh,
high level.
but you'll see reflected in here
is the LFC recommendation, uh,
but those will be adjusted as
the public schools work group uh
continues its work. OK, thank
you for that. We're gonna go to
Representative Baca.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Charles. But just,
and this is actually regarding
the DPS equipment. We did hear a
uh
presentation the other day
regarding equipments and the
vehicles that were there.
Have we, you know, I'm gonna
advocate for that again as we,
we kind of shared with that, uh,
you know, kind of flag that if
there's some way we can.
Get closer to that amount, uh,
that was requested. I think that
many of the committee members,
um,
We're in support of that.
So
thank you, thank you very much
for that flag, and let's really
keep an eye, uh, on the DPS and
um we'll offline, see if it's
for the, the, um
The sort of healthcare related
vehicles or others, but we'll
follow that up offline. Uh,
Kate, next we're gonna go to
represent Do please. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you,
Charles, and so on
31 and 32. And I don't even know
if this is the right place. I
could, it could be somewhere
else. The real time crying, the
police led.
You'll see that when we get to
Mr. Chairman, when we get to the
IT projects,
is that what we see vehicles for
local law enforcement somewhere
else as well, not local law
enforcement, but what you see
online 232 is the uh HAFC, uh.
Takes the the LFC wreck for 6
million for the state police
vehicles represented.
Like 232 is where the money is.
Thank you.
Great, uh, Representative Silva,
please. Thank you. Just a quick
clarifying question on line 231.
Uh, implementation of a
commercial off the shelf records
management. Does this help the
Department of Public Safety, um,
with the custodian, being a
custodian of public records.
Thank you, chair.
Yes, I believe so.
Great. Thank you. OK.
OK, so we're, uh, we're turning
the page here.
Um
And then we're gonna go which
page catch us up 28.
28, OK.
All right, Mr. Chair, we are on
page 28, uh, line 255 for higher
education.
This was flagged by several
members uh for partnership with
Burrell for osteopathic
medicine, $3 million that brings
the HAFC recommendation up to
the executive recommendation.
Uh, your next line down here,
256. This is another sort of
behavioral health, uh,
reallocation. So this is $1
million to higher education for
career development and
behavioral health fields,
including youth and mental
health first aid and training.
So there's 1 million for that.
Mr. Chair.
Uh, we'll go to Representative
Hernandez. Thank you. I was
gonna bring this up back on line
210, but I think it's more
appropriate for like 256, uh,
Mr. Chairman, I was talking to
secretary yesterday. Uh, they
want to start a child welfare
certificate program.
The College has a school of
transformation, rolling out
certificate programs to get more
students in the career path. I,
I wanna, I wanna flag this
because I did contact in at
college. They are uh starting
the early conversations with
CYFD on getting this child
welfare certificate program
rolling because they have a uh
MOU at Highlands University
already, so think this term.
Thank you. Uh, we have
Representative Lohan and then
Representative.
Yes, Mr. um, how are line item
257 and
262 related, if at all, Mr.
Chair, in regards to us giving a
million dollars for pathways
into careers.
Um
And then
Oh just the dis distribution of
public post-secondary
institutions statewide to
support dual credit programs for
New Mexico high school students.
How, what is the interplay
there, Mr. Chair?
It's not in, Mr. Chair.
It's not, was not in the LFC
recommendations. It's not in
this scenario, it's something
that by law, the institutions
can work with the school
districts who have the money to
make sure that the money can
follow the students
paying double for the same
student. OK. And Mr. Chair
Representative Lu Han, is a
clarifying, there's a couple
line items mentioned, uh, for,
and we haven't quite gotten
there yet, but uh the 1 million
for behavioral health is, uh,
ideally for mentorship related
to behavioral health and then
the pathways to careers is more
of an economic development
focused one, which lives in
different areas of higher ed, so
that's why those languages look
similar, but they are for
different purposes. Thank you.
Great. Thank you, Representative
Luhan, Representative Little and
then represent Ferndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, uh,
I knew we were largely going
over um moving past the public
education piece, but on page 26,
Mr. Chair, um, line 233, um,
This.
we had it flagged, but nothing
is going, nothing, there is $0.
Mr. added to this category?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Little, this is for DPS.
The outdated systems. Um, this
afternoon, Mr. Chair
Representative, uh, the IT work
group will see suggestions for
some of the C2 projects related
to this, um, we can circle back
to see if those overlap and and
do some more research there.
Thank you. It was a bit
confusing. Thank you so much,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much for some
little Representative Herndon,
please. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
um I am directing your attention
to page 27 and it's line 249,
and I'm asking for a
clarification. One of the
requests was for purposes of
having defibrillators in all of
the high schools and then making
sure that people who use those
would be trained. They had been
there at one time, but there was
never any follow up or batteries
put in those um instruments, so
is
That in
249 or did you include it in
anyway, this is not a recurring
cost.
Mr. Chair Representative
Herndon, that is um on the list
of considerations for the public
education work group. Again,
these numbers haven't changed
much since the LFC
recommendation. So until we have
the work group recommendations
finalized, I, I can't tell you
much more. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much,
Representative Herndon.
Uh, OK. Um, let's go on to
We
29.
You're right.
You're right. All right. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, Representative,
um, on page 29, your first
change is or your only change is
online 260, and that is to
higher ed for high school
equivalency tests, $1.2 million.
Uh, this was flagged as a
priority for many members, so
that is added here in the HTFM.
Mr. Chair, members on page 30,
your first change is going to be
line 262 for higher ed, um,
Representative Lu Han had just
mentioned this. This is for
pathways into careers, including
funding for the supercomputing
challenge, which I know, um, is
a challenge that affects kids in
all sorts of districts, so we
wanted to make sure to call that
one out, but this is for
economic real uh economic
development related career
pathways.
Right under that is for uh line
263. This is $3 million for
scholarships, financial aid, and
other support practicums for
behavioral health or addiction
counseling students. So several
members have brought up, you
know, trying to get more social
workers, trying to get more
caseworkers. This could help go
towards some of that. Um,
And then one more change on line
265 for higher ed, uh, the
health professional loan
repayment program was flagged by
many members when we went
through, uh, specials and
supplementals, so that's
increased from 15 million to 20
million here.
OK. Great. Mr. Chair
Representatives on page 31, um,
you have line 269 as your first
edition. This is for Tribal
Dure. This came up both in the
higher ed hearing, um, as well
as some legislation and some
member priorities. So there's an
additional 200,000 for tribal
dual credit, ah, which gets some
of those programs closer to
their goals for funding.
Um, and then we do have another
reallocation here online 273 for
higher ed, uh, that 20 million
for the technology enhancement
fund is taken back down to 10
million, which meets the
executive recommendation that
fund also has some remaining
balances from previous years, so
it allows them to work through
some of that fund balance.
Next we have um a couple of new
ads, um, and I know director
Seli can speak more to these,
um, so I'll start with 276, uh,
for the bioscience Authority at
University of New Mexico. This
came up in the interim as well
as for some members. So there's
1 million there, um.
Director Seli, do you want to
touch on
Line 275.
Sure, this would be a 3-year
appropriation for UNM's
athletics department, uh,
basically, they've been having
to fundraise, have their coaches
fundraise for basic student
operations, and this would help
them get out of that hole for a
3 year period to get their
finances in order, you'll see a
similar appropriation amount for
NMSU when we get to that and
then uh uh line up just above it
would be for the.
Veterinarian loan repayment
fund, uh, which was house bill 9
Representative Lohan. Yeah, uh,
$9 million for student
athletics, um.
For 3 years since is a program,
Mr. Chair.
It's kind of acting like a, a
grow without coming from the
grill. That's OK, so what, what
things are they not getting
afforded to them, Mister Chair.
Student nutrition, counseling,
uh, there's a number of
different uh basic operational
costs in the athletic program
that they're having to fundraise
for because they're
appropriations are too.
OK. Um,
Not was not my experience when I
was at UNM.
In fact,
It was quite the opposite, Mr.
Chair, so I, I, I probably would
like to know more offline about
that, Mr. Chair, thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Mohan.
Uh
I don't see any other questions.
Great, Mister Chair, we will
move on.
Uh,
on the dual credit program, um,
just like, uh, there's a
question I asked about how that
gets distributed and um
And I got clarification that,
that it's per student that gets
requested and just, just want to
um make sure that
Uh, Mr. Chairman, how can we uh
ensure that, that, that money is
going.
to what the Secretary asked
about, I think it was um
The 3 institutions, so just not
like that. Thank you.
OK, let's keep going.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, page 32,
line 280, um, this is strategic
water at NMSU for research
monitoring and development. So
this would help the institution
continue to do some research
there, for a million dollars.
And then line 282, you see a
similar appropriation to uh New
Mexico State University for
athletics for $5 million which I
think might be a technical
error. It might need to be 66,
yeah.
Um, so there's that, and then on
line 285, uh, this is for
implementation equipment for
laboratory facilities for water
treatment, uh, this NMSU came
back to committee members with
the true cost of um of this
program after they had a
feasibility study, and that was
4 million, so this increases
that to meet that full cost.
And then 286 is my 3rd mistake.
It's connected to my first one,
and this also is a technical
error, so this is where we see
moving livestock board money to
um NMDA at NMSU. So this is for
meatpacking facility as well as
equipment. I know they have
some, um, other equipment that
they need repaired and new, so
you have in your column 1.3
million, that true number is 3.3
million. Um, it's just a
Uh error when we when I typed it
in.
And Mr. Chair, that's all we
have for this. We're gonna pause
there. We'll go first to
represent Baca and then to
Representative Dao.
Thank you, Ms. Sharon. Thank you
for that. One of the, I think
that I, I, it may just not be on
this page. We did talk about the
NSU kind of AI as far as
programming the machine, uh,
learning.
I don't know that maybe he
captured somewhere, but I just
want, I know that that was part
of the presentation. So is it
Do we have that, that request
that was
And like Yeah, Mr. Chair
Representative Baca, that's a
great question. Um, that
priority came in after some of
this with the new leadership at
NMSU, so we will definitely flag
it for consideration, but it
wasn't on the original, so
that's a great flag we'll know.
So thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman
manager. So would that be
possible to catch it up on catch
a clean up or or some, some
better time or again, again,
again, if the answers that we
like to take a look, I'm, I'm OK
with that as well.
Thank you. Reentative again, not
the last time, there will
definitely be some technical
corrections in addition, so
we'll note that one. I
appreciate it. Thank you. Thank
you very much for the back.
Uh, Representative down, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and this
is a, I'm confused, so the, the,
the 3 million at
Livestock Bureau.
was for
Climate Smart composting
practices.
That should have been moved to
Mexico State University, but the
way this reads,
It looks like the New Mexico
Department, it looks like MSU
was creating their own and
they're gonna opt that they're
gonna have one on campus, so I'm
trying to understand the
language there, and then if you
could just explain to me with
that uh salt water conservation
district, is that grow money?
That wasn't a change, but is
that grow money or is that one
time?
Mr.
Yeah, Mr. Chair Representative
Doo, the, the, um, soil and
water conservation is one time
or line 286. This was the uh
language that we reviewed with
NMDA, so I'll have to research
more to get more of your
question, but this was the
requested language.
Uh,
I think, and I certainly desert
defer to the ranking member, but
I think this for um
Yeah, I think through New Mexico
Department of Agriculture to
administer it.
Or sorry, which one are we
talking about
Mr. Chair and, uh, Amanda on
online, OK, so before the
livestock bureau had language as
I understood.
To help the USDA facilities
comply with issues around water
disposal and composting, etc.
But you had mentioned Amanda
that it was going to be moved
over here, but the language is
completely different and this
language implies on 286, that
it's for campus purposes.
For the inspections that stays
at the livestock board, there
was a meat processing.
Appropriation just be MDA.
Where does that, Mr. Chair
Charles, where's the move?
Where's the move?
Right here on
Mr. Chairman, 286. OK, so that's
a new item that wasn't in the
LFC, I'll, I'll, that's ranking
member will look at that, I
suppose.
Mr. Chairman.
The
This money was it inadvertently
put into the livestock board. It
did not belong there, it
belonged under NMDA.
So we moved it to NMDA.
Livestock Board got money.
Recurring, which is not
reflected in this bill to stand
up there in beef inspection
program.
So both of those programs are
funded.
Uh, the mistake was in the
initials.
Putting this money into the
livestock board where it never
belonged. Uh, Mr. Chair, ranking
member Chatfield, I totally
agree with you, but the language
is not the same.
From the Livestock board to
here.
OK, thank you, Mr. uh, we can,
we can figure it out.
But, uh, we'll, we'll make sure
that it's right and obviously
the right numbers here. Um, and
I see Secretary Whitty there and
a big thanks to the ranking
member for working us through
that.
Um
OK, let's keep on going.
great, Mister Chair, on page 33.
Uh
Apologies, I apologize, rip it
out of question. Let's go back.
Um, Mr. Chair, and, um.
And Amanda and Charles, I, I
just wanna say, I see that 1.2
has been has not been added, uh,
for the Asean community
distment, that's an important
fund, that's the adjudication
fund.
Uh, a lot of your kids are
getting sued, uh, this is what
handles, um, uh, kind of the
legal battles that they're
having right now, uh, all over
the state. So I think that's an
important thing to keep in this
budget, and they got it last
year as far as I know. OK. Thank
you.
Uh, any other questions?
where, uh, page 33.
Great, Mr. Chair members, page
33, uh, we'll direct you to
lines 289, that's for New Mexico
Highlands University, 150,000
for uh social work degree
program and feasibility studies
again, big uh focus on social
work in this committee.
Uh, right under that 290 is to
implement the Water Data Act, $2
million to uh NM tech that was
flagged as a priority as well.
And those are the only changes
on this page.
Uh, I see.
I don't see any questions there.
Um
And if I miss folks, obviously
we'll just go back, no, no
biggie.
Um, great. OK, let's keep on
going. Alright, great, page 34,
Mr. Chair, members, line 307,
um, this is line 307. We're now
in, we've now entered
supplementals, so we've gone
from specials one time funding
to supplemental appropriations.
Uh, the first change in this
area is online 307, as well as
308. Those are the two,
supplemental appropriations that
uh, secretary props just.
Kindly asked you to fund, uh,
those are reflected in HAFC
here, 500,000 for projected
shortfall in personal services
and 1604 um obligation bond
program.
All right, Mr. Chair, if it's
all right with you, we can
probably skip quite a few pages
until we get to our next change
on page 35.
Which is on 35.
324, Mr. Chairman, is bringing
the supplemental request for the
state health benefits program
down to the latest projection.
Thank you, Charles, that's
another cost savings.
People.
Uh, your next change here is on
page 36, line 334. Uh, this is
for the corrections department
for a projected shortfall, um,
in personal services and
employee benefits. Their request
was 7 million. LFC staff looked
at it and 3.
recommended 3.5 million to
address some of those shortfalls
from the general fund. We can
move on to
Page 3.
right.
So we'll keep moving, not a lot
of changes here now we're in the
grow section, Mr. Hill. There
were no growth changes. OK.
Great. So, um 43.
43. This is the fund transfer
section, Mr. Chairman.
Yes, Mr. Chair, members, so this
is the fund transfer section.
This is where we'll start seeing
some of those reductions in
reallocations. So the first new
one is, um, line 365, that's $5
million for an animal welfare
trust fund contingent upon
legislation, um, and then your
next change is going to be 368,
so that's that community benefit
fund that was originally at $350
million. This uh scenario takes
that down to 2
$85 million but again targeted
towards things that are in the
spirit of that bill, such as
cleanup sites such as um.
Uh, economic development.
So similarly, if you go down to
line 371, the original LFC
recommendation had transitional
housing money and supports going
to MFA at 50 million, uh, that
was reduced.
Uh, in this recommendation to 2
million, which that's supposed
to still be too much. Yeah, Mr.
Chair, this might be a technical
error. I think that's supposed
to be 0, but we'll double check
with our notes, but that was
reduced to move housing money to
that big DFA appropriation that
you saw for statewide, uh, in
community housing.
Right, OK, uh, we're gonna pause
there, we'll go to questions,
start with representative Lohan.
Mr. Chair, thank you, uh, the,
the preparation for the 5
million and 365 is great, but
the actual legislation.
Um, maybe need to be um changed
because
That's that's a great start, but
it might need to be distributed
differently, um, so I just
wanted to point that out, um,
line 371. So,
The correction, if we can have
clarification, is it all of that
$50 million move to DFA, Mr.
Cha.
And increased for transitional
housing. What's the
60 million. So.
50
50 plus
on top of it for transitional
housing Mr. Chair, this takes
the 50 million out of the New
Mexico housing Trust Fund then,
is that correct? That's correct.
It already has an earmark or uh
housing programs including
transitional housing that, Mr.
Chair. However, there are two
different, they're two different
funding mechanisms and and uh
+22 different priorities as far
as I can see of DFA and NMFA
with
Um, I have a problem with that,
Mr. Chair. I'd like to, to clear
that up and talk about that a
little bit more. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much
Representative Muhan. Uh, next,
we're gonna go to Representative
Silva.
Thank you, Chair. Uh, I just had
a clarifying question if I can
go back to pages 37 and 38.
Sorry about that. Lines 346 and
347, um, that, um,
We're not adding more to that
because you believe like that's
what they can spend in those
years. Thank you,
349, Mr. Chairman, was the
request from the food banks on
this 3-year project. I'm sorry,
346 and 347.
That's correct. That's what we
think that they can spend it it
includes the equipment costs in
year one. Excellent. Thank you,
Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Silva.
Uh, any other questions? Oh,
sorry, Representative Sanchez,
please. Thank you, Mr. Cherry. I
also want to go back to line 365
and welfare Trust Fund. I know
there's been numerous uh
Cos in the rural areas, uh,
having issues with animals and
uh I know this would definitely
help those areas, uh, that's
been the
One of the top issues that uh at
least 4 communities in my
district.
And I know it's not just my
district, it's uh issues.
All over the state, so
I was trying to point that out,
see if there's something we can
do to, to add to that. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you very much for
flagging that Represent Brown,
please.
Mr. Chair, thank you very much.
Um, just a question on line 366.
This is $150 million for
appropriation contingency fund.
General fund transfer in fiscal
year 2025. Could I just have
some explanation, please?
Yes, so the appropriation
contingency fund is one of the
funds that makes up our general
fund reserves, and it is used
for emergencies. And so this is
loading up that fund.
Or uh the annual, uh, emergency
allotment.
Uh, as well as some additional
amounts.
OK, so Mr. Chair, um, Charles, I
heard you say for reserves and
emergencies, is that correct?
Yes, it sits in our general fund
reserves and the intent, well,
by law, it's to be used for
emergencies.
That's when you see the governor
doing those emergency orders.
They are pulling money out of
this fund in our reserve. Right
overspent, it's depleted and it
needs to bed. Thank you.
Great question. Thank you very
much, Representative Brown.
Um
Page 44, Mr. Chair. We keep
moving.
Alright, so page 44, um, we have
a couple more things moving
here, so online 372, uh, the LFC
had an investment of 222
million, uh, for, uh, water
trust board.
A water project fund that item
just goes down a little bit to
an even 200, which is what they
can spend, um, and get out the
door quickly. Line 373 for the
public school insurance
authority goes from 40 million
to 65 million so that additional
funding will help keep premiums
for teachers down at least for 2
years, possibly longer, um, so
that's what's going on there on
line 374 also
Naysia, um, an additional 5
million to the
Uh, risk fund to help that fund
be a little more solvent as
well.
And not hit teacher pocketbooks,
and that's all we have for this
page.
All right,
on that page, uh, let's go to
Representative Barrera.
Oh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. I'm looking at
um uh 272, and we have, uh, I
think, I think this is water
project plan goes down to 200.
I actually think funded
projects, I, I, I, it's hard for
me to remember this number, but
I think it's about 272 million,
and these are, these are
projects that have already been
approved, they're shovel-read,
uh, they, with, with how they
take down the money, they don't
quite have enough money to do
all those funds, and I think
I think another 72 million for
water project funds that have
already been that are shovel
ready, already been approved
with a good be a good way uh to
spend uh one time, uh, money.
Especially in this year, uh,
especially given the fact that,
you know, these communities have
worked for 3 years on these
projects, and they've been
approved, there's 7 state
agencies that overlook how they
how they uh how they qualify for
this funding, so I, I know
that's a big ask, but, but
they're ready and it's important
project, just saying.
Thank you very much.
OK, um,
Let's go to page 45.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members,
our final stretch here, last
page. So you'll see one change
on line 382, the transfer to the
uh computer system enhancement
fund goes up a little bit.
That's because the C2
recommendation for HAFC goes up
a little bit so that transfer
has to correspond to that
number.
Um, and then your next change
is.
Is that right, Charles?
That is right. There would be 22
million extra you'll see in the
IT overview for the DPS project,
and just so members understand,
you're putting money into this
fund, and then you're
appropriating money out of the
fund, and the the reason for
that is when money comes out of
the fund, there's specific
oversight processes that are
assigned by statute to the
Department of Information
Technology, so it's putting
guard rails on your IT projects.
That's the way, that's why it's
funded this way.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you, Director Soli.
Uh, your next change is going to
be on line 383. So the LFC
recommendation had 188 million
for transportation. Uh, we've
been doing a lot of general fund
for transportation, but in
consultation with the
transportation chair, as well as
uh a bonding bill for the
Department of Transportation
that's worth $1.5 billion that
they're very excited about the
HAFC recommendation, uh,
reallocates that general fund.
That's all.
Mr.
Uh, great, OK, members, uh,
that's, I know that's a lot. Um,
we wanted to do it this time,
uh, as we've emphasized, this is
not the last time that we'll be
able to make adjustments, um,
but this is an important time to
sort of go through. We've gotten
a lot of questions. Any
questions or flags on the final
page?
Right,
Representative Brown, please, as
you know, I get a little
concerned about transportation
funding, um, you know, we, we
had committee this morning we
looked at um putting together
house full 3.
Um, if you got that done, but we
also have the bonding bill.
at 45 and, and we're stalled on
that one actually, we're not
quite sure we have the
information we need to go
forward with it.
So I, I would almost like to see
these transportation ones, um,
move over into the HAFC column
until such time as we know.
The bonding bill passes.
Otherwise, I think we're
We're gonna be uh hurting here a
little bit, so I don't know if
we can do that or not, but.
I'd like to preserve that, at
least for now, until we know
better. Thank you. Thank you for
flagging, uh, OK, I'm gonna,
we'll look over here
representative Herndon, uh,
thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Lee, I just, I'm not quite sure
I understood.
Uh, line 385 on page 45. Are you
saying that that funding for
rural air service enhancement is
someplace else.
Mr. Chair, um,
That, uh, you've made
appropriations to that in the
past, and there's still uh
balances available, and that was
in the executive recommendation,
it was not in the LFC
recommendation for that reason.
They have resources that they
can continue to spend. OK, thank
you, Mr. Chair. Great, thank you
very much for representative
Herndon.
Um
I look to my left.
Uh, I don't see any other, uh,
questions right now. So we can,
uh, thank you members for the uh
questions. Thank you, Director
Soli, uh, and, and director
writing and all of the LFC
staff. This is a great deal of
work that incorporates a lot of
what the committee has already
flagged and asked about. We did
it today because as we move into
sort of the final pieces of our
work here, they'll have more
work and then we'll give them
some more work after that. But
this keeps
on track, which is great and it
makes a number of adjustments
that have been, uh, that are
important.
OK, uh, with that, we're gonna
go to the vice chair for
emotion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I move
that we adopt the HAFC
recommendations for um the
recommendations except for the
public education component by
Vice Chair Dixon,
saying by Representative
Sanchez. Is there any opposition
to that motion?
Seeing none, we've adopted that
motion.
OK.
Now we're um members for the
information technology
Workgroup, uh, sorry, you're,
uh, we still need you here.
We'll take, we should take a
break for that.
Um, if there's some refreshments
and, and such in the back. Uh,
members, thank you very much for
today. We have, uh, a big day
tomorrow with public school
support and look forward to
seeing everybody here. Thank you
for your really diligent and.
Uh, full committee.
It's
Mr. Chair, we're good to go into
our group. We're just clarifying
some work groups, we're good,
we're good to go to while we do
that, I want to see, is there
anybody who wants to make public
comment.
Yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
committee, Valeria Larcon here
with the New Mexico Alliance of
Health councils representing all
county.
And tribal health councils, um,
petitioning for your support in
investing towards HB 75, even if
it's an incremental increase
above $3 million will be
incredibly leveraging to health
councils across the state in
concert with NMDOH as they
provide public health education,
prevention intervention, and
coordination of access to
critical services for all of our
communities. Thank you for your
support.
Thank you very much.
OK, I see what, I don't see
anybody else in person.
Uh, online we have Denise
Miller.
Go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. Good
afternoon. My name is Denise
Miller, executive director of
the New Mexico Farmers Marketing
Association, and we've run the
New Mexico grown approved
supplier program on behalf of
the state for the.
I want to start by expressing
gratitude for all of the support
of this committee and the
legislature for
agriculture-related programs and
I would like to just say that um
we hope you will catch the um
the bill for the approved
supplier program in clean up the
$430,000 request is for the
backbone of the food quality
assurance program that's used by
4 state agencies to purchase
locally grown food for students.
seniors and many others, and
it's grown tenfold over the last
5 years, uh, with substantial
economic impact and also
leveraging federal funds, so
thank you very much for your
support and um we hope that uh
that you can catch this in the
next phase. Thanks again.
Great. Thank you very much, uh,
Jason Riggs.
Hello, this is Jason Riggs. I'm
with Road Runner Foodbank.
And we'd like to thank the
committee for consideration of
supporting all the efforts to
combat food insecurity and for
supporting supporting food
systems work overall. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much.
OK, I think that concludes our
public comment. We, we're
adjourned for the full committee
today and thank you to the IT
working group.
