So, um
If our first, um hearing begins
with game and fish, will you
please start us off?
Lfc. Thank you. Good. Good
afternoon. That is loud.
Sorry.
Um
I'm Helen goes fine and lfc
analyst with me today is the
director of game and fish.
Michael Sloan and my D F a
counterpart Monica Tapia.
Um, we are going to be
discussing the game and fish
budget. They are agency fives,
16. And behind. Have five in
your binders. Um, you can find
more information on the LFC
recommendation in volume two on
page 232, and there is a table
on their fund balances and
volume three on page 61.
Um, the major difference between
the two recommendations is in
the accounting for the Legacy
fund. Um, if you remember, they
get 2.75 million from that fund
this year. Uh, the LFC
recommendation spreads the
spending of that fun over a
variety of categories of
existing categories. The
recommendation puts it into a
new spending category called
Legacy Fund.
Um, the totals on revenues and
spendings are the same, and they
are the same as the agency's
request.
Uh, the way that in the way that
lfc spent out the money of
spread out the money, we there's
2.75. I'm sorry. That's not
right to 0.55 Million more and
other uses and 500,000 in
contractual services, And with
that, I will turn it over to
Monica Tapia to cover the
performance measures and
targets.
I'm Terry. Members of the
committee that lfc and executive
recommendation have come to a
consensus on all performance
measures to maintain existing
measures and targets for all
programs. I will now pass it
over to director Michael Slow.
Madam Chair representative.
Thank you for
Hearing our budget today, as was
pointed out, our budgets are
Essentially the same. I think
between the LFC and the
executives so that I hope makes
life simpler for everybody.
As you know, we're we're
Enterprise agency. We get all of
our funding through the sale of
hunting and fishing licenses are
very careful and thoughtful
about how we budget. We came in
with a flat budget this year
except for the Legacy fund and
some smaller amounts. 600,000
out of, um some separate
accounts from the Game
Protection fund, which is
generally what we use as
Are operating fund.
And we still have concerns about
that. But feel like this is a
judicious use of our funding to
get us move us forward and
continue to do the good work
that we do not take any
questions.
Thank you for that presentation.
I'm going to go to our committee
to for questions.
And I see pedigree.
Anybody else?
Represent representative
Herndon. We'll start with
representative pedigree.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you all for the presentation.
The, uh in the base that
representative we can't hear
you.
It's probably a good thing.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you all for the presentation.
In the base. Uh, narrative. We
talked about 2.55 Million for
other uses, Can you
Please do me a favor and get
specific on that because I'm
missing missing it environment
you want me to take? That
doesn't mean it's not there just
means
The 2.55 million another uses as
primarily in the conservation
services program.
And I will leave it to you to
explain what your hope is for
spending that
So just just for clarity is the
2.55 million. The Legacy fund
money, which
Is that? What? Yeah, so that's
dedicated to species of greatest
conservation needs. So anything
from
Prairie chickens to him his
mountain salamanders to
Sacramento Mountain chipmunk.
Um, we're going to use those
funds to
Um, further restore and protect
those species. There's generally
species that are either listed
as threatened or endangered or
are declining. And so this is an
opportunity for us to take
proactive measures to restore
those species and make sure that
we reduce the number of
threatened and endangered
species on the landscape and
allow people to continue to
enjoy New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Director.
Food to be specific that 2.55
this specific for restoration
with respect to some different
animals. None of that money will
be used for land purchase right?
That correct.
Madam Chair representative.
That's correct.
Okay?
Madam chair. Uh,
Do you have anywhere in your
funds?
That are set aside for land
purchase, Madam Chair
representative Noh
Okay?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Representative. Pedigree,
um, represented her day.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you very much.
Prisoners for today. The
question that I have has come
from, um
A person who is very interested
in the in the Black bear The
Bear of the state of New Mexico
And the question that was raised
to us. Why was there an increase
in the number? That's to be, uh
Killed this year. And how did
you all come up with that
number? Is that information
published somewhere or how?
Where would we find it? Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair representative that
that information is available on
our website. We came up with any
changes that we made by doing
cutting edge science using D N
a.
I'm collecting hair samples
figuring out how many bears that
were
Mark recapture study that we've
done in. We only change numbers
and those places where we
actually, um, have new
information. Otherwise we left
it the same.
I would be happy if you wanted
to pass along that information
to
Reach out to the individual and
talk them through it.
I'm sorry, madame tear they can
reach out directly to you. I
didn't hear what you said. You'd
like to give me their
information. I'd have somebody
reach out to them. Sure.
That would be very That would be
fine. That seems to be a very,
very big concern of them and
thank you very much, Madam Tr.
Thank you. Representative. Have
maybe a couple of questions. Um
Just a little bit of the
clarification from LFC on the
Legacy fund the way that it
spread out the two point
Five. Specifically you said that
that we have 500 for contracts.
What is it? The 2.5 just a
little bit more.
The 2.55 million is mostly in
conservation services, and it's
for of well I will let you
explain it again. Yeah, that's
fine. That's all I needed to
hear. Thank you. I I just wrote
down a note and I wanted I
thought that's what I heard. I
wanted to just clarify it for
myself. So thank you so much. I
think that
Um
I'm gonna look around. And does
anybody else have any questions?
I know we have some new reps
here, okay?
Alright. What? Yeah. What is the
motion from the
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd like
to move that we accept the LFC
recommendation.
Okay. We have emotion from rep.
Dela Cruz in his second from
representative Chatfield. Um, is
there any opposition CNN? We
have the recommendation from the
lfc. Thank thank you.
Seriously.
Thank you. So next, we have the
the youth conservation corpse
and
If we'd like to get started with
that. Thank you. Good afternoon,
madam Chairman. My name is Scott
Sanchez. I'm the analyst for
natural Resources for the LFC.
Um, today will be reviewing
agency code of five to to the
Youth Conservation Corps, which
you can find behind have five
Um you can also find more
information on the Alexey
recommendation and volume two
pages 247 through 248.
With me today, Sarah would the
director of Ycc and Donna
Rivera, my counterpart from the
Department of Finance and
Administration.
They all seemed executive budget
recommendations are identical
and both increased the budget
for YCC by about $102,000 or
1.7% over last year.
The LFC and executive budget
Recommendations decreased YCC
personnel budget by about
$46,000 and increased the budget
for contractual services by
145,000 to raise the cap on
awards by 25,000 from 202 25.
And with that, I'll turn it over
to Donna.
Good afternoon, Madam chair and
members of the committee. I'm
happy to be here and I'm in
concurrence with the Legislative
Finance Committee and alternate
over to director would
Good afternoon, madam chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you for hearing us today. This
is the budget we requested. So
we're very pleased that the LFC
and executive recommendations
agree, and I'll just stand for
questions at this time.
Thank you to the committee. Do
we have any questions for the
See? None Do I have a motion
moved there. We approve the lfc
recommendation. Thank you Do
have a second. I have a
A recommendation from
Representative art to the cruise
in a second from representatives
are Nana.
Is there any opposition?
I see none. Uh, we have going
with the recommendation from
Lfc. Thank you. Thank you.
Good afternoon. We have some new
faces here. Good to see
everybody, Um
Next. We have one of us, um
Indian affairs if you'd like to
start with lfc, and then we'll
go on to the
Other guests here. Thank you.
Good afternoon, madam
Chairwoman. My name is Rachel
Mercer Garcia and I'm the LFC
analysts for Indian affairs You
are looking at, um, agency
number 609. It should be behind
Tab six in your binders. In
addition, you can find Indian
affairs on page 270 of your
volume. Two.
I'm here with me today is
Secretary designate Josette
Monette as well as D ofa analyst
Nicole Macias walk through the
key differences in the
recommendations alternate over
to D F A and the secretary for
additional comment.
Over the LFC recommendation
provides a 2.6% general fund
increase, while the executive
recommendation provides an 11%
general fund increase the
executive recommendation is
$394,000 more than the LFC
recommendation. The LFC
recommendation includes a flat
base budget.
While the executive
recommendation increases the
other spending category by
$180,000 for employee travel, as
well as marketing costs.
The agency did have an expansion
request. The executive
recommendation includes four
additional F T E and 340 action.
I'm sorry 334,000 in the
personnel category for FTE for
the missing and murdered
Indigenous People Initiative as
well as one FTE and for a
financial coordinator position.
When it comes to expansion, the
LFC recommendation took into
account prior year spending as
well as reversion, um and looked
at the agency's alright and so
recommended only one additional
F T E and an additional 120,000,
noting that the agency could
likely find many of those
positions within their existing
operating budget.
Um, also call out specials for
you. Um, this agency has two
specials and one in particular
$1.8 million deficiency request
that is to reimburse tribes
related to capital outlay. It is
included in the executive
recommendation. It's not
included in the LFC
recommendation because the LSC
didn't receive it in time last
fall to consider it as part of
the recommendation, so I will
call out that one for you all.
Um and then I will turn it over
to D F A and the secretary to
provide additional comment.
Thank you so much, Rachel. Um
Madam Chair members of the
committee. I'm Nicole Misuse,
the DFA analysts. I have nothing
further to add other than to say
that the analysts have come to
consensus on performance
measures, and I will turn it
over to the secretary designate.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee. Good afternoon. I'm
Josette Manette. I'm currently
serving as the Cabinet secretary
designate for Indian Affairs
Department. Thank you all for
having me today. Um, so I'll
just briefly go through. Um,
sorry.
Um, I just wanted to briefly
talk a little bit about some of
the stuff that Indian Affairs
Department does so that you are
all are aware, Um, you know,
some of our objectives are to
strengthen tribal relationships,
advancing the indigenous youth
engagement, promoting health and
well being for, um tribal people
in indigenous communities,
Infrastructure development as
you know, and are Mm i P
initiative.
So the executive recommendations
supports IEDs request for an
expansion of four FTE for the
department, including the three
FTE for Mm, i P and one FTE in
our ASD division, which would be
an accountant. Auditor to help
pay, um, make some of the
payments that we have, uh, in
100 and $80,000 in the 400
category to support expansion.
And then of course we have.
The $249.3 in the tobacco
settlement Fund for tobacco
cessation initiatives, which is
the same level as FY 24.
Um
And then just the to the, um
The other two parts in the
slides that we've asked for.
There's the deficiency.
Uh, that, um Rachel also
mentioned and then we have done
in a time extension for prior
year appropriation for the
special appropriations as well.
Thank you. Thank you for the
presentations. I'm going to go
to the committee. I
I have one question from
representative How Romeo
Madam Chair. Uh, Madam
Secretary. Thank you for being
here. Um
My question is when I look at
diversions, um from last year,
it's a little over $2 million
Um which is about half of your
budget. Can you just tell me
what happened? And, um and what
That madam Chair?
Representative. How to me. Oh,
thank you. So, uh,
The way that we're looking at
it. So what we've got is, um
General fund reversion of 1.1,
which is about 26% from our 200
category That's from personnel.
That was due to we had several
vacancies and I e. D last year,
we are working on filling those
vacancies and we have filled
some positions in our 300
category. We had, um
$187,925.34
and then our 400 category was
$487,000. So there was a suicide
prevention initiative was new to
the agency.
And so it took a while to hire
an FTE for that position as well
as looking at, um, figure out
how we're gonna get that money
expended as well. We are working
on that we are making some moves
to push out some behavioral
health money and suicide
prevention funding right now,
there were and
Forgive me. This is my first
time, but there were some
adjustments as well. I have my
CFO here. If there's further
questions looks like Nicole
might be ready to say something
as well. Um, Madame Chair. Uh,
representative harem you to kind
of add more to the reversion.
Comment. Um, if you look at page
197 of the executive
recommendation document for
Indian Affairs Department, it
includes about one point month
$1 million reverted from the
agency operating budget, which
Secretary designate, um fully
explained. It also includes
837.1000 from junior bill
appropriations.
That were allocated to the
department. She can provide a
little bit more information. Um,
post this presentation for that.
And then 175 from prior year
River. Thank you, Representative
Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you presenters. So, with respect
to the Mm, I
WR positions that were
requested My question to you,
Madam Chair and presenters is
is, are those positions intended
to work with the Attorney
general's office and the
creation of the position within
their office to help with Mm I.
WR issues.
Could you tell me what the
correlation and coordination
will be?
Madam Chair representative,
representative Herndon, Um, for
I e D what we're doing. We're
those those physicians were
specifically asked for for I a
D. And it's to help I d with
helping to address. Uh,
Implementing the state response
plan that was provided by the by
the task force in 2022, and so
are Mm I, P personnel that we're
hoping to bring on is really to
help. I'd continue to implement.
Uh, the work and the initiative
are Mm i p
Uh, initiative kind of
Person, Um, specialist Melody
Delmar took some time to look
through.
What was required in the state
response plan to see
What
Based on her expertise in her
work in the field, what she
thought was necessary in order
to help her ensure that I D is
able to continue to do the work
and to implement the state
response plan to the best of her
ability is the best of IEDs
abilities. And so our position
was that those four positions
would be specifically housed an
idea and that we would really be
able to build out the Mm. I P
initiative with an I A D.
So thank you and Madame tear and
presenters. So I
Um, asking for clarity has the
attorney general's office asked
you to work with them on the
building of that position within
that office, as required by the
statute?
The statute that was passed in
2021.
Madam Chair, representative,
Hernan my understanding, you
know, unfortunately, I don't
know. Um, exactly what the A G s
office is doing. However, there
has been conversations between
Melody and the A G s office. I
believe the A G s office has
their own position. Um, is my
understanding that's focusing on
on M m I p work within the A G s
office specifically, And then I
d s work.
Will focus on you know
The work that I can do because
there's I think you know were
limited in some respects as to
what I'd can do based on the
type of work that we do.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, representative.
Do we have any other questions
from the committee this time?
Again. I want to thank you and
welcome our new second
secretary designee. Um there's
that it was wonderful to see you
there sitting there and taking
on this position. It's It's a
lot of work. And you just happy
to see you there. Thank you for
doing the we're doing the work.
Um
I see. I would like to echo some
of the questions that were
brought up today and maybe we
can get some clarification from
the A G s office.
I think that that is, um
That is that is a
In compliance with what is in
statute and regarding the re
versions. You know, we've seen
that in, I think
If we can have a follow up with
that, if you understand that
better and how if it's going to
be any issues without moving
forward, I think that will come
down the line. But
I feel confident with our
leadership at hand and I want to
again welcome you, and if we
don't have any other questions,
entertaining motion. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I move that we
accept the LFC recommendation.
Do I have a second?
Great. I have, um
Emotion from
Representative Chris and the
second from Representatives
Saturn Yana.
Is there any opposition to the
motion?
See none. We will adopt the LFC
budget recommendation. Thank
you.
Thank you, Matt.
Thank you, Chair and director
for that so
Typically if I understood the
last part of your answer is you
would be able to go.
To to council and get a budget
adjustment request.
That was big. Would that be
correct? Um
To pull from Madam chair
represents, and that's what
we've done this year for our 200
category we put in our 5% are
roughly about $600,000 in most
of that will go to the 200
categories of salary and
benefits the pay for the current
salary and benefits that we have
in place. Um, I know I said it
last time I was here, but when I
came as the director
Two years We've gone line by
line the last two.
Unfortunately, as I talked about
earlier returnees in I T, which
are not cheap position. Um,
we've given about 600,000 more
to our
To our employees. I think that's
one of the reasons we have such
a little vacancy rate when I
first started. If we got a half
of an applicant, we were
fortunate.
Now, when my staff talking to me
how many of these people would
you hire? It's usually 1 to 3
people.
And we just follow this full
rules, education and experience.
It cuts both ways. If you have a
very good employee who's been
with the agency, but doesn't
have that masters and you hire
someone that hasn't been with
the agency, so we've been very
methodical of what we do with
the money that we receive.
Because, frankly, for last three
years in front of all of you and
dollars CE and those are the
questions they're asking.
Um, thank you very much for that
one Last question for LSC if we
have multi million dollar
project
Madam chair with respect to I t
What would be the reason why it
wasn't suggested that we used a
special for that non
reoccurring? Yeah, Madam Chair
representative and
Historically, the workers
commented. Administration has
been entirely self funded
through those fees that they
collect, and they maintained a
quite large fund balance. We
have some analysis that we can
provide for you going back to FY
21. That fund balance was around
$12 million with the director is
noting is that the fee level has
not changed over time. And so
while we haven't
The pace of revenue growth. Um,
has not maintained kind of the
fun balance that the
historically had as expenses
increased they needed to do
compensation increases and
things like that, and so
historically there, see to
requests from this agency, which
is self funded, has come from
their fund balance. Our analysis
suggests that they're fun
balance can do that likely in
this year and so you'll see in
the LFC recommendation to see to
request um, from that agencies
fund.
But the director is making an
important point that you are
seeing over time This fund
balance is declining. And so in
the lfc recommendation, for
example, related to that one F T
E.
The LFC recommendation aims to
kind of manage those expenses
because we are starting to see
you know, the fund balance they
once maintained is not the case
because the fees have an
increased and Madam Chair
representative Does that help?
Answer your question?
Yes, it does. Thank you very
much. Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, representative
Brenda.
Thank you, Madam Chair and, um
And Mr Presenter.
You know, it's still unclear
about the $2.30 that is
collected and placed into the
fund balance. When was the last
time that that amount was
raised?
Um, Madam Chair representative.
It's never been raised $2.
For employees and $2.30 for
employers have not been raised
since the fund was created in
1991. Can you come to the
microphone? Um
The fund was established in 1991
using that assessment at $2 per
employee and $2 per employee by
the employer when the entered
employers fund was created in
2003 30 cents was added to it to
cover that program. But aside
from that addition when a new
program was created, that fund
amount has never been the
assessment of Mountain has never
been adjusted.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you very much.
With respect to that fund, in
terms of how we see in this fun,
Madam chair presented on this on
this presentation. So Madam
Chairwoman, representative, Um
all of that revenue is in other
revenue sources. And so, um,
while you don't have the fun
balance in the specific packet,
the revenues you are seeing are
those fees that are coming into
the fund if you'd like, kind of
the fun balance over time, we
can give you that analysis and
then in addition
In that lfc recommendation,
you'll see
Budgeting the use of about
400,000 in that fund balance
because the fees collected in
that year won't be enough to
cover the budget. They will need
to use some of that balance in
the fund, But we can get you,
um that fund balance trend over
time, if that's helpful, and
actually the director has the
fun, Uh, page from here.
Presentation. I have that and it
has an Asterix. As you know,
it's three years that we go back
and until they're audited.
We can't say there are 100%
true, but that's in the package
that I presented to you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Presenters. What I also
heard is that there is a million
dollars that's being transferred
each year to workers Workforce
Solutions of Madame Chair
presenters. Why is that
happening? And what is the basis
for that?
Madam Chair representative.
How it happens is it's put into
the budget. Why put his put
there is it's put in the budget
signed into law.
I can't answer that. That's the
budget we receive and when we
receive a bill from workforce
solution, we pay the million
dollars Frankly, because how
we're getting low on this. I did
ask the question. Hey, can we
use some of that uninsured
employer find where is the 6.9
Million and my attorney said no.
They can. Maybe answer the It's
the budget I received Madam
Chair representative. So madam
Chair of presenters. What I hear
is that and what I heard that
analysts say, and please tell me
if I was if I heard incorrectly
that this $1 million is being
transferred as usual, Uh, madam
chair? Why is this usual and
what is the basis of usual?
Um, Madam Chair representative.
I would probably need to go back
and look at the specific
duration of time. Alright, The
director can tell me the total
has been 41 million over some
period of time. Historically,
you all as a legislative body
have appropriated this transfer
since 2003. The director tells
me
You always a legislative body
have made this transfer since
2003 from this fund, which
historically has collected
significantly more revenue than
expenses and put it to work kind
of in a in a workforce related
way, And that is the decision
you all have made since 2003.
So madam chair of Meta Mandala
analysts
If the Department of work
For solutions. I'm sorry if the
workers compensation is saying
that they're now need money for
a statutory provisions they need
money for raises for attorneys,
and I'll ask you the question
about that in just a moment.
Then, uh, why aren't they able
to just use that money for those
purposes rather than
transferring it to the
Department of Workforce
Solutions, Madam Chair
Um So Madam Chairwoman,
representative, I will clarify.
Um, both the executive
recommendation and the LFC
recommendation do maintain that
transfer, though it's not what
the agency requested, Um
And from the LFC recommendation
Perspective, um the fund balance
suggest that likely we can
continue that transferred this
year, if kind of costs are
managed at the agency level. Um
and in addition, if we if we
stopped that transfer, we would
likely need to backfill a
million dollars in General fund
at the Workforce Solutions
Department.
Madam Chair representative. Want
to be clear for as the director?
I do support the executive
budget, which does have that And
since 2003 41 million has been
taken from this to go. It wasn't
all workforce solution There
was. I believe 200,000 that went
to the LFC at one time back in
the day.
And madam chair and presented
just for clarification, Did I?
You were asking
I heard the
Director asked for an increase
for the attorneys that work in,
uh, worker's compensation. When
was some
But you also indicated Madam
chair and presenters that the
people who were hired last or
making more money.
So I could you please explain
that madam Chair presenters
manager representative.
I'm sorry if I wasn't clear
since I've been the director
I created an HR position. The
main job was to look at
All our employees.
When I came on
A little over two years ago, the
attorneys and I T were looked at
by the last director, so we put
them to the side and we started
with our employees who made the
least amount of money, which I
believe at the time was the
clerk of the court.
The HR person's job was to look
at the pay Bon
By their education experience,
which is what's so drugs me to
do? And if someone had the most
experience was gained, paid the
lease. We changed that. So we've
done that methodically with the
budget that we've received for
the last two years, since that
it's been roughly about $600,000
of Madame Chair representative
that we've increased the salary
of the workers.
Workers comp employees when an
employee comes in something we
were going to hire, we look at
it. It's a very mathematical
formula. How we look at it. The
corporation compared Lee
internally. What is my state?
Um, to answer your question
about the attorneys. It's not
the attorneys. It's also I T was
recently done recently. Spo did,
um, a deep dive study of what
we're paying statewide for
attorneys. I have a lot of trees
in the workers Comp Madam Chair
representative.
I'm currently working with them.
The sea that the new mids change
currently I have no money where
I can say yes, You have 40 years
of experience by this new pay,
you should be getting X by how
we've done everyone else and
there is a
Principal did it didn't say it
automatically had to be done it,
said agency. If they have the
funding, it's up to the agency
director. How you do that? So
hopefully that clears the
question. Madam Chair
represented.
Madam Chair of presenters. Yes,
that tells me that there are a
number of attorneys who or
others not necessarily just
attorneys who are behind and
pay.
That need to be paid additional
funds.
And, um
Madam chair will just seem to
take note of that. I think that
that is incredibly important. I
am also madam chair concerned
about that There is an
additional position that should
be a
Part of the workers. Workforce
Solutions. I'm sorry workers'
compensation, but they're not
able to feel that if I'm looking
at this one, this ombudsman
position and the other position
that one woman is being required
to
Work two jobs. Is she being paid
twice the money, Madam Chair
representative I won't speak for
but she asked.
Continues you in the ombudsman
and once again, the position
we're asking for is what the
statute asked me to have in
these in these offices. It's not
expansion of our safety or our
attorneys. It's a corp them
Busman's main job is I'll mess
it up and they'll crack me up.
Somebody calls who's not quite
sure what to do. They do not
give legal advice. We
We did a deep tie when I came
in, because, frankly, I thought
we were given legal advice where
we treat our woodsman. This is
how we we can help and we
changed our forms into Spanish.
That's what they're the first
one.
Here's a list of attorneys not
this is the attorney you go to,
So we're fortunate our manager.
of course, our current employee
of the year. By the way, I don't
care representative, um that
she's willing to feel that it
and if she couldn't do that, we
would
Make those calls come to our
Albuquerque office or another
office. But as I've been saying,
I want to keep it as close to
the community as possible.
Um Madam chair just to comment
with respect to the workers
compensation last year, they
were given a responsibility for
a task force for which they had
been doing an excellent job to
look at the statute and whether
or not they need to be changes
with respect to that, and I do
know that over the years with
respect to the work that I've
done in the past and looking at
them and and being in the
community so that they are able
to
Talk with people and people
don't have to travel that we are
having people there with him
with respect to workers'
compensation issues, they have
done an excellent job, so their
request I think are very
reasonable. And I hope we can
consider that and thank you very
much.
Thank you, representative. Those
those are really well stated
questions and responses. I want
to say that
I'm from what I'm sharing is
that
You might. You might want to do
a little deeper dive into this
this budget to figure some of
this these things out which I
would support. Do we have any
other? We have one more question
from representative Art
Delacruz.
Thank you, madam. Not so much a
question as a comment.
Uh, it's kind of refreshing to
see an operation that carries
his own weight. So thank you for
that, Robert. Mr Do set another
comment I've known, Mr D. Said
for many, many years and always
find him very straight forward
individual and I just want to
thank you for that.
Thank you, madam. Sure.
I appreciate that, Um, I can
second that,
Um and I appreciate all your
work and and just your
information piece on this and
how much you know about this,
um, as a former HR.
Um
For the state and working with
your office. When I had to. It
was really
Very streamlined, very, very
efficient and I really
appreciate it all. Um, all the
employees there.
So I understand what you're
you're going forward with the
explanation before the
additional funding for our
attorneys and all that sort of
thing. So
I would. I would say that, um
My I don't have any questions
for you. I'm just making
Acknowledgments of what's being
discussed. Um
Right now and
But when I'm looking at our
report here, that what you're
saying for the additional Ft is
not an expansion but rather in
online it with state statute. Is
that correct?
Madam chair, Correct.
Thank you almost said madam
Chair myself.
Um, thank you for that. I think
that that's important, too.
Um, highlight here so
It's um if we can entertain a
motion that would
Incorporate a workgroup with
with this. I also wanted to just
to show here as looking at this.
Our information.
Um, what I'm seeing here is the
agency request. Um at 13 million
0.79 for their request, and I'm
seeing here from our executive
of 14.7.
Um, and the lfc of 14.26, so I
wanted to just
To emphasize that yes, if I can
get a response from lfc Thank
you, Madam Self, Madam chair.
Um the core difference between
the agency request and both the
executive and the LFC
recommendations is that $1
million transfer to workforce
solutions, so the agency did not
request it.
Uh, requested we stop that
transfer both the executive and
the LFC recommendation included
and that's the core difference.
Thank you. I'm pretty much I
thought that it was much of the
discussion. So if I could have
emotion and myself, Thank you,
Madam Chair. I moved that that
we accept the LFC
recommendation, which is quite
coincides with the executive.
Thank you. Do I have a second?
Thank you. Um, I have, um
The motion from representative
Villa Cruz in his second from
representatives. Indiana. Do I
have any opposition?
Seen none. I We have the
recommendation for Lfc. But do
we want to include that
workgroup with that so
We can entertain that in the
motion.
Madam chair. I would like to
include that as part of the
motion.
To have a second to that.
2nd 2nd.
Thank you. Um, so the
recommendation from the
committee is to accept the LFC
recommendation and with a
workgroup and I would like to
To ask representatives, Um
Herndon and representative Dela
Cruz and
Does anybody would
representative Baca be
interested in
Madam chair. If you need me, I
will serve on this committee. I
appreciate that. So we have we
have the
Adopted the motion of for LFC
recommendation with a sub work
group. Thank you. Thank you very
much.
Up. Next we have the division of
vocational rehabilitation.
And we can find that in our
Volume two
For the number 644.
Alright, madam Chair members of
the committee. My name is Eric
Sr.
I'll be presenting the book.
The vocational rehabilitation
Division again, It's agency 644.
Um, sitting next to me here is
director uh, Casey Stone Romero
and sitting next to
Her is the executive, um,
analyst Laurie Ski, aka
And just to mention real fast
before we get into it is, um you
can find the volume to, um,
write up lfc right up on page
328.
Um and
I miss ski, aka and I had kind
of discussed this right
beforehand. Since there's not a
ton of differences and not a ton
of differences by several of the
programs, there's four programs
in total. I'm just gonna run
through the different sheets
real fast, and then we'll pass
it over to her at the end for
any further comment.
So moving on to page to the LFC
General fund Revenue
recommendation for the division.
Is a 4% increase. While the
executive recommendation is an
8% increase.
LFC recommended a 2% decrease in
federal revenue while the
executive recommended a 2%
increase in federal revenue.
Because of growing balances and
the vocational rehabilitation
fund, LFC recommended the use of
more fun balances.
LFC recommended an 8.5% and the
executive recommended a 5.5%
increase in personnel spending
to fill vacancies.
Because of prior you're spending
levels, Lfc recommended less
contractual services and other
costs, category spending.
For language. The LFC
recommendation included
Language specifying that 500,000
of General fund appropriation
and the rehabilitation services
program is to be used for adult
vocational rehab services.
And then analyst risking
consensus on all performance
measures.
Moving to the next program, uh,
in revenue.
And this is on page three
because of growing and recurring
balances in the vocational
rehabilitation.
Fund LFC recommended
More fun balances because of a
negative vacancy rate LFC
recommended as 16.2% increase in
personnel spending.
To feel about six positions.
Moving on to Page four and the
rehabilitation services program.
LFC recommended a 4% and the
executive recommended an 8.6%
increase in general fund revenue
for the program.
Um LFC recommended a 4% decrease
in executive recommended 4%
increase in federal revenues.
Ah LFC recommended an 8.8%
increase and the executive
recommended to 7.2% increase in
personnel spending to fill
vacancies because of prior
you're spending levels. LFC
recommended less contractual
services.
And then the last two programs
on Page five and six. That's the
independent living services and
the disability Determination
program. There was no difference
between
Between the two recommendations.
and with that, madam chair, I'll
go ahead and pass it off to the
executive if she has any further
comment.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair
members of the committee. I
would just like to point out
that the majority of the
differences were in P. 508 the
rehabilitation services program.
Page four of your hand out and
the majority of those
differences are due to the
executive recommending increased
support in general Fund for the
agency to
Um, increase their federal match
capabilities that they have not
historically been able to do and
in turn, also supporting
increased support for the VR
services for individuals who are
eligible and wanting those
services. And with that, I will
pass it over to directors Casey
Ramirez Stone
Good afternoon, Madam Chair.
members of the committee Um
Casey Stone Romero. That's okay.
That's okay. Um, with the New
Mexico Division of Vocational
rehab, As you've been told, we
have four major programs to
other programs. Disability
determination services does all
of the medical adjudication for
Social Security claims they are
100% federally funded.
We also have the rehab services
unit, which is
Essentially three federal
dollars for one state dollar. It
does require the one state
dollar for us to pull down our
three federal dollars.
Um, we have increased services
to participants over the last
year if you'll recall were on an
order of selections slash wait
list for many years. We did
clear that last year in addition
to clearing that we did see an
increase in about 300
applications for our last
program year.
Um, we anticipate that we will
see more increase in those
applications. First Services.
We've also created a business
outreach coordinator position
within the agency to provide
services directly to businesses.
Brand new service that we've
created in the last year. So our
goal is to really get that
outreach to the community to
people who want to work. We are
seeing individuals with
disabilities return to the
workforce. As you all know,
Covid was
Very scary for people. They
didn't want to work. They were
afraid to get Covid.
So we're seeing that return,
which is good. We also have the
independent living services,
which provides services to those
individuals who are most
significantly disabled. We do
support that with federal funds,
State general funds and then we
use program income to pull that
together. And then our last
program.
Is our administrative services
unit, which is our full support
unit. So it's r I t r h R r
administer our finance and our
legal team. Um And so that's a
breakdown of the agency and I
stand for questions. Thank you.
I'll go to committee. Do we have
some questions? No questions. I
I do.
And I want to thank you for all
your work and for forgetting
everything in order that you
what? You just, um you you
discuss and getting off that
list and increasing the services
and the outreach, I think is one
of the most important things as
As we've had discussions about
our workforce and getting them
do you have any numbers and and
those increases in how many apps
you said over 300? I believe,
And if you can just lay it out a
little bit more what you're
anticipating what it costs for
for that amount of work. And how
many FTS you have dedicated to
that work.
Madam chair. Thank you. Yes. So
we did see in our last program.
You're an increase of 300
applications for services. Um
We had seen a decrease over the
last five years of 2000
applications, so we're slowly
ramping that back up.
So we've got some work to do. We
are still serving about 7000
people a year through the
program, and those individuals
can be in any stage of the
program from referral to
eligibility to plan their
working through their actual
plan for services or actually in
employment. Um, services, So
we're we've maintain the 7000
over the last several years.
I would personally like to see
that go up to, um, 17,000. We
have the capacity when we're
fully staffed to serve, I would
say 10,000 individuals in the
rehab services unit
specifically, we have 146 F t E.
Ah, When I was here last year, I
talked about how we were going
to beef that unit up and in the
last year we have pulled
positions from our other two
main units to, um
Staff Rehab services unit, So
we've moved 18 positions to rsu.
To provide services right now
are vacancy rate in Rsu as of
last week was 16%.
Ah, we do still struggle with
the vocational rehab counselor
positions. There are tough job.
It's a big job, but in the last
year we also expanded our
counselor licensure.
Rule to allow for a larger pool
of, um individuals who could
qualify for that position.
Thank you. I really do
appreciate that. And I'm
emphasizing this because this is
something we discussed in
economic development was very
Thank you. I really do
appreciate that. And I'm
emphasizing this because this is
something we discussed in
economic development. It was a
very hearty conversation related
to our workforce and workforce
development and some of the
statistics that have come out of
Of the those eligible to work
and those that don't and that
they are not. But they are very
they're capable and they're
willing to. I think it's because
of the outreach that you're
doing, and I'd like to really
follow through.
As we move into the next fiscal
year, I've seen how you're
developing that.
I feel like this is, um as we're
looking to, um
Increase our workforce and
looking for those places where
we are we we have neglected
this, um, the services and this,
uh, this type of programs, and
there are other programs out
there. They think we discussed
and I'd like to look at that.
More so in a 60 Day session, But
I want to thank you again for
all your hard work. This is
really important and I want
this. You know, I'm making these
statements because we need to
move on to, um
To really grasping what we can
do with what with your work and
your agency. Thank you. Thank
you, Manager.
I don't see anybody else with
any questions. Um, so I would
like to entertain a motion from
someone. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I move that we accept the LFC
recommendation.
Thank you and you have a second.
Great. Um
So I was talking about two
because I'm trying to reach a
quorum so we can't We can't
finalize the boat.
So And I'd like to also say that
just through this conversation,
um
We, um we are going to entertain
that motion. We always do for
the the lfc or the lower. Um
A recommendation for our budget,
But that doesn't mean our
discussions are closed, and I
think I like myself actually to
to talk to you a little bit more
about that, but that's what we
do. And, um
As we're waiting for a quorum,
and now we have it. So
representative McCluskey make
the motion again.
Thank you, Madam Chair, a movie
that we accept the the LFC
recommendation.
Madam Choi second
Thank you, sir. We have the
motion for the L C
recommendation and second by
representative Baca, or is there
any opposition to this?
Thank you. We will adopt the lfc
recommendation. Thank you.
So next we have, um, crime
Victims, Reparation Commission
and their agency numbers 780.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair. My
name is Scott Sanchez. Sorry.
Good afternoon, madam Chair. My
name is Scott Sanchez. I'm the
LFC analyst for Public safety.
We're talking about the crime
Victims Reparation Commission,
which is agency code 780. You
can find that information behind
Tab seventh
You can also find information in
the LFC volume two pages 401 to
404.
Also here with me today Director
Frank Zubieta from the Crime
Victims Reparation Commission
and Diego Jimenez, My
counterpart from the Department
of Finance Administration.
The recommendations ultimately
differ by about $280,000.
despite what the over under
reads on your different sheets,
But you can see on Page one.
You have seven. The critical
difference is that the LFC
recommendation replaces
anticipated cuts in federal
funding through a special
appropriation in Section five,
which is on page five of your
packet instead of building it
into your base budget, as the
executive recommendation does
The LFC based budget
recommendation includes a total
increase in general fund revenue
of 1.2 million, or 9.8%, over FY
24, providing $250,000 to offset
the loss of revenue.
500,000 for sexual assault
services and approximately
406,000 for agency operations to
sustain positions, providing
victim services and grants
Administration
With that I'll turn it over to
Diego.
Thank you. Scott, Madam chair
and members of the committee.
Uh, Scott did a good job of
Going over the differences so I
won't. I won't go into too much
more detail about that.
But the executive would really
cautioned the committee and and
taking the route that the
Legislative Finance Committee
recommendation has taken. Um
well, it is true that
That the commission can use that
additional federal funding and
the current
All right, And that's why 25 in
the next fiscal year. Doing so
creates a
A pretty dire funding scenario
for sexual assault service
providers and
In the near future.
Um
The executive also contemplated
going that route, but ultimately
decided to use General fund to
provide a more steady funding
stream for for those providers
and the other services that the
that the commission provided
with that on hand it over to
director Zubieta. Thank you.
Good afternoon. Sorry. I didn't
mean to shout Good afternoon,
madam chair and members of the
committee again. Frank Zubi, a
director for the New Mexico
Crime Victims Reparation
Commission. I want to thank
Diego and also Scott with lfc
who we worked closely with when
we, um
Creator budget. I also if if you
would allow me, Madam chair to
introduce our commission chair,
Ellen Suma who's in the
audience? Cindy Mark, who's our
chief financial officer, and
Donna Richmond, who is our
grants bureau chief. We also
have a special guest Alexandria
Taylor, executive director.
Sorry for the New Mexico
Coalition of sexual assault
programs. Um, I prepared a power
point. Madam chair members of
the committee and is for pages
Try to be brief. Um, and my
hopes is that I can be, um,
Mexico Crime Victims. Reparation
Commission has two primary
missions. We provide financial
compensation to victims of
violent crime across the state.
Um
We? We do that with our service
organizations, so in addition to
providing financial compensation
to victims of crime across the
state, we also are a funding
organizations. So we've minister
both state and federal money to
146 projects across the state.
Those projects consists of rape
crisis centers, sayings,
domestic violence shelters
causes.
Child advocacy centers. Law
enforcement victim advocates
and, um
D a victim advocates district
attorney victim advocates, Um
victim advocates in almost
every, um, field across the
state. Um, Madam chair members
of the commission, if you would,
um
If you would
Trying to page two of my power
point. Um, madam chair that
They're the vocal victim
assistance.
We? The Book of Victim
Assistance Funds began.
It is, um it was an inception of
1981. It was under the Reagan
administration. It was under the
victims of crime, active
funding. Um it was created to
enhance and cooperation with law
enforcement not going to go into
Too much detail, but I think it
was important for me to provide
you some context. Typically, the
funding the crime victim funds
was fines, fees and forfeitures
on a federal level, and the fund
grew substantially over the
years in 2015, the Department of
Justice OVC, Um, said that we
are going to kind of not
necessarily opened the
floodgates.
But, um, we are going to allow
administering agencies to access
additional funding. So 2015 we
got, um we went from 3 million
to almost 6 million.
That Subsequently we went to 9
million and then in 2018. We
went to over $20 million in
federal funding for our state.
We
Work closely with all of our
coalitions are sexual assault
coalition are Native coalition
or domestic violence coalition
also, uh, Children's
organizations to ensure that we
could get this money out and to
enhance services across the
state. We were one of very few
states that reverted none of
that money back because we were
very strategic.
On how we implemented and
strategized with our coalitions
to make sure that we did it
successfully. A lot of our
organizations did an amazing job
of enhancing
Their services across the
states. They not just enhanced,
but they were working with both
metro and rural parts of the
communities to make sure that
individuals or victims of
violent crime were accessing
services across the state as
well.
Um, Madam Chair members of the
commission as you can, Uh,
committee. Sorry. Um, if you can
it
On my graph on Page two
demonstrates the decrease in
federal funding that our
organization has received. We
were we met with the director of
The Department of Justice, and
they were anticipating a 42%
cut from what we received this
fiscal this federal fiscal year.
So currently
Our organization received
$8,360,000 so
If we anticipate a 42% cut,
we're looking at a $4 million
4,000,849 appropriation to our
state.
That's why we're here before
you, madam Chair. Members of the
committee is to ask that you
support our continued services
to critical needs across the
state for victims of crime. Uh,
madam Chair members of the
committee if you would now
change to, um
Page number three of my power
point.
Um
As stated earlier. We provide
victim compensation for victims
of violent crime for every state
dollar that our organization
expense. We also get 75 cents
from the federal government.
Um, we strategically also worked
with all of our nonprofit
organizations to make sure that
individuals who are victims of
violent crime access this
funding
Um, one of the unfortunate
things about our state is that
historically we would be. We
paid. Our primary focus was
paying for medical expenses
across the state. But now for
the last six years, our
organization is paid for burial
and funeral services. So we've
expended close to $7 million on
just burial and funeral.
In New Mexico, and it's
unfortunate because that's now
been our biggest expense.
Um, the unfortunate thing and
I'll get into the breakdown with
regards to our budget. But if
you would I just needed to
provide you some additional
context as to why we're asking
for such a significant amount of
money. Um
There was legislation that was
passed last legislative session.
HB 139. It was a revenue source
for us that revenue sources now
gone. There was a sunset clause
of July 1st 2024.
It's unfortunate but
administrative us as the courts
is not
Is not collecting what we were
supposed to be getting.
Um
We
We've seen a huge deficit in
that revenue stream, even though
there was a sense that clause of
July 1st 2024
We didn't anticipate that we
were going to be affected this
state fiscal year were affected.
We asked for an additional
special appropriation. Um and I
know that the executive is
currently supporting that lfc is
currently not, um, we
understand, but there's a need
and we can demonstrate the need
of that particular request.
Madam chair members of the
committee if you would now
change to the last page
Leaves me into illustrate our
actual request.
If you look at the graph madam
chair members of the committee
sexual assault victim Services
we're asking for $2 million
currently.
We can demonstrate that there is
a significant need. And, um, the
Sexual assault.
Um
The coalition of sexual assault
programs and the services that
they provide across the state
have been incredible, and
they've done an amazing job and
making sure that all of the
organizations that provide those
services have what they need.
And we've done such a good job
about making sure that they have
what they currently need and all
kind of go into the specifics.
The
The additional appropriation of
they were able to increase. Um,
rape crisis centers from 13 to
15. They went from 11 seen
programs to 12 same programs,
and additionally, they expanded
services to institutionally
underserved populations, such as
survivors with disabilities.
Spanish speaking immigrant
Survivors and native survivors.
In addition, they developed a
work group of stakeholders to
improve data standards for
sexual assault service providers
in New Mexico and for the
implementation of a statewide
hotline.
In addition, they increased
therapeutic services both to
urban and rural communities
created additional exam rooms.
With your equipment, Increased
staff salaries, established
retirement benefits provided
nurse on call and pay travel and
currently supporting six new
tribal sexual assault programs
across the state.
Um
The next line is the other
organizations aside from sexual
assault, and I'm not trying to
minimize the importance of the
services that are sexual assault
providers are conducting across
the state. But we are an agency
that administers funding to all
victimizations across the state.
So we're hoping that you all
support a one point
$1,250,000 appropriation to make
sure that organizations that
provide services to victims of
homicide
Child abuse.
Ah, domestic violence D wi in
various other victimizations.
That's the additional request to
make sure that we can continue
to support those victimizations.
Um
The crime victims care and
support that is the direct
funding to victims. And finally,
crime that goes directly to
victims of crime.
That's where HB 139 ultimately
affected. Um, we are not getting
the revenue, um, that we were
anticipating for this state
fiscal year and obviously for
the future, madam chair members
of the committee.
That's $750,000 appropriation is
to ensure that we can continue
to enhance and provide services
to victims of violent crime
across the state. Other victims
services is the guardian at
Lightem.
Um we currently received a
special appropriation wasn't a
lot of money, but we currently
are working with two
organizations that provide
guardian light. Um to two
Children of child abuse, and we
want to continue to support that
because we believe that the work
that they're currently doing is
Critical and necessary for our
state.
Um, I am the CBC personnel. I do
want to let that both lfc and
our LFC is actually supporting
the entire request of the 342
because of the decrease in
federal funding, and I want to
let Madam chairman members of
this committee know that we are
very strategic on how we expand
our federal funding. We
currently have eight position.
I'm sorry.
Yes, six positions that are
federally funded positions we
need to absorb three of those
positions because we can't
sustain them with our federal
funding and with the cut that
we're receiving from the federal
government
Um, the next item, madam chair
Members of the committee is CBC
CVR C operational costs and that
is our mou with state personnel.
We don't have human resource
representative in our
organization when we're fully
employed were 28. We're
currently down to 25. We just
lost our bureau chief.
He retired, Uh and we just lost
the transfer over to works.
Workers comp, So they took one
of our individuals and she
started on Monday. But I say
that because our vacancy rate is
pretty low, madam chair members
of the committee, so we
Well, we tried to make sure that
we fill our positions. Um
Aggressively. And when we work
with state personnel, um
Madam chair members of the
committee. I
Although our lfc L'Est has been
incredibly supportive, um I hope
and we hope that you support the
executive recommendation for the
entire amount. Madam Chair
members of the committee. I
stand for questions.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
for all that information. It's
been in a long interim where
you've been, Um
In our committee meetings, and
so I want to thank you for all
the time and everything that you
do for, um, the work that we you
have at hand. It's not easy, so
I'm gonna start with our
committee member.
Terror had a meal.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for being here. I have had
the privilege for the last 10
years to work with Children's
advocacy group.
And we often, um
Access your services.
Um
I'm grateful that those services
are there. I'm sad that they
need to be there.
And I'm sure we all feel that
way.
Um
This is hard work. This is hard
work to do. And, um
When I look at, um something
like this where we're seeing a
42% reduction. I know what that
will mean to the Children I work
with who are raped.
To the individuals I work with
who are victims of sexual
assault.
I know it will mean the
difference between having
counseling.
Being able to move to a
different location.
Um, away from from those that
perpetrated this crime or their
family members.
Um, sometimes being able to
leave a community but still
being able to feed your
Children. This will be
detrimental.
If we do not receive this
funding
So I am urging this committee to
consider.
Um, the executive
recommendation.
I think that it is vital to
Children's lives.
It is vital to individuals who
are victims of crimes so I would
support the executive
Recommendation. Thank you for
being here and thank you for all
that work. It's nice to put a
face to that angel that that
helps us out.
Adam Gierasch representative.
Thank you for that.
Uh, now we have a representative
Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Presenters. Uh,
My question centers around the
budget X specifically for the
sexual assault services, and I'm
asking the analysts for
explanation here. It looks like
the executive budget requires or
is
Presented to allow $2 million.
Let's see. LSC is only allowing
500,000 in my reading that
correctly and please tell me if
I am
Madam chair.
Madam Chair, representative
Herndon. Uh, that is partially
correct. Yes, the lfc
recommendations specifically
included in the volume two
explanation of, you know, trying
to restore most of the vocal
cuts through a combination of
Section four appropriations, So
that is the 500,000 and then the
special appropriation for
restoring victims of crime Act
funding. Um, now I can see on
this spreadsheet in front of us
that is broken out into two
separate line items, and so I
want to make clear that it is,
um, the understanding of the LFC
recommendation that they would
be able to allocate that as they
saw fit right, so not
necessarily 1.5 has to go to
You know every other service,
but the idea is that in
combination with the section
four appropriations and the
special appropriation on Page
five of your packet, um that we
would get a little closer to the
funding levels before they were
cut.
Thank you, madam. Chair of Mr
Analysts. I just want to make
sure I understand. I'm looking
at this budget requests. That's
what you're looking at. And the
500,000 that was recommended by
Lfc. And I'm sorry. Could I
couldn't hear you because I need
you closer to the mic. Sorry
about what was the additional
funding that you said could be
utilized so that they get closer
to a amount that was aligned
with the executive.
Correct. So again. Thank you and
Madam chair.
There's 500,000 in the current
budget in Section four
specifically for sexual assault
victims services, um what the
Loc proposed was a $1.5 million
special appropriation. Um, that
would restore some of the
funding for that. That's the
agency's gonna absorb through
the cuts to the victims of
crime. Max the vocal cut If you
look at the slide in front of
you
So 1.25.
Million dollar.
Cut for every other type of
assault, you know of
victimization group. So we
understand that by putting 1.5
in the special appropriation,
the lfc endorsed, you know we're
soaring a little more than that,
knowing that it would flow to
sexual assault victim services
as well. Thank you, Madam chair.
Thank you, Mr analyst.
Thank you, representative now
Chairman Smoke.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Mr Zambian.
Thank you, Analyst. Madam Chair.
Um, Mr Zubieta. And thanks for
having your sort of some of your
team here today.
The these cuts.
Um
Alongside sort of the decision
that the Legislature made of
which I was proud to support,
reducing the fines and fees or
removing that uncertain what we
saw uncertain revenue source and
also a source that sort of kept
folks in some of these tough
cycles.
Um are these both recurring
costs that you will face with
CVR C or they sort of. Is there
any sort of
Uh, potential for restoration on
the horizon.
See
Better chair. Um
Chair. Small, Um
representatives small. We were
working with our federal
delegation in our office of
victims of crime, and there are
mechanisms already in place with
Congress and there's
implementations to see how they
could potentially remedy a lot
of the cuts that were actually
taking place on a federal level.
Um, what was happening? Madam
Chair representative Small was
that a lot of the larger
corporations instead of actually
being convicted of a potential
either felony or, well, you
know, they were
Put on us like a ppd First
defender program and they
weren't made to pay. The fines
are the fees. So a lot was, um
I have a lot of potential
funding was lost.
Um, And so the federal
government has now worked with
the U. S attorney's office. And
now that if you are put on a
first offender, or PPD program,
first defender program that you
still have to pay the fines and
fees so that there's there's
that potential revenue stream on
a federal level. Um, we're also
working to see how we could
potentially access to digital
funding as well.
Um, with regards to not just
state appropriation, but we are
very strategic on making sure
that we expend all of our state
money to make sure that we're
accessing the federal, um 75, or
75 cents that we could
potentially access as well. Um,
we're constantly having
conversations.
Uh, Madam Chair, representative.
Small, uh, to look at ways of
which we could potentially
access additional funding. Don't
know if that answers your
question, Madam Chair. Mr Zambia
is very helpful. Um, and I don't
want to take too much time. Uh,
what's helpful for me that I
guess in summary, Madam chair
and
Uh, is we clearly need that
there is a very large delta
here. There's probably
additional work that's needed
to bring us closer as
representative Artemio outline
where we're supporting across
the number of areas, Uh, it's
helpful to know Mr Sanchez. I
want to go to you, Um
That
There are there is there are
potential additional federal
funding sources so we can maybe
do additional work that is make
additional investments but
continue to focus on maybe more
on the special appropriation
side, as opposed to sort of
having to from the state that
that your answer was very
helpful, I think and sort of
illustrating.
That to me so far, Mr Sanchez,
Is there anything
Mr Chair. Thank you. Yes. So,
essentially, that is the biggest
difference between the LFC wreck
and the executive recommendation
is that
Recognizing that there is the
potential for some of this
funding to be restored at a
federal level. Uh, the LFC chose
to refrain from building those
types of things into the
recurring budget. That's why
there's that contingency
language in there during the
budget making process we saw
Congress passed to continuing
resolutions when those
continuing resolutions were
originally introduced. They
contain partial restoration of
vocal funding.
When those bills finally passed.
They didn't have it in there
anymore. And so as we watch
Congress going through the same
thing again here with the
impending funding Cliff or
whatever you want to call it,
you know, we see the same thing
and so
If the LFC record work. I'm
sorry if the exact correct word
to be what the committee adopts,
Obviously, we would the LSC
would not recommend endorsing
the special appropriation
funding the same thing. Okay.
Thank you, Mr Sanchez. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um so Yeah, it
seems like there's more work to
do here. We need to come closer
to the executive recommendation.
But perhaps
A lot of that work can take
place as opposed to sort of
committing the recurring funding
across the board. So thank you
very much, Manager. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, Chairman.
Next on my list. I have
representative dela Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Choi.
Thank you, madam. Sure. I
appreciate the Chairman Smalls
commons. Uh, certainly it is a
concern to continue to grow the
budget and in a way that that is
not sustainable, However, that
being said
Uh, if we can keep you whole at
least with a special
appropriation that was
I mentioned earlier. I think
that's a good step forward, but
I would really like to see us
having more stable source of
revenue.
Because, you know, I serve a
district of need.
And I would love to be able to
say that my my community does
not have crime does not have
sexual assault victims,
etcetera.
Reality is that we do
And it is a chronic problem
across the state. I get that.
But they're there simply are
areas that have a little bit
more need for attention and
funding and support,
particularly for victims.
And so, madam chair, to the
extent that we could do
something, either with a special
appropriation till we find out
what's going to happen at the
federal level with special,
other special or federal
delegation weighing in and
helping, I would really support
that, and I just want to make
that public. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, representative. I
really do appreciate that, Um
And I just
I think I made a lot of comments
when I saw you, Mr Zambia in
Health and Human Services
Community Committee.
Over the interim, and so I can
echo enough of what my
colleagues have stated here but
to be on point with this and and
working with the budget
Um, and understanding how the
how everything is flowing and
these federal dollars
Or like a merry go round that we
keep. We keep having to address
and
We need to
Really address. I like what
Representative Villa Cruz said
about finding us stable source
of revenue. I think that's going
to be a task.
To work through the interim
should be quite the next
interim, to be quite honest with
you, but at hand what we have to
work with here in, um, I support
That we need to get closer or as
close as we can to making this
funds hole for for our crimes
victim.
Budget area where we're falling
short or there's a discrepancy
here.
And what we do in our committee,
as you all know is that we go
with the lower recommendation
But what we also do is we
create a an additional
subcommittee to work with with
this budget item.
So that we can further this
conversation and I think you
heard from so many of us already
that this is something that we
want to do so at this time.
To address this merry go round
of the federal dollars to really
zero in and what it's going to
take to address. Um, the
discrepancy here.
Um what, Um
Chairman Small called the delta.
I think I'd like to entertain
that motion from a committee
member of Madam Chair, I moved
the LFC budget.
I appreciate that.
Thank you. We have the motion.
Um, can we add to that motion
representative Herndon that we
will have a working group around
this budget? Um, area, Madam
Chair, I moved the recommend the
LFC recommendation with a
working group to take a closer
look at the budget.
Thank you. Do I have a second?
Thank you with a second. Um, Do
we have any opposition to this
scene? No opposition. We will
move the recommendation from the
LFC with a workgroup and I look
forward to having more
conversations. Thank you. Thank
you, madam Chair members of the
committee.
Did you want to assign the
workgroup? Madam Chair? I will
sign the workgroup. I I would
like to have a representative.
How Romeo Representative
Herndon.
And
Representative.
Chatfield if he would
Yes.
Thank you.
Thank you, madam. We are good on
this topic.
And that is all we have on our
list for today, everybody thank
you for attending the LFC
subcommittee. See hearings today
We have a lot of work at hand.
and I just can't express how
much I appreciate all the work,
especially for more staff. Thank
you.
