Good morning everyone.
I smack dab in the middle of
Albuquerque's.
Everybody I'm day Hochman Vigil
I represent house district
fifteen in Albuquerque right the
district.
Happy to see everybody.
Good morning everyone.
So the billing and account.
Everybody is yes Sir house
district seventy which is San
Miguel Torrance and Santa Fe.
A good morning everybody madam
chair monetary Garcia I
represent house district sixty
nine would.
I'm looking forward to doing for
college thank you for being here
today thank you madam chair.
L..
Thank you madam chair I'm candy
Spence Ezzell state
representative district eight
southern Chavis canning who does
send money up here where we can
build thank you.
I.
Everybody Representative
Chatfield seven counties in
northeastern New Mexico Colfax
curry Harding quay Roosevelt
said McCallum you better be here
this morning.
Good morning state
Representative Gail Armstrong
house district forty nine
Sapporo Valencia and catching
County.
Good morning madam chair
everybody Representative ready
Crowder I live in Clovis
Representative district sixty
four which is the northern two
thirds of curry county glad to
be here.
Good morning madam chair good
morning everyone I'm Candie
Sweetser state district thirty
two I have the southwest corner
of the state I border Mexico and
Arizona.
The morning madam chair thank
you I'm Nathan small I'm very
proud to serve house district
thirty six which is the middle
and northern parts of Dona Ana
County thank.
Thank you madam.
Representative houses three
which Mr.
Seven can.
It.
Twenty one.
Madam chair more to the days of
I represent house district
twenty directly.
The third.
Thank you very much and I am
Representative Patty Lundstrom I
have the honor to serve as the
appropriations chair hi
represent house district nine
which is out on the far west
side of the state a
Representative city of Gallup
and at least for the next
several months into sound one
County that's change with our
redistricting and very proud to
be here and stand up proud to
have everybody here today.
The committee will function is
we've got to bills on our agenda
we've got house bill one and
we've got house bill two we will
be allowing public comment on
these bills I know this the
speaker's intention that we try
to get down to the floor as
quickly as we can so it's some
cases I'm going to ask for one
or two spokesman if it's a if
it's a large group that wants to
speak we're not going to have
everybody basically repeating
themselves so we'll have one or
two come forward if they choose
to speak I will also have folks
possibly way of through our web
web system the staff will let me
know if we do have any of any
folks that would like to make a
comment or two that about the
bills will here today so with
that being said I'd like to
welcome our majority floor
leader he's here as well as our
Legislative Council director to
talk to us about house bill one
go ahead Sir thank you madam
chair and thank you members of
the committee good to see all of
you again this morning on house
bill one as you know is our feet
bill this bill allocates four
point one million dollars for
this special session
the breakdown is as follows
fifty five thousand dollars for
the house of representatives for
session expenses.
Seventy two thousand dollars for
the Senate for their session
expenses and the way this breaks
out is you know these are your
sergeant at arms and other
session staff the need to be
hired as well as per diem for
legislative force of the
Legislative Council Service will
receive sixteen thousand seven
hundred dollars this is for
contract drafters that they have
set up in order to systems with
the bills that will be working
on the special session and then
there's a four million dollar
appropriation and this was
actually vetoed house bill to
this committee and and
legislature passed as part of
house bill two those for million
dollars or for a number of
renovations maintenance and
upgrades that council service
has identified for our building
in many cases in conjunction
with some of the stuff
leadership staff on on in in
both chambers and and in both
parties these include things
like renovations to the annex a
reconfiguration of the L. E. S.
C. office space and then other
upgrades and maintenance items
cameras plumbing it's a trap
like I said that funding was
vetoed in house bill two and so
we are re incorporating it into
house bill one in hopes that it
passes get signed by the
governor and that are
Legislative Council staff can
move on with the work of taking
care of our building so with
that madam chair as you
indicated Mr Burciaga the
director of the council services
here as our expert witness and
we're happy to stand for
questions.
Well
Raul would you like to make a
comment.
Morning.
As of the committee I don't have
any comment except to advise
that I am various technical
expert I'm either in favor of
our opposition to house bill one
although that is with the state
legislature someone sure it's
important but I would later on.
Thank.
Before we go to comments from
the public and the questions it
can you give a little bit more
detail on what the four million
is going to spend.
Madam chair and members of the
committee yes so the four
million dollars as the Martinez
indicated is two million dollars
of cash balances to from the
state capital maintenance fund.
There are three renovations to
re configurations that we're
looking at and that there have
been requests through
discussions with leadership
staff in in all four caucuses it
would be
review it reconfiguration of the
for leadership offices house and
Senate D. as in ours those are
the four caucus offices
downstairs the
Offices the legislators to me
the house of representatives
offices in capital north that's
on the second floor
one of things we were asked to
look at with the possibility of
making those offices instead of
two members per office making
one.
and lastly is the LTSE space
which is adjacent now to the LFC
space.
That used to be people AOC
administrative office of the
courts space.
How yes is there now those are
much bigger because the AOC
was and there so the idea is to
reconfigure that space to
accommodate for staff because
those offices out to make the
offices closer to what LFC
offices are to be able to fit
more staff down there.
Those patients in addition to
that
we need to modernize the
elevator in the annex and
capital.
that those elevators are have
been touched in substantial
overall if you will since they
were installed about thirty
years ago it.
The.
The.
The parties at all of you have.
Looking at putting those a lot
of the offices.
Simply because it's a security
measure to know who's coming in
and out of those offices.
It's just easier to track things
that way.
The parking facility across the
street the top deck we're
looking at the ceiling that
there's a little bit of water
leaking through there's no
there's no structural damage no
be clear but we want to make
sure that it doesn't turn into
structural damage we are looking
at the possibility of of
upgrading or purchasing new
vehicles for building services
we have one regular truck.
Dump truck and possible.
Those are the major ones there
are other things we need to look
at it all depends on how much
money we have available which of
these we can do.
And also so you know there is a
facilities review sub committee
which is comprised of the
speaker.
Ten point leaders and they look
at any request to renovate
building space that's actually a
Legislative Council policy so
all of that would have to be
prioritized person but in
addition to those that I just
mentioned those major ones we've
got stuff.
Pair stucco repair some concrete
payers cameras
Market place things like that
that are smaller dollar.
Need to see how much of that can
be accomplished that dollars and
again a lot of this will go
through the.
With that manager of stand for
questions.
What
questions from the committee.
Start with.
Representative Crowder thank you
madam chair three very quick
questions on the
Funding for the session of fifty
five thousand for the house
seventy two thousand for the
Senate it is that funding for
one day or is it funding for two
days.
Chair reserve Crowder that is
funding for today.
Okay thank you just curious and
madam chair perhaps you can help
me understand this and once the
seventy member House receiving
fifty five thousand in the forty
two member Senate receiving
seventy five thousand can you
help me understand that.
Difference.
I already have that has always
been a discussion item for us
rivers that are as you know
serving on this committee for a
long time I'm going to have role
explain it as he is of staff for
both both chambers go ahead
madam chair Representative
Crowder and members of the
committee.
My understanding is that the
chief clerks are the ones who
put together not my
understanding the chief clerks
put together the budget as
mentioned earlier it does
accommodate two days a per diem
one round trip for mileage and
the the house and Senate chief
clerks determined how much staff
they need.
And how much that comes in a day
or so before having how much
stays on afterwards and that's
what they base their
Their costs for the session but
as as madam chair indicated of
the Senate has traditionally
been a little bit higher than
the house despite the number of
members.
Thank you madam chair thank you
will I would appreciate this in
a one page sheet that explains
why.
Less members than we the houses
there there's got to be some
kind of reason there and and if
you guys could find just one
page cheat I would appreciate
don't need it today but I would
appreciate it turned my my final
question madam chair is of the
four million dollars the state
capital maintenance fund is for
two million is coming out of in
any other two minutes from
provided cash balances.
What is the balance left in the
state capital maintenance fund
after the two million is removal
for what is the current balance
prior to removal and what is the
current balance of the
Legislative cash balances where
are we on those numbers after
the four major move what will be
the balances.
Madam chair and Representative
Crowder my recollection is that
the.
The legislative cash balances
is proximate to I.
Because there's a lot of.
Not
just.
Thank you madam chair product.
I understand let's that cash
balances currently are about two
point six almost two point seven
million dollars so this would
bring it down to about six
hundred sixty six thousand
dollars.
the state capital maintenance
fund I believe is a neighborhood
about two point four million
that would take it down to about
four hundred thousand dollars.
Now.
Capital state capital
maintenance fund yes.
It gets a share of the capitol
buildings repair Fund which I
believe comes from the land
grant permanent fund so it gets
money every year I believe it's
two percent.
All I Vigil be happy to provide
that along with the explanation
on on the house and Senate
differences the cash balances.
gets reversions from.
Legislature expenses so.
Regular session any
appropriations for the house for
the Senate and the Legislative
Council Service that are for the
legislature for the content the
the the the conduct if you will
of the session
Any money that comes out of the
general fund any money that is
left over reverts to provided
cash balances and I believe
that's been in place since about
nineteen fifty.
so that gets replenished so I
would expect.
In the neighborhood of may be
anywhere from half a million two
million for two cash balances
July thirty first a lot of the
cash balances have gone down in
the last few years because of
redistricting primarily
the research Pauline the
attorneys and the redistricting
the citizen redistricting
committee has brought down cash
balances build it gently picks
itself back up anywhere between
three and five million.
And that is what has
traditionally been used to
operates and renovations and
capital as opposed to having the
council the council service.
Ask for capital outlay money.
Thank.
It sounds like that there will
be a little bit recharge take
place of those funds prior to
all the expenditure taking place
is that correct Madam chair
representative that's correct
thank you thank you Mr thank you
Representative Representative
Ezzell.
Madam chair thank you very much.
Prouder was question.
I do have a question whatever
you say that you're going to
possibly reconfigure the offices
capital.
Affectionately called the out
house okay.
Yes that's out house out there
how how do you plan on re
reconfiguring in those offices
just strictly by using the AOC
offices that you were talking
about earlier and maybe some of
those members to those
particular offices because right
now all of those offices out
there.
With the exception of a couple
there's two members and every
one of those offices so that's
doubling up office space up
there.
I'd like your thoughts on how
those might be reconfigured.
Madam chair representative.
The reconfiguration of the
Legislature our actually house
members offices in capital north
is as you mentioned there are
two members per office right
now.
What we were asked to do by the
facility review subcommittee.
Speaker pro tempore leaders was
to look at that to see if we
could possibly change those
offices by making a little bit
smaller into into an individual
office for each member there.
So where you have to members for
office the ideas to look to see
if they can be.
Changed to one member per office
but that might make me make
taken up some room elsewhere in
that area no we don't have those
drawings it I haven't had the
coupon that simply because that
money was vetoed so we haven't
had any one actually look at
that any engineering or
architectural service to look at
that say yes what can be done.
That would be strictly for the
years
old AOC office space downstairs.
Is.
Speaker so that
so that out of the SCG down
there now can have a little bit
more space and possibly the
Legislative Council Service can
have some space there for some
staff as well.
That would be for staff that
would not be for legislative.
Madam chair Mr Burciaga thank
you for that explanation I
stringently opposed.
Configuring those offices to
make them smaller for only one
Representative.
Tell us.
Mainly the I have been in that.
Out house for sixteen years I
was only over here for two years
okay.
It is wall from over there to
over here.
A lot of us that are out there
like it out there we're able to
get a lot of work done that
benefits our constituents and
the whole state.
But whenever you're talking
about reducing the size of those
offices I am opposed to that I
think for the added benefit we
get we do get our exercise
walking all that way out there
and it's pretty good high
especially whenever the speaker
of the house is members to the
floor immediately we will start
at three minutes there's no way
it will.
Some of these younger members
can but the.
I'm not able to do that anymore
I'm not able to walk that far so
as an added incentive for us
remaining at their I cannot see
the benefit of reducing the size
of those offices and so madam
chair with that being said I
will be quiet thank you very
much.
Password.
For the next
And that this.
Madam chair the subcommittee
facilities review subcommittee
is maybe speaker the pro tem and
the four leaders.
So that means that the best way
to deal with that is to go
through.
Around.
Office sites madam chair that's
correct right Representative
Brown.
So the
But.
Right I think.
Very much call for but I'm
curious how powerful you are
with four million dollars.
Given the fact that anybody has
tried to build anything or
renovate notes that the cost of
building materials has really
skyrocketed.
everything except sometimes I I
know we just did a contract for
the leaves D. O. H. they needed
a new building for warehousing
and
The Pattullo was going to take
up almost the whole amount that
they were initially us so are
you do have a provision here
that anything not spent goes
back into the originating Fund
but it sounds like notes plans
have been made yet we don't have
any blueprints we it's all very
speculative at this point so how
confident are you in that's the
question madam chair that the
four million will cover the need
or what we have to come back and
entertain and other request.
Madam chair and representative
brown I'm quite concerned
because you're absolutely right
about construction.
I was working building
superintendent looking.
Generally at renovation and
building cost in Santa Fe and
they're significant
I think you're gonna get
anything less than fifty dollars
a square foot personal
reservation costs building if
something new is three hundred
fifty thousand.
Fifty percent of what.
So he's just going to depend on
the size and it would have to go
back I can't decide.
That is the Legislative Council
policy and ask for their review
and approval at that point we
would have at least some
preliminary drawings maybe not
to speak to.
Maybe our actual architectural
drawings at least some
preliminary look at look at the
estimate
decide to.
Very high.
Representative Townsend.
House Bill to next.
Here's.
House.
Thanks.
Hello hello can you hear me
great okay very good.
Try it again.
Terminals the other two long so
we're ready Representative.
thank you madam chair good
morning committee it's it's an
honor to be before you to
present house bill two House
Bill to as I'm sure you all know
is a rebate bill we are
proposing rebates for tax filers
in the amount of five hundred
dollars per individual a
thousand dollars per head of
household married filing jointly
and we are proposing two
payments one in the spring in
this fiscal year in the second
in the fall in the next fiscal
year this of course is in
addition to the rebates that we
passed in health bill one sixty
three our tax package that left
the house in in the earlier
session on the proposal also
includes a program for non tax
filers and it is modeled on a
program that we have passed in
the that we enacted in the past
and present it in the past
relating to individuals who did
not
qualify for the COVID released
payments and from the federal
government so this program is a
twenty million dollar program it
is capped
people individuals who are non
filers and generally those
individuals are people who do
not have sufficient income to
warrant a filing a tax return.
And I would note for the
committee it feedback that I
received from various members is
that they have a number of
senior citizens in their
district who are not tax filers
because their incomes are too
low and the purpose of course is
to assist individuals such as
those and again it's capped at
twenty percent first come first
serve it is modeled on a program
that we have implemented in the
past TRD has worked with health
and Human Services in
implementing the program so
secretary Schardin Clarke and
others in the administration of
and very helpful in crafting
this bill and developing the
various deadlines and sort of
the implementation piece there
are some appropriations in the
bill which I'm sure you're aware
of the twenty million dollars.
And sums to support TRD HSD and
in addition there is a provision
that is sort of a a false the
fail safe.
Twenty million dollars so if
there's some issue about
a deficiency we can tap into the
revenue stabilization fund we
model this provision on a
provision that's in house bill
two that I believe is you're all
familiar with so without madam
chair and committee members I'm
happy to entertain questions and
I have secretary Schardin Clarke
to assist as well.
Okay we go to questions from the
audience I'd like to pass
secretary to take us through the
process I'm looking at the
General Fund finance.
Looking at what would be R. S.
your reserves.
For FY twenty twenty three.
I have that there at the back
it's attachments may.
We need is yes but I want you to
take us through where is the
money come from and then.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and I want to also
mention that I think the chief
economist is the will be helpful
in this and we also have tax
policy director mark taking here
for any technical or policy
questions so that the process of
their will basically be three
different rounds to tax rebates
and one payment to non filers
the first tax rebate that's for
tax filers we'll go out by June
thirtieth twenty twenty two
which therefore will affect the
FY twenty two general fund
financial summary the second
rebate will go out in September
twenty twenty two affecting FY
twenty three financial summary
the HSD payment which is that
twenty million dollars
appropriation amount would go
out in late July twenty twenty
two was the final version and so
for the tax rebates like all tax
expenditures tax and Rev
receives incoming revenue on a
monthly basis from all different
tax programs we make
distributions as required by law
and then we.
You know we we distribute
whatever's left over to the
general fund and so in this case
those tax rebates would be
netted out of what would
otherwise under normal
circumstances go to the general
fund.
Madam chair that that's right
with the secretary described as
right up so that rebates will go
out as lost revenue and in the
probation or maybe from the
general fund so if there are
insufficient revenues in the
general fund to meet these
rebates there will be a
withdrawal from the tax
stabilization reserve and I
believe you asked about reserve
levels as well and you know as
you all are aware that the.
Economic situation has changed
pretty dramatically since
December the Russian invasion of
Ukraine inflation wages those
are a lot higher than we
expected and so we're currently
tracking revenues higher than
the December estimate of you
know economists from the TRD DFA
and and us at the LFC put our
heads together and we were
talking about three hundred
million dollars higher in FY
twenty two and maybe a similar
amount in twenty three and so
you know the official financial
statements there don't reflect
that increased revenue but given
sort of those expectations and
what the spending in this bill
might be you might expect to be
anywhere around twenty percent
reserves of course there's
extremely volatile Revenue so.
Plus or minus two percent would
be reasonable to expect as well
so is the the reserve detail
that we have here is based on
our last session okay so that's
important for everybody to know
also.
All right
okay.
Have the FIR I and I are funded
the list go to the public and
see if there's any comments we
have one spokesman couple people
if you would please come up
stand behind the presenters will
hand you the hand money and
to make a couple comments.
There should be the hand my next
is Schardin Clarke if you could
please hand of the folks of the
Mike hold down the button and
tell us what you think.
Thank you can you hear me yes
thank you madam chair members of
the committee good morning my
name is JD Bullington and I'm
speaking today on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce which supports this
effort to share our historic
surpluses driven by our state's
energy production directly with
New Mexicans many of our
taxpayers are also small
business owners and we all know
what they've been through in the
last few years but now our
customers and consumers and
businesses are experiencing
runaway inflation the highest in
forty years so the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
strongly supports this rebate
plan and it also urges the
legislature to continue to
address the fundamental problems
in our tax code that make our
state less competitive we must
promote long term economic
growth attract investments and
make it easier to develop and
attract talent to New Mexico
that is here to stay thank you
thank you Sir next come on up
please introduce yourself for
the record.
Madam chair members the
committee Chris goes on on the
register lobbyist for Los crucis
public schools I'm sorry let's
because this chamber of commerce
and we support this piece of
legislation for the same reasons
that G. D. brought to
representative of a car chamber
stated thank you very much thank
you very much.
When is yes I mean I mean I'm
just glad he's all set up I
think that's a little.
So I member site they have small
Micah I am from New Mexico let
me family I still have enough
complicated but the new all of
my family worked in the oil
fields sign member us almost on
boniva I'm a member of the most
important then it must as many
members as to how it is a
sincere less if I meet estimate
on this we have three thousand
members.
Essential workers and immigrant
families is the most initial
coin that house we are in eight
counties.
All right yes I'm a psyche Seyss
gone that those we are here
there are six counties present
here today he.
The R. Riva gari Chavis Santa Fe
is one.
Giacomo ma'am Yoakum a motion
member this almost.
All right if that many members
of some is that most people have
yep us on the part of the
struggles and up and they may we
are here
going through all the struggles
of the pandemic so most I mean
SLO hello yes we are working
family.
When I was that Casey most they
mean I mean just Morning Star.
we did a survey of a thousand
families or and also address is
someone that sells gone with
through the list yes that most
and though that those that
survey showed that one third of
us behind our bills he could not
stand was built and we have a
lot of that.
Yes this bill but I I mean
yesterday less common that mia.
Worse for rural families like
mine is the most content does
again again echoing off you
don't and then he left up Abia
we are very happy to know that
the other legislature land this
is the that is the most of
community that if that line
needs of our family.
They can just send them off Los
ramble so that'll stand to think
when that eking inTaos.
Getting a rebate of two hundred
and fifty and five hundred.
They don't claims nacion E. L.
costs that are fully not nice if
you see anything but with the
inflation and the gas cost is
not enough okay so is that what
I keep but apple yet invoices I
do see on the next slide in ways
that I mean yes gas yes why we
are here to support rebates for
our families thanks committee
thank you very much folks.
Thank you.
Next.
Okay.
What is yes.
What is the US and Europe
president and members of the
with the.
Good morning
The.
President of the state chair
woman and members of the
committee.
You know what is he this.
Is a member of the some of what
we need my name is fitness and
I'm a member of some awesome I
really need to do so but that
that's available to serve on
this is that it will make a call
and I'm part of the population
that it's and most needed in New
Mexico hello just about all of
us to meet at this.
The most as Griego that you
economic updated at this a bill
like many of the immigrant
workers we were excluded from
the economic relief federal
economic relief and not
implement any castle thankful
they learn a little bit to make
notice and my money in my case I
owe about eight thousand dollars
a lot but they make it to the
local you view sample of the
sellers are the work of a fiscal
year end up and then may I.
I lost my job and I have to use
all the money that I had state
and I had to ask for loans what
does a little I was in west of
yes them is that because but at
a club that is in the store if
you level it is and like
everybody I pay my taxes and
this message is to remind
legislature's list are are
estimated at this again we will
just a little disappointed
economical.
That that immigrant workers that
were excluded from many economic
relief hello this is the most
are effective opacity that a
left that we still need money to
continue going forward that's
what I don't know probably that
is that most of the state want
to keep us in the thank you for
giving us the opportunity to
give our testimony here thank
you very much thank you for
being here.
Hello my name is mud and then
decide on what Senator the one
that is that it shows an
immigrant rights and work
assesses organization in
Albuquerque New Mexico we have
over five thousand five hundred
members switch of a more low
wage workers and immigrant
families despite their
contributions many were excluded
from traditional economic relief
and worker benefit programs such
as unemployment and stimulus
checks in house assistance a
recent study that we did with
BSP reception back in December
of twenty twenty one prior to
the Omicron wave so the one
third of Latinos included
immigrants assure struggling
alarmingly showing that twenty
eight percent of spandex across
the state reported making less
than twenty thousand dollars
prior to taxes and among Latinas
the percentage was thirty five
percent even higher also thirty
five percent have less than a
hundred dollars and save in
support emergencies essential
workers cannot be essential
object not included in the
recovery we are here to support
for tax rebates there are
inclusive of all of our New
Mexico families including
families that have been left
behind in order to prosper
together lose must all be part
of this process of this recovery
the state must invest in our
communities thank you.
I
mean I'm gonna send up that I
think.
So you're not.
I mean the list and that the
whole the state unit of a
photograph.
The where the Ninos so you gonna
central the one that individual.
My name is summed up their whole
a domestic worker rights okay
take care of children and I'm a
member of and some through the
one that I chose.
Just wanted to us without any
sense you seem famous the local
and that okay okay hello member
this yes get one back when was
this thing called me members can
reach almost monumental
political money that they make
and thank.
Send us a nonprofit worker
justice organization which about
half of of five thousand five
hundred members and Albuquerque
New Mexico.
This is the imposed a comment
what does it is this I mean just
just dump us on the properly
must finance yes no with mantis
disables that the lowest
estimate with us from the list.
Yeah can we just the less I'm
going to tell us or us that that
I hope will was just built up in
the moment the most of a horse
you let us and was kind that
that might give us but I was
just thank the.
Many of our families have been
struggling during this pandemic
because whether are always for
kind of worked there we lost our
jobs having to look for
alternative ways to be able to
sustain ourselves and survive.
I would just tell us when we
left able to us through as a
bucket this element that get us
what we love the thought those.
Mixed outlook caliphate company
leave your furnace you.
It is simpler.
This has especially been
traveling for families that have
not the have been excluded off
economic relief at the federal
level and other forms of cash
assistance including
unemployment that was offered to
New Mexicans.
nessie so you want to put the
numbers through based on the
handle of the of the explanation
that a second Senator that that
office I know that it's
connecting the parental block
the call me then I'm just.
Do we continue to work every day
exposing ourselves to not a
healthy working conditions in
order for us to be able to
continue to feed our families.
What is the only up we almost
interim both say I live
economical but I must us family
just.
This is why we're here today in
this room because we are in
support of rebates the support
our families all of our
families.
Yes yes right thank you very
much.
You know I asked for two people
to speak.
From the from the group so.
I think if the deal with this
bill given that but.
So that yes I asked for to
spokesman from the group and we
have done and I appreciate it
thank you very much I need to
get to the committee that's what
we need to do so do we have
anybody on we have nobody on a
virtual so we're going to go to
the committee but before we do I
want to ask David to make an
announcement.
Chair thank you.
I can't produce bubbling who is
my counterpart from Wisconsin
the hits the Wisconsin fiscal
bureau and he has an incredible
record he's sort of the
Wisconsin legislature for fifty
one years.
Is a Vietnam veteran.
He's been the director of the
fiscal year for forty five
years.
And this.
Actually thanks to Bob I would
avert what retired ten years ago
some of you may have wished I
have but he he encouraged me to
stick with this based on his
experience on thank you so much
madam chair for letting me
introduce him he one this year
the Tommy Thompson of public
service award for the Wisconsin
school public administration.
Well thank you very.
One person is just research
center person thank you very
much for allowing me to run the
president.
Not only this committee hearing
but in your wonderful state it's
an honor to be here Dan Lee and
I been touring New Mexico for a
number of days and will continue
to do so and it's an honor to be
a cast of my job my counterpart
and my very good friend David
Abbey so thank you very much
okay thank you very much.
Go ahead and go to the committee
let's start with Representative
lane
We don't have a Mike down there
too.
Okay can you will that work.
Talk about okay.
Want me to answer.
For.
It is one.
The second.
Think of.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair so Representative
how I understand this bill is
essentially creates two
categories of rebates one for
those New Mexicans to file tax
returns and those who have
chosen not to file a tax return
is that correct.
How is it okay thank you very
much madam chair
madam chair and representative
that's essentially correct
although I think I would refer
to as a payment in terms of the
second second program.
Madam chair as opposed to a
rebate you madam chair and and
Representative yes and madam
chair is there a legal
significance to those
differences and now it's just a
clear madam chair and
representative to clarifying
point.
Madam chair.
Out of the the folks that are
the non tax filers the second
category
reading through the F. I. R..
The LFC estimates there's
there's going to be a proxy
hundred thirty five thousand of
those folks
do you have any other numbers
madam secretary to suggest other
than that Madam chair
representative lane
the economists and others that
have been analyzing the data for
the weeks up to this have
various estimates but we think
that the one listed in the LFC
report is as good as any it is a
little it is a little tough and
if maybe hired maybe lower but
the I want to emphasize that the
appropriation the bill is capped
and so we can serve anywhere up
to a maximum of forty thousand
payments through that would be
less if some of them are you
will have full.
Madam chair and so the cap of
forty thousand filers that's for
the second category.
Applicants rather than filers
madam chair and representative
yes.
The madam chair.
I guess I don't know enough
about how are in come tax code
system works if I'm an
undocumented resident can I also
filing a state income tax
return.
Yes madam chair representative
lane and in fact many
undocumented individuals do file
and the at if they basically we
accept tax returns from someone
has a social security number or
with called and I ten which is a
federally assigned tax ID
number.
Madam chair.
The again the LFC.
estimate is there's going to be
approximately sixty thousand
undocumented residents that
would be eligible to apply for
the second category I understand
is capped at forty thousand
I I guess I do have some
concerns there because if you do
the math even if you capita
thousand madam chair R. forty
thousand thousand each of those
persons get a thousand dollars
that correct.
madam chair Representative Lane
each individual could depending
on if there dual householder
single.
With dual with or with
dependence or single household
the payment amount varies but
yes it could be up to a thousand
dollars and that's reflecting
that the tax rebates there's
there's two of them in each can
be a maximum of five hundred so
totaled one thousand so we're
making the same amount but
through one payment rather than
to.
Madam chair
and I think my concern lies and
just you know doing the math a
thousand times forty thousand is
forty million.
That and I off on that Madam
chair representative land that
my comment earlier was that it's
a maximum of forty thousand
households served if they were
all single it could be a minimum
of twenty thousand if they were
all double we're estimating
about twenty six thousand
payments would go out but it
could be somewhere in the middle
madam chair
madam secretary than in that
sooner than you talk about a
prospect one six million that
would go.
The state.
Preparation is capped at twenty
million dollars in the bill the
madam chair madam secretary
thing that's helpful so you're
looking at.
On the high side then twenty
million that would go to a
doctor residents who haven't
filed income tax madam chair I
think that's not quite right
there may be some madam chair
some undocumented but there will
be uncertain
Citizens New Mexico citizens of
the state and as I pointed out
madam chair earlier this is that
we're hopeful that we'll be able
to support our seniors in the
state if we're not talking about
all on document madam chair and
if I may add to that it might
clarify chair representative
lane to look at page four of the
bill.
Line eighteen three twenty.
We're in the section of the bill
here that deals with the
payments that will be made to
non filers and they to be
eligible for the payment they
must provide a social security
number or an item number which
is the federal tax ID number so.
You have an I. ten if they're
undocumented.
Are likely for tax filers and so
really what we're talking about
here is as one of the members of
the committee mentioned
previously you have a lot of
elderly folks and others who are
very low income for different
reasons are required to file
taxes so I just want to
emphasize that the twenty
million dollars for non filers
isn't really all about
undocumented it's about non
filers because of income level
primarily.
Madam chair the LFC report house
those folks that you mentioned
you do secure read reference to
maybe elderly folks that don't
make enough income
to have no need to follow state
income tax return it
Representative investments those
people the seventy two thousand
but I'm just talk about what's
the actual language in the bill
doesn't preclude that scenario
because I think it's going to be
sort of a race to the
application line if we capita
twenty million
we have no way to sort through
what number of those are going
to be the the elderly folks that
choose not to file income tax
return verses
undocumented residents doing.
And madam chair and
representative lane I would
disagree with you but I just
come back to the language of
highlighted which is the to
apply for this payment.
For a social security number or
and I tip number.
You have to have one of those to
be eligible.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative will
still Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair of just
two or three pretty simple
questions I think
The refunds are the tax rebates
are going to be given there six
hundred seventy seven million I
believe over two different
periods
three hundred thirty eight point
seven million and one and three
thirty eight.
Are those funds when people
receive all are those taxable at
ordinary income or is it non
taxable or can you explain that
and the twenty million the same
thing is that taxable money when
they receive it is a totally non
taxable.
Madam chair.
Madam chair representative there
non taxable because of all the
checks received are not taxed.
Madam chair representative
that's correct okay I say all of
you shaking your head yes
someone account on that.
Thank you madam chair and and
and notice that we're break it
where there's a decision been
made to break it to two
different tranches of money
we're gonna do it two different
times one this spring one of the
following is that driven by cash
balances or what you're driving
that choice if there's an
urgency in the gas issue that
the inflation issue that's
that's just consuming everybody.
Why are you not giving it the
day the governor signs it start
cutting checks point.
Madam chair representative of
course we discuss that we felt
it was more fiscally responsible
to split him out between two
fiscal years as we're you know
ending this fiscal year we
wanted to get checks out
promptly your point is well
taken madam chair and
representative so that's the
that accounts for the first two
hundred and fifty then we're
putting that the remaining check
in the second fiscal year at
again to smooth out the fiscal
impact I would point out also
there had been questions madam
chair that about you know taking
advantage or you know
profiteering with these psalms
this will also mitigate against
that as a possibility it madam
chair and representative it also
traces it sort of follows what's
going on where we are we have
high gas prices now and and the
attendant results of that
including other high prices as a
result of that we're taking care
of that now we expect that to
happen be continuing in the fall
so the checks are also following
kind of the inflationary trend
that we're seeing madam chair
and representative.
Thank you for that it would just
to me if it's not a cash
balances should it make a whole
lot more sensitive that if the
public is hurting front the
money.
Put out there immediately it
appears to me and this is my
personal opinion the to someone
is a political decision more
than it is a fiscal decision to
split up into two buckets money
so that's just my opinion
An opportunity about two weeks
ago heard art Laffer give report
these are.
National economist someone I
have tremendous respect for he's
written many books
Was an economist for many
presidents
He made a comment that really
caught my attention he said that
the the driving force behind
inflation is causing all of us
heartache for for all these
issues the driving force is not
the war in Ukraine is not Russia
it's not the pandemic it's
governments printing money
importing it into the economy in
New Mexico has been part of that
we receive twenty four billion
dollars into the state New
Mexico.
From COVID related issues
whether cares Act money or are
for money whatever it was.
But it looks to me like we're
going to turn around and do it
again we're going to give
someone a five hundred dollar or
thousand dollar check if they're
married it is going to be a
quick relief it's going to be a
good boost but it's going to add
to inflation which is going to
create a bigger long term
product for need it's going to
create more urgency for the
people is going to put more
pressure on paying on those.
They're not gonna be able to
deal with it for for
exacerbating a problem Hurden no
stress we're pouring gas on a
roaring fire.
Is what we're doing NF troubles
likes to have a lot of respect
for him.
But that's the that's the one
thing that is really.
Causing me a great posture
hesitation and wanting to
support this is the long term
effects of what we're doing
we're looking at a very short
term fix we're creating a long
term issue that we're gonna have
to deal with some more the money
at some point is going to shut
off they can't print money
forever I just I struggle with
that so thank you madam chair
already thank you Representative
still Representative Sweetser
thank you madam chair and thank
you all for The presentation I
just have a quick question in
section two it starts out by
saying the Human Services
department so provided relief
payment to state residents and
I'm wondering how we prove
residency.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for that
question I will ask the
secretary to respond to that as
that TRD worked with HSD in the
original program.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Sweetser you can
hear me okay using the funds so
yes Representative has what we
call our data warehouse and we
have data sources state federal
and other ways that we use in
our normal course of business
regular auditing and and
compliance activities related
taxes due and we can use those
to verify that someone has an
actual presence here in New
Mexico and so we've actually
done this three times and if you
recall there have been various
appropriations made to HSD for
public assistance payments to
individuals who weren't eligible
for federal stimulus and we've
been doing this all along we've
gone through it and three
different times where basically
HSD does a web based application
portal they send us their data
we verify it and weed out
anything that looks duplicate
fraudulent or any otherwise
troubling where we cannot verify
that that person exists or
exists in New Mexico we send it
back to them and and so for with
the payments that's what we'll
do again will use all of our
existing data sources to verify
identity.
So thank you for that thank you
madam chair and the I guess my
question is are you using
licenses like driver's licenses
and state ID's or your data
database even goes further than
that is that fair madam chair
and representative of Sweetser
in this case we're looking at a
bill that requires the
individual the applicant through
HSD to provide a social security
number or an itin number so it's
very straightforward we won't
have to go further to with a
driver's license or other
sources if the look if the bill
had been less prescriptive we
would have had to look for to to
alternates but it'll be very
straightforward so thank you for
that and that's what I marked
but I just guess I didn't
realize that a social security
number or and I tend would tell
state residency.
Well and and Representative and
and madam chair it will it will
be a very good indicator but to
the extent we still have
questions we have all those data
sources to fall back on and and
make a verification.
Thank you thank you madam chair
alright school Representative
small thank you madam chair
thank you
chair Chandler madam secretary
madam chair first the the this
is going to be money that New
Mexico has in the bank approved
almost exclusively are very
significantly from the rents and
royalties based upon our our
energy and oil and gas industry
is that accurate Madam chair
representative I certainly we
owe a lot to the oil and gas
revenues however I'm in talking
with LFC staff we also have an
increase in income taxes and
other revenue stream so I think
it's a mix I think that would be
more accurate madam chair and
representative for the state
okay thank you madam chair thank
you chair I appreciate that the
the really all the income
streams are rising if you think
it's it's important and I want
to appreciate you know the
incredible workers in our energy
industry we've as we talked
about
production has returned more
quickly has eclipse pre pandemic
production in New Mexico more
quickly than other states
yeah and we've seen that
actually and while New Mexico
has led the way in reducing
emissions within the oil field
which I think is also very
positive
Madam chair madam secretary this
also builds upon all the Titans
it tightens while building upon
previous efforts that this
legislature has done to ensure
that all New Mexicans whether
they're they're filing an income
tax return or not are eligible
for these these important
benefits is that accurate to say
madam chair and vice chair I
think that's a fair statement
okay great and madam thank you
madam chair and and but madam
secretary you pointed out that
it's it's actually more
prescriptive in this piece of
legislation really tightening as
we perhaps go out with a bigger
bigger sum of money in a shorter
period of time.
Representative small that's
correct okay madam chair then
secretary chair thank you okay
thank you let's go on the
representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair amendment secretary thanks
for the presentation of on this
rebates to people that are that
old taxes are you gonna be
qualified for the five hundred
thousand dollar rebate
chair representative yes but
they also will be subject to an
offset put ten off yes and madam
chair and representative I can
clarify that that's correct but
it's only their tax year twenty
twenty one offset that liability
that could be offset.
Thank you madam chair Madam
chair of the next question I
have the the.
People are undocumented no this
is the twenty million dollar
first come first serve basis.
What kind of outreach are we
going to have to contact these
people right you know I referred
to the rules to the whole state
and then they don't have the
courage I mean the deal of
internet and so forth of
newspapers how we can reach
these people to make sure that
they have the same opportunity
to get that twenty million is
other people do sentiment but
madam chair and representative
very good question and I would
prefer to refer them and non
filers because it really is a
group of people that are most
likely documented individuals
but I will ask the secretary to
respond to that question share
madam chair and representative
Garcia our department is very
passionate about outreach and
education to taxpayers and
constituents in general that
have anything to raise a budget
roof the from the state so we
have some establish
communication lines for example
we have a YouTube channel that
has thousands of abuse of
educational outreach material we
have a distribution list we work
with local newspapers and every
county will send people out into
the field will work a lot with
community organizations we've
got great relationships with
many community organizations be
they for our rural areas tribal
areas documented or undocumented
Spanish speaking will kind of
get everybody together will also
work with our sister agencies
like the aging and long term
Services Department HSD any you
know that Indian Affairs
Department what we're all
working together to get the
communication out as much as we
can.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair and secretary you know
it's very very concerning to me
because we always get left out
rural New Mexico
news about people right here
that are undocumented mom would
maybe they are I don't know for
sure but we need to make sure at
the end of the day that
everybody gets created has the
same opportunity because first
come first serve basis the big
word.
If you have internet you can.
Dial into it a lot if you don't
even know it's there we need to
make sure that we.
Make people aware of what's
going on thank you madam chair
thank you for writing also
representative Costello.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair and secretary my
question was just like a
representative Garcia as you
know I know people in my area I
live.
Seventy miles out of Las Vegas I
know they don't get the paper
they don't see any publication
how are you going to target
those people because it's a
concern you know these are
people elderly that have a ranch
that cat going to Vegas I go in
once a month that might Mr the
publication and and I think it's
a little bit Representative
Garcia said it's important that
we reach out to these people
because you know that first come
first serve and I was gonna ask
what that meant but you guys
clarified that so I I think we
really need to look at how we're
going to do the Opry channels I
know you you said you're gonna
reach out with some partners and
some stuff but a lot of people
don't get that outreach which
side I really I'm really
concerned on how we're going to
do that and thank you.
Madam chair representative and I
might add I I know legislators
send mailings out to their
constituencies I I receive some
of those and always happy to
receive them you know the
department could work together
with Council Service perhaps to
put out put together a letter
that's informational that you
could send all your constituency
at by your choice.
That would be awesome I really
like to work with you guys on so
it's going on and these benefits
are out there great thank you
secretary than ventured thank
you madam chair all right let's
go to Representative Sarinana.
We could have had the Mike
please thank you to our.
Madam chair.
Thank you madam chair I have the
exact same question I I my mom's
eighty five and all our friends
about ninety and they don't have
computers and so I was just
wondering how exactly how you
gonna do it but I think it's a
flyer would be great or a
newspaper on these are the steps
you have to do and just
something to them in that first
come first served also I'm
worried me on that but I think
you answer the question and
madam chair and representative I
point out that this is modeled
on programs that we have
information in the past so I'm
certain madam chair and
representative of there's been a
learning curve and and they and
there's been improvement in
terms of communications over
time so and I'm sure that
departments are committed to
doing so madam chair thank you.
Thank you Representative
Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair thank you very much
I do have some concerns as well.
But first I do have to.
Respond to something that was
said earlier I.
Some members.
Well I guess contributes right
at forty percent of the state's
budget so I'm I'm very bothered
by I want good solid numbers put
out there and I do want to
stated that that is what drives
our economy right now it's close
to forty percent it's not a
personal income tax that does
it.
To verify that you do live in
the state I don't see how that's
going to qualify by just stating
your social security number.
I think the teller got to face
real hard problem Sir madam
chair.
Of and if we're setting up two
ticks.
You're going to be doubling the
workload.
Because you're gonna have to do
it twice because sometimes the
same people will not apply the
second time.
It and I have a problem with
that because now.
If we're going to send that to
checks it's two times the work
that's going to be done so madam
chair I do have a problem with
that and just like
Representative Crowder pointed
out with the cares money that
came into our state with our
money that came in.
People are still not working we
still have problems in our local
communities where there are not
enough workers because basically
they don't have to Madam chair
in the F. I R. there's a couple
things here I do want to point
out of.
And I don't know if you all have
cut the issue do you do have a
copy of the file
page for that particular.
Document that we do have
received.
We have seen over the course of
years that people do.
Of.
Fraudulently to use somebody
else's so security number.
And I have a problem with that
of.
At the first come first serve
area I agree with the statements
from representative Garcia
Castellano.
We have to newspapers in my area
take both of them there each one
called the daily record the
daily press we get a once a week
okay.
We have residents that live in
my area because I do live in a
very rural area and I love it
out there but we do have areas
of our state that don't have
internet service.
A lot of our seniors don't want
internet service and I get that.
So how are you going to.
Verified that this is being
distributed equitably equitably
throughout the state first come
first serve I have a real
problem like that and madam
chair I'd like a response.
Madam chair and Representative
thank you for those questions as
I said before this program has
been implemented before it is
very similar program and it
worked very well I recognize
madam chair that there are
always issues with communication
and we're always striving to
improve on those communications
but the tax department in HSD
has done this before and has had
a strong success in doing so I'd
ask the secretary to supplement
if she has anything to add madam
chair.
Madam chair and Representative
Ezzell I agree with with the
chair with the chair chapter
seven I don't have anything to
add.
Madam chair I guess I would like
to just the presenters what are
the programs have been present
at that it seems to work will
I'm I'm kind of curious.
madam chair and representative
as I mentioned in my opening
comments there have been two
occasions where this body has
enacted legislation I believe
through house bill two where
programs were created
designating funds to HSC HSD
where HSD provided some some to
individuals who did not
qualified for COVID relief
payments so the program is very
similar HSD partnered with the
tax department and they worked
out a system to validate
eligibility and to check for
fraud and ensure that all the
criteria madam chair and what
were met before payments were
made.
Madam chair and representative
to the thank you for that
explanation I still think it's
going to be a huge load whenever
I'm looking down on page seven
of this FIR under the
administrative implications.
Of.
I just see a bigger part of that
what you all are.
Saying it's gonna take to get
the job done I don't think
that's going to be possible
myself madam chair and these
things I have problems with
you stated that there is madam
chair and secretary of madam
secretary you said that there
was a hot in it.
Right at a hundred forty
thousand fighters is that
correct.
Madam chair representative
that's correct I think the LFC
estimate is a hundred and thirty
five thousand and we don't
disagree with that more or less
up.
We're gonna take an average with
the.
And so they do have to make
application to the HSD
department right.
And it could be through word of
mouth.
But how are they going to know
when the deadline is and if they
do not have the means to be able
to get hold of oil that's my
concern right there I want to
make sure especially our seniors
that have worked all their lives
that have paid into social
security that we have now
removed that tax burden because
they have already paid taxes on
that money it's about dang time
we did that.
How are they going to be.
Hello is this money going to be
administered where the they are
the ones that go are going to
get it.
Because as she said as she spoke
earlier madam two years sick
madam secretary.
You stated that it is more often
than not our seniors that the
non fighters who so how are we
going to ensure that that is the
course of action is going to
take place Madam chair
representative is out and I
mentioned the a whole host
outreach efforts we plan to take
on to get the word out about
this but in the specific case of
seniors for example will work
together with aging and long
term services department to put
out fires and information three
senior centers which are located
in both urban and rural areas
one example you know I I know
the community organizations to
as well as libraries and senior
centers have that internet
access to that some seniors
seniors might end up using to
make their applications.
And community organizations I
believe I in the past in these
programs that we've done
together in recent years with
HSD that Representative Chandler
mentioned I I believe community
organizations have also
facilitated taking applications
and then inputting I'm for the
individual so that they can do
more outreach with individuals
who don't have ready internet
access.
Madam chair thank you for that
explanation I see this being
implemented easier in our more
urban areas but as far as our
rural areas go I see a big
hardship on those particular
filers that will not learn of
this until it's too late and
madam chair once again I do want
to reiterate it whenever we're
talking about the
Like I said on page seven of the
FIR thank.
Yes because of the implications
that are going to be faced by
your department because also now
produce seniors you've included
the aging and long term services
division that is going to be
much more work that is going to.
Be a person on that particular
agency so madam chair I think
you're being very
short sighted here as far as
what it's going to cause HSD to
get the job done and I have a
concern you madam chair thank
you very much thank you for your
responses thank you
representative was going
Representative Brown.
Thank you madam chair
representative and madam
secretary my first question is
what is the income ceiling for
not having to file a personal
income tax return Madam I'll
defer to the secretary and madam
chair I'm gonna look to more
take it I don't know that I know
that off the top of my head.
Okay what will work
Representative Brown and getting
an answer for that thank you
madam chair representative and
madam secretary so I I noted
that this is a point ten version
of the bill.
And we're dealing with the bill
that's the point ten version
because that's the one that's in
front of us but I just like to
know a little bit about what
changed from the point one to
the point ten.
That might enlighten us a little
bit about how we arrived at this
one.
Madam madam chair and
representative there was a lot
of words smithing there was a
lot of discussion about what the
deadlines would be madam chair
and representative so we you
know we talked a lot about what
dates should be in in the bill
and what
what would work best for the
agencies in terms of
administrative fees and so on we
looked at tightening up madam
chair and representative the
provisions relating to the non
filers we recognize that there
were concerns about you know
having appropriate checks and in
the system so that we could
verify residency and validate
those sorts of things so
truthfully we it was a lot of
detail oriented these sorts of
things madam chair and
representative thank you and
madam chair I think we have an
answer thank you madam chair
representative brown on and I
would say that each time the
bill change from point one to
point ten of those
administrative costs were
tweaked and and clarify to the
appropriation amount for for
office team along the way so I'm
told in the sounds familiar that
for single filers with income of
twelve thousand five hundred
dollars or less for married head
of household surviving spouses
other filers it's twenty five
thousand dollars or less.
Thank you very much Madam I just
have one other question and it's
regarding something we've
touched on already and that is
the the
The the non filers who will
actually apply for a payment and
so what I'm seeing here in the
bill it's page for starting at
one sixteen.
the department and that's TRD
will shall require residents to
apply for the relief provided by
this section on forms and then
Amanda required by the
department so I think it's
really important that we know a
little bit about what these
forms will ask for in terms of
information because to me that's
where the residency is
established it's not so much in
the declaring of a social
security number or individual
taxpayer number so what are you
planning to ask on the fords to
establish residency madam chair
and representative from one one
point of clarification in
section two the department is
HSD this is actually a and HSD
programs that we will assist
with we're going to do data
verification behind the scenes
for them but just to make that
clear and so and we've talked
about we've done three rounds of
payments of public assistance
out for HSD in collaboration
with us similar to what we'll be
doing and so the it's a web
based application that's
flexible will tailor the that
forms on the web based
application to what's needed
given this legislation and the
you know the particulars of this
in the past some of it was
income tested and so we don't
need to ask questions verifying
income that makes it much
simpler and but what will make
sure we have things like address
exact spelling of name
you know obviously that social
security number or itin number
it will be a no go if that's not
included on the application but
that's something that the two
departments will work on as soon
as this bill is is inactive and
will make sure that we have all
the fields we need to do the
verification.
Thank you all righty thank you
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you to Chandler and
secretary Schardin Clarke I have
three specific questions for you
on the first one is for those
New Mexicans who live on tribal
lands our tribal members will
they be eligible for this report
rebate and our payment and
and if so will they be there be
any difference in process.
Madam chair representative yes
they are eligible and I do not
anticipate a change in process
but perhaps the secretary could
end in Linus I I agree madam
chair and Representative Hochman
Vigil
they will be eligible we have
many tribal members who do file
tax returns and they'll receive
the rebate like everyone else
but then there are some
instances where tribal member
does work on tribal land they
might not be required to file
personal income tax so they
could I choose to go through
that the HSD payment amount but
one thing I guess that sort of
an overarching comment that gets
your question is there's nothing
precluding someone who is not
required to file a tax return
return to file one so if they
prefer to go that route they can
file a tax return and receive
this refundable benefit you you
know along with other refundable
tax credits and it might be in
their interest to do so.
Thank you very much thank madam
chair the second question I have
is
Preface this with during the
pandemic I have a lot of
constituents contact me because
they had a payment usually in
the form of a check sent out to
them for the various types of
COVID relief the check got lost
in the mail or was sent to the
wrong location or address that
they had moved and they then had
an exceedingly difficult time
tracking that payment down and
figuring out where it went and I
know that at the time taxed
rather than every other New
Mexican intergovernmental entity
was over loaded especially
workforce solutions with calls
is really hard to get through to
somebody so my question madam
chair secretary Schardin Clarke
is have you learned from that
experience and is there a
specific program set up or
individual assigned to can help
with these types of situations
so that those individuals aren't
left out sure madam chair and
Representative Hochman Vigil yes
we
I might be wrong but I think
that taxed Representative has
the largest mailing apparatus of
any state agency we we send
millions of pieces of mail and
then therefore we have a lot of
return mail and so I will
certainly encourage anybody and
we always do we research we
encourage folks to receive
payments from us electronically
a CH payments are much less
likely to get lost and and
But to the extent we received
return mail we have an
established process to try to
locate the person and figure out
why it was returned
the commission chaired secretary
Schardin Clarke and I but I want
to count expand the the the
issue and not for some folks
like I had one constituent who
did receive the electronic
payments that went to the wrong
bank account to someone else's
account then they couldn't get a
hold of anybody to try and help
them track down the money so I'm
I've I would ask madam chair
trademark that that that you be
ready for those types of
situations and that we don't
have to wait for the department
to realize a check was returned
to realize that something is
wrong so my my last question
madam chair
To do that or not so for those
individuals are already
Representative register to the
department to get there but
state tax refund electronically
these funds will go out
automatically to them
electronically or are we issuing
paper checks madam chair and
representative you're correct to
the extent we have banking
information available we will
automatically send it where
they've automatic for work where
they directed us to send
anything in the past so
the majority of taxpayers file
electronically and opt to have
their tax refund if they're owed
one sent electronically so we'll
just use the banking information
of record and then if they in
the past directed us to send a
check will send a check but it's
in their interest as well as
ours for them to receive it
electronically thank you very
much madam chair and secretary
Schardin Clarke Clarke is this
also go will those individuals
are just getting the payment
have an opportunity to enter in
their bank account details or
will they just be getting a
check.
I'm Representative not sure I
understand your question so for
those individuals madam chair up
secretary Schardin Clarke those
individuals will not be getting
the rebate but we'll be getting
it said the payment how will
they receive that payment thank
you madam chair and
representative of Canadian
health the form that that
they'll apply on will they'll
enter and wherever they want us
to send a payment whether it be
a routing number for ACA turn
address for a check thank you
very much madam chair and just a
quick comment I want to commend
the department and you to share
share more for figuring out
processes equitable that we can
make sure we're the those New
Mexicans who file taxes versus
those who do not aren't overly
impacted by what's going on in
the world right now today and so
we're all hurting thank you very
much for going through the
process and figuring out a way
for every New Mexican to get
help in this time of need and I
commend you for thank you madam
chair.
Thank you very much
representatives go
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair of I thank
you for your hard work I really
have no questions but I do have
a statement of you know it's
said that this will help to
return some of the money back to
New Mexicans that we're we're we
tax just a little more than we
needed during the time that
turned out to be a time of
plenty and I would just have to
say that this rebate will not
fix New Mexico's broken tax
system our gross receipts tax is
stifling to business and peer
meeting greatly reduces the
value of money that's directed
at any project we need to fix
that and we as a legislature
need to have the courage to pass
legislation that fixes our
broken tax system this rebate
will not fix the high cost of
fuel all those well intended for
citizens that it cost me a
hundred and fifty dollars to
fill my pick up with diesel
for person that gets up.
Gas is up Daschle's up drives to
work in works all day using as
one of my as two of my sons to
heavy equipment that burn diesel
this rebate will not fix that we
need more jobs we need more fuel
production we need a more
friendly environment for gas and
oil in our state and for the
refineries we need to produce
energy of I have nothing against
wind energy solar energy but we
need some good old time guests
and all energy and those things
those jobs that legislation is
will what will help fix this
problem and I appreciate your
efforts I will be of no on this
Because I think we need to take
other measures that will fix the
problem and not just put a band
aid on the results thank you
very much thank you madam chair
thank you representative will
still Representative Lara thank
you madam chair thank you sure
Chandler and madam secretary of
a really basic question you know
we we spoke about the
accessibility we spoke about the
internet we spoke about
computers and and the rural
areas but one of the things that
I noticed is when we have this a
group of hardworking people back
here is that I'm assuming the
majority of speak Spanish so it
is what it what the what's in
place for language accommodation
for Spanish speakers but also
for other other languages.
you madam chair Representative
very good question and I'm
certain that the secretary has a
very good answer.
Madam chair and Representative
Lara thank you for your face.
We we you know with we are
moving in a path towards making
as much of our publication and
outreach is the available in
Spanish as possible and so a lot
of the webinars we do
particularly for community
outreach and a lot of the
publications we do are in both
English and Spanish for other
languages other than those two
we would engage a translator
maybe Philly sometimes the
community organizations we work
with will provide one just to
help make that available to
their constituencies so we're
very committed of especially to
making everything available in
Spanish but other languages to
the extent requests as well.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam secretary but if I can
just specifically on the
application itself yeah that be
available to them as well yes
thank you it will thank you for
that madam secretary madam chair
just one last comment you know I
just want to acknowledge and
appreciate everyone that came
here to speak today this group
back here because I'm wondering
how many of these folks back
here by taking the day off the
coming to Santa Fe are not
getting paid for work today
that's something really
important that I want to
acknowledge and that's something
that.
I want to acknowledge them and
coming up here in advocating for
for for for what they believe is
right and I want to give them a
dollars for for that of you will
have my support on this bill I
think this is I I agree with
Representative Chatfield this is
in a fix but it's going to help
thank you madam chair.
All righty do we have anyone
else any that the committee
members I do have a question
this may be a is here David
question
As you're looking at section
three the temporary provision
transfer from the tax
stabilization reserve.
What I'm seeing here on page
five is.
To the appropriation account of
the general fund the amount
necessary to meet the fiscal
years obligation so my question
is what is the true cost for FY
twenty two what's the total cost
of this.
Thank you madam chair the.
Total cost is actually on your
FIR there on page one so that
would be the addition of the
lost revenue the three hundred
thirty eight point seven million
dollars in addition to the
twenty I think point nine if you
some those appropriations so
it's a it's just about I believe
it's six hundred ninety seven
million dollars just about seven
hundred million dollars in total
and.
Four hundred and twenty eight
million dollars in FY twenty two
alone.
So Mike my question is is yes.
Four hundred.
Yeah in FY twenty two why do we
have in this bill the amount
transferred shall not exceed two
hundred million that's a great
question madam chair this
relates a little bit back to my
statements earlier about the
revenue tracking we're seeing
revenues come in about three
hundred million dollars higher
than we expected in December so
you that actually that two
hundred million provide some
cushion because the three
hundred million.
That you are currently tracking
above that we expect to be in
the appropriation account plus
the two hundred million
authority in the tax
stabilization reserve covers
that four hundred million
dollars in total cost in twenty
two.
Then why are we not saying shall
transfer rather than may
transfer.
That's a great question and
check up it's because it allows
the transfers occur up to the
amount needed so the the total
might not be needed the two
hundred dollars to two hundred
million dollars in total may not
be needed but whatever is the
remainder after revenues come in
to what's needed is what will be
transferred and and authority
greater than that is not needed
that's why to me.
Okay.
Right.
Other questions from the
committee you spoke to
Representative small was Frazier
Committee representative the
manager I move it do pass on
house bill two.
Motion to have a second.
The second representative to
fill proper motion proper second
is there any opposition to this
motion.
What we take the role.
Thousand yes.
Representative.
Our.
Representative Brown.
Madam chair I I believe I need
to of students as well as this
morning I.
That is conflicts.
All right you connect stain
let's go next for her.
Representative Castellano this.
Representative capital so.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Ezzell the.
Representative Garcia if.
Representative Hochman Vigil
yes.
Representative what yes.
Representative setting at yes.
Senator now.
Representative Trujillo yes.
Question small yes.
Chair yes.
you have a photo of yes
Representative and six.
With one abstention so with that
being said Representative you
have a do pass motion thank you
madam chair.
Committee it.
We don't need the applause.
Much
