here.
Representative Herndon.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Little, here
Representative Lujan.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sareana
Representative Sareana,
Representative Silva.
I
Representative Silva,
Representative Vincent.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Cheers mom.
I'm here.
We have a qua. Excellent. OK,
uh, members, we are ready to go,
um.
I think, uh, let's go ahead. I
don't see uh representative
Anaya yet. We've sent a text. Oh
yeah. Oh, goodness, great. I'm
so sorry. It's like the 3rd time
in this session, uh,
representative, thank you for
being here. Thanks to uh for the
secretary for being here. No,
no, it's my, I, I've done this
on the floor and in committee,
so I, my apologies, uh, thank
you for being here. We've got
Hospital 15, I believe you have
an amendment. If you can.
Uh, explain the bill briefly.
Tell us about the amendment, and
we'll go from there.
Absolutely, thank you, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee
in front of you, you do have
House Bill 15, um, my expert
witness is here with me today,
Secretary Naier, and essentially
what House Bill 15 is, is, um, a
recruitment bill for healthcare
workers, specifically those who
have graduated from our own New
Mexico institutions. We know
that data shows that our own
graduates are the most likely to
stay here, um, in our state. So
it is a bit of a blend between
A headhunter program and a
concierge program. The head
hunting piece, meaning, uh, we
use data from our higher ed
institutions to make sure that
they're our own graduates. Um,
we directly reach out to them.
We call them, um, after we call
them, we, uh, lay out all of the
different incentive programs
that we've passed throughout the
years. Right now this incentive
programs lay in many different
departments, whether it's higher
education loan forgiveness, any
sort of down payment assistance,
tax credits.
All of that
Um, and if and when this person
is ready to come home, we open
up a file for them and we helped
them through licensing,
credentialing, which is a big
hurdle right now. We essentially
walk them through the process
until they get back home. We
help connect them with social
services. We help connect them
with housing services, um, the
childcare incentive programs
that we've passed as well. Um,
and so, uh,
Uh, Mr. Chair and committee
members, you have already
allocated funding for this,
which is lovely. Um, it is on
page 205, line 5. Thank you, Rep
Dixon, for helping me figure out
exactly where it was, um, it is
$2 million and with that, Mr.
Chair, we stand for questions.
Great. Thank you very much um
and can you, uh, can you read
the 202, the 231, 231 number for
your amendment, please. Yes, you
should have in front of you.
Uh, 0.231403.1 and that, um, Mr.
Chair strikes the uh
appropriation. It's been moved
by Representative Duncan, uh,
seconded by Representative
Dixon, um, OK, uh, so we see
page 1 lines 14 and 15.
And then page 4.
Section 2 is we is noted.
Uh, any discussion on the
amendment?
Any uh position to the
amendment.
Uh, can we have a motion to
approve the amendment. OK? It's
been moved by Representative
Brown, same by Representative
Duncan, in the opposition to
that motion, seeing none, we
adopted that amendment. OK, uh,
we're gonna go to brief public
comment on the now amended bill.
Is there anybody here who wishes
to make public comment on House
Bill 15.
Great. Please come forward.
Please be brief, but thank you
for being here.
Good afternoon, chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Alison Riley, Public Policy
director at the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce, standing in
proud support of House Bill 15.
By actively recruiting qualified
healthcare providers,
particularly recent in-state
graduates. This program
strengthens our local healthcare
system an essential pillar of a
vibrant economy. A robust
healthcare workforce not only
improves public health outcomes,
but also attracts business
development and supports job
creation across our state,
leading to long term growth and
for those reasons, we urge you
to.
support the bill. Thank you.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Nathan
Bush. I am staff at the
University of New Mexico. We
stand in strong support of this
bill. We really think uh the
bill sponsor and also the
secretary for uh understanding
the needs of the state,
understanding our intentions as
UNM health system to grow our
own and keep our, our best and
brightest here in the state and
uh retain that workforce for the
future. So, really appreciate
it. Thank you very much. Thank
you.
Afternoon, Mr. Chairman, member
of the committee, Jason Weeks,
register
lobbyists from the Mexico
Hospital Association. We stand
in strong support of this bill.
Thank the representative and
secretary for bringing it
forward. We have a health care
crisis in the state, we have a
lack of physicians, we have a
lack of nurses, we have a lack
of all kind every type of
healthcare staff you can imagine
and really the only way we're
going to dig ourselves out of
that hole is if we're proactive.
And this is an important part of
that of being proactive in terms
of addressing that issue. Um, we
really do need to get serious
about recruitment retention, um,
keeping the folks that we.
trained and we educate here,
here, but while trying to
attract folks from outside of
New Mexico into the state. We
think that this bill does get us
to a point where we're going to
be better at that, um, really
look forward to seeing how it
functions in reality, and also
kind of understanding exactly
what we then may need to do
after that to continue that
trajectory towards addressing
the relevant healthcare
shortages. So we stand and
support, think this is a great
idea. I really hope you guys
move forward. Thank you. Thank
you very much.
Uh
chair, members of the committee.
Uh my name is Mish Rossetti, uh,
trial lawyer, um, and I'm just
here, um, to.
Yeah, a good occasion for you
guys, which is we also are very
strongly in support of this
bill, along with everybody else
in terms of a real solution that
we think actually might bring uh
the data and the information we
need to recruit more healthcare
providers and, you know,
contrary to some of what folks
think, uh, trial lawyers just
like everybody else that live in
the state, get healthcare in the
state, we all want good
healthcare in the state, and I
think this is a real bill that
gets us one step closer to that.
I appreciate the members for
standing up for the solution,
and we're strong in support.
OK, thank you very much. That
concludes our uh comment in
person, nobody in opposition and
I see, OK, we're gonna go online
for one person for a kinda peck,
well.
Uh, a kind of ec, please go
ahead for one minute.
Um, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, I'm a Cone
speaking for the League of Women
Voters of New Mexico. We
strongly support HB 15 in order
to help New Mexicans retain more
healthcare professionals who are
so badly needed in our state. We
urge you to pass this doll.
Thank you. Thank you.
OK, I think we'll conclude with
Dana Gray. Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Dana Gray, Executive director of
Desert States Physical Therapy
Network, representing 30
independent private practices
throughout the state. We'd like
to thank the representatives for
introducing this piece of
legislation, network clinics
continue to find recruitment a
challenge. We appreciate any
efforts made to keep and bring
back qualified providers to our
state. This is a great way to
compile information about tax
credits, incentives, and job
openings for potential.
candidates. It also provides
valuable information to health
care practices looking for
candidates throughout the state.
We stand in full support of
House Bill 15 and urge your
support as well. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much, Ms.
Gray.
Hey, I don't see anybody else,
uh, any questions from
committee?
And then
Reserve Duncan. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, just a quick comment,
I think this is a good start.
Um, until, but until we get our
Medicaid rates where they need
to be until we get our tort
reform where it needs to be,
we're going to continue to have
a um.
Oh.
Where our healthcare workers
need to be. So, thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan. Representative Brown.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, thank you and
um thank you, Representative. I,
I have some doubts about this as
well. Um, I wonder what about
going after teachers and having
them come back and we could name
a lot of career fields and say
we really, we need uh
and we need all kinds of
People, um, $2 million Mr.
Chair, is a lot of money for
this and um I, I think I'm of
the opinion that was just
expressed that the best way to
approach this is to uh reform
some of the laws we have on the
books that are keeping people
from being or staying in New
Mexico.
And um also,
Um, I think that, um,
You know, we, we know from, for
example, medical school
students, Mr. Chair, that if
they come from rural New Mexico
to UNMed, they're likely,
there's a good, there's a better
chance they'll stay in New
Mexico than if they're from uh
metropolitan areas.
Uh, so I'm just a little
skeptical that this is a good
spend of $2 million but um, I, I
certainly acknowledge we need
Uh, we need people in a lot of
different career fields. Thank
you.
OK, thank you very much,
Representative Brown. uh,
Representative Wuhan, Mr. Chair,
I would just
support what um
Or two other members who said
we, we need to look at some of
the, the laws we have on the
books and what's really
preventative of what I'm hearing
as I've been talking to
providers and potential
providers are are.
Or residents, um.
Um, in our, in our, um,
healthcare systems and and uh
our students, so.
There, there are some concerns,
and I would, I would, I would
too, we need a closer look and
maybe.
This is a committee that we
could take on this, this issue
as we have in the past during
the interim to really
investigate what that looks
like. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Bohan. OK, I
don't see any other questions.
We'll go to, oh sorry.
Uh
Oh yes, Madam Vice Chair, I
apologize.
Sorry, uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
I snuck my name in, so didn't
have a chance to see it. Um.
Representative just wanted to
thank you for the, the really um
specific parameters that um
you've included in the bill,
particularly the um reporting
components. I did have a
question, um, if you could
provide a little bit of
elaboration on number 5 for the
sort of the report reasons an
applicant may or may not want to
apply for the program.
Absolutely, um, uh, Mr. Chair,
uh, Representative, I'm actually
really glad you asked that
because part of this is a data
gathering component. We actually
do want to know why folks do or
do not want to come back home.
Um, and, you know, addressing
the comments made earlier, um,
that is a part of this bill and
we're very much so looking to
gather the data to say why
aren't folks coming home? And I
think right now, um, we're
lacking a little bit of that
data, and so I'm hoping this can
fill a gap that we need right
now.
Great. Thank you. I really
appreciate that. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Uh, thank you very much
Representative Dixon. OK, uh, I
don't see any other questions
now. Um, I'll go to
Representative Duncan for the
motion.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move for
a due pass.
As amended on HB 15. Great.
OK, it's been moved by
Representative Duncan, signed by
Representative Dixon. Is there
any opposition to that motion?
OK, please show representative
Pettigrew and represent Brown in
opposition.
Thank you, ma'am. Secretary,
thank you very much
representative, um, good to see
you here today. Thank you, chair
and committee members.
OK.
Uh
Represents little, if we could
ask you to
down
Right, OK, uh, Representative
Little, thank you. Um, we'll go
ahead and go to you for House
Bill 17. We'll also ask that the
amendment be passed out and then
go from there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I am here before you to uh the
committee, Mr. Chair, members of
my committee, um, with hospital
17, which establishes a
commission on the reduction of
grocery costs.
Uh, we do, I do have an
amendment to offer.
Great. Uh, do you have that
there with you? I do. Great. Can
you read us the 231 number? Yes,
that is 231-506.1. Uh, can we
have a motion for the amendment
just for discussion?
OK,
it's been moved by
Representative Luhan taken by
Representative Hernandez.
Uh, can you explain the
amendment. Yes, I'm happy to do
so. Um, is this bill will
establish a commission to
examine the costs of groceries
in New Mexico. Uh, it will study
um grocery prices and develop
strategies to recommend for
lowering costs for consumers,
particularly for essential
household foods, um, this is a
committee of action. We look to
have it established, uh.
In March, not long after the
session ends, and to submit
their findings, uh, by November
15th, so that in the interim, we
may have some suggestions at a
strategies that can be
implemented or recommended to
the appropriate uh interim
committees and to the
appropriate uh bodies.
Great. OK. And the amendment,
uh, as we see, um, strikes the
appropriation, making an
appropriation.
Uh, on page one.
And then on page 2 strikes out
the um
Uh, the actual appropriation,
while leaving the emergency
declaration. And I guess that
knows sort of the March time
frame that you mentioned.
OK, are there any questions on
the amendment?
OK, can we have a motion to
adopt the amendment.
Move, move adoption.
OK, it's been moved by
Representative Han, seconded by
Representative Dixon or Vice
Chair Dixon, in the opposition
to adopting the amendment?
Seeing no
We adopted the amendment.
Anybody here who would like to
speak on House Bill 17 as
amended.
I don't see anybody in person,
anyone online.
We've got 2, OK. Uh, first, um,
from Vida Meor Capital.
Mhm
Uh, my, Chairman, can you hear
me?
Yes, you can.
Good afternoon, Chairman Small
and members of the committee,
with respect, my name is Scott
Lopez, and I am the founder of
Vitamijo Capital and a
registered lobbyist. We are a
501c3 nonprofit located at the
00 Winga Pueblo and Espanola,
and we are also the
administrator for EDD's Healthy
food financing fund, and the
lead awardee of the National
USDA Healthy Food Financing
initiative, and we thank the
chairman and the entire HIFC.
For all of your vital support.
Additionally, we encourage the
passage of House Bill 17, as we
understand the importance of
several of its mandates,
including recommending
strategies to support New Mexico
food food businesses that
produce locally grown, raised
and processed, raw and
value-added products and to
expand access to those products
in the retail grocery settings
for New Mexicans. Again, thank
you for, thank you, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee for
your vital support and
consideration.
Great, thank you very much, uh,
Mr. Lopez. Next, we're gonna go
to Aaron Ortigoza.
Good afternoon. Can you hear me?
We can.
Chairman Small and members of
the committee. My name is Aaron
Ortigoza, and I'm a food hunger
and agricultural program manager
for the economic development
department. This program
includes the Healthy Food
financing Fund, and we thank the
chairman and the entire
committee for all of your
support.
We encourage the passage of HB
17 as this bill will yield a
study with actionable strategies
and recommendations that build
upon our work through the
intersection of economic
development and food security
for New Mexicans, including
developing financing tools and
technical assistance for small
and mid-scale food processing
and agricultural enterprises,
strengthening in state local
food market channels, advancing
food-safe storage, aggregation
distribution and transportation
network infrastructure.
This commission and resulting
study will provide great value
as we continue to collaborate
with statewide partners to make
fresh, healthy, staple food
accessible and affordable for
all New Mexicans. Thank you very
much for your support and for
your consideration.
Thank you very much. OK. Uh,
that'll conclude our public
comment, uh, go to the committee
starting with down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative Little, um,
for the, for the um
the study, um, on page 2 when
I'm looking at the appointment.
The governor shall appoint 3
members.
Legislative council shall
appoint 6 members, and the
importing that authorities shall
make every effort to ensure that
there's economic, geographical,
gender, cultural, and racial
diversity among the appointed
members.
And that they have expertise in
Uh, economics, consumer
protection, agriculture, trade,
food production, the farmer and
the rancher, or nutrition.
Have you been approached or
asked to have a grocer, like
someone who operates a grocery
store as a member.
Mr. Chair, Representative Doo,
yes, and there will be um the
commission will establish public
meetings,
uh to uh include uh public
comment and the grocers has also
has also been raised as well. So
we think that the economics
piece uh would also include, uh,
could include grocers as well.
Mr. Speaker and gentle ladies it
is not, uh, forgive me and you,
you're not interested, you're
not open to that amendment when
I mean the cost study is about
the cost of groceries, and those
are sold by grocers you weren't
open to that amendment.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Doo, we look to have the
commission incorporate that
information from them as
stakeholders, as well as we
would from those who are
providing, uh, meat, uh, and
other industries as well, though
they're not specifically laid
out in here.
Mr. Speaker and gentle lady,
well,
Well, I, they are because cube
production is the farmer in the,
in the rancher.
But Mr. Speaker, that's, that's
OK. I mean, Mr. Cha, sorry, Mr.
Chair. Um,
I, I don't, I don't see a
definition of price gouging. Do
you have in mind what a margin
would be appropriate. Who's
gonna determine? This is page 3,
on line 12.
State's laws require price
gouging.
Who will determine? It's my
understanding.
And I know we still have a lot
of small local owned grocery
store in Sierra County.
And um they say they have a 2%
market. They have a 2% profit.
And so they, they generally take
Uh, the products that they
receive and, and they have a
markup that allows a 2% profit.
Um, what if the price gouging is
happening above New Mexico
level, like it's, it's the meat,
it's the big 4 meat processors
or it's like who, who's gonna
define price gouging?
That would be the responsibility
of the commission and uh working
with making this.
Making their findings known in
the, in some cases it might
actually be forwarded to the
Attorney General's office who
would deal address that specific
issue.
Mr. Chair and and I correct
myself. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
and Representative.
This dynamic, I mean dynamic
pricing.
Are, are we in price
manipulations. OK. Will you be
considering the cost of fuel?
Yes, the commission will. OK.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Representative on
page with with the amendment
we've struck the making an
appropriations section, but um,
On page 4 line 14, the members
of the commission are still
entitled to compensation. How,
where will that per diem and
mileage be received from?
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Dao that is included in the
economic development
departments, um, budget.
So Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair,
sorry, 3 hours, Mr. Chair and um
representative, how much money
is in the budget for this
project?
400,000. OK, so we're striking
the appropriation because it's
in the budget. Yes, Mr. Chair,
Representative, thank you, Mr.
Chair.
have started with that question.
Perfect. OK. Thank you,
Representative Doo. We'll go
next to Representative Garrett
and then represent Mohan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Representative, do you know,
have there been any economic
studies from LFC, DFA or EDD.
leading
Up to this.
No, Mr. Chair, Representative
Garrett.
There aren't, or we're not sure.
I'm not sure that there are, um,
thank you.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair,
because, um,
I think, well, the grocers would
certainly be included.
Under the um expertise in food
production trade, consumer
production.
Um, I think what concerns me is
When we look at production to
make sure we include labor when
we had the red and green bill
yesterday, Mr. Chair, what I
wanted to ask is, who's the
labor, because that's a big
issue in all of this, and then
my other question was, uh,
Looking at food sourcing, I
think all the vegetables I get
now are grown in Mexico.
And so it's not within the
state, but it impacts all the
areas they're studying.
From consumer protection,
agriculture trade, you know,
transportation, so
I think that's included in
there. It, it has to be.
Uh, and that's my only comments,
making sure
We do the labor study.
Going to the fields.
And then sort food sourcing that
is beyond our borders.
I think I bought meat from
Argentina the other day.
So I mean cattle growers are an
incorporate a part of this.
Anyway, that's just the only
comments I wanted to make. Thank
you. Thank you very much for
Garrett. Uh, next to
Representative Luhan.
Thank you, Mr. Mr. Chair. Thank
you for this bill, uh
representative.
I think this is um this is
covering a lot of the, the
issues that we we continuously
hear about.
A food chain supplies and and
really supporting our local our
local businesses and local
foods, um, I just want to say
thank you. I think this is
really important that we get
this done. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much,
Robson Wuhan. I don't see any
other, oh, sorry, son Duncan and
then Rep represent Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
And we just passed a bill a
little while ago on, on the
floor. I can tell you what's
gonna raise the cost of
groceries. We're getting ready
to hear another bill that's
gonna raise minimum wage to $17
an hour. That's gonna increase
the cost. We're getting ready to
try to tax the oil and gas
industry, $400 million more,
that's going to raise the cost
of fuel.
We're looking at 6 different
taxes.
Right now.
And if you don't think your
groceries are gonna go up next
year, whether this study is done
or this study isn't done, they
are, and we're the ones doing
it.
So we can't point a finger at
anybody else except for
ourselves when we, when we do
this.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The next represent Brown please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
representative little, uh, so I,
I would like some clarity about
the uh I, I have something here
that says that House Bill 2 does
not include any appropriation
for this legislation. We did
strip the language in the bill.
Is there money in House Bill 2
for this,
thank you, uh, and represent Lit
represent Brown, I'll add
clarity to that. Uh, this body
appropriated a significant
amount of new funding recurring
and non-recurring.
for EDD, there have been
explicit conversations with EDD
and they since this is the
400,000 non-recurring items that
they will use some of the money
that we have in HB 2 for this
purpose.
So I feel very confident saying
that very fair question. And
yeah. OK. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I appreciate that. Um,
honestly, um, representative, I
um have great respect for you,
but if I go back to my district
and if I were to vote in favor
of this, I think I would get
lances askance at me because
this is a lot of money and I
really think it's basic
economics 101, it's supply and
demand and those factors like
the cost of transportation, uh,
wages, all those things. I, I
think we've probably really know
the answer to this, and if we
were going to do a study of the
cost of groceries, we probably
could have started that 4 years
ago and uh see the trajectory on
it, so I, I think there are
better ways to spend this kind
of money. I don't think it'll
do.
much for economic development at
all. I think it'll just give us
information we probably already
have, so, um, for that reason, I
won't be supporting, but thank
you for bringing it.
Great. Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Brown.
Um
Representative.
Pedigre, sorry, go ahead,
please.
Mr. Speaker, I can't.
Um, speaker, sorry, Mr. Chair.
You just had a long course that
looks all good. It's been a day.
Uh, I, I don't think I could say
any better than what
Representative Duncanresentative
Brown.
Uh, just said other than the
fact that we all learn basic
economics in 10th grade in high
school.
This is pretty straightforward.
And, and.
To, I mean, I, I can put anybody
that's gone, gone through
economics 101 and write this
report for less than $400,000.
Thank you
Thank you very much,
Representative Pettigrew. Uh,
next, we're gonna go to
Hernandez.
That Mr. Chair and I'll be
brief, uh, I'm a former grocery
worker.
About 5 years ago, I worked at a
national chain, so I won't say
who, but um, um, I worked in the
dairy department and I saw the
fluctuation of the price of
groceries, uh, way before, uh,
you know, we had a lot of the,
the inflation risk and uh let me
tell you, Mr. Chairman, I, we,
we always knew that there was
some type of uh of big market
game between the grocery stores,
uh, just having to like know the
price.
We're selling it and having to
go home to Shiprock, which is 30
minutes away from the grocery
store I worked at and seeing
that the prices that in, in, uh,
on, on the uh uh reservation are
like extremely high and you go
off the reservation and, and,
and you're playing, paying a lot
lower cost and I, Mr. Chairman,
I feel like a this type of
information is needed for the
consumers and uh I'll, I'll
conclude that. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Great. Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Hernandez.
OK, I don't see any other
questions, um, uh, sort of
tongue in cheek. Can we make
sure that, uh, green chili is
part of the
Absolutely,
OK. uh, thanks, members. Thanks,
Representative Little. Uh, can
we have a motion to
uh, if you pass, OK, we have a
due pass on House Bill 17 as
amended.
Great. It's been said by
Representative Garrett. Uh, can
we go ahead and just briefly
call the roll,
please.
Representative Brown, no.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Down.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Garrett.
Representative Garrett.
Yes, thank you.
Representative Hernandez. Yes.
Representative Herndon.
Yes.
Representative Jareta.
Representative Little.
Yes.
Representative Lujan. Yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
No.
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Saraana.
Representative Silva.
Representative Vinson.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Chas small.
And representative Baca.
OK. We have a vote of 8 in the
affirmative and 6 in the
negative.
7.
123456.
I, I think, OK, we've got that,
we all, it's always good to
double check, we know that in
when the numbers are involved,
uh, I saw it's by a vote of 8 to
6. You have a due pass as
amended.
And we want our green chili.
other things.
OK, um,
People are
cheap and hot.
That's right.
Uh, OK, that we're gonna now ask
uh chair Romero to come up, uh,
Mr. Senna, thank you for being
here, Director Senna.
Mm.
Got it.
OK, uh, Chairman, thank you for
being here. Uh, please present
House Bill 63, and then I know
you also have an amendment.
We'll go through that as well.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Hello committee members, um,
House Bill 63, um, does a few
things, so one of them is to
remove English language
learners, mobility and Title I
as indicators for um at-risk
funding. This would be replaced
by the family income index, so
if you remember a few years ago,
we as a body approved a pilot
program.
for the family income index,
which would be a much more
accurate way to identify
students living below the
poverty line, um, in our
schools, um, so the, the at risk
factor would be replaced by the
family income index. I think
that's particularly important
because we will get a great
snapshot at the school level of
the types of students, um, and
their income that schools are
are are pro
services for, um,
The next thing, Mr. Chairman,
would be to create a standalone
factor for um EL students, um,
so that again, the schools that
are providing EL services to
their students would get this
added, um, um, funding, and we
as a legislature would be able
to know exactly what schools are
generating those funds, um, as
well as, and this might blend in
a little bit of the amendment as
well is increasing these or
include.
Increasing the 6th grade factor,
um, for students, so increasing
the amount of money that's uh
6th grade students would get to
better align with uh the amount
of money that middle schools
get, so the original part of the
bill had increased the secondary
factor, um, so 7 through 12, um,
but that's something that's not
a part of House Bill 2, so
that's what the amendment would
reflect, um, or what's been
adopted by the house anyway on
um you know.
House bill too.
Great. Thank you very much,
Chairman. Um, and, uh, Chair
Romero, can you, uh, read the
231 number, please?
Sure, um, Mr. Chairman, it's uh
231-454.1.
OK,
uh, can we move that for
discussion?
Hey, it's been moved by uh
Representative Herrera, uh,
seconded by Representative
Luhan. And, OK, so members, uh,
Chairman Rometo, you had a, you
explain the uh sort of the
content of the amendment, um,
and just tore sort of ask
chairman, Director Sanna, this
amendment tracks what we've sent
over in House Bill 2, which is
an increase for 6th grade, uh,
but not, uh, other grades.
Mr. Chairman, that's correct.
Great. Thank you for that.
Members, any other questions?
Uh, Representative Wuhan,
Chair, um.
Mr. Chair.
This, this is just um
This is, this amendment here is
just mostly in a in accordance
to how we amend.
The, um, appropriation include
including moving the
appropriation from the bill, is
that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative
Lu Han, that's correct.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
wanted, I just want to make sure
there's nothing else, uh, really
substantial in this amendment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Great. Uh thank you
for that. Uh, OK. Um, any other
questions on the amendment?
OK, uh, can we have a motion to
adopt the amendment moved.
That that was quick, uh, uh,
moved by Vice Chair Dixon,
seconded by Representative
Lujan. Any opposition to
adopting the amendment, seeing
that we've adopted the
amendment. OK, now we're gonna
go for public comment starting
first in uh here in the hearing.
Is there anybody who wishes to
make public comment on um House
Bill 63 as amended.
Great, OK, we have, uh, if you
could all line up, we'll, um,
Uh, try to go for a minute or
so. Thank you for being here,
Mr. Rounds. Please kick us off.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee. Good
afternoon. uh, good to be with
the House Appropriations of
Finance Committee. We support
House Bill 63.
Aligning it with House Bill 2 is
the right thing to do. That's
what this does. I just want to
go back to what the bill itself
does also now that it's amended,
and that is we change from a
system that was called the
at-risk index to something now
that is the family income index,
we feel like that's a better
indicator of where student needs
that we have to support
programmatically will exist and
so it comports with what we
found out, Mr. Chairman, as we
use the family income index as
sort of an add-on for a couple.
of years. So Mr. Chairman, we
support the bill, we ask you to,
to support it also.
Mr. Chairman, uh Charlie Marcus,
registered lobbyist for Gallup
McKinley County schools, uh, we
stand, we appreciate the sponsor
bringing this uh bill forward,
uh, and we stand in support of
it, um, and support also the
LESC recommendations.
Uh thank you very much.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, Lily
Ortiz, the legislative liaison
for the New Mexico School Board
Association, and then New Mexico
School Board Association fully
supports and has favorable
approval of this piece of
legislation. Uh, we had
representatives sitting and
working on the task force that
worked collaboratively to
increase funding for Secretary
secondary students and for
dollars for FTE and other
programs to help graduation
rates. Uh, we spoke the whole
harmless provision for those
schools whose calculated program
units are less than.
In its final program units for
the previous year, and we hope
that she passed this legislation
forward to help our students.
Thank you very much.
Great. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Matt Paul
with Public Charter Schools of
New Mexico. We support House
Bill 63. This has been something
that's been on our platform for
a number of years, finding a
mechanism to allow charter
schools to generate their own
at-risk index. Um, so we
appreciate the sponsor for that
work. We do want to point you to
the, to the FIR where there are
some schools that lose funds on
this. This bill includes one
year of hold harmless, and
that's in the budget and we
appreciate that. And we hope we
can have future conversation.
about how a new mechanism like
family income index with with
variability that we don't know
about and, and, uh, operational
impacts that we can talk about
that in future fiscal years with
this committee. So thank you.
Great. Thank you very much. Good
afternoon, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, Amanda to go with
New Mexico Kids can. One of the
things I'm most proud about in
our education system is our
funding mechanism and I really
believe the legislation you have
in front of you makes that
stronger and will better allow
us to track the impact of
dollars, particularly for most
underserved students, so I
really want to thank the sponsor
for that. I would also like to
say that when we go forward and
make changes to the funding
formula when we have the ability
to do so, that we always
factor in a 3 year hold
harmless. I think it makes it
easier for the education
community to get on board with
necessary changes and it gives
us a longer time to make those
adjustments, but, uh, we stand
in strong support of this. Thank
you so much. Excellent. Thank
you very much.
OK, I don't see anybody else in
person. We have uh 4 folks
online, uh, we'll limit it to
those 5 folks.
Stop talking. Uh,
we're gonna stop at 6 folks, uh,
who are all
and start with Josh, uh, Josh
Bennert, uh, Josh, go ahead,
please keep it uh under one
minute.
It's uh John Batt. I'm the
executive director at Cotton
Classical Preparatory School,
representing 850 students and 90
staff members. On the whole, we
definitely support this bill.
Uh, it's common sense. I
appreciate the work of the LESC
and the sponsors who are
educators and understand the
work.
Uh, however, I want to point you
to the fact that we are one of
the top 200 schools in the
country, and this would
effectively cost us $780,000 in
cuts, even as we are a growing
school. So this speaks to the
whole harmless and how important
it is. Um, there's a narrative
that maybe we've been overfunded
and this is correcting that, but
we've strategically invested
those funds, and if this these
funds were to go away, the first
cuts we'd have to make are math
and English interventionists and
counseling staff and there
really isn't another choice
because we don't have large cash
reserves.
Uh, our students with
disabilities, which is an
at-risk population, just
recently outperformed the
statewide average for all
students by double in math and
English on the Namassa
assessment.
So
most definitely. I just really
encouraged the work on the long
term hold harmless. Thank you
for your time. Excellent. Thank
you very much, uh,
great, we're gonna now go to
Trey Smith.
Thank you, Chair, members of the
committee. Uh, my name is Trey
Smith. I'm the executive
director of East Mountain High
School. We are 25 years strong
as one of the top performing
schools, but being the top
performing school doesn't mean
we only serve one particular
kind of student, we serve all
students and we support the idea
of what this bill is trying to
accomplish, but as written, it
is really one of the most
devastating pieces of
legislation to impact our school
in years. The at-risk funding we
currently receive benefits
students who need it most,
students on IPs, English
language.
Learners, students from
disadvantaged backgrounds and
that funding pays for
diagnosticians, therapists,
evaluations, and other supports,
and it's going to really hurt
our budget if we get this
without a 3 year hold harmless.
Um, so to be clear, any idea
that our school has been
overfunded in the past is an
extremely fallacious argument.
It does not make sense. I would
invite anyone to point to any
which of my interventionists or
teachers is just extra and not
serving a critical function.
These are real lives and
No matter how you spin it, this
is a cut. And so I really, uh
really support the whole
harmless for 3 years. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Mr. Smith. Next, uh, we're gonna
go to iPhone 5, if you could
please, uh, tell us your name
and go ahead for less than a
minute.
Yes, my name is Deborah Henwood.
I am the school leader,
Montessor of the Rio Grande
Charter School, and I would just
like to echo what um Trey had um
just said we um are spotlight
school. We serve 25 zip codes in
Albuquerque, New Mexico, and 84%
of our budget goes to direct
instruction support services. We
do not have a padded um budget
and it would directly impact
students who need intervention.
and counseling services. Thank
you. Thank you very much. Uh,
next, we're gonna go to Alvin
Warren. Please go ahead.
Um, good afternoon, Mr. Chair
members of the committee. Uh, my
name's Alvin Warren. I'm the
vice president of policy and
impact for the Lano Foundation.
We've supported House Bill 63
from the beginning and we'll
continue to champion what we
believe to be thoughtful changes
to the public school funding
formula. We appreciate the
research time and collaboration
that went into this piece of
legislation.
We recognize that these proposed
changes address the need for
increased funding for English
learners and students who are
the most underserved in the
state. We appreciate the focus
on secondary education. Um, our
foundation has long recognized
that our middle and high school
students are seeking meaningful
experiences in school, and this
is a step in the right
direction. Students in the
system can and should benefit
from your belief in them. We are
to do pass and thank the
sponsors.
Great. Thank you very much, Mr.
Warren. Uh, next, we'll go to
Carrissa Petrie.
Good afternoon. Uh, my name is
Karissa Petrie, and I'm the
parent of a student with a
disability at Cottonwood
Classical. My daughter has been
at the school for 4 years since
she was in 6th grade. She didn't
start reading until the very end
of 3rd grade, even though our
family had provided tutors and
we have reading materials in the
house. Um, she's still struggled
and in elementary school because
she was so behind at Cottonwood,
she's had her needs met um
through her small
group classes, she's had uh
intervention classes. She
attends tutoring. Uh, she has
teachers that are licensed
appropriately in their subject
areas and highly qualified. Um,
she uses the enrichment
activities and for the first
time this school year, she is at
grade level in all areas. So I
really um urge that we pass this
bill, but with a 3-year hold
harmless, because cottonwood pla
is doing a great job.
With our students with
disabilities. Thank you thank
you very much uh Miss Petrie.
Finally, we'll conclude with
Savannah Colt.
Hi, my name is Savannah Cole,
and I am a teacher at Montessori
of the Rio Grande Charter in
Albuquerque, New Mexico. Um,
this bill would cut our budget
by a significant amount, which
would, uh, while we support
schools that serve high risk
populations, this bill would
negatively impact our school,
um, we serve 25 zip codes as
Deborah had previously stated,
um, we provide smaller class
sizes, specialized programs, and
personalized learning.
Um, we also, it would affect our
programs like art and music,
teacher aids, and most
importantly, our intervention
services, um, data shows that
at-risk students attending
charter schools have much higher
learner outcomes compared to
those in neighborhood schools,
we are an alternative school for
children who aren't thriving in
their neighborhood schools,
producing funding for charter
schools undermines our ability
to continue improving these
outcomes and hinder what's
working well.
Um,
Shows that these additional
programs are key to student
engagement and academic success.
The students that we serve that
are at risk will suffer from
this bill.
Thank you very much. OK, uh, I
don't see any other comment
online. We're gonna go first to
represent Baca, then to
represent Luhan represent Baca
please. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
and thank you. Um,
Mr. Chairman and and Chairman,
um.
With this bill, it's actually,
it's, it's kind of hard to
understand how it's going to
affect people. So I appreciate,
Mr. Chairman and uh chairman
that we have a one-year hold
harmless, and I would recommend,
Mr. Chairman, um.
That during the interim that we
studied this and see what the
impact is to charter schools to
small districts, microdistricts,
uh, and Mr. Chairman and
Chairman Romero. I also have
advocated and I think that there
needs to be more joint hearings
between the LDSC and the LSC
around budgeting so that there's
greater alignment, uh, and the
recommendations come in, uh,
Uh, more, uh, closely aligned
and make sure that these changes
be reflected in the budget to
the degree possible, so.
I appreciate it, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Baca. Uh, next,
we're gonna go to Representative
Lohan and then represent down.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for the opportunity.
And I just want to commend the
work of the Aligacy and our, our
chairman, um, on this um.
This piece of legislation, um,
there has been, um, uh,
A great amount of time.
And, um, and studying that has
gone into into what we have in
front of us today, and quite
honestly, it really echoes.
For me,
Mr. Cha, what's, um, where the
needs are in our schools and how
those needs are being met and.
And also, um,
How our budget works around
those needs and, and changing
from the at risk to the family,
um, index.
Can you, can you tell me why you
did that?
Mr. Chair
Uh, Mr. Chairman, and, and
represent Luhan is because the
family income index is able to
get a more accurate picture of
students' income at the school
level rather than um the current
system now of at-risk funding
using three different factors,
um, also you heard in some of
the testimony from charter
schools, charter schools would
receive their at-risk funding
based on the district that
they're in and not particular
school sites, so that's part of
why you're seeing.
Um, uh, the increase in some
cases cause some of these
charter schools are getting a, a
large increase because they are
servicing students that are
living um uh 130% below the
federal poverty line, um, and so
the others that are taking the,
the, the cut is our, our charter
schools that have been utilizing
their local school districts,
um, at risk, um.
The other thing to mention that
this would not affect their
special education um funding at
all that would be separate. One
of the other things to address
your question, Mr. Chairman,
and, and Representative Lu Han
is part of in the original bill,
we have the secondary factor
increase was to try to offset
some of the costs, um, that the
schools or the uh the charter
schools or the districts would
be taking um as a result of this
legislation as well.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair, um, um,
So
The disparity that we're hearing
uh through through testimony and
charter schools. It's just that
they're gonna be getting the
amount that they, they, they
should be getting per student or
per district.
Is that correct, Mr. Chair Mr.
Chairman and Representative,
yes, it would more accurately
reflect the students and the
income levels of the students at
that school site. I appreciate
that and I think that's, that's
the due diligence two of us, of
us having the communication with
um LFC and LFC, um, and
understanding that and
supporting that supporting this
legislation, Mr. Chair, I think
that that is.
That to me is ideal and um uh
decreases the parity that we see
in our education system.
Um, from our charter schools and
our regular public schools, um,
anyhow, um, Mr. Chair, can you,
um, when you said that they
would still, everybody would
still be getting their special
education entitlement funding is
that with Title I, Mister Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
Title I is a federal program, so
this wouldn't, this wouldn't
affect that, but schools do
receive special education
funding through the state
funding formula, and this bill
doesn't affect that that funding
at all. So neither title one nor
the special education or we will
be affected by this. Thank you
so much. I really do appreciate
that because that's, that's what
we've guaranteed our students is
that the money will follow each
student, and that's what this
bill does, is that correct, Mr.
Chair?
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative,
yes. Thank you so much, um, I
think I just have one more
question. Let me, let me, um,
So that that would be true when
I heard in testimony awesome to
show that charter schools would
be able to calculate their own
at-risk factor, or would it be
this, this new uh formula
Mister.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair
Representative Luhan, just to
clarify that the
In statute, it will still be
called an at-risk factor.
But the mechanism used to
calculate that factor is
changing, so rather than the 3,
we're now using the family
income index. And so that's,
that's what's, what's changing.
Those are all my questions. I, I
just really appreciate this bill
and all the work that you put
into it, I strongly support.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Lohan, bless you
and go down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um, so, so one
of the testimony was from
Cottonwood Classical, and they
are spotlight school. They're
also a district charter in
Socorro School District. So
they're in the district.
It's, is that correct?
Oh, this is a cottonwood
classical in Albuquerque. Oh,
OK, OK. Let's take cottonwood.
There's a cottonwood
Spotlight school in Secorra
County.
It is a district school, so they
would see no change.
In their
Funding, because they're a
district school.
Mr. Chair Representative Dao,
uh, no, every, every charter
school, whether it's a state
charter or a locally charter
charter school.
We'll see it's, will have its
own at-risk index.
Based on the family income index
mechanism. So every, every
charter school, whether it was
chartered by the publication
commission or chartered by your
local district. It will still
have its own app index.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, John. I the
Is the factor the same?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Doo, I think you're referring to
Cottonwood Valley, potentially,
yes, OK. Is it in Score County?
I'm new to Socora.
Yes, it is. Thank you. OK. Um,
Mr. Chair Representative, so
theirs will, theirs will also
change to reflect the students
that actually attend that
school. And I think it's
important to note here that um
while we included the whole
harmless, because we know there
will there will be impacts to
schools.
The, the, the long term impact
depends on the, the students who
attend those schools. These are
not.
Fixed in stone. So if others, if
that's, if any particular
schools starts to serve a
different demographic of
students or received students
with different needs.
Those, these at risk factors
are, are intended to change to
reflect that population, so they
may be losing money because of
their current population, that
may change over the next couple
of years or 3 years or 5 years.
So Mr. Chair and John
Representative.
Is there sort of an incentive
for people who are spotlight
schools that are achieving
educational reforms that we
might want to model or emulate
that we want to spread to a
traditional public school. I
mean like, when we, when I think
about hold harmless.
What we've done traditionally of
recent years is, even though
there's a declining population,
we've held them harmless in
their budget because of the
declining population. I'm
wondering if there's a whole
harmless mechanism that goes
past one year for for the
charter schools that are
thriving and they're we're
chartering a new reform to
education, they're meeting it
and maybe it does cost a little
bit more per student, maybe, but
there there's a model or a
mechanism that they're doing
something that a best practice
that they're implementing that.
Some of the folks testified that
they're they're even children
with special needs are at or
above grade level, that's,
that's phenomenal. We want to
replicate that and expand it,
right? We don't want to
jeopardize it with loss of
funding. And, and Mr. Chairman
and Representative Dao, I mean,
that was part of why we had
originally in the original bill,
the increase in the secondary
factor was cause it's not just
perhaps charter schools, but
it's also a school districts
that are doing really wonderful
things that they need the added
funding in order to replicate to
grow within their own district.
Um,
Um
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative John. Um, so the,
it's not the location of the
school site. It's the, uh, the,
the student population, so if
they're from 23 different school
districts in Albuquerque then
23, it's not based on location.
That makes sense to me. Um, the
last time that we did a major
formula change, how long was the
whole harmless for charters?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Doo, um,
I think the last big change that
affected charters was uh the
elimination of some small school
size, and I think that was a 3
year old. It was a 3 year phase
in.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, through
your phase and why this time one
year?
Mr. Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Doo, I think
between the combination of this
change and the original intent
of having the secondary.
Um, increase that would have
increased funding for most of
the charter schools that you've
heard from today. Um, we felt
like one year was sufficient.
That hold harmless is gonna need
to be larger now because that
secondary piece didn't take
effect.
hasn't, Mr. Chair and
Representative John is the full
5 million for charter schools.
Mr. Chair Representative down,
no, it's for all public, it's
for charter schools and any
school districts that might also
have seen, uh, might see
negative impacts.
and representatives at
microschools.
What, what, what other
traditional public schools,
because these are all public
schools. If what other
traditional public school would
would see a decline.
It's a, it's a number of
districts, very small number of
districts, they usually are, uh,
small rural districts, and part
of that is the the data and the
swings in that data because
you're 1 or 2 students makes a
big difference every year, and
so that's why you're probably
seeing it in more small rural
districts.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative John. It's, it's
so hard to vote on these bills
because like,
I think there's gonna be a great
benefit to the traditional
public schools in my district.
Um, but not for the spotlight
charter school in my district.
It is, it's
It's sad to see, you know,
micros schools, small schools,
rural schools, charter schools
that are often in the top 100
schools in the district, instead
of saying, do that, and let's do
it there too, jeopardizing their
sustainability of their funding.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Doo. We're gonna
go to Representative Garrett,
Representative Brown, and then
the vice chair representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for clarifying that this
doesn't affect just charter
schools. It's any school that's
benefited from the district's at
risk number is affected for this
in a positive way or negative
way.
Financially speaking.
Thank you. Um, I'm grateful that
at least the 6th grade.
Unit value.
went up to the grand total of
1.1475. That's good news.
Because 6th grades will get more
money.
Um, we worked for 2 years, Mr.
Chair, on the state equalization
guarantee.
And as uh Chairman Romero just
explained that would have.
Assisted in the changes from
that risk. Do we anticipate
bringing the sig proposal back.
For fiscal year 27.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative
Garrett, I mean, we still have
part of the session to go and so
we'll see where everything lies,
um, once we get the budget back
from the Senate, but um
hopefully that's something that
that we would bring back if
those changes are made.
Thank you very much. That's my
question.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Garrett. Next
Representative Brown.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very
much. Um,
chairman, I
I have a rookie question,
forgive me, but when it comes to
the family income index, Mr.
Chair.
What do you do when you have a
family that that does not want
to disclose that information.
Mr. Chair, Representative Brown,
let me give the
Cliff Notes version of Family
income index, Essentially what
happens is the public education
department shares student data
first with the tax and revenue
Department. So students and
families are not asked to share
anything.
The department takes essentially
names and addresses, shares that
with tax and revenue, Tax and
revenue matches those households
to available income tax data,
and then sends back to PED only
the number of students in each
of the 5 categories outlined in
the family income index statute.
That matches a certain
percentage of students across
the state. Anybody who's not
matched in that process, then
PED sends those, those, that
information.
To a healthcare authority now.
Um, and they use benefits data,
income data that they get from
benefits applications to match
additional students.
And they send the same set of
data back to PED to continue to
add to those numbers. And then
finally, whoever's not matched
in those first two steps, PED
uses census data, census track
data essentially to create
proxies for those unmatched
students, so you live in a
particular neighborhood, we
know.
certain information about the
income of folks in that
neighborhood and they create
proxies. That's the last step.
And I think we matched all but
6.
8 students, uh, the last time we
did this. So it's a pretty
precise way of getting at income
level.
Uh, by household.
And student.
Mr. Chair, we need to issue some
detective badges to all these
people who are doing this work.
So thank you for that. I, I, you
know, I want to make sure we
preserve privacy. Uh, it it
sounds like you've accomplished
that. So, um, my next is not a
question but a comment, um, Mr.
Chairman and representative. I
I've heard two things today. One
is support for for this bill for
House Bill 63, and I've heard
However, there are concerns
regarding the charter schools
and that a one year old harmless
will not be sufficient, so I
I'm just wondering if Mr. Chair
Representative, maybe the
Senate, assuming the committee
thinks this is something that
has the merit this longer hold
harmless period of maybe the
Senate can't fix it, and I think
this bill is gonna finish its
journey through the house pretty
soon, and maybe the Senate will
do something about it, but if
not, um, Mr. Choi, I just asked
that somehow somebody flagged
this for discussion in the
interim and that we keep track
of how our charter schools are
faring under this.
OK, thank you.
Absolutely. Thank you very much,
uh, Representative Brown. We're
gonna go to uh representative
Herrera and then the vice
chaired.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Um, John, can you tell us the
last time we adjusted the uh
state equalization formula.
So Mr. Chair and Representative
at uh uh we've, we've changed
the formula a number of times.
Um, we haven't changed, we've
increased the at-risk factor
over the last few years, but
this is the first major overhaul
to that factor, I think since
its inception, um, we're
creating a brand new English
learner which has never existed
in our, in our formula, and I
think this is the first time
we've changed 6th grade since.
1993.
And uh chlamydia and uh
presenters said like, uh, you
don't understand, I introduced
this legislation two years ago,
so that we could do a deep dive
into how our educational formula
works, and I'm grateful for the
work of this committee and uh
and I know it's, it's very
difficult to come up with an
equalization formula that will
that will please everybody, but
I think it's very important that
we do this work, that we
continue this work and that we
try to examine.
Our system as compared with
other states, who's who's taking
the lead in in really servicing
students equally, according to
need and for that I, I'm, it's
just my comment mystery chair.
Excellent, thank you very much,
Representative Herrera. Uh,
we're gonna go to the vice
chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Some of us
were over here calculating what
grade we were in, uh, when it
was last, uh, adjusted,
um,
um, Mr. Chair, um, and, uh,
Cheramero and, and Doctor Senna.
Thank you so much for um for
having this conversation with
the, with us, um, this
afternoon. I want to sort of
reiterate what uh Representative
Brown highlighted, um, and that
we've heard, and that is that
there is concern among members,
you know, in this committee
about making sure that um some
of the schools that may um be
negatively impacted in a
financial way, um, you know, we
have
We're glad that there's the one
year for the hold harmless, um,
and we do, I think, want to make
sure that in the interim,
unfortunately, um, our very own
chair, uh, will be chair of LFC
in the interim, so we can make
sure it's on the list. Um, but
that we we really work with, you
know, LFC and LESC, um, so that
members of both committees have
a good understanding um of
what's required to make sure
that all
of our schools um have the
resources they need. Um, so
thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you very much, uh,
Vice Chair Dickson,
if I may just quickly respond,
uh,
thank you, Mr. Chairman, um,
because I think it raises um um
you all raised some good points
as to these schools that we're
concerned about and represent
Doo kind of mentioned represent
Dixon, that maybe these schools
with the added funding that they
had been getting from the at
risk from their school district.
Um, maybe they have been doing
something really well, cause it,
to me it raises the question of
maybe these schools do need not
just these charter schools, but
all schools need this added
funding to implement the
programming that they need
that's in the best interest of
their students so along with
these charter schools, I think
exploring that question of what
it means to fully in adequately
fund our schools, um, so that
they're doing the best job
possible. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Great. Thank you very
much, uh, Chairman Romero. uh,
thank you, Doctor.
And thanks to everybody who
commented both in person online,
uh, great questions and comments
committee. I want to go back,
uh, what, uh, Representative
Vaca flagged, uh, which is, you
know, we were able last year to
sort of do a joint meeting more
towards the end of the interim.
I think we're very interested
and want to thank Representative
Baca Cha Romero for their
leadership, thinking about how
we approach the interim, um, and
being able to engage with LESC
also on the front end of the
interim.
And the need for this, um, to be
very sort of squarely in that.
We've heard chair a lot of
excitement and a lot of work
that's gone into this, um, and I
think we're very clear that
regardless of what our Senate
colleagues do, our ability to
focus on this during the
interim and to build the budget
during the interim, making sure
that you're too, 3, and beyond
are addressed, uh, particularly
your 2 and 3 as we sort of get
adjusted to this is squarely at
the sort of the top of what
we're looking at with.
education.
And I think we, we will very
much have that it's squarely at
the top of our LESC LFC sort of
joint uh approach.
And so with that, uh, I would
ask, uh, go to a motion for uh
approval.
Mr. Chair, I move a do pass for
House Bill 63 is twice amended,
it's been moved by
Representative Garrett, seconded
by uh ranking member Chatfield,
in opposition to that motion?
OK. Uh, please, great, well, uh,
please show Representative Doo
in opposition and
We've done that and to explain
your book. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you John and
Representative. I, I, I'm
starting to understand like this
is a real hearing committee, and
when we get to the floor,
members are going to see who
voted in favor and who voted
against, and I don't, I don't
know what if it was unanimous
out of education, but when I'm
looking at a bill, I look to see
if there's opposition, and I
looked through the bill and I
read it a little bit more
intentionally. And so I, I, it
helps some, it may hurt others
and um that's why I voted no.
Great. Thank you very much. OK,
thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Doctor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
OK.
we're, so we're going, please
engage with the staff if you
wish to have materials handed
out Vortez, great to see you
here. Please go ahead, grab a
seat.
Great.
OK, uh, representative, whenever
you're ready. Thank you Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, I'm here to present House
Bill 109, um, which is, um,
which establishes the extreme
weather resilience fund, um,
over the last 5 decades, New
Mexico has experienced a 2.7 °F
rise in average temperature
we've seen um an increase in
extreme fire wildfire risk days,
worsening drought conditions.
Um, this has all led to
increasing emergency room visits
for heat-related illnesses,
declining air quality due to
wildfire smoke and a growing
threats to our water supply.
This bill is going to provide
much needed financial resources
to local governments and tribal
communities to plan, prepare
for, and respond to these
escalating threats. Um, the fund
will support adaptation projects
such as heat mitigation
strategies, wildfire smoke, uh,
protections, emergency response
infrastructure and flood
preparedness, um, at least 50%
of the funding will be directed
to uh small communities,
ensuring that the most
vulnerable populations,
children, seniors,
low income families, communities
of color receive targeted
support, um, the grants are
capped at $1 million each, uh,
which will also help leverage
additional grant funding to
maximize impact of Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. I have
my expert witness here with me,
Doctor Wendy Johnson. And with
that, we stand for questions,
Mr. Chair. Great. And you also
have an amendment. Can you read
the 231 number, please?
I will be able to just
Right now, Mr. Chair, uh, that
23 number 1 number is 231-507.1.
OK, we've got that, um,
In this strikes the
appropriation, as we must do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Can we
have uh sorry, can we have a
motion uh to discuss the
amendment, please.
It's been moved and by vice
chair Dixon, seconded by Sam
Little, um.
Members, we can go through uh.
On page 1 lines 12 and 13.
Striking that um.
Those two lines and then page 31
8 through 10.
OK.
Any questions on the amendment?
OK, I don't see any questions.
Um, any, uh, can we have a
motion to approve the amendment?
I moved.
OK, it's been moved by by Cha
Dixon, seconded by
Representative Little, there any
opposition to approving the
amendment before we go to public
comment.
AC and none.
We've adopted the amendment.
Anybody here who wishes to make
to comment on House Bill 109 as
now amended.
OK, OK.
Uh, please go ahead and line up.
Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Nathan
Savara. I'm the program manager
for Equality New Mexico, and we
stand in strong support of House
Bill 109. It is true that LGBTQ
people experience homelessness
at disproportionately higher
rates. It is also true that
LGBTQ folks have fewer access to
resources and do not always have
the capability to move out of
the path of extreme weather due
to climate change. We are even
now limited to where we can
relocate, given the number of
state governments who would
choose to see us erased. This
bill is a necessity for the
LGBTQ plus community. Public
health
and resiliency have always been
the values of Korean trans
folks, and this bill will
support those values. The
resources and directions
outlined in this bill are real
priorities for queer and trans
folks in New Mexico, and we urge
passage of this bill and the
funding with it. Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, my name is Arturo
Castillo and I am the director
of equity and culture at
Conservation Votrs New Mexico or
CBNM, um, it is well known that
the impacts of climate of the
climate crisis is felt the most
by people of color, people in
rural communities, and low
income families.
Most specifically, people
experiencing homelessness who
represent all of those
categories are the first to
experience the disastrous
weather caused by the climate
crisis.
While we work to address climate
change in a more holistic
manner, we cannot sacrifice
public health or the lives of
these human beings.
Additionally, this funding would
drive funding directly to
communities to address the
current impacts of climate
change, making our communities
more resilient for the future
and having a positive return on
investment as well. Conservation
voters strongly supports the
resilience fund in order to
create community-driven plans
for saving these lives. Thank
you very much.
OK, uh, online, we'll, we're
gonna go first to Melissa.
Uh, one minute or less, Melissa
Bernardine.
OK, we're gonna go then to
Shelly.
Thank you, thank you so much.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Shelly
Manev. I am the executive
director of Healthy Climate New
Mexico and a longtime public
health leader, this need for
this fun arose out of the public
health infrastructure task
force, New Mexico is amongst the
top states being impacted by
extreme weather events having
heated up more than other states
over the last 50 years. We have
got to have resources for our
communities, especially our most
vulnerable front line fence
line.
communities and populations and
we stand in strong support of
this measure. Thank you so much.
Great. Thank you.
Uh, back to Melissa.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Melissa Bernardin here
representing the Sierra Club Rio
Grande chapter in support of HB
109. This bill acknowledges more
frequent temperature extremes
along with the calamitous impact
of increasing droughts, fires,
and floods. We need to protect
and minimize harm to our
communities. This bill will help
communities protect public
health and is fiscally prudent.
Examples of what's what this
could fund include adding each
systems to schools and community
centers where people can gather,
helping to avoid cases of heat
exhaustion and respiratory
illness. During winter storms,
providing plans and
transportation to get residents
to warming centers when power
goes out, allowing them to
charge medical equipment and
phones, and helping volunteer
members of Asia Association's
prepare for flooding, saving
lives, and preventing injuries
caused by flooding, which costs
far less than doing the clean up
from floods. We urge you.
That.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, Joanna Struther.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Joanna Struther and I
serve as the senior director of
advocacy for the American Lung
Association. I'm gonna try not
to repeat um what's already been
said. Obviously, you know, New
Mexico is already home to a
short drought and wildfires and
rising temperatures. Um, one of
the most dangerous components of
wildfire smoke is fine
particulate pollution, which can
penetrate deep into the lungs,
and even into the bloodstream
causing a range of health harms
and even premature death.
Everyone's health is at risk
from our change.
climate, establishing an extreme
weather resilience fund to
assist and enable local and
tribal communities to adapt to
our changing climate is how we
can invest in the health and
safety of our communities in New
Mexico. The Lung Association
asks you to, uh, please vote yes
on House Bill 109. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, next we have Athena
Kristadula.
Chair, committee members, my
name's Athena Christodoulou. I'm
an energy and environmental
engineer with the Environmental
Justice Caucus were in full
support of HB 109, New Mexico is
warming faster than in almost
any uh state in this country,
and we need to go ahead and get
ahead of it. We are adding
Schooling needs to the northern
parts of our state that we've
never had to use before, please
pass this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, finally, I guess,
uh, last person online, Steffi
Weisberg, and then we're gonna
go back to the committee.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
committee, um, I'm behalf of 350
New Mexico. Um, I'd like to
express our strong support for
this bill, for all the reasons
that have already been stated.
Thank you.
Thank you. OK, that'll conclude
our public comment. We'll go to
the committee.
For questions.
Thank you,
Representative, I'm looking at
page 3 of the FIR and I think
It correctly makes a point.
Uh, be on page 2.
that the uh
grants up to 1 million to
political subdivisions of the
state.
Or Indian nations, tribes or
pueblos.
Section D on page 3 says at
least 50% of the total grants
shall be awarded to political
subdivisions of the state.
But it doesn't include the
Indian um.
Nations' tribes or pueblos. Is
that deliberate or does that
need to be added, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative Garrett, I think
we need to add that.
OK, I recommend that you add it.
Thank you.
OK. uh, thank you,
Representative.
Uh, we've got Vice Chair Dixon.
OK, uh, we'll go to, uh, so let
me, we're gonna go to
Representative Luhan and then
Representative Vincent and keep
going from there some behind.
Uh, thank you, um.
Mr. Chair, um, and I'm just
gonna, I wasn't expecting to say
this, but since representative
um member, um.
Garrett. Thank you.
Made that mention if you were to
add that, then the language then
would read at least 50% of the
total grants approved by the
Secretary shall be awarded to
political subdivisions. Indians
tribes or pueblos.
Where were the other 50%?
Mr.
Chan, um, to,
um, other political subdivisions
and tribal nations, tribal
entities that are over 100.
00
With a population of over
100,000. So the, the big cities
and counties, Berneo County,
Santa Fe County. Thank you,
thank you, thank you for that,
um.
And then I'm going to ask Mr.
Chair, I, I was gone at the
first part of this, um.
Hearing how much money did we,
do we have in HB2 for this, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair Representative
Luhan, uh, nothing in the house
budget that went over, but we
have got gotten confirmation
from the Senate that they're
working to put money into the
budget on that side, to confirm
that, and I don't know exactly
how much. Somewhere between 2
and 3 million probably.
Representative Han. Yeah, I'm
sorry, I was not here, but a
really good start, Mr. Chair. I
just wanted to know, OK,
understood. Thank you. um.
This is um
Is this the 2nd year, Mr. Tay,
uh, representative that we've
had this legislation, Mr. Chair
Representative Lujan, I believe
it might be the 3rd, maybe even
the 4th, the, the
The years are getting to me, but
for sure, the 3rd.
And Mr. Chair, uh, is this, is
this, um,
Are we seeing, and I don't like
to say duplication, but are
there other like?
Other, um, other legislation
that that does the same thing as
or close to, cause I think this
is, this is robust what you're
asking for, which is we're
looking for, but.
Is there something similar, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair Representative
Hanna, um, this is the only
legislation that I understand
that really focuses on the
public health effects of extreme
weather and um working with
communities to develop plans to
ensure that that public health
of those constituencies are, um,
you know, are, are supported and
protected. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Um,
Representative, I mean, I do
hear, oh, you know, in a real,
um.
areas um.
About different complaints about
things that happened happened
when there's even just a a small
fire, if you will, or if there
is
Any kind of burning that's legal
and sort of thing, but they
would, would they then just
would they be, uh, could they
apply for this as well, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Mr. Chair Representative
Lujan, um, the political, any
political subdivision that, you
know, is, is trying to prepare
their community for upcoming
wildfire or extreme, you know,
extreme weather, whether it's
extreme heat or extreme cold,
you know, kind of, can apply for
this funding. And one example
that I'd like to give you is,
um, you know, we saw what
happened, um, in Al Saina with
the Eton fire, um, there were
whole communities that did not
have um
did not receive the emergency
alerts to evacuate, um, and this
one you could go to a community
to ensure that they emergency
response system was adequate and
reached everyone, everyone in
that community. So that's the
kind of thing that, um, can be
supported by this. Thank you,
Mr. You're saying for any public
health, um,
Need or effort, Mister Chair.
Right, thank you, thank you.
Thank you for bringing forward.
Thank you, thank you very much
Wuhan.
Uh, next we're gonna go to
representative Vincent, then
represent Duncan, Vincent,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
So
I keep hearing the word
wildfire. How does this help
with wildfire? Tell me again,
it's not.
Preventing its
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, uh, it helps the
community prepare for what will,
uh, I think inevitably be a a
pretty deadly wildfire season,
and I can see we've got one
coming up in front of us, so it
would help a community prepare
for um for that event by
ensuring, for instance,
I'm not saying that this is
something that would happen in
Taos County, but it could happen
where the county would apply for
funding to make sure that the,
you know, 2 or 3 community
centers in various parts of the
county are ready to go and they
have maybe they have backup
battery power system, maybe they
have, um, you know, enough, you
know, cooling, um, capabilities
so that if there is a a wildfire
and they're, you know, there
needs to be, you know, uh
congregate housing, which we
saw.
A couple years ago with the, you
know, Cafan and Herman
Spikefire.
That that county would then be
ready to go, um, and could tap
into funding to ensure that that
community is safe and has a
place to go, um, with, you know,
multiple, uh, air filtration,
uh, chargers for their phones,
things like that and uh cooling.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I didn't think you
representative. I was, um, did
you, did you, when you were
drafting this legislation, did
you talk to any of your Office
of Emergency Services or, or
emergency managers in your
counties and do they not already
provide that cause my mine does.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative uh
Vincent, they don't have the
access to the funding to provide
this even extensive um
preparation.
Uh, plan, I just don't have it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So you,
you were saying that um, you
know, this funding was gonna go
to, you know,
places that were that were ready
for wildfire. So if something
did happen, are you talking
about shelters?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, um, my witness would
like to weigh in.
Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, um, I think that it
could help for mitigation of
wildfires in the case where you
have people who are low income,
low resource, every community is
going to have to assess their
own needs and do that based on
evidence-based interventions as
well. So if for example you have
and I have practiced in Taos in
Las Vegas in Espanola and
Albuquerque, many places around
the state.
I've seen, for example, a lot of
folks who are ranchers and
farmers who live in very remote
places who are older and just
don't have the resources on
their own to do some mitigation
on their land, um, it would
really depend on each local
community and what they saw and
what they saw the needs were and
again really focused on
evidence-based interventions, so
you were saying all counties
have this, but all counties
don't have, for example,
especially in the southern part
of the state.
where heat is such an issue.
You know, in rural areas,
there's not a mall where people
can go to during the day. That's
air conditioned. There's not an
air conditioned place where they
can be. Some of the commu the
community centers aren't air
conditioned, so a place where
they can go and these
interventions like cooling
centers have been shown to
decrease mortality by 2/3 to
decrease emergency room visits
to decrease hospitalizations in
places where they've been
located, so those are some of
the examples, but it would be
each community would.
Um, assess their own
vulnerabilities and be able to
apply for a grant to address
that.
Thank you, madam, Madam Chair,
and uh witness so.
Did you specifically talk to
emergency management at all
cause I hear, I hear some of the
stuff you're doing, but I think
a lot of it's being duplicated
because a lot of, we get a lot
of federal funding.
And state funding, and you know,
when you were talking about, um,
you know, elderly people and
them needing thinning and stuff
around there, I mean, their
state grants through our inner
And state funding, and you know,
when you were talking about, um,
you know, elderly people and
them needing thinning and stuff
around there, I mean, their
state grants through our MED
And state funding, and you know,
when you were talking about, um,
you know, elderly people and
them needing thinning and stuff
around there, I mean, their
state grants through our inner
that that deliver that. It's a,
it's a cost match, but you can
get it done and um as far as our
shelters, they work on those all
the time and they are air
conditioned and, you know, we
have law enforcement there, so
I, I'm just, I'm trying to
figure out where this money.
would get plugged in.
Representative Vincent, um, I
think that's a great question.
Not every county has the
capacity that others do. Um, I,
our congregate shelter in Taos
County does not have air
conditioning at all. That's just
one example of what can happen.
We're this and this funding is
not going to go to um to
thinning projects because there
is plenty of funding, uh, I
think in this budget that does
support that as well as it
should. Um, this is really
specifically for uh preparing a
community um to ensure that the
most vulnerable are
are supported, um, so it could
look like a lot of different
things, um.
And not every county has the
capacity.
That you speak of,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative, so as
far as as the facility you're
talking about, could it, could
capital money take care of that
or Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, that that is a
possibility, but it's not just
for that's just an example of
the kind of thing that the grant
can support, but there are
Other things that are so, so
important that are hard to get
funding for planning, um,
emergency preparedness planning,
um, you know, just emergency,
you know, high heat planning,
things like that. What are we
going to do? How are we're going
to move people? Where are we
gonna, where are we gonna put
them, um, how do we make sure
that we have, you know,
facilities that have the right,
you know, whether it's air
filtration or or cooling, things
like that, um.
That funding can go to that as
well. Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, and you had uh
You said that the Senate had
possibly get you some money, but
there's none in House Bill 2 at
all, Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, I got, I got
confirmation from the Senate
that they're putting that into
hostile 2 on the Senate side.
OK, and, and how much money is
that? Uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative, I don't know
right now, I think somewhere
between 2 and 3 million,
probably, um, but I haven't
gotten a firm number from them.
Thank you. And the only reason I
ask you that, Madam Chair and
Representative is because how
much money is enough and how
much is too little where we're
not gonna make uh uh impact.
Mr. Chair Representative
Vincent, um, right now there's
no money for this kind of, you
know, for this kind of public
health health focused uh
planning and preparation that um
political subdivisions can tap
into, um, and so anything more
than 0 would be better than what
we have now.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative who oversees this
program, Mr. Chair
Representative Vincent, it lives
at Department of Health.
Department of Health and Madam
Chair Representative, so since
it lives there, do people apply
for this? How, how do they, how
do you make sure the funding
goes where it needs to go. Mr.
Chair Representative Vincent,
the funding will you live at
Department of Health, uh,
political subdivisions and
tribes will apply for that
funding. I'm sure they have,
they'll have some process for,
uh, you know, noticing and then
the grants will be made through
the Department of Public Health
Department of Health.
through to those political
subdivisions or tribal nations.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
think you represented Duncan,
uh, or Vincent and now to
Representative Duncan.
Mr. Chair.
I don't even know where to
start, Mister Chair.
I can tell you that there's a
really good start to this.
With your capital outlay.
If you bought a genera.
Propane
Generator, you could get air
conditioning in your
Really easy.
That's the first thing.
Mr. Chair, um,
I always hate creating another
department just so we can put
money into that department when
there are other departments that
could, we could put money into
those and do this.
So why wasn't money just, why
didn't you ask for money?
to be put
In Department of Health, is that
where this is going?
Mr.
Chair Representative Duncan,
that the request is for the
Department of Health to
establish the fund and that they
will manage. Um, so they, they
have experience managing grant
programs, the focus of this is
on the public health of those
communities. So that's, that's
where it's coming from to help
those communities prepare for
the events that cause health
problems like increased
emergency room visits. Thank
you. I can see it creating the
extreme weather resilience fund.
We're going to have hot days,
we're gonna have cold days and
and nothing is gonna stop that.
I believe that the Lord is in
charge and those things are
gonna happen and those things
are going to occur.
So I guess my question then is,
is still going back.
Uh, why couldn't you just ask
for a million dollars to be put
into the fund to
look at whatever we're gonna be
looking at here.
Um, and, and, um, for healthcare
benefits.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Duncan, it's not for healthcare
benefits specifically and I the
the purpose of this is really
for that.
Individual communities which
have individual needs to be able
to apply for funding that would,
you know, support um the the
most vulnerable when they're
having um when there's, you
know, high heat, high heat index
or, you know, like what happened
in my community a couple of
years ago, uh, the snow squall
that killed uh a number of
people in parts of my county,
the the extreme wind that came
from that snow squall was really
devastating for my community. We
were not
Prepared for it, um, and
This funding would go to a
community that
You're just needs to figure out
what it needs to do to prepare
for those kinds of things, and
every community is different,
Mr. Chair Representative Duncan,
I think that's why we, you have
it in a fund.
Very, you know, anybody, any
political subdivision can apply
for that fund. We're not
telling, we're not being
prescriptive, like you have to
use this for a cooling center
you can only get this funding if
you've applied for a capital
outlay. It's not just for um a
building. It could be for a
plan, it could be for an
emergency response system that
is outdated. So, you know, it's,
it's, it's flexible so that the
community can really determine
what they need to protect the
health of their constituents.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. Thank you
for that.
When you said that your county
didn't have this coming from
where I started from in the
county, my first thought was,
why not?
You, I assume you have a person
of the county that's in charge
of emergency situations.
Mr. Chair Representative Duncan,
we do. And so, madam, or Mr.
Chair, so if you have that, then
why hasn't he circled the troops
and said, OK, this is what we
need to do.
Mr. Chair Representative Duncan,
um, he's not capacitated. He
doesn't have the capacity to do
that, um, we, they need the town
and the county in my community
and I imagine in other
communities need the funding to
be able to do that work, hire
experts, make sure that we're
you doing a plan that meets, you
know, that, that uh serves as
many people as possible. That's
what we're talking about.
Thank you Madam chair and, and
representative, um, but that's
what cogs are for.
Mr. Chair Representative Duncan,
uh, cogs are doing great work. I
don't know if they're doing
extreme weather resilience
planning.
Which is what this bill is
focused on.
And not every community can be
is served by a cog, Mr. Chair
Representative Duncan.
Miss Representative, do you have
a cog, an active cog in your
area, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative Duncan, we, we do
participate with the
Who represented her is probably
better at the name Northern New
Mexico, North Central. OK.
And
Mr. Chair and Representative,
they have grants all the time
for planning these things.
So, I guess I'm still trying to
figure out we're building
another silo over here, um.
I'm not, I'm not on board with,
with, uh, where you going with
this, but would federal
government be allowed to apply
for these funds so they can
manage our forests better so
that we wouldn't have fires that
would impact.
Mr.
Duncan, no.
This is for political
subdivisions of the state. I,
I'm, I'm sorry if I misheard
you. I thought you said the
federal government. That's,
that's not the case here. This
is really for our
Really for our uh communities in
New Mexico. It is only for our
communities in Mexico.
As chair and Representative,
thank you. I said exactly that.
Because if our forests were
managed properly, we wouldn't,
you probably wouldn't even need
to have this bill here, this,
this year.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. No further
questions. Uh, thank you very
much, Representative Duncan.
We're gonna go to next to
Herrera, then represent
Pettigre.
And then I'll.
OK, great. Uh, Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Chairman, Chairwoman, um,
table motion takes precedence, I
moved the table. I have some
questions. Still takes
precedence.
uh, I'm not accepting the motion
any motion right now. We have
additional questions.
The chair has to accept the
motion.
And uh and then it is accurate
what the representative just
said.
Any further questions?
I have questions, Hernandez, do
you have a question?
Hernandez.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, uh, um,
representative, um, a few, a few
days ago, we, uh, heard from the
uh uh from the uh.
Uh, funding for tribal and
community health councils which
are under the Department of
Health. Mr. Chairman, I'm, I'm
trying to understand like, like
as we as we create this fund.
Uh, what would be the
relationship between the 33
health councils and the 10
tribal councils and association
to this fund, like, like, will
there be some type of
relationship in, in
coordination, thank you, Mr.
Chairman,
I think that's a, that's a great
question, um, you know, the, uh,
the Department of Health can
open up their process for
looking at the grants, I imagine
they're going to be relying on
the health councils, especially
the tribal health councils for
um epidemiological data.
To help determine how to get
these grants out the door, so I,
I imagine that there's gonna be
a a strong relationship. I
don't, you know, we don't uh
delineate the the the must have
kind of relationship that needs
to exist, but um, I can't help
but think that there will be
Chairman, uh, Representative,
uh, an area that, uh, I could
see this benefiting the, the 23
tribes, pebbles, and nations is
around technical assistance,
applying for uh this
Type of uh funding source. Mr.
Chairman, back in September in
the Shiprock community, uh,
weeks.
Uh, suffered massive flooding
and it uh put 40 families
homeless.
And the water levels were so
high, uh, um, I believe they
were at 4 ft. Uh, it was in the
newspaper, uh, it flooded the
school districts, um,
administration building, and,
um, and this was again due to
climate change and uh and just
the impacts that we're we're
dealing with, uh, even that are
occurring a lot, a lot
frequently and, um, and Mr.
Chairman, Representative would
How should this event happen
again in, in the shipro
community.
Mr. Chair Representative
Hernandez, I think this, uh, if
your community applied for a
grant to um map the communities
where flooding might occur, um,
make sure that there's sandbags
that get, you know, that are
ready to go and distributed to
those communities. And that's
the kind of thing that, that
this grant could support, again,
we're not mandating what um what
people are gonna apply for,
what's what's eligible, um, but
that's the kind of thing, um,
ensuring that that community has
access to clean water, um.
before of a flood event like
this, so that, you know, they
can, that that can be deployed
quickly.
Thank you Mr. Chairman, that
concludes my questions. Great,
thank you very much. Uh, next we
have Vice Chair Dixon, and then
I'll have some questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Um,
Can you define disadvantaged
communities.
Um, Mr. Chair vice chair. I
don't believe we have that in
the definitions.
Uh, in this bill.
Just rural.
And um we, we don't have that in
this bill, but um I don't know
where the latest definition of
disadvantaged community lives?
Could you like me to do? No, no,
I, I, I mean, I assume that
there's sort of a generally
accepted um.
Definition, um, and it's
entirely possible. It doesn't
need to be included um in the
bill, I, you know, I just
thought I'd ask if there's um
You know, how we determine that,
but I suppose um
When the department is making um
Rules and guidelines for the
program, uh, that that can be
something that is is delineated.
Um.
And then, um,
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
Is this part of the community
benefits fund.
Mr. Chair Representative Dixon,
um, it is not at this moment,
um, but, um, what I have uh
heard from the Senate side was
that they're trying to get this
into HB 2 via the community
benefits fund. OK. Uh, thank
you, Mr. Terry. Thank you,
Representative. Thank you very
much, Vice Chair Dickson. Uh,
thank you, Representative uh
Ortiz, thanks to your expert.
First, um, the
Well, yes, we've had a question
about adding in tribes, Pueblos,
and nations to sort of the
guarantor part of this bill,
which is to ensure that uh
smaller entities are eligible
and receive sort of uh the
initial, at least half of the
funding, and you're open to that
change, Mr. Chair, that would be
in uh part D, uh, adding
Tribal tribal entities after
political subdivisions. Great.
And I also have another um
Uh,
I think we've, there's good
conversation about some of the
um needs but also uh challenges,
potential duplications, gaps,
one of the ways for us to track
that, particularly at HASC and
LSC is sort of through clear
reporting requirements, um, I'd,
are you open to adding reporting
requirements to, uh, LFC and
probably, you know, other
interim committee.
these as well. Chair,
absolutely.
Right
OK, um,
Yeah, we're, I, I'll conclude my
questions will go to
representative Doo for some
others that those two changes
representative Ortez, I think
are um substantive and needed.
I'd like to work to make sure we
get the language right for the
reporting requirement.
Um, acknowledging some of the
potential for duplication, but
also I think also uh well, and
Just a statement that we are
headed into a very challenging
year down south it never rained
this past year, um, up north,
you guys got a lot of rain. We
have very little snow pack right
now, which is really strong
conditions for forest fire.
We're gonna need a lot of
support, federally, we're gonna
need to do more as a state. It
seems like there may be a role
here, although there's, I think,
really good comments about
defining that role or to
separate from any other.
Any other things just sort of
responding. So thank you for
being willing to make those
changes. Uh, I'll ask if you can
roll and bring those changes
back and work with the staff.
After I want to go to
representative representative Do
any questions, this is a good
time for us to get those out, so
please go ahead. Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you,
Representative. So this is for
heat and cold in the extreme,
um, Mr. Chair Represent Doo,
extreme weather, extreme
weather, and Mr. Chair
Representative, it's different
than the cooling stations I, I
got lots of invitations from my
district to come volunteer at
cooling stations. What was the
funding mechanism for those
cooling stations, Mr. Chair
Represented, I, I don't know.
OK, Mr. Chair, before we
Can we find out what those, what
the funding mech mechanisms were
for there were communities
putting out flyers and offering
cooling stations, uh, they had
food and, and so I'm not, I,
we're finding something maybe it
was federal, I don't know. It's
a great question, uh, director
of writing is here. What I'll,
what we'll ask since we're gonna
bring it back. I, I too, we've
had notices about cooling
stations and cruises, can we
sort of send a query out to the
municipalities and counties.
And um
And asked them sort of that, uh.
Great question and um.
And maybe we can, you know,
Work with the sponsor, and if
there's members who have
additional things that they
wanna sort of learn on this
topic. Um,
With, I think it's, it's very
worthwhile because it, there is
a very, it's a mixture of many
different
Entities facing sort of urgent
and extreme needs sorting
through that is super helpful.
Um, so,
OK, uh, any others, uh,
Folks that want to make requests
to, for that letter for more
information, please uh check in
with Director Bridingent Ortez,
thank you very much. We'll look
forward to seeing you back.
Um
OK, now.
Uh, and, uh, members will wrap
up by
550, 5:45, 550. The main reason,
um, is, so our staff will be
able to attend uh the 100th Bill
party tonight.
Opened everybody else, of
course, but our staff works
very, very hard, and we want to
give them that.
Great.
OK. Uh,
We're saying, good to see you,
expert, good to see you.
Please go ahead on House Bill
28289. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
um,
Members of the committee, I'm
here to present House Bill 289,
excuse me, which is relating to
geothermal resources.
Amending the provisions of the
geothermal projects Development
Fund.
And um what HB 289 does is
expands the state's economic
support for development of the
state's geothermal resources as
a reliable renewable constant
stores of dispatchable electric
power to reduce the state's use
of coal?
And natural gas generators and
provide round the clock backup
for solar and wind energy
sources, and with me today, I
have, um, as an expert.
and directorsta and um online I
have um 2.
Via Zoom
Um, I have 2 individuals who are
also available to offer, um,
excuse me, um,
Answers to some of the questions
that I may not have, and that is
Lucy Durango.
Um, with the geothermal working
group. She's the chief
commercial officer of XGC
Energy, and then uh we also have
Tom Solomon, who is also with
the geothermal Working Group,
and they will alternate cause I
understand from your committee,
uh, secretary that we do want,
we can only do one at a time,
and so we'll alternate as we see
fit. And um I
Go ahead and ask director if she
has any statements or however
you wish to, that's great. I
think that's great. You have an
amendment. Can you, um, uh,
Uh,
read us the 231 number. Yes, Mr.
Chair. The number is 231-508.1.
Great. OK, we have that.
Um
Sure, um,
To bill
OK. Uh, can we move that mineral
or or that
uh yeah.
It's a mineral on the page that
I was.
OK, it's um it's moved, it's
been uh
For a second.
For the amendment, to be clear.
Um, OK, and so on the amendment.
Line one.
page one.
13, making an appropriation.
And then on page 4 lines 5
through 10.
Striking that appropriation.
OK, any questions on the
amendment?
OK, it's been moved to adopt
the.
I'll ask for a motion to adopt
the amendment.
OK, it's been moved by Vier
Dixon second by,
uh for Lohan.
opposition to adopting the
amendment.
opposition, we've adopted the
amendment.
Um
members this $10 million for.
Included in House Bill 2 that
we've sent over.
To get that out of the way. Um,
we'll go next to uh public
comment. Anybody who wishes to
make public comment in person.
Come on up.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Travis
Kellerman. I'm the senior
climate advisor to the governor
of New Mexico.
And I stand here in support of
this bill.
We took a big step last year to
supporting the geothermal
industry, and this is the next
step.
This is really how we realize
our potential to generate clean,
firm power. So we're number 6 in
the US for geothermal resource.
We have huge resources along our
Colorado border and also in the
southwest.
A big part of what this bill
does is complete our geologic
mapping to fully understand
those resources and the intent
there is to support and de-risk
this industry. So we don't have
a lot of the trial and error
drilling that was once seen in
the oil and gas industry.
When we think about using
existing oil and gas resources,
there's drilling skills, assets
that carry over, also workers
all the way down from those on
the field to petroleum engineers
can be easily retrained and
redeployed in geothermal
development and production.
So I urge your support for HB
2289, we took a big step last
year again. This is how we scale
our industry. We have a lot of
major developer support and a
broad coalition behind this
effort. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, Jared Najar on
behalf of Interspace Action. I
know we're short on time, so
I'll be brief, uh, in addition
to what was just said, we
support this bill because it
will um help encourage
investment in our state and also
uh create jobs. So we strongly
support this. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and committee members,
my name is Garth Tolman. I'm a
4th generation New Mexican, grew
up in Fort Sumner. I'm an
attorney. I spent about 10 years
of my life, uh working,
representing geothermal firms.
in uh California, Nevada,
Oregon, Colorado and New Mexico,
um, I want to, uh, urge you to
pass this bill, uh, you've got a
tremendous group of people in
this state that have a, a
tremendous amount of knowledge
in this, particularly Pucker,
who you heard from.
And also Doctor Kelly that put
together a report a couple of
years ago. She's a uh.
Jealous down in in Mexico Tech.
Now those of you that have
looked at that, if you look at
page 25, she talks about the
economic benefits, the idea that
I have and the thing that I
conclude to come here
is to build 50 megawatt power
plants which would generate
tremendous employment for you to
pass this. Thank you. Thank you.
OK, uh, we're gonna go online.
Uh, and, um,
Two hands, uh, one minute or
less.
Uh, Mr. Solomon is identified as
an expert, so we'll go to
Melissa Bernardin.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, my
name is Melissa Bernardin here
representing the Sierra Clu Rio
Grande chapter in support of HB
289. Anything we can do to build
out geothermal in this state
deserves our attention. It's one
of those energy sources that
everyone agrees on, or nearly
everyone. If we compare data
centers with geothermal, we
avoid emissions that otherwise
might go unregulated. Allowing
grants to private entities will
help move this technology
forward. We urge
support. Thank you. Great, thank
you.
OK, uh, next to Athena
Christodoulou.
Chair, committee members, my
name's Athena Christodoulou. I'm
an energy and environmental
engineer and also a tech
entrepreneur. It's great to see
this state moving into future
focused, innovating technology.
I am very much for this bill and
getting our research and
development out in the field and
engineered. Thank you.
Thank you.
OK, we're gonna conclude with
Steffi Weisberg.
Hello, um, chair and committee,
uh, just very briefly, I, I
support this bill, um, one,
because as Athena said, it's
based on a ton of work that was
done at Los Alamos for decades,
and also um just to point out,
if you didn't know, this is the
24/7 renewable resource, so, um,
that's a great for providing
base load power. Thanks. Great.
Thank you very much.
OK, uh concludes the public, um,
comment. Any questions from the
committee, go to Representative
Vetta.
Uh, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair.
Thank you presenters. I just
want to say the north is the
center of geo geothermal
activity. I remember looking at
a.
A mutual domestic water system.
It was, it was colder than,
well, it was cold outside that
day, like 15 to 20. I walked
into this whale house and it was
just warm. They had Deel 75
years ago, 2 miles down, and
when that water came up, it was
warm. I mean, there is a real
geothermal, uh, center of
activity in the north that I
think we haven't been able to
tap or work with and um I think
it's just our state is ripe for
this. I know.
the same thing exists in Los
Alamos and uh I, I really
appreciate you bringing this
field for me.
Thank you,
Representative Gary or
representative
next to Representative Garrett.
You all look like.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, I
found something I'm happy about
with the Trump administration,
and that's that the Secretary of
Energy to be, I don't know if he
was uh uh Christopher Wright was
at Los Alamos in Santilia this
week, and he said he's excited
about geothermal as an enormous
abundant energy resource below
everyone's feet, and his
personal company invested in a
geothermal company.
So that is helpful to know. So
thank you. Got to do this.
it
OK, great. Thank you,
Representative Garrett, uh.
Representative Duncan, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. There's a
lot of things that President
Trump is doing that I'm happy
about
totally fair. No, no, no, no.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan, please continue and
totally free. I apologize, no,
no, it's all totally given the
previous comment. Thank you,
Madam Chair. um, just a quick
question for you. I think this
is, I think it's a great idea.
But if it's such a good idea,
why do we need to throw
$250,000. Um, I, I'll begin. It
is to actually promote the
development and further research
and further study, uh, in this
area, it's really important. And
so the whole idea is to
encourage investment in our
state, which is really key in
this area as the representative
has indicated Representative
Herrera in her statement, and I
don't know if um directors.
Representative, great question.
Um, you're familiar with oil and
gas drilling, and you know that
there are certain stages um in
this case, a century ago when
the technology was being
developed and particularly the
knowledge of the subsurface was
still very unknown. That's
essentially where we're at with
geothermal because it's so much
deeper than oil and gas, and
it's in, in some cases,
different areas of the state. So
more research is needed to learn
more of the subsurface, um, and
that can be very expensive. The
good thing is, as Representative
Garrett pointed,
out the DOE. There are lots of
support for that, and one of
that support is um loans from
the Department of Energy's loan
programs office, which we are in
active talks with, um, those
loads are fabulous and they
would go to potential geothermal
developers such that if the
state can invest $1 sort of
alongside, there's a potential
for the LPO to come and invest
up to $100 to back that
exploration and development.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you for
that. That, that's one of my
questions. You know, we throw a
lot of money, grants out there,
and then as soon as those grants
are gone, those people are gone
and those ideas are gone, and,
and that's, you know, my, my
fear here is that we're going to
be throwing money.
20 million or 12 million or
whatever that number is.
Why don't we just give that
money to Los Alamos or whoever
did the initial study and say
finish, finish up and then we
put it out to private company.
Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair Director Steer.
Chair and Representative, great
question. So if you're familiar
with technology readiness
levels, there are, they're
numbered 1 through 10 in terms
of developing new technology and
um the labs typically focus on
technology readiness levels sort
of 12, and 3 when the technology
is emerging, they're looking at
different drill bits, different
sensors and and things like, you
know, looking at AI mapping and
geology, where we're at right
now at the labs have taken it as
far as they can without actually
drilling into the ground. And
so, for example,
Sandia has come to my office and
said we've got 5 different drill
bits that we need to, uh, we
want to test, we want to do it
with sensors and tests, but we
don't have enough just pure
federal government grant money
to do the drilling, we'd like to
do a public private partnership
with a potential geothermal
developer, we'll supply the
different drill bits, we'll test
them, we'll see when they break,
how far they get, how many feet
per day that can drill, etc. to
advance the technology. So it
would open up a lot of public.
private partnerships, this
funding, um, and allow us to
move past the technology
readiness level of valley of
death, which is sort of 67 and 8
until you get to commercial
deployment where the technology
is sorted out and the cost per
kilowatt is very low.
Thank you Mr. Chair, one last
question. How deep are are these
wells gonna be?
Uh, chair and representative,
that's the million dollar
question, so it's short, the
deeper you go, the hotter the
rocks get, the hotter the rock,
the hotter the water that comes
up and the more efficient and
the more kilowatts you could
produce surface, um, New Mexico,
we have quite a lot of knowledge
of the subsurface, but it's in
certain areas of the state and
it doesn't really go to hot
rocks. The oil and gas was not
interested in finding heat,
they're interested in finding
hydrocarbons, um, and so this is
why we need some help with the
mapping. We think we have
some rough ideas, and the idea
is to find the hottest,
shallowest rock in the state,
but we don't know it with enough
certainty.
The deepest will.
And uh Mr. Chara will add New
Mexico Tech is leading in this
research and study, and they are
uh geological experts, so that's
they're researching incredibly
fast.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair
and Chairman. So give me a rough
idea then. You said you had a
rough idea. I'd like to know the
rough idea. Thank you, chair and
representative, uh, they can be
with some geologic heat is right
at the surface, you know,
through the consequences, hot
springs, um,
They can go down. They typically
are below the water table, so
5000 ft is when it's can begin
to get good, um, in New Mexico,
we recently drilled one of the
deepest wells in the country,
close to 20,000 ft, um, down at
Lightning Dock, they drilled a
2nd well in December and we're
able to ramp up their wats by
almost double, so there is a lot
of potential there if we just
need a little bit of money to
advance.
Uh, the subsurface in the
drilling tech.
Thank you, ma'am. Sure, I
appreciate that. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan, great question. Uh,
next, we're gonna go to the vice
chair.
questions. Thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, I, uh,
Really appreciate um
representative, you bringing
this bill, I think it's
wonderful and um.
Uh
Miss uh Stair.
Um
Thank you for your, your um
detailed answers. Um, just a
couple of questions. Um,
Representative Duncan, uh,
brought up sort of the depth,
um, and you mentioned oil and
gas and so I was actually
wondering if um some of the
technology used for geothermal
is uh also similar to
technology, uh, that would be
used uh for carbon
sequestration.
I think uh chair and
Representative, I can give a
beginning of an answer, but I
may want to defer, we have an
expert so this is something
we can maybe we'll ask for that.
It is sort of a knowledge that
would be wonderful. Um, just
thinking about the crossover and
how geothermal intersects with
other sectors of the economy,
thank you, that's why I asked no
further questions and they all
involve injections. Thank you
uh.
Representative
Vice Cha Dickson to represent
Vincent, then Representative
Lujan.
Uh, you know, actually I'll have
some questions, uh, after you.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
I just had a few questions, so
we have
We put a lot of money into win.
A lot of money into solar.
And it's kind of a, it's already
kind of cost effective and kind
of a proven technology, why
would we want to go after.
Just for, this is just for me. I
need to understand this
technology, why would we go
after this new technology.
Mr. Cha.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Director.
question chair and
representative, so glad you
asked. So solar and wind are
great, but they're not, they
can't cover everything, as you
know, first of all they're
intermittent, um, and where,
where they are is not always
where the load is. So geothermal
can answer that. So geothermal
energy is what we call clean
firm, where it doesn't emit
carbon emissions that
essentially needs no fuel, the
fuel's free, and it's available
24/7. And in fact, it's
dispatchable. So you combine our
existing wind and solar, which
geothermal.
And you can take our grid not
only to 100% clean energy with
free fuel, but you can now
create abundant electricity and
start to lower the price of
electricity. Um, in addition,
geothermal also is islandable,
meaning in our military bases
are very interested in this,
particularly Kirtland, um,
because of the energy security,
99% of the electricity used by
our military bases comes from
the public grid, and you can
imagine that that calls into
question some some security
issues. So our military is very
interested in the islandable.
Aspect. Um, it's also what's
called Blackstart services,
meaning if and when the grid
does go down, um, there are just
a handful of technologies that
can start themselves in a
completely electricity less
environment and geothermal.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So, if geothermal energy is
significantly, is it more
expensive to go after.
And is it, is it as effective as
solar and wind?
Sharon representative. It is
early in its tech process. So if
you remember in the beginning,
solar was a little more
expensive than it is now, wind
is more expensive than it is
now, and so it's at the
beginning of where the price is
starting to drop, but in order
to continue to have the price
drop, we need investment at this
point in the technology in the
repeatability, in the workforce,
in the supply chains, and New
Mexico has a uh opportunity
right now to be a first mover in
that space, and any of you who
are business people know.
what that means in terms of
marketing. I think that, did
that answer your question? Yes,
ma'am. Thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you Representatives. So
because I don't know enough
about this, it's not that I'm
not, I'm not gonna support the
bill today.
But if it makes it to the floor,
I'm gonna study up on this and
then maybe I can give you a vote
on the floor. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Great. Thank you very
much.
uh, representative, um, and
expert
the
As we will hydraulic fracturing
be part of what we can explore,
particularly as we go into
deeper depths.
Oh, and, um, I apo I'll ask
questions and I'll go to
represent Pettigre for
questions, um.
Go ahead.
Chair, clearly uh director star
is excited about this, so I can
continue to defer to director
Steer.
Sure, and again, I will start,
but I see that Lucy Durago is
one of our experts, has also
joined us and she um will be
able to give a more fuller
answer. There are
There isn't just one form of
geothermal technology, it's
emerging quickly, and many of it
doesn't involve uh stimulating
the rock at all. Some of them
do, but you can think of it as
sort of fracking light because
it's.
Very different. It's deeper.
It's a one time just to open the
rock once versus continuous sort
of pushing, trying to push uh
hydrocarbons back up to the
surface, so the pressures are
less seismicity is less, you're
working in different kinds of
rock movable shale is and hard
rock.
But I'll defer to my expert and
I would allow,
I would ask,
Mr. Ago.
Um, direct, uh, Mr. Chair
Representatives well said that
um by director Staire, um, there
are a range of technologies, uh,
that range from zero
stimulation, um, like what we do
at XGS Energy, as well as
technologies that um do you
stimulation or hydraulic
fracturing as a part of their
approach. Um, this is a
landscape with different
technologies being best suited
to different death rock types,
um, and other subsurface
characteristics, um, and
critically, they're all
this stage of development, um,
where they're ready for
commercial deployment and can be
an important part of New
Mexico's hot rock resource
development and energy future.
Thank you. Thank you very much
and thank you, uh, I'm pleased
to see, and I think it shows
that as an energy powerhouse,
and the same technology that
we're utilizing that is
benefiting us greatly in
production of oil and gas. It's
great to see that that's part of
other technologies as well, and
I think
is positive for the state, uh,
Representative Pettigrew for
questions.
Thank you chair and thank you,
um.
Representative for bringing the
bill.
There are a lot of different
discussion points on this, and
I'm not gonna go into all that
tonight, if that makes it to the
floor, we'll have a bigger
debate on this.
As as we prepare for that
debate, I would, I would ask
that you look at what the cost
for geothermal facilities to
expand.
Guest facility, natural gas
facility, be prepared to talk
about um.
The known hotspots that we have
and the accessibility of those
within protected zones.
For instance, northwest of Los
Alamos.
Which is one of the best spots
for geothermal right now in the
state.
So I would ask that you be
prepared to to talk about those
things and several others when
we get to the floor. Great.
Thank you very much,
uh,
uh, Pettigrew. I don't see any
other questions. We're gonna go
to Representative Wuhan for the
motion,
I move a do pass.
And I,
uh, it
House Bill 289. 2 as amended.
Thank you. That's thank you
OK, it's been moved by uh
Representative Wuhan, citing by
Representative Garrett, uh, for
a due pass on House Bill 289 as
amended. Is there any opposition
to that motion?
OK, uh, please show um
representatives Chatfield,
Duncan, Baca and Pettigrew in
opposition.
OK, thank you very much, uh,
thank you. Sorry.
OK, we had representative, uh,
ranking member Chatfield
Representative Vincent represent
Baca and represent Pettigrew.
One audience member
and Representative Doo in
opposition as well.
That's, yeah, totally fair. OK,
uh great. Thank you, um,
Representative.
Uh, Representative, I know, uh,
Representative Martinez, I
believe, is here.
Uh
He's right outside, uh, members,
we're gonna skip over uh house
Bill 239 houses 58 just to get
to uh House Bill 158 that'll be
our final bill.
OK, um, let's go ahead, uh, if
you can, uh, summarize the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh, I
appreciate the time. I'll be as
quick as possible.
Um, I'm here today on I'll spill
158. It's aimed to support a
critical military installations,
including Cannon, Holman, and
Kirtland Air Force bases, as
well as White Sands Missile
Range.
The military-based impact fund,
uh, had an appropriation of $12
million I believe that was taken
out or there's not $12 million
available.
Um, but
Other states are benefiting from
these defense funds critical
infrastructure development.
Um, at the heart of national
security and has a unique
opportunity.
To strategically invest in our
critical infrastructure and job
creation. Today I have with me
um
My expert witness, Paul Cassidy
from the Kirtland Partnership
and military-based planning
commission.
And with that, um, oh, there is
an amendment.
Great. Uh, thank you. Thank you,
Representative. uh, thank you,
Mr. Cassidy, uh, Martin, can you
tell us that 231 number, please?
231510.1. OK, great. Can we have
a motion a second it's been
moved by Raman Chatfield, signed
by Representative Pettigrew, um,
OK, let's go through the
amendment, please, members, page
1, line 18, strike and making an
appropriation.
Page 7.
We striking section 7 and
renumbering accordingly. They
were, uh,
We've got that.
Any questions on the amendment?
Uh, can we have a motion in a
second to adopt the amendment's
been moved by ranking member
Chatfield, seconded by Vice
Chair Dixon, any opposition to
that motion?
Hey
adopted the amendment. Uh,
anybody who wishes to make
public comment on the bill,
please come on up.
There we can see.
Appreciate folks, uh, please go
ahead and be brief, but thank
you very much for being here.
I'll keep it real short. Deborah
registered lobbyist for Inwest
Energy Alliance, and we, we
support the bill, although in
the previous committee we asked
that it be amended from 10 days
to 30 days, she said in the
committee that she's here to
follow up to make sure that that
amendment went through, um.
So that's where I'm at right
now.
Mm
thank you. Thank you. Next.
Mr. Chair, uh, members of the
committee, my name is Megan Dela
Rosa on behalf of the Kirtland
Partnership Committee. We are in
full support of this bill. We
recognize the crucial role the
fund plays in strengthening our
military bases and surrounding
communities in New Mexico as a
leader in national defense, our
state must step up to the plate
to ensure our bases are equipped
for any environment challenge
they may. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, committee, I'm Megan
Cornett from the Office of
Military Base Planning and
Sport. I am not necessarily
speaking uh for or against this
bill, just letting you know that
based on the generosity of this
committee, uh regarding the
office's operating budget, we
are prepared to assist the
committee with being um the
church. Thank you very much.
OK, we have one person online,
uh, Richard Moody, go ahead.
Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, my name is Richard
Moody, and I'm a member of the
New Mexico Veterans and Military
Families Caucus, we support this
legislation as it will provide
assistance for infrastructure
projects and defense communities
in New Mexico, um, our states
for military bases provide
employment opportunities to both
veterans and military family
members, which is quite critical
to our caucus, um, and the
veterans and military families
caucus, thanks as sponsors of
this legislation and the members
of the committee for your time.
time and efforts. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much.
OK, uh, that's gonna conclude
our public comment, um.
Any, uh, any questions from
committee?
I don't see any questions. Thank
you very much for staying late
with us. I'm gonna go ahead and
ask for a motion, uh, to pass on
house labor veterans and
Military Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill 158 is
amended, and moved by ranking
member Chatfield,
by representative uh by Vice
Dixon only because the
the sound is closer. There any
opposition to that motion,
saying no.
We will proved that. Thank you
very much. That'll conclude us
for today. Members, thank you
for a really good day after a
long day on the floor. Uh, we
will not have committee over the
weekend, uh, but we will get to
see everybody, all right, uh,
HAFC is adjourned. Thanks
everybody.
