Here.
Course.
There Representative Garrett.
Representative first.
Here Representative Rubio here
Representative.
Representative.
Representative Trujillo.
By.
Share the very simple here.
Share fall here.
Important thank you very much
thank you members okay
Representative Nibert thank you
again for being here we
apologize for earlier in the
week we know you have house bill
one sixty seven and we would
turn the floor over to you and
your ex.
Thank you Mr chair committee
thank you for indulging us we
have before you house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill one sixty seven of this
bill essentially would fund a
pilot program in southeast New
Mexico really the fifth judicial
district building at a Chavis
and Lee counties
to deal with and assess child
crime victims and try to
establish a program as to how to
appropriately deal with with
those children with the intake
and and everything that the
children youth and families
and other agencies now perform
to see if it might be more
efficient and more comforting to
the victims to to have the local
cost to engage in that activity
I believe we have the support of
children youth and families to
do this pilot program in my
expertise when the Taylor with
the chance county costs and I
would also point out that we do
have some junior money that has
been allocated so if we don't
get the full amount I believe we
can move forward at least with a
limited pilot program may be one
of the communities instead of
five or six of the communities
where we have Costa programs
established in the three
counties
you have anything
Not particularly you caught me
off guard today just that you
know we'd like to provide
a holistic approach and and and
the whole child if you could
just introduce yourself I'm
sorry my name is Wendy Taylor I
I work at the Travis county casa
in Roswell New Mexico
The the idea behind this is to
provide a holistic approach to
helping these child crime
victims to treat the whole child
and to help them and the people
that are helping them.
With that Mr chair we would
stand for questions great thank
you very much Representative
Nibert thank you miss Taylor is
there anybody here who wishes to
speak on this bill.
Okay seeing none is there anyone
on like.
Okay great we're we're going to
go to committee questions
representative Nibert
Okay
That we're.
This is.
This is speaking in support of
house bill one sixty seven go
ahead for one of go ahead for
one minute whenever you're ready
please and please introduce
yourself.
I apologize they lower their in.
All right.
no worries thank you very much
okay
Then we'll go to we'll go to
committee of are there any
questions.
Representative Pettigrew.
All.
Chair and committee
Representative thank you by the
way thank you for what you do
with casa.
My wife is able to handle that
for about two years before she
was ready to strangle people so.
Thank you very much for that
chairman I'll just sit here and
say that we have a seventeen
point six percent increase over
last year's budget.
I know that there's nothing that
we can do here I would suggest
to the representative maybe have
some conversations on the Senate
side to appropriate.
The tiny portion of that a
million dollars that we just
gave them to assisting with us
because at the end of the day it
would be one thing that CYFD is
doing on a positive side that
would would maybe show some
benefit thank you Jeff.
Mr Chairman representative
that in fact is being done right
now.
Thank you very much thank you
Representative Pettigrew thank
you for cell number
Representative Brown please.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative Nibert I believe
I heard you use the phrase pilot
project and I don't see that in
the bill could you explain what
that's about.
As as I understand the process
and I my experts may correct me
if I'm wrong but as I understand
the process of the the most of
these functions are being
performed by children youth and
families and so this would be
working with children youth and
families to actually have costs
to engage in the initial intake
and do some of that initial work
instead of the agency and is to
see if that model might work and
and so it's it's I think with
the department's blessing and
it's basically to assist those
child child victims and it would
be the first.
Time at least that I know of
where an outside agency will be
performing some of those
functions so that's why we're
calling it a pilot program those
words may not be on the field
but that's I guess my mind words
for testing out a new type of
procedure that is different than
what is occurring right now.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
thank you very much
Representative Brown
okay I don't see any other
questions for Representative
Nibert
we we understand you for sharing
that that there is some funding
in house bill two junior and so
there will be some initial pilot
project funding
as the budget is already passed
out we we won't be able to pass
as it's just a straight
appropriations but one of the
things that the committee is
really trying to do is to hear
and understand some of the work
that's going on this is a clear
example of some innovative work
to sort of add
Help in a two what is an
incredibly difficult process so
we will have to table but thank
you very much for the
presentation and thank you for
signing the light on this and
thank you miss Taylor thank you
Mr chairman thank you committee.
Representative so Mister chair.
I would like to table
Representative.
We'll go to Representative
monthly.
Mr chair I move to table okay
there's a motion by
Representative Montoya.
Second second by vice chair
Dixon there any opposition to
adopting that motion.
Seeing none thank you both very
much information at Tabor Day.
Okay
We're gonna go on to
I I don't see I think I don't
see of the sponsors for House
Bill twenty one let's go to but
we have Representative
Castellano it's great to see him
here we'll go to house bill two
ninety eight as amended.
And miss Russell is there with
Representative Castellano.
Representative whenever you're
ready thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I just
for Wednesday is this is also
like you said Mr chairman and
we're bringing forth.
House Bill once amended to
ninety eight what house bill two
ninety does Mr chairman members
the committee making
appropriation from the public
project revolving fund to the
drinking water state revolving
fund loan and also to the waste
water facility construction on
the cultural affairs facilities
infrastructure fund in the local
government planning fund Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
Great thank you very much for
some cut yes and no this Russell
anything to add in.
Also maybe you could share that
this is a this is an annual
piece of legislation that we see
if you could give us additional
context please thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
board my name's Marquita Russel
in the CEO of the New Mexico
finance authority this is in
fact an annual piece of
legislation the public project
revolving fund is the recipient
of of a major portion of the
government of gross receipts tax
the law that directed the
government of gross receipts tax
to this PPRF fund provides that
the legislature may appropriate
out thirty five percent of the
funds annually for uses they've
identified those uses and today
we have four of those programs
in front of you approximately
thirty eight percent of the
governmental gross receipts tax
that we received last year so
alternately two of the
appropriations will be used to
match for federal funds another
will be used to provide funding
for pulmonary engineering
reports and grants to
communities for metropolitan
redevelopment plans and lastly
for a five million dollars to
the cultural affairs department
for its infrastructure
improvement plan portion of it
and with that
Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm happy to stand for
questions great thank you very
much Representative Castellano
thank you very much mistrust
okay
is there anybody who wishes to
speak on this bill.
Yes please call.
Is.
Polities Mr chairman I need to
repeat that just.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee New Mexicans are
from with the New Mexico
environment department here in
support of the bill in
appreciation of the
appropriations to match federal
funds for the clean water and
drinking water revolving loan
funds great thank you very much
destruction.
Okay I don't is do we have
anybody online.
K. and then let's go to the
committee.
Any questions from committee.
Saying no questions what's the
will of the committee.
Okay there's a motion for do
passes there's.
Okay there's a lot of second
there's a motion to for a do
pass on house bill two ninety
eight as amended Representative
Brown seconded by Representative
Sweetser is there any opposition
to adopting that motion saying
none thank you very much for
some constant thank you miss
Russell thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee.
You too.
Okay were
members
We're down to House Bill three
oh seven.
I don't see Representative Kate.
and I believe that this is a as
a straight appropriations piece
of legislation.
So we would will we'll go ahead
and ask for a motion for table
House Bill three oh seven.
Mr speaker move the table house
bill three.
Across.
Okay it's been moved by vice
chair Dixon second by ranking
member Armstrong.
Is there any opposition to
adopting that tabling motion.
Seeing none we've adopted the
table emotion for House Bill
three oh seven.
members going down the house
bill three eighty two.
At the request of Representative
Townsend this bill he just that
this bill read be rescheduled
and we're going to honor that
request from Representative
Townsend and of course from a
ranking member Armstrong to
reschedule house bill.
Three three excuse me three
eight two.
We're on to that house bill two
to three.
Three one of the one of present
on that reserve
Correct.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee.
House Bill to twenty three
proposes
an appropriation of six hundred
and fifty million dollars to
address very dire concerns about
road condition and safety on
three highways in southeast New
Mexico.
Mr chairman members these are US
highway three eighty which goes
from Roswell to Tatum and then
on into Texas that's a route
that's heavily traveled
especially by folks from Texas
to go to read dosages ski and
just a lot of other commercial
traffic there as well also looks
at Mr chair highways thirty one
and one twenty eight these are
highways that are vital to the
production of revenue for the
state from the oil and gas
industry but also much from
agriculture and just general
commerce sent that sometimes we
forget our culture is a big part
of what we do in southeast New
Mexico.
So Mister chair and members
There is a hundred million
dollars in house bill two
section nine for some of this
work but as I mentioned the
overall request to six hundred
fifty million dollars which is
what the New Mexico department
of transportation has has told
us is needed to do these
projects so I stand for
questions.
Thank you very much
Representative Brown
I don't see any is there anybody
was to speak okay great let's go
to the committee for questions.
And all the rest of your please
yes.
Representative Brown or any of
these on the section nine part
of the budget.
Mr Chairman representative
Garrett yes.
Million dollars.
Thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Garrett that that
thank you very much
Representative brown I think
that well was one of my
questions and we really
appreciate you highlighting the
needs in the area we know that
this is a vital area for the
entire state and for our
for our committees particularly.
Offhand Representative brown do
you have a sense
of what we've invested over the
last few years in some of the
the projects down and in this
area.
Mr chairman I would really have
to add up some numbers to do
that there have been investments
especially on highway two eighty
five it is absolutely critical
to the flow of everything down
there thirty one intersects with
two eighty five one twenty eight
is right there in the area these
are
piecemeal projects and we're
just still waiting for the
funding to to do the right.
Mr chair great thank you very
much Representative Brown and I
know we're yes Representative.
Mr chair I just remind the.
For the question the U. S. that
there is a
And equity version of how we
take care of roads across the
state and and every year the
amount of funding that goes to
each department and and
complete remove and replace
roads to maintenance the sequel
was completely across every
district and so when we look at
what we're we're putting in here
it may be a little bit about how
much money we put down here but
it's just reminder that all the
other.
Thank you thank you very much
Representative.
any other questions from
committee.
I don't see any of it is you
know Representative Brown will
will ask for the tabling motion
but again in your you in
particular of health bring a
significant amount of funding
and really highlighted I know
we've taken some trips down with
LFC and it seems like something
we need to continue to do to
keep this at the very top of
mind with that will go to vice
chair Dixon for the motion.
Unless Representative no
Representative Montoya is not
here.
With there is a Representative
I.
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair I would move.
To table house bill two twenty
three thank you for okay there's
a motion from by Terry Dixon a
second from Representative
Sanchez
anybody in opposition to that
tabling motion.
Please show Representative
Pettigrew incluso Representative
brown in opposition to that
motion.
Thank you thank you very much.
Okay we are moving in the
quickly down the highway of HSC
today we have number left
against think of for everything
on that that members are going
to go to house bill two zero one
do we have our own
Representative Garcia.
good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee of.
We didn't hold school one as
amended.
Related professional license I'm
sorry Mr chairman everybody I
liked with my expert witnesses
on my left is former
representative but you'll now
she is the.
Superintendent of of a group
from virtual.
Representative lets me Madam and
to my right is ginger understood
should end with the sex of New
Mexico.
Mr Chairman.
We did professionalizing board
extending the termination date
of larger boards and then
Among voters will quickly.
Extend the dates.
For dental health visionary
Medicine architects professional
engineers and professional
surveyors funding accountability
of funeral services eliminating
the termination date of us here
six seventy question.
Thank you very much
representative Garcia great to
see you
Superintendents Trujillo and the
Sanderson is there anybody who
wishes to speak on this bill no
and we don't have anybody online
we're going to go to the
committee and representative
census has a question here.
The.
This is the tenth Representative
incentive
last okay we'll go to we'll go
to ranking members thank you Mr
chairman thank you for bringing
this bill forward this comes out
of the sunset subcommittee that
we have
a working group on and I believe
Representative Garcia was the
chair of that committee and this
is just extending the sunset
dates of these entities it's
pretty normal procedure thank
you Mr chairman thank you very
much ranking member Armstrong
and thank you for the work on
that
and thank you representative
Garcia for your work on this
during the during the interim
I have a couple of quick quite
any other questions I I do have
a question superintendent
Trujillo Representative Garcia
These boards that so you
requested and received full
funding I think for five million
dollars special appropriation
will that special appropriation
have anything to do with some of
these licensure boards Mr
chairman members of the
committee yes thank you for that
question some of these boards
are actually already in the
system for example the public
accountancy is already there and
we're moving pharmacy is getting
ready to go live in a couple of
weeks and dental health is is
right on the verge of going live
also but the rest of them in
here will absolutely be put
online the remaining boards that
haven't been.
Thank you very much
superintendent tree I think this
is a great L. it's a thank you
for that think it's a great
illustration
the it it's deeply appreciated
and this is a good connection
towards us sort of extending the
sun sets at and
working in conjunction with the
special appropriations process
okay are there it
I don't see any other questions
I would go to
to the vice chair Dixon for a
motion.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
it to pass on house bill two
zero one as amended.
Okay it's it's been moved by
vice chair Dixon second by
ranking member Armstrong is
there any opposition to adopting
that motion.
House saying none thank you very
much thank you representative
Garcia.
And Representative Sweetser is a
lot nicer use of.
Okay members we have we're we're
We're here on house bill one.
I don't see the Sanchez here I
think this out of an abundance
of caution work we're going to
this is a very quick day usually
not like this we also there's
some question House Bill three
eighty seven is funded as
members will remember there is
funding for house bill three
eighty seven in our special
appropriations
we're waiting for.
But I'm just got some updated
information.
Okay
so it it appears members that we
can to table house bill three
eighty seven.
which will go ahead and ask for
from Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair I move that
we table house bill three eighty
seven today.
Okay it's been moved by
Representative Dixon second by
Representative sciences to table
house bill three eighty seven
there is money in the budget and
there will be there's some
policy related to this that will
likely be looking at but we can
do it in house bill three eighty
seven so with that is there any
opposition to that motion.
Seeing none House Bill three
eighty seven is tabled.
Then we will take up will
confirm with Sanchez on house
bill twenty one members is
For our house bill three eighty
two again at the request of
Representative Townsend we're
going to reschedule that bill
and so that brings us to the
conclusion of today's agenda I
think the record for this
committee thank you all members
we'll see you tomorrow right
after the floor yes member and a
great reminder we very much look
forward to seeing members sing
are incredible staff from the
LFC staff this evening for
dinner as we sort of take stock
of a lot of the work that we've
done thank you very much
Richard.
