Our agenda today first we're
going to ask Miss Rodriguez to
call the roll.
Here.
Your.
Your.
Garcia.
Representative.
Yes.
I'm here.
Representative.
Here.
Chair small your.
Yeah excellent thank you very
much okay the members thank you
we're going to go in order we
have a vice chairwoman Rodriguez
here it's great to see you last
with Senate bill three seventy
eight as amended and your expert
needs no introduction but feel
free to enter the.
Nonetheless.
Thank you of course is the use
of my own with me here can't do
without him right thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee this seems like a very
simple bill but it's very far
reaching in that because we had
a windfall this year of revenues
coming in we have decided to
gather that we would not bond
issue bonds for severance
severance tax bonds for capital
projects and so on but instead
we would use general fund to
save money and to be able to say
further into the future to
because this way you won't have
to pay debt service now because
we're doing that we are going to
be saving quite a bit of money
so that avoidance of debt
service costs that we were going
to have will give us to ninety
two million dollars into the
severance tax permanent fund is
what we're going to be putting
in by virtue of the fact that
we're not in the issue bonds and
in a ten year period we are
expected to generate
approximately one hundred eighty
five point seven million dollars
into the general fund so it's a
no brainer that we would not
bond they share because we have
the general fund and that we
would put this into a permanent
fund in generate constant
revenues Mr chairman that's what
the bill and not showed us thank
you so much madam vice chair
thank you Mr Fotis well let's go
to is it any questions and
comments from the audience on
Senate bill three seventy eight
as amended.
Seeing none I don't think that
we have anybody online who
wishes to discuss this.
members are there any questions.
Cena okay seeing a man of vice
chair I just say thank you that
then and this will combine with
what other additional monies we
send into the severance tax
permanent fund correct Mr
chairman yes it will grade this
yeah definitely okay there's a
motion from Representative
Chatfield.
And seconded from the number of
folks including recognize that
we're gonna get as ranking
member Armstrong is the second.
is there any let's go ahead and
call the.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Armstrong yes.
Representative yes.
Yes.
Representative been up to yes.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
If.
Yes.
Share small yes.
Kate unanimously DO pass Senate
bill three seventy eight is
amended thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you is the I have another bill
with you today I thank you so
much for allowing me to present
this Mr Chairman this is our
public when you get this number
three thirty two and this is our
public project revolving fund
bill that we have every year
with different projects in it
and all it does Mr chairman
members of the committee is
through the New Mexico finance
authority would bring this every
year to the legislature just for
authorization to have these
eligible entities be able to
apply for low cost loans for
infrastructure and it doesn't
guarantee that they're going to
get the loan it doesn't have an
appropriation bills into it
because it's barely
authorization these these forty
eight entities have shown
interest in net borrowing a loan
but we can't go forth until we
get authorization from the
legislature that's all it does
Mr chairman thank you very much.
Thank you very much madam vice
chair is there anybody who
wishes to speak on Senate bill
three three two.
Okay I don't see anybody online
committee questions any
questions from the committee.
Ranking member for the motion
that would be.
Okay been saying aye ayes look
in this ways we got
Representative Rapp there's a
motion from ranking member
Armstrong segment Representative
brown and secondhand that person
Garcia.
Can you please call the roll.
Yes.
Yes Armstrong yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
This is.
Last year yes.
Chair small yes.
Thank you very much Mr Draghi's
thank you madam vice chair
that's a unanimous to pass you
Mr chairman members the
committee I so appreciated I had
another bill was there and
amended agenda with that there
is were fine are we yeah we'll
look we'll go tomorrow we're
going to ask Senator Burt it's a
okay perfect thank you so much
appreciate you so much we see
agent in here looking for all
the Senate finance members.
They're all in house
appropriations and finance.
It's all about the money.
The fire marshal for the win
again great to see you Mr fire
marshal Senator thank you very
much thank you for advocacy in
this area we're excited flees
present Senate bill two fifty
and it's great to see
representative alright here's
what thank you Mr chairman and
again this is here thank you for
working this into your busy
schedule this is Senate bill two
fifty does one simple thing it
brings the firefighters up to
parity with our peace officers
when it comes to survivor
benefits I mean it's really that
simple and farmers solution with
the today and I don't know how
you would like to say a few
words so that.
Red hat to chair members of
thank you for this afternoon I
like to think of Senator Burt
Harper Representative Harper for
a Representative is built we
strongly support this bill
through farmers office and
homeland security I think it's
important that we bring
firefighters up to the same
level passed by force thank you
thank you very much more of but
a Representative Harper great to
see you is there anybody who
wishes to speak on Senate bill
two fifty.
Please yes come on up west are
excellent intended.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee my name is Joyce
person I'm the executive
director for New Mexico counties
this is an initiative that we
stand behind it was brought to
us all through through to our
fire affiliate that's something
that was important to make sure
that we have Parities bus with
law enforcement increases last
year it's important to note that
the funding for this does come
through the fire fund so does
not impact on the general fund
thank you.
Okay
that we're and don't see anybody
online thank you to the vice
chair any questions from
committee.
okay
there is no questions oh sorry
we do have questions we will go
we're gonna go first a ranking
member Armstrong and then to
Representative care thank you Mr
chairman and thank you for
bringing this bill I'm just
really mad.
Because I didn't know about it
and didn't get to sign on so.
Next time any tires.
Thank you next time thank you Mr
chairman that's all.
Thank you very much thank you
member Armstrong you see what
the okay unexpurgated
Representative directly thank
you Mr chair I just wonder how
much is in the fire protection
fund that we're transferring the
money from.
Do we have that figure.
This love language this
gentleman in and Representative
I I don't know the exact amount
right now it fluctuates
depending on how much closing
the now.
Yes it fluctuates throughout the
year Mr chair members of last
year we received a hundred ten
million on the fire fund and we
distributed seventy two million
to our departments around the
state we also take seven hundred
fifty thousand for volunteer
retirement.
And our budget comes out of the
fire fund also so anything
that's left after that goes to
the grant Fund at this point any
monies for death benefits comes
out of a crack.
Okay thank you Mr chair just
wanted kind of a pickup.
Great thank thank you very much
Representative Garrett we're
going representative Garcia and
and any other questions from Sen
Garcia affected Mr Senator.
Business owners also cover
Volunteer firefighters.
Yes Sir get.
Mr chairman and Representative
yes it does
gentleman on Senator you know
just about is taking this long
to do this.
You know this initiative been
done a long time ago you know
it's like when you put a uniform
on for the military you know
your parties life authorization
and these people are doing
exactly the same thing.
Their first responders when
disasters happen.
Car accidents you name there
there all the time.
She to build before fourteen
thank thank you very much of
Madam Garcia okay I just to want
to say I want to say a big thank
actually ranking member
Armstrong Senator Burt and many
others whose long work
Representative Harper and others
has gotten the fire the fire
marshal especially for us is for
new members the fire marshal is
only recently part of the
department of homeland security
and emergency management for a
very long time as part of a
different and to do here in the
state the three percent
insurance premium that funds
this there were challenges there
and so really a tribute to the
long work again of the ranking
member of the Senator and many
others association counties and
municipalities to to get that
done in great to see that
transfer continue to bear fruit
with that let's go we'll go to
ranking member Armstrong for the
motion Representative Pettigrew
for the second thank you Mr
chairman I moved to pass on
Senate bill two five zero.
Okay it's been moved by ranking
member Adam Johnson by
Representative let's go ahead
and call the roll the fact that.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative yes.
Yes.
Representative.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yes.
Thank you very much Mr Rodriguez
thank you senator Byrd thank you
Mr chairman and everybody on the
committee we appreciate that
very much.
In order to bring your bills to
sign on to the next.
Okay members I think that is a
record for us is the committee
that concludes our work for
today we will be in tomorrow we
have a few other pieces
including the supplemental
appropriations act and others
that we will be taken up but
we're brief today thank you all
so much for your time and.
We're adjourn.
