Anderson here.
Representative Armstrong.
Here.
Representative Brown your.
Representative Castellano.
Representative chat.
Representative Crowder.
Here.
Representative Dixon are.
Representative Ezzell.
Your.
Representative Garcia.
Your.
Representative.
There
line.
Representative Lara.
Your.
Representative Sarinana.
Representative Sweetser.
Here.
Representative Trujillo.
Representative.
Your small here.
You.
All right thank you very long
Center.
All right we need to have
everybody needs themselves
Representative Chatfield we know
he's going to join us today.
Representative Chatfield is on.
Right all right we've got
everybody that's wonderful so
I'd like to go ahead and call
the committee to order I want to
make a few opening statements
and then we'll turn it over to
the staff take us through the
bill.
you know this is our big day
here in HSA of state and yet
we've come in for a landing when
it comes to our budget budget
development I'd like to thank
all the committee and staff
excellent work in building this
bill.
We have a lot here that we can
be proud of.
And I certainly am I couldn't be
more proud of the committee and
the staff and the work and
everything that we've been able
to accomplish in the last
fifteen days.
The substitute makes recurring
appropriations for FY twenty
three of eight point four seven
billion dollars.
and that's.
Over thirteen percent from FY
twenty two.
That is a major opportunity for
the state of New Mexico.
And I think the public will be
very pleased to say what we've
done the state where the funds
have been allocated to and I
can't imagine that we could have
done any better job in the
fifteen days that we've had to
do this so that being said I'd
like to go ahead now the staff
of bill and David let's go
through the bill everyone should
have a copy you should all have
your summary sheet as well as an
index for the bill so if you
want to build you want to take
a.
Yes sure.
Be like to point out what you
have in front of you at as madam
chair you mentioned there is a
key hearing issues that is a
high leverage if you go to page
after page three of that you'll
find a general fund high level
appropriations summary for the
larger agencies.
After that next few three pages
are a rack up of all the general
fund appropriations by agency.
And finally in that package
after the the those three pages
are the general fund financial
summary which would be the last
thing that will address as we go
through.
Also you have a HSC final review
technical catch up cleanup it
just meant to pay.
And then a draft FY are
fiscal impact reports for the.
Madam chair that is and you also
have the bill of course.
If I might madam chair will
start with the summary.
Go ahead bill the subject to
this is a substitute bill.
for House Bills two and three
and that makes appropriations
for FY twenty three of eight
point four seven billion.
Dollars that's up thirteen point
eight percent for FY twenty two.
And the beat COVID current
appropriations are within point
four percent of the LFC and
Executive recommendations that's
that's pretty good to be that
close.
It provides average compensation
of seven percent for all state
and education employees
minimum salaries to fifteen
dollars an hour.
Fully funds Medicaid back
filled.
Use of one time federal funding
and investing keep public safety
health care and family
initiatives.
The H. B. two seven eight
approximately four hundred
million dollars for tax related
initiatives as unspent dollars
that are are out there.
The public education.
Madam chair the substitute
includes three point eight seven
billion for public schools.
A. R. or twelve point three
percent increase from the prior
year.
It raises minimum salaries for
levels one two and three
teachers and principals the
steps to further provides an
average seven percent salary
increase for all school
personnel for an average ten
percent salary increase for all
personal and school to
participate in K. five plus or
extended learning time programs.
This includes sufficient funding
to pay all school employees at
least fifteen dollars an hour
and target rate for hard to
staff positions the subject also
increases recurring
appropriations for school
transportation Indian education
fund allocations early literacy
literacy initiatives and at risk
interventions.
Public education manager higher
education.
It boasts I am need for higher
education by twenty million.
Or three percent with no base
budget.
Reallocation.
It includes strongman a
recurring at fifty three million
non recurring to expand
executive initiatives for
opportunity scholarships effect
free tuition.
The higher education initiatives
include telemedicine
equalization of funding for
regional colleges and expanding
nurse practitioner slots at UNM.
Section five and ten include
significant investments and
university endowments nurse
education technology research
development social work program.
It also funds lottery tuition
scholarships for five years.
In health and Human Services.
It includes one point three
billion in general fund revenue
for Medicaid.
The state's Medicaid program
includes twenty eight million in
state funds for hospital nursing
home labor costs in response to
COVID crisis another eleven
million to maintain hospital
provider rates.
Fourteen point four million to
provide provide postpartum
health care for a year after
delivery and four point two
million to help boost the health
care workforce including in
rural areas.
The budget includes additional
support for behavior.
Behavioral health including
twenty million dollars to
develop providers including
start up costs to implement
Medicaid evidence based
behavioral health services for
adults and children and child
welfare services.
There's four million dollars for
nine eight eight prices now
hotline.
And one point three million for
non Medicaid behavioral health
provider rates.
The Human Services budget also
includes ten million.
Right assistance to low income
state residents of up to seven
hundred fifty dollars per
household one point seven
million to directly pay child
support families up to seven
For temporary assistance for
needy
family recovery said Kenneth.
And one point eight million
protective cash bonus of
systems.
And a half million for the
supplemental nutrition
assistance program settlement
payment of the federal or
placement clean.
Overall the Human Services
department's budget including
federal funds totals to nine
point two billion dollars.
General fund appropriations
increased twenty seven point six
million or eight point seven
percent to the Department of
Health.
Significant increases seven
hundred fifty thousand for
naloxone substance use disorder
treatment program.
One point seven million for
violence intervention.
Three hundred thousand for the
office of gun violence
prevention seven hundred
thousand for suicide prevention
seventeen point nine million for
DD waiver provider rates and
eliminating the wait list that's
our president and four point
three million for state
hospitals and long term care
facilities administered by D. O.
H..
Additionally the H. B. two seven
creased youth suicide prevention
funding right two point four
million from the early childhood
education and care Fund
contingent on legislation
increasing the fund
distribution.
Per CYFD sixteen point one
million or seven point five
percent increase over FY twenty
two operating budget the budget
prioritizes evidence based
services such as early
intervention intensive case
management functional family
therapy multi systemic therapy
wraparound services and extended
foster care and supportive
probably for those aging out of
foster care.
In conjunction with the adopted
several percent statewide salary
adjustment the budget would
improve recruitment and
retention reduce case loads and
sufficiently filled forty three
vacant positions in the
protective services program the
budget also include recurring
funding to meet the needs of the
cabin yes love you lawsuit
settlement.
Madam chair and early childhood.
The early childhood education
care department increased
distributions for admin early
childhood education and care
fund by fifteen point three
million.
Significant increases are two
million for home visiting one
point four for tribal early
childhood services ten point six
million for pre K. of which five
point three million is
contingent on legislation.
The fund distribution and one
million for workforce support
such as scholarships and wage
supplements.
You madam chair.
The judiciary public safety
secretary section of the sub
implements assistant super
improve improve public safety
that prioritizes treatment and
violence prevention over
punishing low level offenders
supports improved policing to
ensure swift and certain justice
for serious buyer violent crime
and effectively addresses the
need of victims of communities
where separate from the failures
of the existing criminal justice
system.
Within the department of public
safety.
This bill provides a ten point
eight percent increase in
recurring general fund revenue
and aims to improve policing and
races up almost sixteen percent
per state police officers
targeted pay increases for other
positions need to addressing and
reducing violent crime and
almost seven hundred thousand
dollars for the law enforcement
academy board which oversees
officer training certification
and misconduct allegations for
all law enforcement officers
statewide.
With the corrections department
the bill keeps a recurring
general fund appropriation for
FY twenty three flat with FY
twenty two budget inmate
population decline of almost
seven percent over the past
years allows the prioritization
of treatment over punishment to
re investment of two point one
million present cost savings
into evidence based recidivism
reduction programming and
traditional housing for
offenders reentering the
community.
The appropriation to the current
crime victims reparation
commission to provide services
for victims of sexual assault
increased by twenty two point
one two point six million.
To more effectively address
these victims needs and close
gaps in the existing system.
Madam chair that natural
resources area.
The bridge be built arrive
prioritizes growth in
preparations for natural
resource agencies.
secret including twenty percent
for the state engineer twelve
percent for energy minerals and
natural resources and sixty
percent for the environment
department the increases both
the fiscal condition of water to
respond allow filling many
vacant positions that these key
agencies and created new offices
to address climate change and
regulate cannabis enforce
regulatory duties of the oil
conservation division.
Madam chair.
The compensation.
In addition to the seven percent
average increase for state
agency school university
employees and fifteen our
minimum hourly wage House Bill
to substitute funds a two
percent increase in employer
contributions to the education
retirement fund to improve
solvency.
Madam chair in this section five
and six.
In the back of the bill for the
special supplemental
appropriations.
And their date total five five
hundred and seventy two point
five million.
Page two hundred and twenty nine
point seven million is from the
general fund.
If it includes ten million to
the entertainment energy
minerals and natural resources
department for eight community
energy efficiency program in
underserved communities.
Five million for department
public safety for law
enforcement retention stipends
twenty five million.
For traditional leader projects.
Four million general fund to the
Department of game and fish to
acquire land for conservation
eight million for building
renewal and replacement at
higher education institutions.
One point seven million for
cyber security at higher
education institutions.
Also the back of the bill madam
chair the other special
appropriations to fund
transfers.
If we're chasing AGFC adopted
recurring appropriation so.
There are federal American
rescue plan deprivations arpa
funds to our state assist in the
state pandemic recovery in the
areas of economic recovery
education workforce development
health care workforce
transportation infrastructure
and natural resource property
action.
Addressing the tight labor
market.
HSC invested in doubt faculty
positions for nurses and social
workers further in Taos a
lottery tuition opportunity
scholarship funds and provides
for greater works started study
opportunities well workers are
in training.
For infrastructure upgrades the
department of transportation was
a lot of three hundred nineteen
million including two hundred
seventeen million for road
projects statewide including the
interstate forty quarter and
stable and McKinley County a new
road in Santa Fe said that that
is signed Dona Ana County in
upgrading service road in Santa
Fe other appropriations would be
improved local roads upgrade
rest stops constructive vehicle
charging stations purchase
requirement and further upgrade.
Efforts.
Madam chair of all is said and
done the financial survey which
is the back of this packet shows
general fund FY twenty three and
being general fund balance is
two point five seven billion
dollars or thirty percent.
Or that madam chair we stand for
questions.
David did you have any comments
you want to make also.
Has covered it thank you madam
chair all righty thank you very
much I'm gonna go to questions
from the committee at this point
if you could use yours in hand
and not be able to say it was
gonna Representative around.
Thank you very much madam chair
I am just as an overall question
were any of the community
colleges in the state are
reduced in their funding over
the previous fiscal year.
Director I do not believe so
David is it except for
statements
Madam chair representative brown
the funding inequity just up
three percent will check real
quick Micaela are you on.
Will it hold that question
permanent will come back to and
put something in the chap madam
chair thank you.
Thank you is that you have
Representative Brown yes ma'am
thank you okay Representative
Dixon.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr Valdez for the the great
summary and the work of everyone
on staff in this committee I
just wanted to
Highlight you know as a member
of the sort of Albuquerque area
and are one of the things that
we've really been talking about
is public safety and so I just
wanted to highlight what I think
is a tremendous job
of the committee and staff in
really addressing public safety
and crime reduction in its
entirety and as a systemic
response and so I just wanted to
flag that I did not have a
question thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Anderson.
Okay madam chair Madam chair of
one question on the house bill
two I believe it has to be based
on what assumption about future
oil and gas prices what is the
oil price and average oil price
in the average natural gas price
of the agency budget projects in
its financial.
Projections what is it based on
point.
Question was what's the oil
prices
function in oil and natural gas.
Okay here is so.
Oil prices.
for FY twenty three of sixty
four fifty which is quite a bit
below where we're at now eighty
seven dollars is the spot price
today and then natural gas
prices are.
Why twenty three is two seventy
two again these are New Mexico
prices after net taxable well
head so there look that you
would expect them to be lower
than than the spot prices but
the markets improved since
December when the estimates were
right.
Thank you for that and is chair
of madam chair of.
When all is said and done in the
dust settles I'm curious is
there such a thing as how many
F. T. does house bill two
fund it and
do we have that comparison to FY
twenty two and if not you can
provide that to me later
question.
Madam chair I think we're gonna
have to do a little more
research on that generally.
Not many positions were added
there was increased funding to
fill some vacant positions so
it'll take more work to get an
answer like that it's a good
question will have a by
Thursday.
Thank you madam chair of brought
comment
you know this as you point out
madam chair this two hundred
thirty four pages represents a
great deal of of us spending
both recurring and non
recurring.
It's clearly a record.
Budget carries not only.
record.
Appropriation but also
carries a great deal of change
for New Mexico in
Education.
Law enforcement
In our in our.
Very is help.
Initiatives we recover from
pandemic so I would simply say
that
With a thirty percent reserve I
believe we go forward with a
budget that is based on real
estate oil and gas prices and
that as we all know the tide
comes in and the tide goes out
and this is clearly a record
high tide but we all know the
tide comes in and the tide goes
out so thank you madam chair
thank.
Lose my remark.
All right thank you very much is
going to Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair thank you very much
is very good presentation I
still have some questions so
that I'm not satisfied with what
I've heard on page two very
tough of Mister bell this is.
Dissertation of what we're gonna
be spending all this money and
is states that there's three
hundred thousand dollars for the
office of gun violence
prevention.
This is through.
The department of health who
then says office where is it
located and what the hell are
they gonna do.
Mr Lee can you help me with that
please.
Madam chair representative this
would be a new office that would
be created and the department of
health the centers for disease
control of recommended that
States epidemiology
Offices.
Start to a better study and get
a handle on
gun violence in communities
across their jurisdictions and
identify strategies and
effective means for reducing gun
violence.
This would provide us some F. T.
to do those studies madam chair.
Madam chair and Mr slate I I'm
going to voice my displeasure
Act because to me that office if
we're going to create one should
go under.
Public safety not for the
department of health if they
want to study what is causing
these people to do it maybe that
should go under the.
violence intervention or
something like that but I don't
feel like we need to be created
and other offices specially with
our oil and gas prices sometimes
being very volatile we've seen
that happen and the I just have
a problem with it.
Madam chair and you reduce the
funding that LESC had
recommended for that office.
Okay madam chair under you on
that same page and judiciary and
public safety as second
paragraph about midway through
it this is the general fund
appropriation for FY twenty
three is flat.
But in my population decline of
almost seven percent.
I need some explanation why
there is such a decline in our
inmate population.
Madam chair representative this
inmate population decline
started before the pandemic.
And.
There's fewer offenders that are
being arrested in the state
there's fewer offenders that are
being.
Prosecuted and there's fewer
offenders being successfully
prosecuted and sent to prison
for felony crimes there's also
fewer offenders that are.
Turning to prison on technical
parole violations and so the
overall population and within
the prison has gone down
significantly again starting
before the pandemic okay.
And madam chair and Mr Slee
thank you for that respond I
also feel like kitchen released
plays that.
And madam chair.
And whoever wants to.
On page three.
The key hearing issues.
Thank you Senate staff.
I'm still not satisfied with
four million dollars of general
fund revenue.
For many game and fish.
Fire lead first conservation.
We are thanking land off the tax
rolls at that particular County.
We are.
Stating it's just for a certain
species habitat that does not
guarantee that public access
will be gained by doing this and
that.
But I have learned by
researching that's a little bit
that particular money is going
to be used for three to one
match from the federal
government I am tired of.
Federal government and state
government buying up our private
land and so I will object to
that madam chair thank you very
much for allowing me my
questions.
Representative Lara.
Thank you madam chair are a
question of some common I would
like to thank the committee and
in yourself chair for for all
the hard work that we've done
with public education our higher
ed and early childhood education
I I see some very significant
investments in in public
education in general of and I
want to compliment everyone for
their hard work and I want to
compliment and appreciate
everyone for their flexibility
in and out in some of these
issues because as we know we
need to keep up we need to allow
the school districts and and and
and universities and early
childhood to to guide themselves
in this process because they
they are the people in the field
of the ones are working and I
just wanted to to mention that
so thank you thank you madam
chair.
Representative Sariñana.
Thank you madam chair I just to
want to compliment the everybody
who works so hard on this budget
I just need to be reassured that
the area for teacher residency
in retention and recruitment is
still in here I am I don't know
if it's falling under mentorship
or what but
Bill helping with that show me
where it's at in the.
Thank you.
One twenty nine and I just need
to know it's there.
One twenty nine of the bill of
the bill yes because I was
looking for specifically
retention teacher residency and
I find it but I don't know if
mentoring is where you put it
The special section let me find
out for you madam chair
representative.
It's not inspection for.
You're you're you're looking in
the in the wrong section of the
bill Charles is looking for the
answer.
Thing else Representative no
that was it chair.
Okay let's go representative
Garcia.
Thank you madam chair.
David generals on that land
purchase deal with issues
requiring that effects what will
tell me how much tax to withhold
rent a property to deface it is
purchased if you have an answer.
The question about Cibola
County.
Thank you madam chair on that
land purchased at the game in
fishing getting that support
County and I want to know how
much tax revenue in a property
what.
Madam chair representative
Garcia will follow up on that.
On Thursday.
Thank you David madam chair
thank you for all the hard work
in thanks committee for all of
your hard work and all the staff
thank you very much.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much madam chair
and I want to commend to the
committee and all of our
committee staff for the
tremendous job well done Madam
there's been some talk today
about the volatility of oil
prices and you know whether or
not the this committee can
safely assume that our increases
in budgeting can can withstand
that volatility and I just want
to highlight a couple of other
sections of the budget madam
chair with regards to economic
development in key investments
and our ability to diversify our
revenue sources in the state we
are granting the economic
development department I believe
an extra thirty million dollars
and local economic development
Act funds are also supporting
stem incubators and places for
New Mexicans to help innovate to
new technology in New Mexico to
also help diversify our revenue
in the state so I I we're in
good hands and we continue to
make investments and and
diversification of revenue and I
feel very safe and I feel good
about voting for this budget
thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Trujillo.
Morning madam chair members the
committee I too want to join in
thanking everyone's hard work
you know for the ten years that
I've been on this committee my
level of frustration goes up and
down based on the amount of
revenue I think that we have to
distribute and this is this is a
really good hearing clearly you
know madam chair I have fought
hard for specific.
Legislation and although I
didn't get everything I wanted I
think that your comments and
David that
We would those folks who are
asking for that in support it
could that have a chance in the
Senate to augment whatever we
give them here is really helpful
because usually eight the pier.
Wanting to pull my ready bald
head out I have two questions.
Page two.
Of the summary of HFC subs.
On our under judiciary and
public safety.
What was the final amount we
gave judges.
Sure it's seventeen percent
Representative Trujillo.
Percent increase madam chair yes
yes ma'am and and what was the
dust and the and the Attorney
But by
district attorneys are at seven
percent.
Your some additional targeted
races for district attorney
staff about two percent.
And the AG are the coverages
they called.
In the district attorney's.
in the public defender's the one
on one and madam chair and
representative tree of the same
for the public defender and
average of seven what a targeted
amount especially for attorneys
in rural areas for about two or
three percent.
Okay and then in that in that
paragraph Judiciary with safety.
It says the appropriations to
the crime victims reparation
commission up for sexual assault
there is increased by two
million but it also includes the
existing one point six million.
So again we have to go to is
that where we go to the Senate
for I meant for the four
million.
Madam chair
Yes Representative that's how it
works okay well listen I
appreciate everything I know.
That I'm gonna go celebrate with
bill Valdez because we deserve
it and you do too you're welcome
madam chair and David Abbey
thank you so much.
Representative small.
Thank you very much madam chair
madam chair I have a few
comments and also questions
first madam chair Mr Browde as
Mr Abbey Mr silly we made some
very big change is it comes to
the office this the the state
engineer with a twenty percent
increase to their budget can you
briefly summarize how that's
going to help us both within the
state engineer in their water
policy and also free up funds
across the state for water
projects.
David this.
Madam chair of.
The increase for the state
engineer was to reduce the
dependence of the state engineer
on their trust funds their
vision works construction fund
and program of the Rio Grande
funds so we step back out that
funding which in turn down the
road will leave more funding for
investment in the the projects
that the fund is needed for
and then in addition
The.
This budget.
And
included the.
That that's almost all of the
increased back out the hands on
the trust fund.
The amount of funded vacancies
so they are able to increase
staffing with the existing
appropriations as well actually
thank you madam chair and madam
chair Mr Abbey in addition to
the financial support that we're
given the office of the state
engineer as a committee knows
in the non reoccurring we have
perhaps the largest drought
short term drought response
package this body has ever
considered madam chair and
committee at thirty million
dollars this is critical to
address our state's water needs
and it will be most important
madam chairman committee I
believe for our farmers and and
ranchers but especially farmers
and ranchers madam chair briefly
on that
in the non recurring parts of
the the.
So included for the first time
ever ten million dollars to go
the association of conservation
districts is that accurate Mr
Abbey Mr silly yes Mr Chairman
representative will great thank
you
madam chair Mr Abbey so that
money is going to go directly to
our conservation district and be
eligible to match federal funds
specifically for working lands
whether those are farms or
ranches is that a good summary
madam chair Mr Abbey yes yes Mr
chairman great thank you madam
chair and you know in that area
to also really please we've
heard about things like weather
stations we've heard about the
need to in increased funding for
ag science centers in as we look
at the natural resource area in
addition to the increases to
energy and minerals to support
the oil conservation division
for NMED and their work and
going our economy and a low
carbon future we've made some of
our biggest investments in
working lands Ag science centers
and and water so madam chair
Committee it seems to me that
we're supporting
Working lands there are more
dollars in this budget in more
places than certainly I've ever
been of had a pleasure to be
part of and all this madam chair
this you
that in the thirty status or of
target which is actually five
percent higher than we
previously upset is that
accurate madam chair committee
it is accurate.
Thank you madam chair the
responsibility while responding
to needs especially in the
natural resource area when it
comes to drought working lands.
In other areas is really
exceptional I just want to thank
you madam chair and committee
for their hard work and all of
those areas thank you chair all
right thank you let's go
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair I I'm in complete
agreement my college that that
this budget is up is like a
dream budget and now I am also
in complete agreement that I've
never seen anyone work harder
madam chair than you have under
the conditions that came up on
you in this the last couple of
months and how you have managed
things it's been amazing.
David in the staff have been
wonderful to work with responded
every question every need.
I I can't imagine that piece of
it all being any better.
With that said I still find
myself stumbling a little bit at
the door recurring the thirteen
point eight percent recurring
funding that's this being
proposed and as my colleague.
Representative Anderson
mentioned there's volatility in
the oil and gas markets.
We are the.
Getting a higher price for bail
right now that was the this
budget was based on and that's
that's a really good thing but
oddly enough my my concern
doesn't really rest so much with
the oil and gas liability as it
does with the COVID dollars that
flowed into our state received
about twenty four billion
dollars worth the COVID money
that came into the state of New
Mexico.
That worked its way through our
economy.
It increased our personal income
tax it it increased our gross
receipts tax those dollars flow
directly to individuals and they
they put in savings or the spend
it but that is bolstered us for
some of this money comes from
in in the special session we use
some of the COVID money for
Roads and and millions and
millions of dollars are spent
that we're comment related
monies that came into our state
we had a lawsuit with the
governor between the legislature
and the governor over what one
point six billion dollars a
COVID money is you guessed
appropriated that became part of
our budget.
And that as I look at that and I
I got to play what's going to
happen in Washington is that
going to continue.
what I watch the news of an
evening I'm here I'm very
troubled that the flow of
dollars from COVID or from the
federal government is going to
remain there.
Even though we had enough money
that we did some wonderful
things I I think that the
waivers and backfilling of
Medicaid with we're we're really
good ideas are good things to
do.
I remember for years we part of
a ten year wait list on the
waivers and we address that this
year was it was a beautiful
thing but I do believe those are
also part of what prompted a
comment that I heard.
Or it said that
We're gonna be more reliance.
On the federal government for
the next decade than we have
ever been.
And like I say as I watch the
news that's very troubling to me
for us to to rely on the
government the federal
government to take care of us
over the next several years so
what I I
What about the budget I mean it
just it seems to fulfill every
need of everybody.
But I am struggling to believe
that it is sustainable.
If oil and gas go sideways or we
have volatility or if the
federal government doesn't
continue the flow of COVID
dollars to our current to our
state we're gonna be in deep
trouble in the recent troubles
me is because the years that I
have been here what we do is we
go in and do swaps and sweeps
and and setting of of budgets
and and we cut back we also
raise taxes they start with the
same taxes that go after
cigarette cigar after alcoholic
laughter this time we're
probably raise taxes on on
cannabis marijuana.
But I I just think that the is I
looked at the ten year trend
line that that says when I came
in the office it was three point
nine percent year over year that
we could sustain over the last
three four years it's grown to
four point nine percent we're
jumping up to thirteen point
eight percent in just all those
together are are causing me a.
I I guess as my colleague said
about the budget going up and
down they're causing me anxiety
madam chair so I just want to
share my thoughts and and where
my struggles lie.
The as we go forward thank you
madam chair.
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair
you know I think a lot of what
I.
You for me is been brought out
by others but.
As I go over there strappedwith
just do you know I think it's
great but we will work hard.
With thank you.
Stand out to me that I want to
come in on one is the office for
gun violence prevention and I
truly think it should be in
office for violence prevention
because it doesn't matter under
amber.
You can.
She.
I think it should be studied as
we should.
In that case what we're dealing
with a lot of these thank you.
So I think it probably is hello.
Secondly the four million.
Or just for the.
In general you know that there I
I don't think it's good for the
state to be with our private
Madam chair or.
You know.
The tax base for our communities
and that's not all our state of
this Mexico was aged are
important to me.
Budget we work hard on.
Thank you for your.
Thank you Representative
Chatfield was gonna
Representative Lane.
Thank you madam chair just just
two brief questions that would
be repetitive I'm looking at the
actual text of HB to one
question is just confirmation
thanks for reading correctly
page two and fifteen am I
correct madam chair that there's
twenty million going into the
judicial retirement fund.
As as a special appropriation.
Yes Madam chair representative
Lente.
Thank you madam chair the second
question on I'm trying to find
the actual text of the bill of
the gun violence protection.
Ear pieces are about brought up
a couple times and I I can't
find the actual language in the
page site so it's the staff
could direct me to that specific
provision I would greatly
appreciate that.
And that's all I have chair.
David madam chair my staff will
help me confirm this but this
was a request of the department
and so this I don't believe the
language specifically in the
bill this is in one of the
programs in the health
department and so the you use
the high level of spreadsheets
the high level different sheets
for the health department to
find out item but not actually
in the bill.
Correct there's no specific
earmarked for that office but
that was the request as David
said.
Okay
Representative Brown is here
hand back up or is it you didn't
take it down.
Yes ma'am sure if I may just for
a minute all right madam chair
and
And and the David Abbey and
staff so I I was asking about
higher education earlier in
about community college budgets
mainly because I was looking at
the general fund order summary
that was given us it's page
three and I did not see
the branch collagen Carlsbad
which is now officially known as
southeast New Mexico college so
it became that new entity and in
mid summer and yet it's still
connected certified financial
bills accord  to New Mexico
State University main campus so
since I didn't see a aligns
specifically for that college
I'm assuming that it's bundled
up in the I'm online one sixty
six which is where the New
Mexico State University budget
is listed so I went back to
to some of our other detail
sheets from a few days ago and I
see that the cross that bridge
is included there in that more
detail budget so that took care
of the concern I have there you
madam chair I I just really like
to
Offer my kudos to you and to the
entire staff and to the
committee for the way that we
have worked on this budget
it's more money than we've ever
had and
I'm a little bit conflicted
because I think in many ways we
put all this new money to good
use I'm concerned that the
overall spend is higher than
that I'm comfortable with
I've been here long enough to
see the ups and downs of the oil
and gas industry and how it
makes for some very painful
meetings for us when we have to
make some cuts so I'm thinking
about what I'm gonna do with my
vote on the budget but in no way
and my
suggesting that and this is has
it been other than a major
wonderful effort
I think there's a lot of good in
this budget there's really
something for everybody it seems
so I just want to thank you
again for for all the hard work
and madam chair for your
leadership thank you.
All righty thank you
Representative Brown I don't
have any other hands that I see
right now but I did want to make
a comment I just want to remind
the committee that if you look
at volume one page thirteen when
we get into stress testing and
revenue forecasting.
which includes changes in
revenue from severance taxes
federal mineral leasing payments
personal income taxes in gross
receipts taxes.
What we do is consensus revenue
estimates and we look at the
sensitivity analysis of select
general fund revenues and if you
look FY twenty three in FY
twenty four and so forth it
looks like we are in good shape
I just wanted to assure the
committee members if you'll look
at that again
it'll let you know that we've
been analyzing mass we've been
running a number of analysis on
the US and we feel we feel
pretty good about it.
Let's go to representative
Armstrong for question.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you.
Bill for the presentation I will
I to agree with most of my
colleagues on the good the bad
and the ugly.
Spoken from a from a ranch girl
here there's so many good things
in the in the time that we have
a.
A lot of money I too have been
my first year in the legislature
where we were sweeping from
every nook and cranny that we
possibly could had no capital
outlay money and now all the way
to this and so I just want to
give my my hi I to all the
committee members to all the
staff that work so hard and
There is so many ways to make a
difference in the state of New
Mexico and
We're we're gonna roll the dice
and
with lots of information and
I don't think anyone really
knows madam chair how are this
committee works all of the
amount of information that we
receive and the staff that gives
us all of that information and
so I just want to give a high
five to all of the staff and and
to you madam chair for your
leadership and your hard work
and to all of my Canadian
friends and and members thank
you madam chair.
All right thank thank you
representative Armstrong and and
I certainly appreciate the
comments and compliments from
the committee you know at the
end of the day when you look at
our constitution and you look at
what our role is as a
legislative body this is that
particularly in a thirty day
session it's all about budget
and quite candidly that's
probably the only thing we
should be working on.
let's go Representative
Castellano.
Representative Castellano.
I also just want to thank the
committee the staff LFC for all
their hard work
it's been really great learning
expressly the list this last two
sessions.
And I just want you guys to know
I really truly appreciate your
hard work
and all the women this committee
does thank you.
All right we have any other
questions from committee
members.
I don't see any other hands up.
So let's go ahead and I think
it's time we do as I say we do
have the technical.
Please just months that were
made after our meeting on
Saturday there isn't FIR report
attached to the packet of
information you have you've got
the index for the bill for the
substitute as well as the bill
of sale and please feel very
comfortable members if at
anytime you don't have or can't
find something this bill is not
particularly easy to read reach
out to me are the staff will
help you get there quick as we
can so I'd like to go I had and
what's the committees pleasure
and I'm gonna go to
Representative small.
Thank you madam chair very
uh excited to move house bill
two and house bill three do not
pass and madam chair to move
that the house appropriations
and finance committee
substitutes for house bill two
and house bill three do pass.
Representative Sweetser a second
madam chair.
Okay so everyone everybody
understands the motion or
actually doing is moving the
substitute.
I'm gonna have the clerk take
the role please.
Representative Allison.
Representative Anderson yes.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Brown.
Because coaches nature I am
going to vote no but again my
comments from earlier I hope
everyone will take to heart
thank you.
Representative Castellano.
Yes.
Representative Chatfield.
Yes.
Representative Crowder.
No.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair.
No.
Representative Garcia.
Yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes.
Representative Lane.
Yes.
Representative Lara yes.
Representative Sarinana.
Yes.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Trujillo yes.
Representative Allison.
The.
Yes.
We need to see him we need to
hear his voice Representative
Allison can you step and
Representative Senator hills
office as awkward as this is
please.
Yes okay thank you very much.
Okay Representative vice chair
small yes.
Madam chair yes.
Okay we have fifteen and the
permanent chair and three in the
negative.
All right bear with that but we
do have a due to pass on the
substitute again I want to thank
everybody generally we do we do
we have our our Canadian dinner
after this unfortunately would
have to push that back I can't
wait because we've done a heck
of a good job here heck of a lot
of work has happened and I think
we've got a document that we can
all be proud of so with that
being said we gotta do pass on
the steps to do it I want to
thank all of you thank you madam
chair thanks.
You.
Thank you madam chair.
Already thanks everybody.
