The last I'm joined today by my
DFA counterpart Simon Miller
we're also joined by Dr the
state auditor's but will hand
over to the presenters to
introduce their team at the
right time I'm gonna start with
your difference worksheet and
this orange piece of paper or
the agency code is three zero
eight.
I'd like to also just point you
to your relevant of all you want
documents which are located on
pages sixty two three sixty four
of your volume to I'm sorry
volume the volume to it that's
the only one I apologize for
that like typo.
okay so we'll go ahead and go
over the differences and then I
handed over to Simon first
comments about the right and
chair looking at the revenue you
can see that the executive
recommendation for the state
auditor exceed the legislative
recommendation by fifty seven
thousand this is due to
differences in recommended
person funding.
Recommendations do you support
the agency's request for seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
in fee revenues however you'll
notice that the executive
recommendation budgeted that
full amount in the other
transfers category where is the
LFC us but those out between the
fund balance portion which is
the fourth fifty and then the
other revenues portion was which
is the three hundred thousand so
those those net out however
there just in two separate
categories.
for the base the executive
exceeds LFC is recommendation by
fifty seven thousand again per
person because the LFC only
partially funds vacant positions
both recommendations support the
agencies requested ten percent
increase for contracts on this
is primarily to fund attorney
services an audit service
contracts and both
recommendations support agencies
request for other costs I'm
looking at performance analysts
have come to consensus on
measures and targets and then
I'll just be quickly on the
requested expansion for the
agency both recommendations do
support the requested expansions
this includes IT purchases for
eighteen and a half thousand and
three expansion FTE this the
three expansion FTEs covers to
senior auditors and a staff
auditor this is primarily for
guardianship and conservatorship
review responsibilities.
Added to Simon madam chair but
the rate for additional comments
and then we'll turn to for all
years all right good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee again my name's Simon
Miller I'm an analyst at DFA I
don't have much to add here
Jessica pretty much covered
everything both of these
recommendations are very similar
the executive is just slightly
higher for person and both
recommendations are funded their
request for
additional FTE to comply with
House Bill two thirty four of
twenty twenty one which are
increased the office's
responsibilities as it relates
to
it auditing and and overseen
conservatorship and guardianship
in the state so with that I will
turn it over to our the auditor
Mr Cologne already Mr state
auditor.
Thank you honorable chair and
thank you to the tremendous
staff thank you both for
presenting both and working so
closely with us at the FAA and
with the LFC madam chair is not
a privilege to be your state or
New Mexico I was jealous of
Simon's background so I switched
off to this one here it's the
best I've got the time and I am
a little jealous I appreciate
your good work but it is a it is
a great time to be in civil
service and public service to
New Mexico at a time when we
have resources to actually build
a budget that reflects our
values and I would say madam
chair members of the committee
that the office of the state
auditor's place where you can
put resources that really
reflect your values of
accountability and transparency
in government we are here at the
New Mexico counties meeting
right now I just finished
celebrating several counties
including McKinley County for
their excellence in their
financial accountancy and
transparency and I would just
say that we are very respectful
of the work that's been done on
both the executive side and and
on the LESC side but we are very
concerned about the budgets as
presented look we issued an
present our budget in a way that
isn't that we let you know madam
chair you have known me long
enough to know that I represent.
The way they are and the budget
that we presented which were a
couple hundred thousand dollars
off on this.
Was what we need to do the work
you've asked us to do and in
fact during the last legislative
session you then it is just to
do now while it is true that you
are receiving recommendations a
fund the additional three FTEs
to do the work of the over the
conservatorship some reviewing
sixteen hundred reports
annually.
It's also important to note that
we lost revenue on the other
side of the equation and that's
what puts our office upside
down.
I would just say that in a time
when the public trust is
compromised and you and I have
worked diligently to rebuild
that trust we've got a history
New Mexico thank you for a
placing the hand out up for me
let it to Sir also joined that's
just my my CFO at the offices
that are but also deputy state
auditor is across the room from
me on the other side
in this private conference room
because we are remote I'm I
would just say that at a time
when we do have as the governor
said resources to really build
out a budget that reflects our
values and to fund things that
have been necessary in the past
to provide good government to
the people that now is the time
to make sure that your office is
the legislative accountability
and transparency and restore
people's faith in government
those offices need to be funded
I would say that the office is
charged with overseeing eight
point four billion dollars worth
expenditures.
Is the office that needs to be
funded appropriately and for far
too long we had to suffer
vacancies because we're not
allowed we have been permitted
to have the resources necessary
to recruit the professionals
that we need in our office this
is the time to allow that to
happen but instead we have
recommendations of fund the
mandatory work that you've given
us above and beyond what we
historically had to do.
But then takes away from the
rest of our budget which leaves
us in a very compromised
position.
I'll just saying closing that I
want to echo the governor's
state save me yesterday that she
said we need to fund innovative
crime fighting strategies I
couldn't agree more.
In the investment money
laundering racketeering these
are crimes.
The office is charged but then
applying these crimes within
government the offices charters
and storing and keeping people
state the government is the
office of the state auditor I've
got a phenomenal team but they
can no longer do more with less
and that's what these
recommendations ask us to do OSA
provides the state with an
innovative crime fighting
strategy for special
investigations division which
received hundreds of complaints
each and every year we do our
best which is very few
investigators did to both.
prioritize and then find a best
additions and then referrals
where appropriate we work very
closely with the attorney
general's office and madam chair
members the committee you know
that we have elected officials
who are no longer elected
officials they're not convicted
felons because the work of the
office of the state auditor you
know that we had individuals but
Alexis.
Taking money for the taxpayers
that was inappropriate who had
to pay it back because the work
of the office of the state
auditor respectfully madam
chairman honorable members this
committee really unique position
with the state's finances to
take decisive action action by
investing in transparency and
accountability both with our
office and also give a quick
shout out to my fellow
constitutional officer the
secretary of state she doesn't
work for reporting from elected
officials and candidates we ask
you also probably from that
office for oversight and
accountability.
This would allow our budget for
the state of New Mexico
demonstrative Lee to show that
we mean what we say and the
proof is in the budget we
appreciate accountability and
transparency in government I'm
requesting approval of our
budget as presented and we
submitted in full madam chair
members the committee I rest in
separate questions thank you.
let's go to the committee we can
we can go ahead and take the.
The state auditor Sheetï¿½ down
please.
Right now I can get a better
handle on who has questions so I
guess with clarification for me
with before I go to the rest of
the committee.
Is a state auditor has indicated
it's a hundred ninety three
thousand dollars.
Short of the LFC and a hundred
and thirty six thousand from the
executive now what I'm saying
and looking at these personnel
numbers it is not that much so I
need somebody to explain this to
me.
You madam chair
If you don't mind I can take
that question yeah go ahead
so I think that they were just
pointing to the person funding
that they requested verses the
person funding in the
recommendations so overall their
request came in for a total
budget of about four point six
million.
And then the executive
recommendation is that I want to
I think it's four point two six
six million and the LESC
recommendation is about four
point two million so overall
between the
request in the recommendations
bears you know about it three
hundred thousand to four hundred
thousand dollar difference.
FY twenty two funded vacancies
and I'm looking out of what that
vacancy rate is here so thank
everybody to look at the P.
chart please.
And so my question is is that do
we have all the positions filled
are there how many how many
folks are actually covered by
this funded vacancy level.
LFC madam chair sorry my mind
you but I apologize madam chair
members of the committee so
you'll see here looking at your
PS help sheet which is page four
of your packet I believe if we
cut to go through this top line
here I'm you'll see that the
agency had the thirty eight
authorized thirty one F. T. E.
were filled and then if you go
over to call and ask you can see
that of the seven that were
vacant about three of them were
already funded a prior to this
recommendation and so the LFC is
recommending an additional
funded vacancy for to an
additional two positions so in
total the agency with the LFC
recommendation should be able to
fill almost five positions on
that are that would be for a
funded vacant position to
clarify madam chair.
In some indigenous comment on
that.
No no comment on that okay let's
go to the committee are there
any committee questions up for
our state archer.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair chair I
found it very helpful on page
sixty two of our volume to.
In what I was looking at was the
general fund transfers and the
agency request and I think
that's where I discovered all
the numbers are different I
think that the auditors asking
for his request not for LFC or
exact he wants his actual
request.
And I'm trying to figure out
what is the actual issue here
with person now when you look in
our chart there are on funded
vacancies here so what LESC is
saying is that there's money
available to fill these
positions.
Are we.
Let chair completely agree with
you.
Okay.
Sure.
Just make another quick comment
on your PS calc.
if you also look in your PS come
and a line item so on the second
kind of column looking down
you'll see that the funded
vacancy and dollars is about two
hundred eighty thousand and so
that that's the amount of the
agency has of for funded
vacancies that they could use to
fill are currently vacant.
Rating how do we have anybody
else with any questions for this
agency.
Any final comments Mr auditor.
Madam chair members of the
committee I think that's exactly
right but it still exists in the
position of unfunded vacancies
and and as far less as four
hundred thousand dollars less
than a request I think the
committee understands the
position we're in but you know
we are not going to be able to
we will be we'll be back for
special appropriation if we're
going to review those sixteen
hundred conservatorship and
continue to oversee and engage
in audits of over eight hundred
agencies that my team just can't
do it with with with this type
of an approach where we funded
the three new positions but we
don't continue to fund the
positions we have in the past at
the same level that we requested
so I appreciate again LFC and
the FAA's work in our.
I will say that they are
extremely responsive and I I
don't want to miss the
opportunity to thank them but
madam chair members the
committee.
This is this is not a padded
budget and these requests are
important to and incorporate the
expanded duties thank you have
not given us and should you not
we find ourselves in that well
some of having an unfunded
mandate and I'm not sure that
will be able to get through the
sixteen hundred reviews that you
have asked us to do that and
granted I'm I'm going to be at
the end of my term of this
budget comes into play but I
certainly want to set up my
successor for success and this
really doesn't do that madam
chair members the committee I
appreciate the honor of being
the state of New Mexico we've
been fantastic to me responsive
and I'm grateful for everything
I've done with you as we built
this office into an office you
can be proud of in the taxpayers
can be proud of and will
continue to embrace
accountability transparency and
excellence in government arrest
thank you madam chair members
the committee.
I I do have a question Simon
what is the fund balance total.
DFA is taken other revenues and
fund balance.
What what is that total.
Madam chair members of the
committee both the DFA and LFC
recommendations have seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
from the audit fund on it's just
more of an accounting difference
the this the state auditor's
office wants to instead of
spending it straight out of that
fund they want to transfer it to
just their normal operating fund
which is why we have shown as
other transfers there but it
really doesn't make it there's
no difference between the DFA
rack in the LFC wrecked their
just in accounting difference
all right okay let's go to the
committee I need a motion
the representative of Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr auditor we greatly
appreciate you being here I
would move the LFC
recommendation.
Okay have a motion to have a
second for the LFC
recommendation.
Second okay I have a second of
the four we vote on this I do
want to have the analysts look
at this again
when I have a dig a little bit
deeper on some of this person
stuff so let's keep in note on
this before we go to catch up
cleanup so I do have a print
appropriate motion an
appropriate second is there any
opposition to that motion.
I don't see any opposition
selected thank the state auditor
for your presentation today
we'll take a look at that before
we get up to Capitol before
we're going to catch up clean up
so I want to spend a little more
time with this so thank you Sir
for being here today.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee all right let's go
to the next HSD.
Is going to lead the discussion.
Madam chair it'll be myself
incitement for us secretary of
state as well all right all
years awesome thank you madam
chair again just because then
LFC analysts was Simon Miller
and DFA we're going to go over
secretary of state which is
business unit three seventy
of your volume two documents can
be found on pages one twenty
five through one twenty eight.
I will go over the a couple of
people because of their will
handed over to Simon again will
go head start with the HSD roll
up which will be paid just
wanted to of your document.
looking at the secretary of
state's budget you can see that
the executive recommendation for
general fund exceeded the
legislative recommendation by
four hundred fifty thousand this
is primarily due to differences
in funding for personnel and for
other costs in the
administration and operations
program both recommendations
supported the agency's request
for contractual services and
this was reflective of a
decrease from FY twenty two but
decreases are a reflection of
the cost of running just one
election in on number fiscal
years compared to two elections
in even numbered fiscal year so
that's that'll explain a lot of
these decreases you'll see
if you look at person LFC
supporters slightly lower person
budget recommending about two
hundred seventy two thousand
less than the executive this is
primarily due to differences and
funded vacancies for the of the
agency.
I mean you look at other costs
both recommendations support a
slight decrease on these are for
items like I. T. hardware and
software and employee training
that were requests but you can
see that the executive slightly
exceed the LFC and this category
by a hundred seventy seven point
two thousand the executive just
fully funds the request if you
look at the I apologize I just
wanted to make a note that the
agency also inactivated I long
term vacancies in FY twenty two
so that plays into their their
personal recommendation analysts
have reached consensus on
performance measures and targets
of all handed to Simon for any
comments on the overall roll up
and then I'll move to the peak.
Yes thanks good afternoon madam
chair members of the committee
just you can just go ahead and
and run through the the Pecos
and and not all can make I can
make some comments after that.
Okay thank you thank you Simon
madam chair members of the
committee will move to pages
three and four this is the
agency's first P. code for
administration and operations
and you can see that the
executive exceeded LESC by four
hundred fifty thousand in
general fund I'm again due to
differences in funding for
personnel and other cost the LFC
recommendation for general fund
is an eight point three percent
increase where the executive
supports a twenty percent
increase so those are the two
differences there.
the legislative recommendation
provided funding to fill at
least eight vacancies at the
average FTE cost where is the
executive recommended fully
funding the vacancies.
if you look at the contractual
services both recommendations
supported the requested twenty
six percent increase this
included increases for I. T.
security contracts which were of
no by the agency.
Of looking at the other costs
you can see the executive
exceeded LFC by about one
hundred seventy seven point two
again due to recommended
differences for I. T. hardware
software this also includes
travel and employee training
again we've also come to
consensus on performance
measures for this purpose so go
ahead and move to the next P.
code which is going to be on
page five and six of your packet
this is the elections program as
you can see the LFC and
executive did not have any
differences here both
recommendations supported the
requested revenue decreased
again related to the fact that
they're only can going to be
conducted one election this
fiscal year.
and both recommendations
supported the decrease in other
costs and contractual services
all with a slight increase for
person to fill vacancies on the
agency also for this program
moved in on field auditor
position from the other program
into the selections program so
that person increase partially
covers that transition okay I'll
go hand it to Simon for
additional comments.
Thanks Jessica madam chair
members of the committee over
the last several fiscal years
the legislative and executive
recommendations have done a lot
to boost funding for the
elections program at the
secretary of state's office
however this is but the
secretary of state's other
divisions kind of on the
budgetary back burner
so this includes their financial
and HR staff as well as the
business services division which
helps all businesses with their
commercial registration as
required by statute
in the fiscal year in this
fiscal years of fiscal year
twenty twenty two the unfunded
vacancy rate in P. six four two
which is the administration
administration operations
program is about twenty percent
which means that the agency has
to leave about ten of their
positions vacant I just to stay
within budget in that P. code.
Our which is again peace six
four two.
For FY twenty three the agency
requests to reduce their FTE
count from forty nine down to
forty two in that program by
inactivating positions that have
been vacant for a significant
amount of time the executive
recommendation provides funding
to fill all forty two of those
positions in that R. P. code
which is P. six point two while
the LFC recommendation applies a
modest vacancy rate and that's
why the executive recommendation
is our about two hundred seventy
five thousand dollars higher per
person in our P. six four two
and then also the executive
provides a bit more funding in
the four hundred four and in
other costs category for
I. T. hardware and software
expenses so that that's what
makes up the difference between
the two recommendations here so
with that I will turn it over to
our secretary of state thanks a
lot
welcome madam secretary.
Thank you so much madam chair
thank you so much Jessica and
Simon for your presentations and
of course to all of the
committee members
for this incredibly hard work
that you all do I do not and be
at your job but at least this
year at the state is in a better
after school position than we've
been in many.
So madam chair I am here this
year to you at seeing a similar
songs what you heard in the past
although to Simon's point
there's been slow steady
improvement and fulfilling the
actual needs of the secretary of
state's office since I came into
office in late two thousand
sixteen so I'm grateful for that
slow steady progress but
unfortunately once again madam
chair we find ourselves in a
position where at least the LFC
recommendation in this case is
simply going to not meet our
needs and as you know madam
chair and of having to come back
to this committee every year as
a result of but you know at
recommendations that just do not
get us where we need to go to
ask you for more money so let me
just have a few of the
highlights from this year I
don't think I have to tell this
committee how important
elections are to our democracy
and our government how critical
the work is that we do the
expanded role that the secretary
of state's office has taken over
the years we do you know an
incredible amount of work with a
very very limited budget but
last year at in late last year
we conducted the regular local
election we increased turnout
over the previous first regular
local election at about twenty
percent turnout which if you
compare that to previous local
elections where you do three
percent turnout was the norm or
even zero votes cast in a school
work race we're doing so much
better on that front.
we you know we're doing you know
everything that we can do to
prepare for that municipal
officer election coming up in
March we have a primary election
is you know madam chair
everybody knows coming up here
in June I want to highlight that
we have requested supplemental
funding to meet the needs of of
the office as well as the direct
election costs that were not
provided in the LFC
recommendation and this is
critical we knew coming out of
last year's legislative session
that we were simply not going to
have enough money to conduct the
primary election this year based
on what we were awarded through
the legislative process so that
that is a critical gap that has
got to be covered up before June
and unfortunately in the last
year in business services we
have had an eight point five
percent increase in business
registrations so that offices
that provide the offices work
continues to grow and expand and
become more critical and let me
see I I know madam chair that
you are are really interested in
making sure we stick to time
some trying to be as concise as
I can given the scope of our of
our office in our offices
request Jessica hardy mentioned
the difference in the two fiscal
years between which elections we
rents I think that you in the
committee understand that
difference in the lower overall
request
one thing that I want to point
out to the committee is the
statewide election fund is used
every year either for a general
or primary election and local
elections Fund is used only in
even fiscal years and you can
see that in our fiscal year
twenty two operations budget and
so that FY twenty two also shows
that supplementals have been
requested and FY twenty three
request that you all have before
you and that doesn't include our
special appropriation request so
let me try to break everything
down
so let's talk first about our
admin and elections operational
funds we do have increased
requests there when we talk
about those.
We continue to maintain our
request to fill those vacant
positions to meet the mandates
that are given to us that you
know as the auditor sat and
needless to say support his
request as well it seems like
that you know what we're talking
about you know several hundred
thousand dollars that can really
make or break these offices to
be successful in this requests
from our office we're asking to
repurpose vacant positions to
support our I. T. and finance
teams as Simon mention costs
nineteen maintenance and support
all you need to continue to
increase and that is reflected
in our admin program budget and
the elections operation fund
which is now just personnel
costs and operational costs not
director lection expenses that
reflects our request to fund the
election security positions into
our operational budget to carry
that program forward be on the
expiration of the hava grant so
we're supporting that program
exclusively through federal
funds right now so being able to
make that a permanent program
election security in the needs
for that are not going to go
away in fact they're only going
to continue to grow over time I
have to do is look at what
happened Bernalillo county
recently in terms of their
ransom more incident we are
providing direct support to the
county clerk's office to make
sure they can continue to do
their job that's part of what
the election security program
does but we need to make sure
that is an ongoing program it
doesn't and when federal funding
and of course I continue and my
colleagues to continue to ask
the federal and to Congress to
continue to fund those programs
both DFA and LCS recommendations
before you do support our
request for special
appropriations I won't go into
what those are we're very happy
thank you very much the
supplemental request we
submitted our partially
supported by the recommendations
so let me talk about what those
are so our elections
operations at shortfall is
supported by both
recommendations are
redistricting notices to voters
that we have to do once every
ten years those are supported by
both recommendations thank you.
Our admin operations shortfall
is supported by DFA but only
partially supported by the LFC
rack those costs include the
current staff we have in place
today we have to hire a new CFO
because we're losing our current
CFO we have to hire deputy CIO
to support that it critical at
I. T. work that we're doing and
finance team member contract
project support and I. T.
licensors to achieve IT audit
compliance on these are all
necessary positions due to you
know the growth in the expanded
scope of the work that we're
required to do by our
constitutional mandate am I
statutory requirements we're not
asking for any fluff right it
does these are all needed
positions to be funded the
statewide election fund
shortfall for the primary
election so DFA is is supporting
this with the two million
appropriation and the re
authorization of the CD one
appropriation ballot so what
that is is you all gave us
special funding last year to
conduct the spend once every
twenty years special election in
the first congressional district
we didn't spend all that money
which was nice and so we do have
that money to carry over I think
where the big difference between
the LESC and the DFA
recommendation com and what's
putting us in grave danger is
the fact that so LFC
recommendation supports the C.
one authorization but we are
still going to be one point six
million short in order to
connect the primary so basically
what I'm here to say to you all
is you know it's it's not one or
the other we need that re
authorization of the funds that
we already have to connect the
primary and we need an
additional one point six million
that's what it is going to cost
for in the primary this June and
as you know madam chair I mean
we are already we are closing
down the pike to that primary
election in June so madam chair
if if nothing else what I
desperately in asked.
In the committee to do please
either adopts the DFA
recommendation right off the bat
or please please please and
catch a claim at close that one
point six million dollar gap
where we are literally not going
to be able to afford to conduct
the primary election.
I'm just gonna skip forward here
and so again madam chair and and
and you know again I'm just
trying to truncate my
presentation to to keep the
committee on track we are
requesting that DFA
recommendation be adopted or
please and I cannot stress this
enough and catch up cleanup
please please cover that one
point six million dollar gap or
we will not be able to conduct
an election in June it would the
DFA recommendation meets all of
our needs we will get everywhere
we need to go I know each and
everyone of you deal in some way
with our office and have either
encountered wonderful customer
service and and great work or
you have problems and a lot of
the problems have to do with the
underfunding of the agency
that's happened year after year
so madam chair thank you and the
committee members again for this
incredibly hard job that you
have the work you have to do the
thoughtfulness that you have to
put into all of this please know
how grateful we are and how
grateful we would do if you can
help us close that gap this year
thank you very much madam chair
we're here to answer any
questions.
Ready to the committee let's
start with Representative
Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you madam secretary of state we
appreciate you very much
you might eight I I got a little
bit lost in your person and so
but one thing that caught my
attention was that LESC said
they in activated I long term
vacant positions I wonder if you
could tell us where those were
and and what happened there
that's kind of that term I don't
hear very often thank you madam
chair I will ask her CFO miss
I'll bend to give you more
specifics some of those
positions and less I can cover
it okay here some of those
positions came over from here
see when at corporations was
transferred over to our office
we didn't find ourselves and for
need of those positions so I'm
we do and.
Yes so we just didn't meet those
ones anymore however we do have
five and funded vacancies and
what we're trying to do is
repurpose three of those and and
I mentioned those in the
personal discussion the finance
position the I. T. the CIO
position deputy CIO position and
we do need an auditor in our
office who can actually review
for compliance all of the
various you know reports the
campaign finance reports the
reports for financial disclosure
that are just currently you know
coming in and only are are are
mitigated and less you know
complaint comes into our office
quite frankly madam chair I want
to just if you want to get in on
that go ahead thank you madam
chair I apologize Representative
Sweetser this was up a note of
something that occurred in FY
twenty two on this with the of
the inactivation of five F. T.
is something that already
happened that is not something
that the LFC recommends for FY
twenty three I apologize for the
confusion.
Thank you for that just again
thank you madam chair I think
that is why I got lost if we
were in activating and adding
and here we there so so we've
already inactivated those now
we're looking at thank you madam
chair.
Garcia.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair a.
Madam secretary thanks for the
presentation of.
Thank you.
Said that if he didn't have the
money that closure on that money
he would not run injection
can spend up to management
better sure madam chair and
representative so the state is
now required to provide a
hundred percent of the funding
to conduct statewide elections
the primary and the general so
we find that that direct funding
to the county clerk's for their
operational costs and then we
also we engage in paid directly
some of the contractual costs
like the ballot on demand
systems the maintenance for
tabulators those types of things
between our request last year
that we made to you all in order
to conduct the election which is
in the same fiscal year we we we
did not get what we ask for what
we said we needed from the final
budget and so the that one point
six million dollar difference is
going to close that gap between
the actual cost of the election
on what we currently have in our
budget.
Thank you madam secretary madam
chair that's the only question I
have.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and thank
for The presentation I'm
secretary my first question is
for of LFC analysts mystatesman
would you.
But there are a but the LFC
recommendation together do you
look at cash balances and take
that into consideration.
When I'm on page two oh one of
our volume three I noticed
there's five different funds
with cash balances and I
wondered how do you use that
data to help you make your
decision or do you.
Madam chair Representative
Crowder thank you for that
question but when we do our
budget recommendations we do
take into account cash balances
we also look at fund balances
and we look at reversions and so
are some shin is that we you
know our budget recommendations
would take into account any sort
of cash balances that the agency
has that we would potentially be
available to supplant some of
the funding the state you know
stay in contracts or other costs
for things like that I hope that
answers your question it does
thank you madam chair thank you
this is what I'm secretary two
quick questions I I think I
heard you say that the executive
recommendation would meet all of
your needs and and take care of
your thank but I also thought I
heard you say please please
please we need the one point six
million or we can't get them
with the primary I notice
there's only four hundred and
fifty thousand dollar difference
between LESC and the executive
so do you need the four fifty or
do you need to one point six can
you help me understand that was.
It's a good question so I think
the difference comes Madam chair
representative from the
difference in the recommendation
to re authorize thank at the
congressional district one funds
that we still that special
election that was conducted last
year so if those funds were to
be re authorized then you're
correct we are still a little
that we're actually about six
hundred thousand short however
no you're right yeah we're so
that yeah four hundred thousand
short however if that the in the
other recommendation that
reauthorization wasn't there so
it's sort of like just six of
one half dozen of the other but
we do need both and Jessica at
looks like you want to chime in
on this I'm madam chair and and
Representative called on the
people so okay I want to
make sure that we're very
crystal clear on what's non
reoccurring and what's recurring
and I as I've been listening to
this hearing is get real mixed
for me so let's go to Jessica
and then we'll go back to the
secretary of state.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam secretary and
Representative Crowder to your
question I just wanted to note
that the LFC recommendation does
recommend the extension of that
appropriation which I believe
our analysts estimated the
remaining amount to be just
under one point one million from
that CD one so that and that is
a nonrecurring special
appropriation extension that
you'll see in your your special
appropriations sheet and in the
back of your colleagues I just
wanted to note that I believe
both recommendations LFC and
exec called extended that almost
one point one million to be used
for primary elections in FY
twenty three I hope that
clarifies.
Thank you just a broader and
madam chair I did just receive a
clarification from our CFO and
and I apologize as as was noted
we have so many different funds
and different kinds of requests
so the four hundred thousand
dollar difference madam chair
and representative is in our
regular budget request those
would be the recurring funds we
have.
Two point six million needed to
get us to the to to to conduct
the primary this year which that
isn't it every year request that
is this fiscal year because the
one that point five million left
over from CD one is re
authorized that's going to help
us get there it doesn't get the
it doesn't get us there all the
way so that's why we're asking
for the full supplemental
request and so madam chair and
representative I apologize
you're right now I'm sure I was
mixing up at different funds.
Senator thank you thank you
madam chair just one final
question madam secretary I
noticed that you are transferred
to a hundred two thousand
dollars out of your personal
service support benefit how did
you use that money.
Madam chair representative I
will defer to our CFO to answer
you on that one.
It's running has available
please I am thank you madam
chair and Representative Crowder
we are
we use that in part for some
contractual services and to
support our IT systems and we
also used it in our other costs
category
in the in the P. seventy three
to help with costs with you let
for the election and we use some
of those costs to purchase
laptops and track forms and all
of those sorts of equipment that
we needed when we sent folks to
work during the pandemic okay I
I was just curious if madam
chair they were transferred from
PSE.
PSEB a one agency here over to a
different category all staying
within the two hundred but it
sounds like used for other
purposes madam chair that
concludes my questions thank
you.
Yes Representative laying.
Thank you madam chair my
question is on page two of our
hand out I'm I was a little
surprised to see the executive
recommendation actually
recommends a decrease and.
software
and the reason why I ask that it
seems like we can never have
enough money in technology and
you know a one of the things I
think that your website madam
madam chair madam secretary has
improved over the years is is
people who necessarily can't
afford a lawyer you can now
foreman and I will see on line
for example and there's there's
instructions on how to do that
but what our neighboring states
also have available to do online
that New Mexico doesn't do this
is why bring up the funding for
for software is you I can form a
corporation in Colorado online I
can file articles of amendment
for LLCs online I can do all of
those things online and I think
that makes those kind of
services starting businesses and
and updating businesses a lot
easier on consumers our reserves
are directly and so I'm just
wondering what this you know
reduction and and software
budgeting there's any plans in
the future to update those those
services yeah I'm madam chair
and representative let me just
speak directly to your question
about improving the business
services opportunities we
completely agree we did receive
funding we did receive a
recommendation to improve our
business filing system and part
to address just legacy
challenging issues but also in
part to develop those additional
services that you just
recommended Representative lane
and then Veronica and Matt
missile been our CFO if you have
any more comments about that
and.
That lower recommended yes hello
recommendation.
Thank you madam chair madam
secretary and Representative the
most of the reduction is because
of the two elections that we
have in in even fiscal year so
in FY twenty three are our
request and the recommendations
are all lower because because of
that a lot of that the cost that
we pay direct election costs for
the regular local election are
related to I. T. services and
software.
Simon get in on that you have a
comment on that Simon is thank
you madam chair and
Representative Lane so I don't
have your hand out in front of
me what's on page two is that
specific R. P. code that you're
talking about.
It's just it's in the different
sheets.
Okay.
Madam chair representative so
for the the business services
division which is six four two
are both recommendations have an
increase for I. T. related
expenses the executive
recommendation is about two
hundred fifty thousand dollar
increase and the LESC
recommendation is a bit lower
than that
I assumed to maybe referring to
the elections programs are I'm
just trying to understand.
Yeah I'm just I'm on.
Differentiate front of you sign.
Madam chair representative I I
have a different sheet but I
just wanna make sure I'm on the
same okay all righty.
Representative Eli that's fine
chair I I I've made my point not
I think it's fine so I don't
have anything else thank you.
Comment on that last question
just.
I just wanted to clarify
Representative lane I apologize
for the potentially confusing
language when we're referring to
a decrease in IT costs the
reality is that the executive
fully funded the agency requests
in in that category for Judy
however the request is a
decrease from FY twenty two
because they're only conducting
one election this year so for FY
twenty two it was higher because
the at two elections now as
decreased and the executive of
supporting the requested amount
in that category I hope that
clarifies.
Okay thank you yes let's go to
the rest of the committee is
there any other questions that
we have for the secretary of
state or the analysts on this
budget.
I don't see anybody else I need
a motion from the committee so
Representative Armstrong thank
you madam chair and move the LFC
recommendation.
We have a motion to have a
second.
Thank you madam chair all right
we have this motion proper
motion proper second is there
any opposition to that motion.
Seeing there it of we're gonna
take the LFC recommendation but
I do want to look carefully at
that supplemental request when
we get to that point in that in
that particular committee said
act thank you madam secretary
and appreciate you being here
today thank you very much madam
chair and members of the
committee we appreciate you.
Right move on to the next HSD.
And who is going to start the
presentation madam chair you're
still with me today this
afternoon this will be our at my
last presentation however I will
be joined by and the monthly
effort DFA I'm gonna be going
over taxation and revenue
department I believe the agenda
incorrectly listed Amanda Dick
Peddie and Diego Jimenez on
there but it is up myself just
because it's meant and Cindy
monthly SO I wanted to just note
that for the committee okay.
Thank you we're gonna be going
over agency code three three
three again taxation and revenue
department will go ahead and
start on page two and three of
your hand out so we'll skip that
high level for just a moment and
then I believe Cindy and I will
kind of trade off on the P. code
so I'll go over the roll up and
then we'll we'll go back and
forth tax.
so starting with the HSD roll up
again three three three of the
executive recommendation exceeds
the LFC by about four point one
million most of which is general
fund revenues and this is
primarily due to differences in
recommended person our our
favorite word person of the day.
The executive recommendation
also budgets two hundred
thousand dollars from the weight
distance tax ID permit fund this
is for internal transfers
however if the committee
recommend up I'm sorry if the
committee adopts the LFC
recommendation staff suggest
adding back in that two hundred
thousand in other revenues of
for the five hundred category
these were not included
initially and the LESC
recommendation due to a
technical submission error but
we would recommend that the
committee dust LFC to add those
back into the related programs
and all bring those up as we go
to those P. codes.
I'm for the base the executive
fully funds the agency's request
in all expenditure categories
where the LFC applies a higher
funded vacancy for the per
person.
I'm LFC also funds a slightly
lower amount about three hundred
fifteen thousand dollars last
four costs like travel I T.
maintenance hardware and
software and programs support
regarding language both
recommendations include language
related to that weight distance
tax ID permit fund eight million
gets transferred to the
department of transportation and
about ninety four point five
thousand dollars gets
transferred to the department of
public safety from that fund
analysts have come to consensus
on all performance measures and
targets and then just a quick
note on the expansions of LFC
recommended include recommended
funding for the requested FTE
expansions and program support
and property tax but the LFC
does not support the requested
F. T. expansion and the motor
vehicle division and that's due
to high funded vacancies so
we'll talk a little bit about
that and that program as well
finally the executive
recommendation just supports all
the expansion request I'm so go
ahead and hand it to Cindy went
way up for any additional
comments on this page and then
to move us into our first Pico
that that's alright madam chair.
And you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Jessica I'll
briefly go over the first
program in the agency which is
program program support which is
P. five seventy two in the
revenue the executive
recommendation exceeds the
legislative recommendation by
exactly nine hundred and thirty
three thousand seven hundred
dollars all of which is in the
personnel and services category
where the executive
recommendation fully funded the
agency request and the LFC
applied a slightly higher
vacancy rate than the Executive
dead.
The executive also recommends
the agency fully recommends the
agency request for other costs
while the legislative
recommendation at some point but
not all of the travel I. T.
services and related costs that
the agency requests performance
measures analysts have come to
consensus and both eight
Appleton accommodation support
agencies request for the
expansion in this program for
one additional FTE to support
recent recent changes at
legislative team.
I will turn it back to Jessica.
Thank you madam chair thank you
sandy just real quick I wanted
to know on that page about us I
believed in the mentioned all of
that she difference was in
person but I believe based on
your sheet here about two thirds
of it is in person and then the
other third is in the other cost
categories I just wanted to
clarify.
One to the next key code on
pages six and seven I'm sorry
just six of your documents this
is the tax administration act
you can see that the executive
recommendation exceeded LFC in
general fund to buy a one point
nine million for person and then
they also exceeded LFC by thirty
thousand for that week distance
tax ID permit fund transfer and
so this is where the committee
will LFC would recommend adding
back in not thirty thousand
dollars for that transfer from
the weight distance tax ID
permit fund well the executive
fully funds the request for
person LFC applies this lady can
see right and again the
executive included that thirty
thousand internal transfer offer
this program we reach consensus
and I'll just hand it to send
the for additional comments.
Thank you and apologies for the
For the.
Asian on the the prior program
thank you for clarifying that
Jessica madam chair members of
the committee I just have a
small
This is the motor vehicle
division correct.
Madam chair Cindy are we just
cover the tax administration act
you have anything on that one
otherwise we'll go to and the.
Thank you madam chair and
Jessica I was out of order me
peaches in the motor vehicle
division program P. five seventy
four the executive
recommendation receipt for
provided recommendations for
general fund by one point one
million dollars and other
revenues by a hundred and
seventy due to the difference
that was recommended for the
weight distance tax
identification permit funds.
In the base the executive
recommendation fully funds the
agency requests for personnel
where is the legislative
recommendation applies a
slightly higher vacancy rate to
the program.
The executive recommendation is
a hundred and seventy thousand
the executive recommended a
hundred and seventy thousand for
the requested internal transfer
from the weight distance tax
identification permit funds
whereas the legislative request
did not however if the committee
adopts the legislative
recommendations staff would
suggest adding the seventy I'm
sorry the hundred and seventy
thousand in other revenues any
other financing uses category in
regards to language both the
executive and the legislative
have the same language
transferring the funding from
the weight distance permit funds
from the motor vehicle division
to the department of
transportation at eight million
dollars and to the department of
public safety at ninety four
point five.
Analysts have come to consensus
on all performance measures and
any expansion be provided
accommodation did not support
the request for additional two
FTE due to the existing high
funded vacancy rates within the
program where is the executive
did include the expansion of two
FTE to assist with the call
center and provide support to
private partner offices.
Thank you madam chair Cindy will
go ahead and move to your next
P. code which is property tax
division this is P. five seventy
five of as you can see here
pretty straightforward that
there were no differences
between LFC and exec for the
property tax division the
recommendations will support the
requested cost and all
expenditure categories this was
an overall two point five
percent increase relative to FY
twenty two for this program
again consensus on performance
measures and then there was and
expansion request for ninety
eight point seven thousand
dollars for an additional FTE
and related costs which both
recommendations did supports.
You madam chair members the
committee we will go to the
final purpose the agency which
is the compliance enforcement
program in in the revenue and
base both recommendations
identical and support the agency
requests reflecting eight point
two percent increase over the FY
twenty two operating budgets
analysts have come to a concert
that come to consensus on
performance measures and targets
and madam chair with your
mission I will go ahead and turn
it over to the secretary I'm and
the agency for their
presentation on any questions
very good madam secretary your
next thank you madam chair and
members of the committee it's a
real pleasure to be here with
you and have the opportunity to
talk about taxed reps budget I
have a few staff members on the
team with me today we're here to
assist with answering questions
if need be we have W. secretary
Emily Oster administrative
services division director
Denise area are in compliance
division director I. Shammara
and IT director and CIO Mike
Baca
I hope you have the power point
that we delivered it side read
inner grace on the front if
anyone's missing I can share my
screen.
We have you share your screen
and be great I well give me just
one moment.
All right are you saying that
madam chair we are thank you.
Okay just for the committees
reference here's our executive
order chart I won't go through
all the division directors and
deputies in detail but these
folks are here to assist you if
there's anything that you're
you're constituents do need.
The mission of taxed Rabb is to
serve New Mexico by providing
fair and efficient taxed motor
vehicle services emphasis on
service well we are an
enforcement agency we do put our
customers first and make every
attempt to show them the path to
test it if we cannot approve
something that they're expecting
on a given day three your vision
statement of taxed Rabb was
adopted in early twenty twenty
we promote a cultural culture of
integrity respect innovation we
are in the trust of our
customers are actions our our
customers through outreach
education and ease of compliance
we offer flexible and secure
school solutions to our
customers we administer the tax
motor vehicle laws efficiently
in transparency and
transparently and we are working
on a maintaining a skilled and
knowledgeable and service
oriented workforce.
I want to review with the
committee just a few key
initiatives that we've recently
been working on and some of them
are recently complete within our
workforce development we have a
big emphasis on training right
now as well as documenting our
procedures and policies to
ensure consistency we've
expanded a mentorship program
that was created within the
department we're really focused
on on internal promotion and
creating career ladders and that
kind of staff engagement the
comes of that the FY twenty
three budget recommendation of
reduces from the executive
reduces our funded vacancy rate
and also adds three FTE we'll
talk about that a little bit
more detail but the reasons for
the expansions to give you a
little bit more background on
what those are for the motor
vehicle division is requesting
two additional FTE to support
private and be partners so of
course there are thirty two
state run field offices across
the state but and we do also has
many private partner offices
that are run by municipalities
counties and private businesses
like MPD expressed and be do now
those kind of things and there's
a staff that it's a very small
office that supports them and
their technical needs and
answering their questions and
we're in the process right now
expanding their transactions and
so they need additional support
we also requested one U. F. T.
and program support which is our
HSD with added complexity in the
tax code in the last couple
years and revenue distributions
it used to be that we just
distributed local option G. R.
T. and then everything else is
mainly to state agencies but now
we have a local compensating tax
that goes to every county and
municipality and now are
starting April have local
cannabis tax distributions so
we've tripled the amount of
local distributions that the
agency is responsible for so
we're requesting one FTE to
assist with that and then I just
want to highlight that we've
completed an MVD reorganization
that was funded by the
legislature and and supported by
the governor and.
FY twenty one of the pandemic
set us back somewhat and and we
did not complete that until near
the end of FY twenty one but it
is all in place now and we want
to thank you for supporting
that.
To highlight some of the
expanded customer options that
we've put in place
In in terms of our customers
including county governments
we've recently in December
twenty twenty one completed a
two million dollar property tax
division modernization that was
funded by the legislature that's
going to offer better data
access and collaborative
oversight of property taxes than
ever before and July twenty
twenty one we rolled out an
eight point four million dollar
C. to project called CRS
redesign or business tax
redesign along with that when an
upgrade of Arjun tax system for
version ten to twelve not again
rolled out and gender July
twenty twenty one some other
ways that we're trying to be
innovative and reaching our
customers we've got a lot of
good content for tax payers and
YouTube channel and that's
gotten thousands of views
especially around the roll out
of that new business tax filing
system so that's been really
helpful in letting customers
self service and get that
information twenty four seven
instead of calling our call
centre where we really do
struggle to keep up with call
volumes we also developed an
email notification system I
would maybe call center
improvements like specialized
call routing customer call back
feature and automated payments
and then I want to highlight we
have these that that pilot
project of MPD kiosks they're
called M. B. D. direct and right
now there are three locations in
Albuquerque so while customers
out shopping they can also print
a registration tag update their
driver information or make a
citation payment and we're
hoping that we'll expand over
coming months we've added more
online services and and be do
commercial driver's licenses
cannot be renewed online they
never could before without an
office visit we also now allow
drivers seventy nine and older
and those who are removing
interlock license to submit
their documentation
electronically and then review
online and we make a
considerable improvement in the
number of New Mexico driver's
licenses that are real ID
compliant at the beginning of
the admin.
Ation it was about forty seven
percent now we're up to about
seventy four percent and that
deadline from the federal
government has been shifted back
to may twenty twenty three so we
feel like we're in good shape
with real ID.
Highlights and tax policy
changes that I I know you're
familiar with because they all
came through the legislature of
course we've made our personal
income tax more progressive in
in recent years by expanding
working families tax credit
elector and adding a new five
point nine percent marginal tax
rate we are proud to say that as
of July twenty twenty one house
bill six from twenty nineteen
has totally been implemented it
was about a two year process to
get in place but everything is
effective now and it's it's all
out there
we also through legislation that
was enacted in recent years it
saw that on January first of
this year the health insurance
premiums are tax went up by one
percent to provide health care
affordability.
We implemented the foreman
restaurant and bar G. R. T. that
came out of the last legislative
session as well as issued over a
hundred million dollars of
rebates to low income workers.
So moving on to some highlights
of our budget I I I want to
thank the budget analyst for
calling attention to the
differences I really want to hit
home that the executive
recommendation does provide us
with a fifteen point eight
percent funded funded vacancy
rate where is the LFC
recommendation funds as that a
twenty point two percent funded
vacancy rate and if there's one
thing I'd like to head home it's
that you know we're we're
looking at a budget out eighteen
months from now and I know that
labor supply is tight right now
and we do have trouble hiring
and retaining workers at this
time but eighteen months for now
I as an economist I think that's
going to settle down somewhat
and I really hope that our
agency can be set up for success
by having a more more tenable
funded vacancy rate
I want to highlight a couple
differences a nonrecurring to
the executive recommendation
fully funds are five million
dollars contention appropriation
request for build implementation
and we also think the LFC for
funding that it three million
both recommendations include a
four hundred and thirty six
thousand dollars supplemental
for program support division
which is in deficit this year
the we also requested a special
of a hundred fifty thousand
dollars for statewide assistance
for low income and elderly
individuals have tax preparation
assistance through nonprofit
programs like for example tax
help board there are others we
do a pretty competitive
procurement but we see that the
money that the state
appropriates to projects like
that programs like that has a
very large multiplier impact on
the number of refunds that we
can get out to those individuals
both from the state as well as
federal tax refunds.
And I'll skip the rest of that
slide
I mentioned already the vacancy
rates
As far as full funding of the
tax administration act program
that of course is our audit and
compliance division as well as
the revenue processing division
sort of the flagship tax
division of our our whole agency
and we have a target that for
every dollar that's invested in
that program we return eleven
dollars and collections to the
general fund as well as local
government so there's a very
high return on investment
they're if if you do choose to
fund that program more fully and
as far as what will come if our
program support budget is more
fully funded some of the
highlights are we can more fully
funded can see that our legal
services bureau other attorneys
who litigate tax basis in
protest to defend the tax code
and ensure that tax law the K.
okay I wasn't maybe that should
be made and prevent revenue
losses for both the state and
local governments we would have
an additional staffing and
program support to make sure
that our financial processing is
faster and accurate we would
ensure correct revenue
distributions to state funds as
well as local governments
Cybersecurity is something
you'll hear from every agency
I'm sure about this you know
what fund I. T. division of
course we hold very sensitive
data every tax payer in every
driver's records are with us and
being kept secure
provided implementation as well
as just timely publication of
our forms and bulletins in FY I
is as well as rulings that
requested so information going
out to taxpayers to help them
know how to comply.
With that here's a high level
overview of the budget but I I
won't go through it in detail
because the analysts are you did
such a great job of that and
madam chair I'd be happy to
stand for questions.
Thank you very much go ahead and
start with Representative Dixon
and and I think we go ahead take
yours your screen sharing down
thank you Here Representative
Dixon thank you madam chair and
thank you Secretary for The
presentation and our wonderful
analysts I have a question in
our volume to on page sixty six
it highlights a twenty twenty
one LFC report progress report
that estimated the state's tax
gap
at seven hundred forty three
million dollars and if I recall
this was actually something
discussed in July at the LFC
meeting in Bernalillo and at
that time you mentioned that the
legislature
in order to reduce that one of
the things that could happen is
by banning taxes APRS and
phantom where and so I was
wondering if you've made any
progress on that if you're
planning to introduce
legislation or what next steps
are I thank you very much.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Dixon you have a
great memory or good note yes we
do plan to propose legislation
in the next sixty day session
that would amend the staff the
tax fraud statutes to address
found somewhere and and zappers
and things like that
the other other thing that kind
relates your question is we have
a C. two request related to
collections modernizing the I.
T. and and maturing the I. T.
about how we go about
collections and that has been
fully funded that request has
been fully funded in the
executive wrecked and partially
funded in the LFC rack thank
you.
Thank you madam chair and
secretary is there a reason
though that that legislation
isn't being introduced in the
thirty day it just seems like
that's an awful lot of money
that we are leaving on the
table.
Madam chair and Representative
Dixon I think it's just the the
helpful the agenda is for the
thirty day session makes it
difficult it's it's also
something that was introduced in
the last sixty day session it
made it all the way to the end
that because House Bill ninety
and it it just got stopped there
at the at the very last point
but I I do want to assure you
that while we do think there are
zappers and phantom where
probably and and operation in
every state we don't think it's
it's material in the sense of
that tax gap that that tax gap
is really about other types of
more general don compliance
civil non compliance not
criminal.
Thank you very much thank you
madam chair and secretary I have
no other questions.
Very much Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and madam
secretary thank you for your
presentation
madam secretary is it as I'm
gonna go through my routine of
looking in different places to
see what's going on to
understand the other side of
your agency notice your cash
balances are large cash balance
your funded vacancy rate is
about three point five million
dollars and then I look over and
I see that you transferred one
point seven million out your
personal services import those
benefits in your reverted a
little over eight point five
million dollars.
One overlooked feature cash
balances you have a twenty five
percent increase in our cash
balances year over year from
twenty to twenty one your up to
fifty million dollars in your
cash balances for your operating
fund your small city assistant
to run about twenty five percent
year over year at ten million
four hundred and sixty nine
thousand dollars in cash
balances that.
What want to see the numbers
like that madam secretary it it
makes me struggle to understand.
Why the request for such an
increase when I every everywhere
I look I see money in buckets
laying around and don't know how
to explain it so I guess my
first question madam secretary
is the million one point seven
almost one point eight million
that you transferred out of
personal service employee
benefits this statement chair
category somewhere else or did
it what was it used for.
Madam chair I'll take as a first
stab at that but I think I would
like to defer for the most part
to our CFO in HSD director
Denise but I I want to mention
that there are few things that
happened about a year ago last
spring in our budget that led to
reversions first
There was the cannabis excise
tax and and recreational
cannabis was enacted and so we
we kind of acted quickly right
after all that legislation was
signed to try to make some
funding available to buy
equipment and to pay for the
programming of cannabis excise
tax some of it did go out the
door but some of it reverted to
set it aside for I. T. and other
costs but for example we had
cash counting machines that we
ordered that he due to supply
chain issues could be delivered
things like that another
significant factor in the
reversion was that we had been
appropriated over a million for
that MVD reorg that I mentioned
where we were we have now been
able to reclassify MPD sessions
for more appropriate placement
and and pay equity but the whole
thing was delayed by about eight
months due to comment so a
portion of MBTs increase from
last year was also reverted some
of the rest of the reversion was
was basically nonrecurring costs
that came in under budget for
example we were funded by
certain equipment and do start
nineteen projects to support our
operations that came in under
budget so we reverted the
balances of those special
appropriations
on that I think I'd like to turn
it over to the to do needs to
answer more of your questions
thank you secretary Schardin
Clarke Representative Crowder
thank you for your question and
then chairman and members of the
committee we also had in
addition to what the secretary
had explained last year we had a
deficit in our tax
administration act program
division what happened last year
is that we had administrative
fees that were no longer allowed
to twenty nineteen language that
was removed on gross receipts
tax and this program was in the
deficit approximately two point
three million dollars we had a
program to program a thorny
language in which we.
He could transfer over monies to
help that program so that we can
go ahead and get those transfers
of salary so what ended up
happening where you see that one
point seven million dollars
reduced and salaries and
benefits are because of the
resort we took most of that
money from the NPD rewards that
did not coming to fruition and
transferred it over so that the
tax administration act program
could be sold at.
Okay okay thank you madam chair
and generates so did the did the
funding from PSEB stay within
yes the big part in it transfer
for another purpose two
different categories I didn't
catch that.
So Representative Crowder madam
chair it stayed within the
salaries and we transferred over
the savings from MVD salaries
over to ACD which are tax
administration at.
Okay all right well thank you
and do you have any explanation
for why your cash balances
increased by twenty five percent
year over year this ten tens of
millions of dollars.
We currently have cash balances
that we have on our audit right
now we have
Some cash balances let me pull
up my audit here Representative
Crowder.
Let me sure I can get this
information later if we need to
I don't want to take up the we
got a lot of agencies to look at
I don't want to take up the
committee's time.
If I may madam chair and
representative Crowder and
Denise will get back to us with
a full time response I'm sure of
it there are a couple cash
balances that are operational
for us like for example the
property tax fund and there's an
MVD operating fund those are our
cash balances that are subject
to a appropriations so that we
can expand them but then there's
other stuff in our audit where
you know because we're revenue
collecting agency we collect it
comes in and then transferred
distributed out so I I think you
you mentioned small cities for
example that's just something
that comes in we we take in
compensating Tax and transferred
out to local governments it's
not our operating money and
there's there's a lot of that in
our audit.
With the
chair Instagram secretary thank
you for that but the the big one
of course was the operating fund
it was a twenty five percent
increase a little over ten
million dollar gain and I was
just curious but I I would like
to get that information offline
thank you madam chair all right
very well is going to
representative Garcia then
Representative Anderson thank
you madam chair of the secretary
thanks for the presentation I
just have one question.
On the taxes that are due on low
income people were businesses
that are struggling right now.
Sure.
Is there any tax relief from all
interest and penalties but they
do pay them could you said you
want to introduce that
collection deal until next year
full.
It's going to be a bigger burden
on people you don't collect from
from here to next year so the
question was is there any review
for interest and penalties for
these people.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Garcia week we
might be getting wires crossed
on the bill that would be
introduced next year has to do
with allowing us to
basically pursued criminal fraud
against those who are are kind
of cooking their books to make
it look like their tax liability
is less of that's different from
collections
Right now the so that there is
not any special waiver in place
right now for penalty or
interest relief like there was
enacted in the twenty twenty
first special session however I
want to highlight that we have a
managed audit program which is
created in statute and it's
permanent and basically any tax
payer can come forward and if if
they enter managed audit with us
it's sort of like a
collaborative audit were instead
of us going out and auditing you
know it's very one sided we do
that together at the tax payer
provides the records in in the
work together when they enter
that agreement they receive a
hundred and eighty days without
penalty or interest so that is
very very helpful to struggling
businesses and individuals and
we've expanded that managed
audit program in twenty twenty
one basically it used to be that
if you were approached for a
random field audit like a
regular audit you could not opt
into the managed audit program
but it's actually better for us
and the taxpayer to go that
route and so now after for a
certain number of days after you
get selected for bill that it
you can opt for manage audit and
get the benefit of that hundred
eighty days penalty and interest
rate.
Thank you madam chair secretary
good to you again.
Right Representative Anderson
thank you madam chairman madam
chairman up I just really want
first want to thank you
Secretary for actual
presentation and the the the
work that her department is
doing I want to conclude my.
Brief comment to simply a COVID
not a question and that is madam
chairman I continue to believe
that us the employment state
government over the next decade
will declined not increase of I
think of the current funding
right funded right throughout
state government is more than we
will see employed ten years from
now so my question the secretary
or comment is simply I hope you
were giving some consideration
to.
The future ways in which the tax
revenue department will conduct
its business utilizing
artificial intelligence perhaps
robotics I think about in the do
as an example I think about
taxed ram and a twenty four
seven workforce going through
the calculations.
How you lay shins and other
vancity current that in
important department and I I
just wish we would hear the
appropriations process not just
from this secretary but
throughout state government more
planning being given to the
changing work environment ahead
in the use of artificial
intelligence to reduce the
manpower needs of the state
thank you madam chair.
Ready do we have any other
questions from the committee.
Any final comments from the
secretary.
And madam chair okay
Representative small for the
motion thank you madam chair I
would move the LFC
recommendation for the taxation
and revenue department.
I need a second place second.
Okay we have a motion and a
second.
Proper motion proper second is
there any opposition to that
motion saying nine I'd like to
make sure that we understand
we've just accepted the LFC and
like to thank the cabinet
secretary for a very very good
presentation thank you very much
thank you members the committee
thank you madam chair.
All right
I wanted to make a comment that
there may be a the zoo meeting
that Representative small and I
may have to pull away for just a
little while when we do I'd like
to ask Representative ray Lara
to run the committee while we're
out.
No okay exactly when it's going
to happen but I just wanted to
ask you right to make sure
you're ready to rock and roll if
if small and I need to step
away.
Yes thank you all righty so
let's go to our next next agency
please.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Amanda
Dick Peddie fiscal analyst with
the legislative finance
committee will be going over
agency number four thirty the
public regulation commission.
I am going to date from the
executive by us in the Montel
yet again she's helping us out
today and from the agency we
have chief of staff Andrew
Propst and some members of his
team I'll let him introduce them
when we can get over to HSD for
con for comment.
So for the PRC you can provide
supporting documents and
narratives in your volume to you
on page one sixty six.
the recommendations aren't too
terribly different for this
agency so I'll go ahead and run
through all the key codes you
can see on your high level that
looks like this the
recommendations provide pretty
closely some of the agency's top
priority.
Moving on to our overview of the
PRC.
Overall the LFC recommendation
increases general fund revenue
to the agency you by eight point
two percent compared to the
executive seven point seven
percent.
Both recommendations support
significant budget and personnel
reorganization requests by the
agency which includes
consolidating numerous divisions
and transferring funding and FTP
between programs.
For performance analyst reach
consensus on all performance
measures and targets.
If you want to move on to keep
code six one one the policy and
regulation program.
The LFC recommendation includes
two hundred seventy four
thousand more general fund
revenue than the executive and
all the other revenue sources
are identical between racks.
Both recommendations support
agency requests to transfer
funding and FTP from the legal
division to program support
analyst analysts and reach
consensus on all performance
measures and targets.
For.
Here you six twelve public
safety there's no general fund
revenue in this program
the recommendations are only
about fourteen thousand dollars
out of different from each other
LFC does include fourteen point
seven thousand more in other
revenue than the executive and
that's all in the person
category.
So are you code he is six
thirteen programs support.
For this morning the executive
recommends about two hundred and
twenty seven thousand more
general fund revenue then the
LFC.
Recommendation support again
agency requests to transfer the
legal division.
So the recommendation support
billing on funded vacancies that
are crucial to the agency such
as an engineer and a public
utilities economist.
Hello the includes about a
hundred and fifty nine thousand
dollars to fill these vacancies
while the executive includes
about two hundred thousand
dollars.
The agency did request four
hundred eighteen point three
thousand dollars for a projected
shortfall in the person category
the LFC recommends three hundred
thousand dollars to address the
shortfall which our analysis
showed to be sufficient to cover
it well the executive that the
agency requests.
All right madam chair members of
the committee your last P. code
P. six fourteen you'll notice
that it's all zeros this this
was an accounting mechanism to
bring revenue and the agency no
longer uses this key code so
with that my remarks are
concluded and I can pass that
you I thank you for any further
comment from the executive.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Amanda as you
stated that differences are very
small in this agency with forty
one forty seven point one being
general fund and fourteen point
seven another revenue I have no
additional comments to make and
I can turn it over to the agency
for their presentation and
questions.
All righty we're ready to hear
the HSD so go ahead please.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Wayne
props and chief of staff to the
New Mexico public regulation
commission during this afternoon
by someone that the committee
probably knows better than you
know me we're not a very Galen
who is our administrative
services director she will be
sharing our presentations
but also helping me with any
questions that the committee has
a light that I can answer I want
to start off madam chair and
members of the committee by
thanking our LFC and U. S. A.
analysts for their hard work on
this agency throughout the year
I've been extraordinarily lasts
throughout my eighteen year
career and state governments
have excellent analyst from both
our LCS DFA.
As I start my my time here to
your C. R. I'm on the bus
together with the what the hell
so we haven't.
Their commitment to the the HSD
oversight helping us with the
budgets and number on it so just
want to say that madam chair.
As indicated the deficits dreamy
LC recommendation the DFA
executive recommendation are
small so I think I can make what
is a.
Presentation you even briefer
I'll start on slide to do want
to acknowledge the current
members of the PRC as you're
well aware madam chair this is a
transition year for the public
regulation commission at the end
of this calendar year we will
try and transition from a five
member elected P. Garcia two or
three number one to the PRC and
as we were developing our budget
requests for FY twenty three at
our supplemental and special
appropriation request for FY
twenty two madam chair that was
really in the back of our minds
we wanted to to build a budget
request that not only about the
current commission to finish the
report work that it's doing
finish their terms but also to
set the new commission up.
Stay strong administrative and
budget position going forward so
I'm going to slide three.
You know the the mandate of the
of the commission Madam chairman
of the committee don't need to
reserves so as the second bullet
point notes.
That manages only in our
continue to become more
challenging as a regulatory
environment Mexico and globally
becomes more complex so we do
want to ensure Madam chairman of
the committee under sure
investors are you on insured the
R. C. have sufficient technical
expertise.
Resources to route to implement
some of the legislature recently
passed well as well as any
legislation comes down and into
the future and we do think this
is a very wise investment in the
state of New Mexico so future as
well slide four on
think I was like I I guessed
wrong about we did ask for as
many noted a couple of
supplementals and the special
appropriation for FY twenty two
the executive recommendation
slightly higher than the LFC
he's but I want to thank both
the LFC and exec for their
recommendations for to help us
out FY twenty two we do have a
shortfall of personal services
employee benefits but we need to
fill.
Chair of the committee is also
probably well aware we start we
have the store last year years
at very high vacancy rates that
is probably my number one
mission next the half of the
year to year to the end of the
year instance fill the positions
that we are authorized by the
legislature and by the executive
we are we're on a hiring mission
from probably every agency
that's appeared before here that
it's a tough Environment hiring
what we have virtually all of
the positions that we have
current budget forty four
virtually all those positions
are being advertised
and we many of those positions
have been vacant for a period of
two or three years some cases
longer we taken positions of
bacon for two or three years so
we didn't think need to be still
for example they can attorney
position the HSD is better
without a chief financial
officer for many years it's been
a priority to try to hire chief
financial officer so we took
that bacon Attorney position
ordered it into right chief
financial officer position and
we recently brought on a chief
financial officer for the agency
and that would be very helpful
in addressing some of the water
findings of the plague the PRC
for a number of years but also
again sounding like a broken
record madam chair ensuring that
the new commission comes in with
the ministration buttons strong
stable.
Is that your gives them a chance
to be there our time as
commissioners in a better
position and perhaps we the
agency when I came on board
slide six.
For FY twenty three
appropriation yeah I don't need
to spend a lot of time on this
differences are fairly small
the LFC recommendations slightly
higher but I understand how the
practice of the committee to
take those lower recommendation
on stand respect that I would
say madam chair that we you know
we probably recommendations are.
We write we requests about to go
over twelve percent increases
was noted the Representative
recommendations no studio closer
to the seven and eight percent
increase Representative about we
would ask madam chair and
respectfully ask madam chair
members of the committee that is
you we're going to catch a plane
up we think the parchment
additional two hundred thousand
in recurring.
Funding for FY twenty three I
will get us closer to our our
goals for FY twenty three
appropriation request and allow
us to continue particularly on
what I just mentioned which is
eight our our our desire to fill
the positions that we have to
fully fill all of our FTEs again
for the the the current
commission but also for their
commission coming in and slide
it's.
I do want to just highlight this
Madam chairman Sierra one
supplemental or special request
but we we do have to are
requests that are well two ones
ARE are requests you know we we
we submitted our as a as a he
was a gentleman what the section
for for House Bill to but we did
request our program transfer
authority for up to two hundred
fifty thousand for both FY
twenty two and twenty three we
think madam chair that we could
probably get through FY twenty
two without that are language
about that program transfer
authority.
I know the office ofttimes.
Else is reluctant to to
recommend program transfer
authority.
Madam chair and members of the
members of the committee if that
could be considered for FY
twenty three I think that will
keep us from having to come back
and ask for another supplemental
appropriation year from now and
I don't think madam chair that
would be an ongoing request we
need to request a program
transfer authority for FY twenty
four four twenty five but I do
think that having it for that
one at least about one fiscal
year will will really help us
terms of getting our our our
budget to know where it needs to
be.
The final request someone to
highlight madam chair is
mentioned it section for
language all over and out and
discussing this with the FAM LFC
staff this may be better in our
section of house bill two well
but we requested to retain up to
five hundred thousand in
application fees or that we will
be collecting under the
community solar act to allow us
to hire person and meet and meet
other expenses that we know
we're going to
or in implementing that act I
think was Senate bill the the
Bill number was accessibility
for I did authorize us to to
retain fees for purposes of
administrative administrative
community solar act and this
language would allow us to do
that if it's included in section
four or included as far language
that madam chair one thank you
committee for your listening to
us today for the sport of your
dad both the executive and Elsie
over last of last fiscal year
certainly look forward to
working with you as a commission
transitions at the end of this
year this year and we're not and
I are happy to answer the
question.
The committee the start with
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for your presentation Mister
Probst I just have one question
madam chair in its on their FY
twenty one reversions Mr props
can you help me understand the
reason behind transfer are
reverting forty one million
dollars.
It just seems like a huge
number.
Madam chair and members of the
committee Representative I I
think we're not will probably
give you a better explanation on
that one and I.
Madam chair members of the
committee actually Senator but
she will start to come out the
simple reversions when you look
at our operating fund the
reversion was actually only
seven hundred eighty seven
thousand seven sixteen.
We have three funds within the
program better transportation
fund part why he's fine and will
tell the students I just brought
back to the general fund it
appears to me that those funds
are included in that forty
million number.
Okay so.
Did you go just a little bit
deeper please I'm sorry I don't
understand I know it's an
automatic sweep or something but
I
think you're quite wasn't
expended but on the ground or
fifty years.
In our operating which is a five
five zero it's the five five
zero zero zero.
General fund reversion of seven
hundred eighty seven thousand
seven sixteen but there was
twenty one point one million in
the fire protection fund six
million the fire protection fund
grants also that better
transportation fund these funds
automatically respond to the
general fund and for some reason
it looks like that those never
for included in the General Fund
reversing number forty one.
Thank you for that I guess I
guess maybe where I'm struggling
is.
Madam chair and jealousy can you
help me understand
how is it decided which funds
are reverted in which funds
going to cash balances has that
decision right.
Funds are statutorily slacked to
the general fund okay.
All right
I make it with the offline I
don't think I fully understand
it yet thank you madam chair.
Representative Lara.
Thank you madam chair a thank
you
Pros for The presentation I have
a quick question I know
The the.
The commissioners are you it's
going to have they're gonna be
they like to commissions are be
replaced by the pointed
commissioners and I'm wondering
and I'm not sure how this works
also Mexicans portion you know
we're doing are the are the
current commissioners
compensated for their time.
Mr Chairman madam chair members
of the committee and
Representative they are all five
commissioners are full time
employees their salaries are set
in statute and I believe their
annual salaries are ninety
thousand dollars we anticipate
that may change with those LFC
recommendation on this actually
with the new appointed
commission but yes all all fiber
commissioners are full time
employees with an annual salary
of ninety thousand dollars which
is second stop in statute.
Thank you Mr thank you madam
chair and I'm wondering if if if
the whole purpose of this is to
professionalizing the the
commission I I I believe and and
you had already mentioned that
so that so that LFC record that
we really need to look at the
compensation of we really want
to hire or bring in
professionals who really
understand what the process is
and how it works so that the
conversation is very important
to me I think about it we need
it we are gonna have confidence
professional people on the
commission I believe that we've
got the compensation with that
as well that's all I have Mister
chair thank you.
Thank you representative go to
representative Costello.
Thank you madam chair on.
Question we can answer this but
I see on page eight on your
guises handout that you guys
have additional FY twenty two
more language requests and FY
twenty three more language quest
allowing the press to press
programs transfer between.
Program between purpose of two
twenty fifty thousand to address
other needs in FY twenty two
exactly what does that mean
madam chair if somebody can
please answer that.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I'm not I can help you
on this one as well but we have
we have a number of programs.
We're not a kind of went through
them and then to do it as well
and we can't transport transfer
funds between those programs we
don't have the authority to do
that so heroes program transfers
if we have the authority for
example in their program support
we're running a significant
deficit in personal services
employee benefits whereas in
other programs we have surplus
or.
Funds and if we could transfer
those to.
Which is a category we're not a
the.
Madam chair members of the
committee right now we have
category transfer authority
within our programs but we can't
budget between programs and we
have three programs within the
agency so that barley which is
forty would give us the ability
to shore up shortfalls and
manage the budget if we do have
access in one fund in order to
well and one program in order to
make up budget deficits other
programs such as our programs
support program.
Thank you thank you.
Madam chair thank you guys I
just feel it kind of maybe
transferring money from program
to program might be something
kind of we take a closer look at
because you know different
programs to move money from one
program to the other to me seems
that might be kind of a.
Difficult to do with the with
the general fund okay madam
chair thank you guys until my
questions.
All right thank you very much I
am looking here on and I on the
screen I don't see any other
questions so.
Is made Representative SariÃ±ana
thank you madam chair I just
have a quick comment so do you
have enough people to
and act like smart meters in my
district in the people I talked
to but I see slightly meters all
over the state so they can
regulate how much energy they
are using when is this going to
happen or what does it take to
get some of these little things
done because they're little but
they would sure be a lot of
energy savings if we can the
people could regulate how much
energy they're using every day.
Sure.
Representative certainly agree
with that you know I think part
of our the way that we're able
we will be able to accomplish
that regardless to many other
items that are on the
commission's docket and are on
their agenda is to be able to
fill the positions that we have
we're not asking for additional
positions I don't think at this
time we need more staff
necessarily to carry out the
mission of the agency but we do
need to fill those positions
positions in support of the
commission for example the
commissioners have the authority
to hire
lexical engineer Joe Lee Thomas
the utility accountants for a
number of years of those
positions haven't been filled
still I'm not that's true
government of the commission so
we've we've made it a priority
to fill those positions so
you're not gonna happen
overnight I know but I do think
that building a budget makes
sense which I think we're doing
filling positions that we have
will allow us to the current
commission and also the new
commission coming on to to.
Rocks Google quicker in the
future on on some issues.
Right thank you madam chair
thank you.
Right you need to get a motion
place thank you madam chair and
thanks to Mr probes for
incredible work I would move the
executive recommendation.
Right second on that it is it a.
What's the difference between
that and general funders are no
general fund involved madam
chair there's a slight
difference in the general fund
less than a hundred thousand
dollars in I I would be happy if
the and the LFC madam chair is
slightly higher by forty seven
thousand dollars in general fund
already all right should we have
a second.
Second.
A motion and a second is there
any opposition seeing non thank
you very much thank you very
thank you madam chair.
Already I think we're almost
done here.
I ask that I'm gonna turn it
over now to Representative Lara
and then I believe that
Representative small and I need
to visit and jump onto another
soon is this our last HSD.
There is the office of the
superintendent of insurance and
I believe State Land commission
after so there's one more after
this one as we've got two more
today but we'd like to go ahead
and let the Representative Lara
fire up here you will be jumping
off here just a few minutes
madam chair before you continue
where am I.
I can't see me anywhere on the
screen.
Yes it gets back to our lack of
a better available technology
but you are all on the screen
Representative Trujillo I
wondered about that I noticed
that a number of people are are
looking to try to find
themselves so to speak on the
screen you're not the only one
that is text me on that and I
know that we have two or three
people that have not been able
to
There there ability to be able
to talk and participate has been
very limited which is also
disconcerting to me.
You can hear me I'm fine I just
didn't want to think that walked
away okay we we see and we see
with our all the different
backgrounds so we're.
There and.
Let's go ahead let's turn this
over to Representative Lara and
then here in a few minutes a
small and I'll be going at.
Thank you madam chair.
I guess the next the next agency
that we have is the R. the
superintendent insurance and we
can have the LFC staff.
Bring us up to date on all.
Mr chairman members of the
committee again Amanda Dick
Peddie fiscal analyst with the
legislative finance committee
from the executive we are joined
by analyst Donna Rivera I should
be commenting on the executive
recommendation for us from the
office of the superintendent of
insurance we have the
superintendent of insurance
Russell told and when we're done
going through the differences
you will go through a
presentation.
So.
The insurance that you can find
a supplemental documents and the
volume to you on page one
seventy one the LFC there is no
general fund revenue in the in
this agency.
The LFC recommendation find the
five point seven percent
increase while the executive
recommendation provides about a
hundred and forty two percent
increase.
over all the executive
recommendation includes about
sixty four point six million
dollars of other revenue more
than the LFC and most of that
difference is going to be from
the health care affordability
funded will go over that as we
go through the agency.
The executive recommendation
includes sixty five million
dollars from the health care
affordability fund comprised of
thirty million dollars for small
business health insurance
premium reductions in thirty
five million dollars for
costsharing to expand access to
health care the legislature may
consider appropriating health
care affordability fund revenues
for these initiatives are
through eight special
appropriation or other type of
appropriation.
performance analyst reach
consensus on all performance
measures and targets and Donna
did you want to comment on the
overview before we go through
the P. codes.
No I don't need to we'll just
talk about each peak code and
the details of that thank you
I'll go ahead and move forward
were looking at the P. code
seven ninety eight which is
titled special revenues
And the difference is one
million dollars be the executive
is recommending one million
dollars more in following the
agency requests level this
particular Pico functions as a
the flow through program there
are no positions tied to this if
you'll notice all of the funding
goes to other financing so that
goes to the other parts of the
agency.
I will go ahead and move on to
key code seven ninety five
insurance policy.
So this is where we see that
sixty five million dollars for
the health care affordability
provide
the executive recommendation
includes funding for two FTE to
manage all the health care
affordability fund in addition
to approximately sixty five
million dollars from the fund to
administer programs and making
healthcare more accessible and
affordable for small businesses
and individuals.
The LFC recommendation
prioritizes funding T. person in
the program including a legal
assistant in an actuary.
The LFC recommendation
includesd.
One more at even the executive
recommendation I apologize that
should actually be two more at
the.
I'll make a note of that.
Both recommendations support
agency requests to transfer FTE
and funding from the patient
compensation program.
Thank you anything to add an
insurance policy I'd like to add
a couple of points about this
particular up he code the reason
that the executive is sixty five
million will almost sixty five
million more than the LFC is the
executive supported the agency
requests and legislation which
the legislature passed last year
that's chapter one hundred and
thirty six it creates and funds
the office directs the office of
the superintendent to manage the
fund and lower health care costs
for New Mexicans every year this
is going to be an annual of
programs at the state office of
the superintendent is now
responsible for so recommending
it as a special is not something
that we see is.
Necessary and besides that the
legislative finance committee
did not find this recommendation
in at specials list of specials
this is not general fund it is
of something that the agency
needs to do statutorily and the
executive also recommended four
point five new FTE.
More than the agency has right
now and also recommended if
you'll notice the personal
servants hurts personal services
category is larger funded that
they Fund all the positions that
are currently vacant which are
twelve they can positions if
necessary they can reclassify
those as they need and with that
I'm I can move to the next peak
so.
All of COVID Mr chairman.
Please.
So I can just add there's a
couple things going on in this
program with the health care
affordability funds that make it
a little confusing.
So.
The agency requests about two
million dollars when when both
LFC and DFA received the request
to manage the find now LFC does
include funding to manage a
bunch the LFC recommendation
includes about seven hundred
fifty thousand dollars for that
purpose.
The sixty five million dollars
was not requested at the time
that the budgets were submitted
LFC does its budgets you know
very early in the fall as
members are well aware of so the
only reason that the legislature
may consider funding to sixty
five million in another part is
because we didn't receive the
request at the time so just this
is a no.
Thank you thank you for that do
we have anything else to be
honest.
Yes I'd like to go ahead and
proceed to the final key code
which is the patient
compensation fund
the left the recommendations are
pretty closely next are close to
each other there's only a forty
thousand dollar difference in
other costs category and this is
basically just flow through
expenditures that pay for
physician settlements and with
that I'll go ahead and turn it
over to of Russell told the
superintendent of insurance if
that's okay with Mr chair thank
you yes please superintendent
all.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee it's
good to be with you again.
We have a shortage now whatever
size short power point.
Interxion that will pull up here
now.
I want to note the twenty twenty
one
the calendar year was a very
successful year for our
operations thanks to your
support.
We saved a considerable amount
of money through our consumer
systems bureau and I managed
health care bureau who both of
which deal with complaints from
the consuming public.
For the first time certainly in
my memory.
We received a not qualified or
if there were zero findings in
our some of you remember there
was a long ago that we had an
audit was sixteen findings we
have done everything we can to
get to where we are today and
its our commitment to you to
stay there.
We also last year received a
full five year accreditation.
from the national association of
insurance commissioners this is
a very important complement the
less you think this is something
this routine.
in the last meeting of the
national association of
insurance commissioners to
states were put on probation and
one did not receive
accreditation and one was given
a severe warning.
So the fact that we came through
with flying colors I think is
quite an accomplishment.
You're aware of that because of
your efforts we were we put caps
on insulin.
To no more than twenty five
dollars per month.
Our efforts over the last two
years have dramatically
increased the number of no cost
or low cost health plans that
are available on the New Mexico
health insurance exchange also
known as BeWellNM.
Because of our guidance.
And our world volume continues
to increase we license three
thousand a hundred twenty one
companies this year and we have
a one almost two hundred twenty
five thousand the producer
licenses all those come with
applications that we have to
process on deadline.
Thank.
So as the analyst both noted we
don't get any general funds we
generate our own revenue and you
see the various sources of that
revenue this past year are
projected revenue for twenty
three almost seventy nine
million dollars that we will
bring in to the agency in the
state.
Now we don't keep all that money
of course.
so here on slide four or the
budget recommendations or budget
for twenty two was about yes
forty seven point five and the
big drop that you see for twenty
three has to do with the health
care affordability fund which is
Donna noted is sixty five
million dollars.
And we're gonna talk a little
bit more about the but as you
see for the most part the
recommendations are.
ET similar.
Our general operations
includes about one point nine
million dollars the other for
these other fund sources other
fund programs including our
fraud program.
Okay so on slide five.
We requested one point nine
million dollars for an
additional twenty five positions
and I know you're thinking well
let's.
Really an exorbitant request but
the fact of the matter is that
we have not begun to recover
from the thirty four plus
positions that were given up by
my predecessor in the last year
the Martinez administration.
Those were staff we desperately
need so as you see the LFC is
recommended six DFA for new
positions but at a higher
funding level what we're
requesting.
Is that our position can be
increased to a hundred and six
and we can manage within the
amounts that are proposed in
terms of our personnel budget.
We like flexibility to bring on
additional staff.
Compensation fund which is all
of you know from last year's
bruising debate on house bill
seventy five.
is the fund that is used to
compensate individuals who are
harmed by the health care
system.
LFC has gratefully recommended
thirty million dollar general
fund request to eliminate some
deficit in the fund there was
created years ago.
And without the US thirty
million dollars the amount of
monies that doctors would have
to pay to receive the protection
from the fund would really go up
quite dramatically.
So we recommend that you include
that in your recommendations for
the OSI.
Slide six.
For the help for the bill to
fund as you heard from Amanda.
Their record the recommendation
for the sixty five million did
not get over to LFC until after
November one.
Because our studies.
Actuarial studies are required
had not concluded.
We obviously recommend approval
of the DFA.
Recommendations and slide seven
gives you a little more
information.
About the affordability fund.
It's funded by an increase in
the surcharge amount in health
insurance premiums to.
It replaces what was the federal
tax that ended a year ago.
The money is that go into the
health care affordability fund
do not revert to the general
fund.
The surcharge revenues are split
between the general fund and the
health care affordability fund
as you see there the year once
but as forty five to the general
fund fifty five to the Health
portability Fund that split
remains in place in twenty four
and then in fiscal year twenty
five the split goes to seventy
percent for the general fund and
thirty percent.
For the affordability fund you
may ask why is that.
Split in the early years is to
build up reserves to capture
ongoing cost in subsequent
years.
Now importantly the general fund
revenue was done in such a way
that it will be more than the
state chair of increased MCO
costs managed care organization
cost as you'll see on the next
slide.
That's where the bulk of these
payments come from.
Most of the health insurance
that's paid for the state here
in the bright yellow is covered
through self insured so they do
not pay the surcharge Tax.
The fund for the bill to program
which will generate about a
hundred and sixty five million
dollars in the next fiscal year
will split will be split as I
told you is go back one.
As you heard from analyst thirty
five million will be used to
reduce premiums out of pocket
costs.
For individuals who are
purchasing.
Health insurance on the New
Mexico health insurance exchange
and we propose to put a program
in place to reduce the premiums
of small businesses across the
state that offer health
insurance by ten percent.
And we define and a lot of funds
small business is an employer
with fifty or fewer employees.
As I noted go ahead
thank.
On this next slide.
Percent of the surtax revenue
comes from the Medicaid MCO.
And this is something that
should delight most of the
committee members because.
That Medicaid MCO payment is
largely made up of federal funds
the state share considerably
less.
Yes Sir question that the.
Representative Crowder brought
up last year the surtax does not
apply to Medicare plans or
Medicare supplemental plans Mr
commercial health insurance
plans so again the split forty
five fifty five.
So next slide I promised you
just a few.
We are doing our best to meet
new challenges.
but we are.
Undermanned understaffed and we
need more resources to perform
the expanded work to go to
Representative Anderson very
legit question we are looking at
ways to reduce the amount of of
manpower and manual work that is
done still amazes me that in
twenty twenty two we have a very
large and sophisticated
insurance companies worth
billions of dollars to send us
reams of paper over here and
sending us instead of sending us
something digital.
We're going to try to tackle
that issue this year.
We urge House Appropriations to
approve the LFC recommendations
with the addition of the.
Health care affordability fund
funding.
And the increased position co.
As I hope you've all realized
over the last few years we are
not the agency right here is a
few years ago who is known for
doing as little as possible
we've grown and refocused our
efforts we've gone from multiple
plastered findings to non.
We've reduced our very large
previous vacancy rate and we've
tackled.
Rules and regulations to address
the insurance needs of the
twenty first century.
We're serving for more consumers
that we ever have before.
That wouldn't be possible
without your support so we thank
you for that and we urge you
consideration.
At this point Mr chairman I'll
be happy to.
Take any questions.
Thank you superintendent all of
our we can stop sharing the
screen so we could see on
everyone's faces please.
Thank.
Or three take that down please.
Okay so if we have any questions
from the committee.
Representative you.
Thank you Mr chairman.
In getting a lot of email as you
all probably have regarding the
Your portability Fund and based
on conversations with some of
these folks have been sending
the information to me and what
the superintendent told us that
I I recognize that there are
Full issues passed the
cabinet level secretary issues
that might warrant.
Some folks to be our little bit
more conservative in the
recommendations but I feel that
there is a legitimate call
cause to move forward with the
recommendation that
superintendent total has
suggested it is the LFC
recommendation with the health
care fund
component to it I don't think
that we can afford to lose
anymore in this particular
agency because it dragged its
feet so long in the past.
Provide support Sen momentum and
inclusion.
In two in you know for this the
citizens of New Mexico and I
hope that this committee will we
reconsider or consider strongly.
The the superintendents comments
about
support for the agency the way
he's playing that thank you so
much.
Thank you madam chair
representative your hero I
appreciate that.
I want to note that from my
perspective LFC has been
incredibly supportive of this
agency had recognized early on.
Of the state we were in.
When I took over and they've
continued to provide great
directions systems to us and we
appreciate that very much.
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
superintendent told I I just
wanted to echo Representative
Trujillo comments and and ask
Amanda if indeed since that
request did not come in before
the deadline if it would be her
opinion that it would be an
appropriate thing to go ahead
and and included the addition of
the health care portability Act
funding.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Representative
Sweetser of course so I
apologize but was a little
unclear in my opening statement
it wasn't received in time and
because it was received later
even after LESC had done its
recommendation up for special
Boller mental probation LFC
staff including myself and
director Abby Abby had submitted
the inclusion of that is a
special appropriation for HFC
approval so it's it's definitely
on our radar.
Okay so thank you Mr chair just
say that again you've included
in the special not in this
agency budget.
Madam chair Mr Chairman
representative.
Use me and then you're on the
special supplementals and
deficiencies Committee.
We're still working on it so
we're going to have another
meeting of that's words that.
And thank you madam chair I
guess for the rest of the
committee I was just trying to
make sure that we didn't end up
with that with the a big mess so
I was just trying for
clarification thank you madam
chair.
It.
Thank you Representative and now
I have a Representative Brown.
Mr chair
the question I have to the
superintendent is regarding a
performance measures on page
five of our package.
And it's about two thirds of the
way down the page
and it is regarding percent of
the criminal division complaints
process and recommended for
either further administrative
action or closure within ninety
days
for the consensus target for
twenty two twenty three there is
no consensus and we don't see
that very often I just wonder if
you could explain why there was
not a consensus reached.
I'm not sure to give you a good
answer Madam chair of.
Mr Chairman Representative
Brown.
Mr Chairman representative Frank
I take a shot at that.
That that's incorrect we did
reach consensus on target
all of the with you would what
that number should be it should
be the eighty five percent we
have a new budget system and I
just want.
Okay thank you very much.
Well I was gonna say
representative of ground that
that is an area that's been
under staffed and under managed.
we've made changes there.
And we're doing much more in
terms of insurance fraud that we
did in the past historically
that unit has been focused on
auto theft.
And auto insurance fraud.
We're trying to resent that.
Thank you very much answer.
Thank you Representative around
our next we have our
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair this question
is for the superintendent
You know in talking about
additional staffing support
were the office to have more
staff in the compliance division
how much of revenue do you
anticipate
just I would be able to bring in
as an increase I'll tell you
candidly we have not made that
estimate.
Okay.
You know as you well know
when we file actions it
typically takes years.
First actually see the revenue
that comes from that.
Okay thank you very much thank
you Mr chair no more questions
thank you Representative any any
more questions from the
committee on the committee.
Okay seeing none thank you to
down by
of super didn't told anything
else before we close.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you and with that I would
like to a motion please.
Representative do you.
Yes I move the LFC budget with
all of the.
Discussion information that we
talked about that will be
considered and specials and the.
And the other components of the
subcommittee.
Thank you Representative the
wider second.
In addition.
A second by Representative
Garcia
with that we do we have any
opposition to the motion.
Seeing none are we.
Where we move to accept that as
the LFC recommendation.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
Thank you superintendent all.
Okay thank you and how we can
move on to our next presenter
the commissioner of public lands
madam secretary madam
commissioner.
Are you here yes I can see you
thank you now if we can start
with the with our LFC staff.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Caitlyn one analyst with the LFC
as you said we have commissioner
of public lands Stephanie Garcia
Richard with us and from DFA
Andrew Miner I'm going to very
quickly add go over the
recommendation because there are
no differences between LESC and
DFA.
I just wanted to start with a
reminder on revenue the state
land office is funded by the
land maintenance fund which
derives revenue from activities
on state trust land that do not
permanently to the resource and
both recommendations increase
revenue by five percent.
Both three happy to increase
enforcement and accountability
efforts on state trust lands and
the recommendations also
increased funding for contract
attorneys vehicle replacement
and I. T. infrastructure
upgrades LFC in DFA staff
reached consensus on all
performance measure targets
that's all I have it in your
head anything that he can go
ahead or otherwise we'll turn
things over to commissioners
hearing thank you.
Thank you thank you good
afternoon Mister chairman
members the committee is Kaelin
said there are no differences
and so I have no further
comments thank you.
Thank you Sir and now what we
can now you're from from our
from our.
You Mr.
Mr I'm sorry.
Thank you Mr chairman everyone
hear me okay.
So I do have a presentation here
Mister chairman so I'm gonna go
ahead and share my screen if
that's okay please do thank you.
As you all can see hopefully.
this is our presentation for our
FY twenty three budget and
I am going to begin even before
I introduce the staff that I
have on with me I want to begin
by just making sure that you
walk away from this presentation
knowing three things number one
not only are there no
differences between the DFA and
and LFC budgets but both.
Both budgets fully fund our
agency request and we are just
I'm very grateful and
appreciative appreciative for
all of the work of analyst one
analyst minor to to help us
through our our budget request
for FY twenty three the second
thing I want you to here is that
we have a very modest increase
that we are requesting from the
committee and from the
legislature this time around of
of five percent and that is.
In comparison with with request
that you're going to be hearing
a fairly modest one and finally
the vacancy rate currently from
today in the land office is
seven percent we've got two new
hires in the pipe taking us down
to six percent but I can't claim
that yet so sitting before you
right now today January twenty
eighth we have a seven percent
vacancy rate that is
considerably lower than any
other agency of our size any
other agency with over it with a
hundred plus employees
we have the lowest by far
vacancy rate of all of those are
agencies so madam chair are Mr
chairman and and committee
we do a whole lot with just a
little bit and so I hope that
you have in front of you the
hard copies that we delivered of
the presentation.
I'm going to go ahead and just
skip right away to slide up I.
Because that's it's kind of our
bragging rights.
Slide talks about
The record revenue that we've
had for the past three years and
Bloomberg just put out an
article today that talked about
oil prices right now being at a
seven year high they put a
Goldman Sachs in that article
that that Goldman thinks that
oil prices will be at a hundred
dollars a barrel by Q. three of
this year and so we are just
seeing these incredible trends
not only in oil prices but
really in production and
efficiencies and as you all know
that that means record breaking
revenue but but for what what it
means for you all and for the
taxpayers of New Mexico is that
is a billion dollars y'all don't
have to find out of general fund
that is a billion dollars that
New Mexico taxpayers don't have
to pay for these very vital
services like education and
health care so I wanted to make
sure to bring that to your
attention Mr chairman.
From here I'm going to skip to
slide seven all of the other
slides to start the presentation
are a little bit of a summary of
the office for for folks who are
not familiar they are we do list
are beneficiaries out and things
like that this slide shows the
bulk of what our agency requests
It's it's a few things so.
Because of shipping shortages
because of just a backlog of of
different items we have not been
able to properly
upgrade our field vehicles in
quite a long time and you can
imagine that our field staff put
mileage on those vehicles like
nobody's business so we've got
vehicles with over a hundred
thousand miles on them we've got
a couple of vehicles with over a
hundred sixty thousand miles on
them and part of this request is
to fund that refresh of your
goals in addition you all I'm
sure very familiar with are on
guard system that we just
modernized very successfully we
just do the roll out of that
modernization actually right
around this time last year with
no hiccups we have seen that we
can take that modernization even
further.
In terms of purchase of I. T.
equipment and updates to to
software and start to realize
the revenue around some of our
renewable projects as well so we
do have a separate C. two
request Mr Chairman but I'm not
gonna talk about here today of
two million dollars for that for
that I. T. program but in
addition to that upgrades and
refreshes of hardware and
software is included in this
five percent request we're also
X. requesting an expansion of
three FTE like Caitlyn said
We originally had one individual
who was responsible for our
remediation program and
essentially this is where
lessees have to remediate the
lands back to its original state
through clean up to the seating
of it it is quite technical it
requires a science background
and this person one individual
was being inundated with a lot
of paper work and compliance and
so he recommended to us that
rather than have all of that
work best on the shoulders of
one person that we actually
create a little mini remediation
division and so that's what this
request us and throughout this
presentation you'll see
pictures you'll see more metrics
around our efforts to remediate
cleanup hold my sis accountable.
So that's what that is.
All right so from.
I'm going to go on to slide
eight.
Read about our vacancy right in
the beginning and just I'm I
want to let you all know this
takes a team we have some rock
stars in our HR office who are
just really great at being on
top of spoke paperwork but in
addition to that all of our
hiring managers all of our
exempt of appointed.
Leadership know the importance
of having the right people for
the right jobs in the seats we
we can do this work without
without.
Their efforts to ensure that our
vacancy rate looks like this.
Here is a list of some of our
accomplishments
and I've I've talked about these
throughout the years but notably
of enforcement and
accountability program for the
first time ever cultural
resources protection for the
first time ever outdoor
recreation and renewable energy.
Your some of our oil and gas
activity slides
so we have here of gas I'm at
the top oil at the bottom this
year Mr chairman for the first
time natural gas hit six dollars
and so as you all know that
affects consumers in their
pocketbooks for the
beneficiaries and for the trust
it is a good.
More charts one gas production
over time.
Interestingly for the first time
this year natural gas became a
larger portion of our revenue.
Traditionally it had been of the
low twenty percent and this year
it was.
The four percent.
All right.
Even though we've got those
strong production numbers and
strong prices we all on this
call know that this resource
will not be with us forever
fossil fuels will not be with us
for ever and so we commissioned
an independent study to look at
what the land office could do to
make up the revenue and I just
want to be clear we're not
saying that we can make up the
billion dollars with this
diversification but we would
like some diversified revenue
streams to start building at the
Land Office for the eventuality
that fossil fuels will not give
us a billion dollars.
so one of the large projects
that we've done this is the
study by the way
if anyone would like a copy we
actually have links of that on
our website so please let me
know if you like us to send you
a copy so one of the sort of
notable projects that we have
done within this past year has
been the lease up at messa del
sole with the City of
Albuquerque to provide Netflix
land for their brand new studio
so we're very excited about that
particular projects for those of
you Albuquerque legislators you
know that east central north
east central
Southeast central sorry
southeast central.
Is it always in the best shape a
lot of those let lots our State
Land we've partnered with the a
greater Albuquerque Housing
Authority to create some senior
affordable housing is called the
luminaria housing project we'd
love for you all anyone on this
call to attend our ribbon
cutting for this project in
April or two I have a toward it
so please let me know if if you
would like to be included in
that we're very proud of this
project.
And then obviously State Land is
prime for wind and solar energy
development we've got some of
the best resource in the country
we've been told by developers I
I feel like I've told you this
multiple times every time I'm in
front of you but it cannot be
overstated we have increased all
of our metrics around megawatts
produced on state land.
Is on state land of projects on
state land and so we're just
very proud of of these metrics
and proud of the small office of
renewable energy for just
keeping up with all of the
request we have been inundated
flooded with requests from
developers to to develop of
renewable energy on student.
Chair of our call the wind farm
in Torrance County.
And then outdoor recreation this
does not bring in a lot of
dollars but this provides access
to the public New Mexicans
especially so that they are able
to enjoy their state trust land.
And we'd like to do that
responsibly there are certain
locations that we are
highlighting its destination
spots and that.
Little office that could does
very well in.
Highlighting and showcasing our
state trust land that's
available for outdoor recreation
in addition we signed a four
year easement with game and fish
to allow public hunters in New
Mexico to access eight point
eight million acres of state
land for hunting.
so I talked about
diversification some things are
this right economic development
partnering with local
municipalities.
Is that diversification effort
that might be a little bit less
this.
You all know we have thirty five
hundred grazing lessee.
Aber culture is incredibly
important to this office has
been for as long as we've been
around.
We would like to partner with
our greasing Westies to
incentivize some of the
practices that will not only
affect soil health.
But also may make them
additional revenue and make the
office additional revenue so if
you look at some of these things
we are we are working right now
on some pilots we are partnering
with some of our grazing Westies
throughout the state
on on some of these efforts and
we will keep you informed of of
our efforts to partner with are
praising the seas around
incentivising some of these
practices.
Got a lot of questions about
thirty by thirty house thirty by
thirty going to affect State
Land and you know we are we are
wanting to work with our grazing
lessees around.
The protections that thirty by
thirty calls for.
And then finally.
Near and dear to my heart our
enforcement and accountability
program to the very first time
ever we have.
Allow our divisions to really
comb through our leases to
ensure that everyone is
compliant.
Clean up.
Ensuring that lease payments are
on time ensuring in our audits
that we don't we are told back
royalty payments.
This has been the result it's
pretty phenomenal this is this
is over one year of this program
being
Being in in in force and you
know.
We do take folks support who are
non responsive but that's a last
resort very often are let's see
is want to work with us to bring
themselves compliant to bring
their leases compliant and so
we're just very grateful for all
the work that are in particular
our legal division heads this
this particular program up here
are some additional metrics
around that
Enforcement accountability
program.
She
protecting cultural resources as
you all know
We have been working hand in
glove with are all of the tribal
governments in New Mexico to
ensure that here's some pictures
of
Sites on state trust fund the
need to be cleaned up.
To ensure that we are protecting
cultural resources to ensure
that we are properly engaging
with tribes in tribal
consultation and the result of
all of that work over three
years essentially has been the
passage of our new cultural
properties will change which
essentially says anytime you did
on state land you got to make
sure you're not destroying
something first.
this this particular a rural.
Was published in August we had
our public hearing in October at
the public hearing in October we
were requested to give more time
for public input
To to be considered for this
role and so we extended that
public input period through
December six right now we're
combing through all of that
public comment because as you
all know part of the rule
change.
When you publish the finalize
rule you publish the public
comment that came in and our
response to that public comment
so right now that is a process
that's being under gone in the
land office we expect full
implementation to to being
spring or early summer at this
particular rule.
And Mr chairman that is it for
my presentation.
Thank you commissioner and now
we will go to the committee
the first person I have is
Representative Anderson and then
the Representative Ezzell.
Thank you commissioner for your
presentation
And and congratulations on your
record here.
Well.
In FY twenty one hope.
You will see that in FY twenty
two.
commissioner I have a couple
questions on the handout
and I'll be sure to into the
point of Preciado answers the
equal because we're are running
late and that we can't pursue
this after the hearing or at
another time.
On page nine when we talk about
fiscal year twenty one
accomplishments the first two
bullets.
Of course start with the record
here one point two six billion
dollars of revenue.
Commissioner and data.
The second bullet is to me talks
about executed seven defer
renewable leases commissioners
is we talked I believe in the
past
I have a continuing interest in
trying to understand the
contribution that New Mexico is
going to receive from renewable
energy revenues so when I see
the two bullet side by side like
that my question is to what
extent did.
Seven additional renewable
energy leases contributed to the
sept one point two six billion
dollar.
Record.
So Mr chairman and and
Representative but let me just
once again be clear that in our
diversification efforts we are
not expecting the diversified
revenue streams to make up
dollar for dollar the billion
dollars from extractive
industries I just want to be
clear about that I've never said
that I hope nobody gets that
impression from me.
The revenue from renewable
energy projects is it.
Millions of dollars however that
is over the lifetime of those
projects.
So if you would like we can we
can line out the seven projects
with their projected revenue
most of our projects were per
projected to be about forty to
forty five years and and we can
project that out for you but
that is over the life of the of
the project thank you
commissioner my only point would
be that I'm wondering if there's
true equity in the reflection of
revenues received if we're
counting lifetime revenues for
one energy source or revenue
source and one year revenues for
another revenue source because
we are trying to then I'll add
this commissioner.
When I hear that the objective
on renewable energy is not
revenue
it I say to myself no set policy
or statute.
I don't know that I necessarily
said the objective is not
revenue.
But.
But certainly a sustainable
renewable energy source is an
additional.
Is an additional motive for for
seeking these projects out.
I I I would be curious whether
it's policy or statute only
because I don't think.
Of the statute necessarily sets
out an expectation of for
renewable energy revenues and I
do believe long term that New
Mexico must look to maximizing
the revenue off of the state
lands and I am concerned but
I'll I'll get to that minute if
I could I wanted to
Move to let's see.
One page twelve I just wanted to
point out that I believe the.
Willing oil and gas activity in
revenue for the one year
revenues.
When I look at gas going from
ten percent to twenty four
percent my question is I believe
the twenty four percent is more
reflective of the last decade
in two thousand nineteen is that
correct.
Relations Mr chairman in
percentage in other words I've
always felt natural gas is about
a quarter in oil it's about
three quarters.
For our revenues Mr chairman and
representative it's it's
actually been a less less than a
quarter.
So so it's closer to the ten
percent.
Correct thank you.
I stand corrected on that.
Then.
I
just want to I think go to page
seventeen.
In in patient do not I see the
Six.
Six yes you're making in
renewable energy.
And I see that operations are up
one hundred and twenty five
percent.
Megawatt potential was up a
hundred and twenty two percent.
Active leases are up one hundred
twenty five percent.
But what concerns me
commissioner is revenue
generated is up only eighty nine
percent.
And it portrays to me a picture
that revenue generated is
falling farther and farther
behind if this were to be a
trend question Mr chairman and
Representative I think what this
is referring to is from the
beginning of when when I took
office so the revenues that we
had from renewables from when I
took office to win this chart
was created we have had an
eighty nine percent increase in
revenue.
And commissioners that eighty
nine percent.
Revenue increased the wife of
the project.
Mr chairman and and
Representative correct yeah we
we calculate all revenue.
For the purposes of of this
presentation all revenue from
renewable energy is calculated
on the life of the project
correct.
Commissioner I I appreciate your
presentation of look forward to
your continued success I simply
caution you that New Mexico
cannot afford to allow renewable
energy not to pay revenues to
the state in the future.
which are important to the
education of our school children
and I know you're aware of that
thank you very much.
Thank you Representative
Anderson Representative Ezzell
all of our representatives are.
Thank you chairman.
Commissioner pursue.
I do have some questions for
you.
What percentage of our state is
state land and what percentage
is federal land
and and Representative I do know
that I yes about twenty percent
of the state is statement I do
not know the number of federal.
Okay because it's very important
to me when they were talking
about the thirty by thirty.
I am and I'm totally against
that if it was that way for
every state across you it might
be a different story but I'm
afraid that they're going to.
Really affect our western.
And and that gives me great
concern.
What is your office doing as far
as the ESA get those
I know that we've had problems
in the fact passed with the
lizard in with the.
The grant to what are you all
doing to make sure that our
state lands are accessible for
exploration for ranching use for
easements as far as electricity
and gas and everything else so
what are you all doing to ensure
that that is going to be the
case thank you for the question
Mr chairman and representative
Ezzell so essentially there are
particular areas throughout the
state.
Where we focus our efforts
On these conservation candidate
conservation agreements with
users of state lands and
essentially those folks paid to
come into a system where
particularly
remediation efforts are asked of
these folks and as they are
doing they are development as
they are building out their site
plans these remediation efforts
on behalf of the species that
you just referred to are
included in their in their
projects.
Madam commissioner I guess my
concern is we so.
What was going on when they were
talking about the sand dunes
lizard and and the amount of
problems we're going to have and
the lesser prairie chicken I
said grant relief but is the
lesser prairie chicken
We.
I know that industry down there
and I'm not talking strictly the
oil and gas industry have
talking about.
A ranchers are utility companies
the list goes on and on.
Because they were making the
steps necessary to make sure
that that that chicken was
protected especially during the
breeding season and.
I'm moving we have.
We have bagels down there we
have all sorts of predatory
animals down there and also
feral hogs and
It's not necessarily these
activities through the ages
through the businesses that I
named off that is detrimental.
To be unable to protect those
endangered species so that was
my concern there madam chair Mr
chair and commissioner Richard
also whenever we're talking
about the jobs that are created
and what it does for our state
school and everything else that
the oil and gas industry does
fund.
I guess my concern there.
Because there are lots of wind
turbines going up in our area
there's lots of solar panels
going up solar farms going to.
And are they going to be held to
the same standards of clean up.
As well as oil and gas industry
or the compromise or any of the
other extractive industries
throughout our state I very much
appreciate this question Mr
chairman and and it's something
that I get on the Senate side
very often from Senator Kernan
so for our oil and gas leases
the text of the lease the
context all the terms of the
lease were decided by this body
back in the nineteen forties
been updated in the seventies
but those are set in statute I
have no control over the terms
of the oil and gas lease between
this office and a developer.
So when you're different we
develop those pieces here so
right away we put in those costs
and and that is a of a period of
time that progress over the
length of this project there are
demolition remediation costs
built into the lease built into
lease payments that increase
over time as the project becomes
of older and older to ensure
that the money for the cleanup
of this project is built right
into the lease.
If you would like a copy of one
of our just.
Sample leases are we'd be happy
to provide that to you Mr
chairman and and you could see
there is there's an actual lease
term a whole section of the
least that is dedicated to the
demolition of the project okay
there there in lies might follow
up question on this right now
the OCD is in charge of ensuring
that the oil and gas industry
does follow certain regulations
and if there is a problem or if
there is no ban abandonment of
whatever that is taken care of
through the SCG is there going
to be an agency said that
strictly to deal with our
renewables because we do we do
know that there was a problem
last year in the state of Texas
we're one of those big turbines
rose up it.
You I know that you're aware of
everything that took place
during that so is there going to
be an agency set up to deal with
this so I know for transmission
that agency is the public
regulation commission
do you.
All all of the transmission
projects have to have to be
certified and overseen by the
PRC for the visual.
Solar farms good will get your
and I I don't want to tell you.
Mr Coveney you representative
Representative thank you.
I'm sorry I missed you last.
yeah I mean I'm asking I'm
joined by one of my deputies
said deputy of operations do you
have any knowledge about who
oversees the safety of or
regulation of wind farms.
Mr Chairman representative I I
think you had economy in the PRC
regulates that and you know we
have I'm not aware of any new
agency contemplated to regulated
as OCD does.
Okay that gives me a little bit
of concern there I mean if one
industry sale to certain
standards I think that all the
renewable should be held to the
same standards as well because
even with the wind turbines
would even with the solar panels
the solar farms are going up we
still have to have the
extractive industries on board
because of everything that
these.
Renewable to use from the number
of.
Terms of seem it down hold to
the plastics that is about to
the copper that is involved to
the oil that is involved too I
mean.
With I want to make sure.
That we are not safe okay it's
okay for you all to do this but
your weather industry no way so
pleased please keep that in mind
commissioner Garcia Richard like
to visit with you later on about
this about take up so much
Committee tap thank you for your
responses Mr chairman thank you
very much.
Thank you Representative and
just a reminder we can stick to
budget questions are right next
is our Representative Chatfield
please.
Thank you Mr good to see the
state of this afternoon.
just to start out New Mexico's
fifty two point six percent
private land twenty percent
State Land rest of its federal.
Twenty percent.
So.
Just a question about the arc
surveys and this relates back to
the budget I think.
Is you know I've businesses when
you know that I've managed a
watershed project for a good
number of years one year we
spent five hundred thousand
dollars half a million dollars
on our surveys different
agencies have different
departments and different
requirements as to the level of
the archaeologist performing
that survey variety of saying so
what my question to you is are
there different levels of
surveys say for instance if I'm
putting it in the replacing an
existing friends as opposed to
putting in a
Something we're excavating
School putting into fell a few
Joe skyscraper or something or
digging alone and the clearing
land there are there are
different levels of arc surveys
and are there different
qualifications for those of
people performing that service.
Thank you for those questions Mr
chairman and you know this gives
me the opportunity just to say
that within the rule we also
tried to
communicate to to the public
that are remediation projects in
particular Land Office would
pick up the cost of our services
for those projects because
remediation is something we do
in partnership with our lessees
and something that benefits the
trust has a benefit back to the
trust in addition any
agricultural improvements
of a certain size can also
qualify for our services are to
be paid for through a compliance
program at the Land Office so we
wanted to just highlight those
two particular areas to let the
public in our lessees know that
those are are you know we're
we're not.
The purpose of our survey was
not to increase the cost of the
project.
But to your question Mr Chairman
There are differences actually
there are level one two and
three of of of arc surveys I I
never knew about that too I
started to part in this process
but we are requiring at the Land
Office the same level for any
kind of our survey if you are
disturbing new ground that is
kind of the rule of thumb so if
you're just replace replacing a
stock tank replacing offense
that's not.
Additional ground service that's
not new ground disturbance if
you're putting in a whole new
structure that is when the arc
surveys will be required it'll
be the same arcs level of our
survey required throughout state
trust land
we there is a list of about a
hundred our contractors on the
state historic preservation
office website that can be
chosen or our in house
archaeologist like I said before
we'll we'll do those surveys
will will cover the cost of the
surveys if the benefit to that
is back to the trust like in a
remediation project.
Chair
Replacing an existing friends
are archer raise not required.
That is correct.
Thank you.
Thank you
Representative Chatfield and now
Representative Crowder.
Representative Crowder.
I'm sorry I thought you said
Representative what first I
apologize I'm sorry no it's
okay.
Madam secretary I've got
something to I was gonna bring
up it is troubling me a little
bit so I'd like to reach the
subject just a little bit it has
to do with your to fees and
charges for easements across
state land.
Brought to my attention that a
lot of projects that are funded
with state dollars federal
dollars local government
dollars.
That the fees are charging to
cross State Land it is
significantly higher than than
the rest of the ranch land I am
talking about in the rural areas
across ranch land in in
undisturbed land I'm not talking
about Albuquerque Santa Fe Los
crucis or down the Rio Grande
corridor.
It.
Truck from a financial
standpoint it it's difficult for
me to be comfortable funding
projects the state dollars in
finding out of the state agency
is is.
According quite a bit of that
money much more so than the
other lands and I'd like to sit
down and talk with you about
that in in help help me
understand it I.
I don't know how you're coming
up with the value for your ease
that doesn't seem right to me
and I'd like to talk to you
about that and and find out what
the differences between I
understand he's been Albuquerque
much for that and he's been out
on a ranch but
It's becoming very uncomfortable
for me to hear reports from
others and I'd like to sit down
and talk to you about that.
I appreciate that Mr chairman
and Representative Crowder
My door is is open if you would
like to sit down we can
absolutely show you the formula
we go through to determine cost
of rights of way on state land I
will say this.
I have a fiduciary obligation.
To the trust to the
beneficiaries.
That the use of this resource
cannot be discounted.
Both the court and state statute
have stated that we must charge
a market rates.
So that that's kind of what
keeps people out because you
think well market rate is
probably.
You know what you would get for
for a grazing allotment here.
But what we have to take into
consideration is any possibility
of commercial development of a
particular area and you are
right it varies from rural to
urban.
It varies from areas that have
you know high concentrations of
development and not.
But we do have to calculate what
I'm going market rate for a
particular parcel of land is and
we cannot give a discount from
that.
Value that has been determined
and and we can walk you through
it and show you what factors go
into determining the market
value
but but it's.
What you may not understand it
is proposed uses of the land any
proposed use of the land.
That's who the right of way
holder is competing with.
I appreciate your comments the I
had heard similar.
I would like to see.
Would you said fair market
value.
There's probably a difference
between oil and gas and and
putting in a water line or
something like that there's
benefit to the state for for
water line there.
Perhaps but I would like to sit
on it I don't know that I fully
understand and and right now I'm
getting very uncomfortable with
what I'm being told so.
Like to chat with the.
Mr Chairman.
The particular area I think
you're referring to the U.
pipeline you water pipeline if
there is no proposed oil and gas
or possible oil and gas activity
for that area that particular
use will not be factored into
market rate.
Propose of that particular
before make sure that the state
dollars are are being used as
they should be and and we get
the maximum benefit out of
infrastructure that we're trying
to fund so thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam Mr and the next
available representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman
Commissioner Richard good to see
you again I don't have a
question I just have a few
comments if I may Mister
chairman commissioner of first
of all I would like to thank you
commissioner of course Richards
or recognize you staff.
You hardly ever see any the
presentations the mention of
staff and you did first part of
your meeting you know a Mr
Garcia Richard I had the honor
of working with you in the house
and not have the honorable can
use of that commissioner and of
what I would like to see just
thank you for what you do for
New Mexico missioner thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative are you
see any other questions from the
committee
Okay Mister Garcia Richard but
any closing statements.
No one thank you for their time.
Thank you commissioner I have a
I do have Representative
Lundstrom no Mr chairman I was
just going to make the motion
okay.
I'd like to move the L..
Representative Lundstrom is made
a motion to adopt LFC to have a
second second second second
representative Garcia
Do we have any opposition to the
motion.
Seeing none at the motion to
accept the LFC recommendation
has R. as in accepted.
Thank you commissioner we
appreciate the presentations
thank you for for for all the
great information thank you you.
All righty Committee on thank
you Representative Lara for
jumping in and and covering for
us today I wanted to I think we
have completed today's work
based on the schedule so with
that being said will stand
adjourned until tomorrow same
time same place.
And you know we're really moving
along which is a good thing so I
want to thank you all
Representative Brown you had a
question.
Yes ma'am sure of according to
the calendar we were given at
the start of the session are we
meet tomorrow at eight thirty.
Is so we at my understanding we
thought we were not going to
have a floor session because
generally the first Friday of
the session we don't have floor
sessions and bill was informed
by the speaker's office we're
gonna have a floor session and
he did announce that so we're
gonna have regular committee
time tomorrow at one thirty
thank you yeah it was a little
confusing we were hoping that.
Everybody else could go home.
is there any other questions the
committee might have.
Saying none thank you all and
I can send tomorrow same time
same place thank you.
