Distributions that members and
districts were allocated and
have made two important local
government projects all across
the state in New Mexico madam
chair and committee it's split
between recurring and non
recurring funding although is
madam chairs pointed out that is
a decision ultimately to be made
by the department department of
finance authority on how they
book these but madam chair and
committee it adds up to just
slightly over fifty million
dollars fifty million two
hundred twenty five thousand
dollars of note madam chair and
committee and because members of
course are very familiar with
the projects that we and our
colleagues have allocated and
dedicated earlier in the in the
regular session two small and
things to note first madam chair
and committee in the Senate
finance committee there was an
amendment that struck a an
additional one million dollars
appropriation that's no longer
in here and madam chair and
committee at the back of this
seventy one page bill is a
temporary put provision.
that
that all of the appropriations
that members have dedicated from
their districts for these local
government and local critical
local projects will be published
no earlier than the day after
the governor signs this act and
no later madam chair and
committee thirty days after
adjournment of this third
special session with that madam
chair and stand for questions
all right I want to go to the
audience first user and comments
do we have anybody that has any
comments.
Okay have out in the audience
all right I do want to ask David
if you'll come up please to the
to the table here Representative
small before I go to the rest of
the committee I did have a.
Couple of questions here so the
committee and be able to find it
fairly quickly.
Inside the bill we have this
built as of divided between
recurring and non recurring.
So explain to me what sections
of this bill your current was
sections are nonrecurring.
Each three.
This section three.
For.
So.
Okay so.
Of the thirty eight thank yes
thirty eight with judicial.
Thanks for the thank you Mr
Rubin's so pages one through
thirty eight.
Or nonrecurring for FY twenty
two and twenty three.
The what the section title says
twenty two but if you look at
the language it says twenty two
and twenty three because you
could spend it all on the
remainder of twenty two.
Just like a special
appropriation like section five
of house bill two.
Could be recurring and non
recurring so the first sections
all the way through thirty eight
thanks bill section to ours
professional like appropriations
in that section eleven begins
the FY twenty three
appropriations that were scored
here's recurring and and you're
right madam chair DFA what
whether they continue in the
budget this first a function of
distance if they put him in the
opposite does DFA ask forum does
LFC recommendable and also the
lady does the legislature
continue them at the twenty
three session for FY twenty four
the ultimate decision about for
current will be in your hands
madam chair.
At first of clarification I
wanted to hear and then the
second clarification
I would like to know how close
this bill is to what we passed
back in February.
You madam chair and members
there were five hundred plus
items.
Initially DFA forget about sixty
as related to the concerns that
are described in the FIR on
page.
The bottom of page two.
The concerns to DFA flexo sixty
out of five hundred about twelve
percent of them.
the concerns generally related
to DFA said sometimes recurring
should be nonrecurring.
Like.
A capital an investment on
equipment should be nonrecurring
and sometimes DFA said
nonrecurring should be recurring
in this is art not science I
think generally the approach
leadership staff worked with the
executive LFC staff helped
evaluate some of those things
and and also with the desire was
to try to find a way forward to
not sweat the small stuff to the
facts so those were
significantly resolve sometimes
DFA said appropriation to HSD a
better go to DFA sometimes DFA
said it's better to go to the
agency then DFA local government
division so there was a back and
forth as I understand it all
members leadership staff work
with all members to invite them
to evaluate their support for of
these adjustments and generally
it's it's desirable to find a
way forward where people agree
and then finally there are some
real concerns about naming
nonprofits the there weren't
very many but I think leadership
staff did an excellent job
scaring the bill to make sure
there weren't specific
nonprofits named which is not
correct.
So that was the process of stool
percent of the items were kind
of adjusted in minor ways.
All right let's go to the
committee this past I've got a
few more questions but let me go
to the committee first
Representative Crowder.
What follow up question David
On the highest rate of eleven on
that are booked as as recurring
is it going to be somewhat the
responsibility of the receiving
agency.
Where it says it's for twenty
three are they are they gonna be
responsible to turn around a
request that again for twenty
four as a as a recurring.
I'm gonna kind of go over what I
said earlier what the process
the first step of the way for
nonrecurring is for an agency on
their September first action let
me back up the first step is to
put it in the operating budget
which is due may first.
And that's a very quick.
Pretty much operating budgets or
the way agencies and DFA work
and I'm very aware that LFC
will.
State otherwise the way they
have it and we you you would
hope I would hope that they
would put the twenty three items
beginning on page thirty eight
to the end in their operating
budget the next step as of
September first when they submit
their budget request is to
continue the operating budget
items into the request for
twenty four and that's where the
rubber really hits the road for
current and then LESC will look
at those and if a member.
Thanks that something that
should have been recurring has
been left out it I'm inviting
will work with the chair and
will suggest to members flag it
when you think it was supposed
to be recurring and it's not in
the request and then LFC staff
will make a recommendation one
way or the other but ultimately
will come to HFC in this
conversation will continue to
those twenty three items carry
the way you intended so all the
steps are part of that.
Thank you for that clarification
it just it it seem like in times
past that that the agency or or
university or the community
college or someone kind of
dropped the ball in requesting
it a second time and it would
seem to fall in a crack in can
you just clarify that very well
so I appreciate thank you madam
chair that's my only question.
Question I have a Representative
Garcia.
Your I just have one I would
leave it on the FY are the first
page it says of reoccurring
twenty six one five nonrecurring
is twenty four one twenty five
Representative comes out to a
fifty five fifty million two
hundred thirty thousand on the
bottom this is Senate bill one
is for fifty thousand hi we
fifty million two hundred
thousand to thirty thousand
dollars district and see their
can you explain that a result of
the above much to see thirty
twenty four to twenty thousand
dollar difference to me that's a
rounding error I couldn't
explain why it happened but it
rounds to zero really twenty
thousand and then you know fifty
over fifty thousand is going to
be a point one and less than
fifty thousand is going around
is zero so it's it's not
explained rounding error Mr I
won't be an issue right not not
my opinion thank you thank you
madam chair.
What else.
Let me ask a couple more things
that on this bill
So technically all the projects
that were in the original
General Appropration
supplemental bill our junior are
in this bill.
I would say generally yes Sen
but with the kind of the.
Leadership staff had a greater
role than your appropriation
staff in developing this last
no.
Some you know some sort of a.
What happens in a special
session the leaders and kosher
the with the governor on trying
to find a way forward so I
believe that leadership staff
asked members you know how they
feel about the changes I don't
believe if DFAT objected
members had the opportunity to
change their if if the if they
didn't object.
I don't believe members had an
opportunity to to read we
prioritized I do think there are
some circumstances where maybe
DFA said some should be this or
that and members were asked and
they had may have had left to
but I'm not the position to get
into those details because
leadership staff led that effort
sure.
Just a text away those projects
that will fly by the governor's
office the only projects that
were worked on that's my
understanding.
So if I ask Representative
Garcia to look on page two of
thirteen of the FIR us of all
the county peas and stuff in
there right.
Very
your projects.
Like everybody else to do that
if you would like to quickly.
I think that's an excellent
point I mean.
The staff did not get this bill
till yesterday.
Resource spreadsheets even
barely for a day.
And if my staff I mean to say
LFC staff so this happened fast
and.
And it's kind of like capital
outlay madam chair.
Our staff available to help you
but unfortunately you.
Need to get our staff to help
you don't have your own
resources and and it would be
great if you would to help us
validate that unfortunately.
This bill.
Let's set up
the floor in the.
Look at this bill trying to
compare falsely sent out what is
this.
I found some areas were for
identifying formation of I found
however the state changes
between the current nonrecurring
cost most of that I am also sure
to talk with the council service
they assured me they make sure
every house I was back in some
form or another they could not
necessarily because they didn't
Sanchez.
This.
The house speaker
I'm
comfortable this point that the
house.
Okay.
We do have in front of us
members the one amendment that
was made by the Senate that was
to remove the railroader
project.
Correct Mr yes you madam chair
and part of that the we
understand Rio metro.
Is committing to provide some
fair relief regardless of what
happens in this bill anyway so
that was that paved the way for
the Senate to take that out
along with the fact you can see
in the FIR Rio metro had
substantial federal revenues
that allow them to have that
flexibility on track.
I had.
Excuse me okay.
At.
We turn on our lights.
That
that mean you.
Finally for.
I think she may end up here yes.
Repaired with that for.
There are.
Okay thank you well okay.
Okay thank you very much
So what does this bill take
effect.
Citing citing consuming there's
no.
Well it's a general
appropriation act so takes
effect on signing regardless of
of emergency close its internal
preparation transparency pace
means that that will be released
on our website or have has at
work.
This is.
The thirty days.
Page seventy one.
To.
Report that transparency
requirements and that is
basically tying the project to
the sponsor is a very similar
way to cap.
Right because one of the issues
for the inner I've got to ask
LFC committee to actually come
up with the policy around this
so we don't have all the way up
to where that check of temporary
provisions anymore these kind of
bills and there it and this bill
is inside our framework anyway
so it's our responsibility to
come up with what that policy
will look like in the summer
when we all get together.
Okay with that being said I'm
going to ask Representative
Crowder for the motion.
We have a motion.
Have a due pass motion.
Proper motion proper second is
there any opposition to that the
