Your with less people I have the
hardest working staff in New
Mexico and I'm so proud of each
and every one of them but they
put their best effort out they
work hard to put the shows on
the go on an entertain folks of
New Mexico but also to be their
form as a as needed understand
that we also have the successes
of twenty two we're building on
them now the gathering nations
which will be back we have a
long term contract with them
again that's a hundred and
twenty million dollars impact to
the City of Albuquerque in the
state of New Mexico the fair
itself generates a lot of tax
dollars with the shows that are
generated not only just from the
fair but that's almost seventy
five million dollars is
generated out of that facility
so we look for the future and
once the future hold I believe
great things it's time to master
plans look at the future see
what New Mexico needs and let's
deliver it at expo New Mexico
it's a valuable piece of
property we have a great tenant
with the downs of Albuquerque
which by the way twenty six
percent of their gross goes
directly to the state of New
Mexico and Texas as well as at
two point seven one seven five
million a year that comes
directly to the state fair a
nice win proposition for a
change and New Mexico deserves
it with that I'll stand for any
question.
Okay thanks for that this
morning we'll take questions
from.
from the committee here and the
way we're going to do it is and
the language of the New Mexico
state fair if you're third on
the list among County I'll call
your name and say you get ready
if your second on the list then
you're going to be on deck and
then the person speaking up
isn't a whole that's going to be
in the language of New Mexico so
we have
Jack Chatfield in the whole and
Representative Sanchez on that
so Mister Ted field thank you Mr
chairman welcome
is New Mexico state very very
important to our rural PS that
every child has gone through
four H. there are now the gold
purchases that'll keep records
of how much the federal
eight.
The whole the that water.
Take it to the fair walked up to
check people's state of the
committee and asked for their
the.
You bet on that and that's the
important part of growing up in
New Mexico it's what makes our
kids able to understand business
it helps to learn and keep
records in order to to have to
learn a new job I always like
the bowl Act a center I've heard
that it maybe it was reduced to
go on but but to see the
beautiful bounty of crops that
used to come in from from that
Very diversified operation up in
the northwestern part of the
state I I enjoy that but it's an
important part of our rural way
of life and I appreciate having
that there and and I think that
we need to.
Push it forward make sure the
facilities are good for our kids
to be able to comment the horse
show the reigning so thank you
for what you do at all Mr.
Thank you.
That that is a thank you Mr
capital and the Mexico
Representative Sweetser thank
you Mr chair Mr director I guess
my question you're talking
about.
Kind of expanding of what we've
done the tingly Coliseum is this
what about six years old the.
I haven't heard of any request
to build a brand new state of
the art venue that can handle
actual big acts like you talked
about some really good artists
but
Are you asking for have you been
asking for funding to build a
new tingly Coliseum have you
have you done anything like that
maybe a new venue for the state
fair where you out without.
Chairman representative thank
you for the question yes we did
a study back in two thousand
sixteen seventeen just about the
feasibility of up in the you
know what size of Rita and where
it could possibly be located we
looked at that and it was
definitely a twelve to fifteen
thousand seat arena is something
that is very feasible and I
think it's even more so today
again geographically the state
the City of Albuquerque is the
most desirable secondary market
in the country we just don't
have the facility do that the
pair does not have the itself as
an entity have the ability to do
it on its own but we are looking
for partners we have work with
the administration of I've
talked to the private sector
other folks are willing to
invest I.
Know that there are some folks
in some centres also right now
they're proposing stage two if
you will our let's redo that
study and let's get it up to
date let's do something
significant for the people in
New Mexico Mr chair I hope
you're not talking about just
remodeling the team because that
place has to go but
Really got to be forward
thinking and build something
that we can be proud of like
Representative Chatfield talked
about people from all over the
state go to the state fair
schools go there I think with
this money you're getting a
nonrecurring got a look at stuff
like that I think you should
really be pushing for something
like that thank you Mr chair.
Representative Sweetser Mexico
to Representative Garrett.
Thank you Mr chair thanks for
being here and thank
Representative Sweetser for that
question very important my
question is there's been a lot
of pressure to move the state
fairgrounds out of the urban
area because it would be such a
real estate of valuable thing
are you continuing to face those
kind of pressures.
Chairman representative no.
But.
The big if we can talk about
moving the amount of money it
would take to move the fair to a
property that is big enough to
house what we do then you're
talking about temporary
structures versus what we have
let's also remember there's a
twenty five year lease with two
hundred acre forty four acres of
that two hundred thirty six acre
property that's not going
anywhere regardless of what you
do I believe that the fair
grounds is the right.
Property for the city and for
the state of New Mexico in that
area I don't believe we need
more low income housing I don't
believe we need in the parks I
think that we do is always have
that and I just think it needs
to be more better utilized by
all the people of New Mexico so
I don't feel any pressure with
that I I think if you move the
state fair anywhere from where
it is the state fair's gone.
Thank you very much that's it Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative next we
have a Representative Baca and
the certi on on that.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
I'm sorry miss Moster
presentation at the rush back in
here because I'm excited about
this the the state fair is part
of our tradition as part of our
culture
so my questions are going to be
kind of war.
A long line of what senator I
would Representative Sanchez
said the needs and facilities
okay what as far as with the how
many people visited
this past year the state fair
okay and do we have the not only
the tingly Coliseum but the
other bills so these to handle
that as far as restrooms
accessibility those types think
that's my first question.
My second question is really
about how do we access schools I
remember as a school age child
we took a trip to the state fair
I think that that would put
students have that opportunity
many that will not if our
schools don't
find that we have money for
extended learning we have these
are the types of monies I would
really like to see.
Kind of getting back and and
working with the school so
markets have.
And the final thing Mr chairman
if I may is really about the
security for that I mean you
know we want this I'll tell you
want to be a good experience
want to family friends who want
to track the families are.
and Mr chairman I I do have to
say is that.
Even prior part of COVID it was
a little bit.
Security was a concern all to
say that so I just want those
very brief I don't need a huge
explanation because of I think
that we has a legislators
appropriators I think that we do
have to put our money where our
mouth is I think we do out the
help out there and I think that
you probably need to let us know
is what is it that you need
thank you Mr chairman.
Chairman representative thank
you for all three of those
questions and they're all very
valid as far as the
infrastructure and what we're
doing we've been very generous
with the state in the in the
capitol money a very prudent and
and Y. as in operating wood and
using that money to develop not
only the infrastructure to
support events but also
facilities for instance you were
talking about the board building
that's going to go under a
complete new renovation to help
these kids and it makes it more
of a year round we cible
property the probably have some
of these properties are sold and
they're antiquated that they're
not we school year round so the
basically are multiple till the
fair we're changing all of that
and have been changing that a
perfect example of the it the
use of the capital money was our
food court venue we change I had
to redo all the affected water
sewer electrical for asphalt
fall apart dangers not where we
want to be completely redid that
project and it was a huge
success so we look forward to
using the monies that that we
are getting a capital and and
again it's been very blessed to
get that and we're going to
improve the facilities safety
wise as well we're talking
sidewalks were talking about all
these asphalt parking lots
become pedestrian walkways so we
are looking and we prepare those
failings I have a whole safety
team that does and goes out and
looks for those those type of
deals but again you know I think
the long term plan is exactly
that five year plan a plan of
master planning it's something a
study needs to go out and really
get down to the nuts and bolts
of what we want to see in the
fairgrounds going forward and
the investment in the fair
grounds is going to come back to
full I believe that it's not
just the fair event which
obviously serves an enormous
amount of people but how many
people do lies over one point
four million people a year go to
that property and so you know it
it's something that promoters
small promoter small business
people and large concerts
whatever they all can utilize
this.
Facility as well as the casino
that being said.
You know it is far as safety and
security always a top concern of
this I can tell you at this
point time we are one of the
safest fares.
That's due to our our good
partners and state police
there is technology that we're
introducing with camera systems
and things of that nature
there's of facial ID stuff that
people never see and don't know
about that is being implemented
now not just for fair but what
we're trying proposed for this
year capital in our request is a
brand new mercy appropriations
public safety building the thing
we have now is nineteen forty
it's antiquated it doesn't work
we need to consolidate medical
homeland security fire as well
as the previous one facility we
have that dedicated and ready to
go it shovel ready and we're
looking forward to making that
happen it will make it safe
understand we're right in the
middle of the international
district it's it's up I have
some fabulous neighborhoods but
there are some challenges in
that area our security year
round I think we do a
magnificent job of protecting
the folks to come out there Mr
chairman thank you just have one
more question do you have a
current five year ten year
master plan or where are you in
that process.
Thank Mr Chairman representative
no we do not we spent the last
two years trying to survive I
mean I'm being realistic and
honest about it I mean just
you're just trying to stay where
we are at this point time I
think at this point we're we're
going to look into bidding for a
master planning and something
that could coincide with the
arena I believe that if you're
going to build the Reno New
Mexico it needs to be done at
the fair grounds to table center
located best ingress egress
there's a lot of other areas and
I've talked to the City of
Albuquerque especially more
killer and CO reports while so
we've all had conversations and
I believe that they believe the
fairgrounds is a place we need
to do that as well could be a
great catalyst for awesome
Business.
Thank you Mr morning thanks we
have a Cerney on and the whole
and.
Representative Garcia on that.
thank you Mr chairman
at first I think your
presentation I was born and
raised in Albuquerque and went
to the fair to schools and
everything off forever and I
remember the last time I went
was in high school with well
let's major time was in high
school we took the Special
Olympics they were if they were
filming a movie on a with Bruce
Jenner and we took all the kids
that were part of that movie to
the to the fair and was very so
when I ask this question believe
me I I I I love the fair okay so
tell me about Mr Chairman about
the circuses you bring and do
you bring exotic animals.
Up Chairman representative I'm
not quite sure on the quick
twenty two about services
circuses circuses.
Actually the Shriners have a
circus it is brought inside
something that they were in our
facility to bring and as far as
exotic animals I believe they
have Tigers and elephants in
that but again this is something
that is there are costly re
evaluating and that is again the
something that's trying to do
it's not something that we
produce.
It's that Mr thank you Mr
chairman but the City of
Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county prohibit exotic animals
in their in their.
In their city and and County and
I know you're not part of the
your the land you sit on is part
of the city or county but the
road to travel on with those
animals are so I've been asked
to ask you why it's allowed to
happen.
Chairman representative I I know
that we're not played in the in
the middle Albuquerque and at
again it doesn't apply you're
right as far as the city's roads
I can attribute that I think
that's a comp that's a
conversation over my pay grade
at this point time again we
lease our facilities that's what
we try to do we don't
discriminate against whatever I
understand the people's personal
opinions and there's a lot of
pros and cons on both sides well
I I also believe that that
people if they do not want to
see these type things will not
attend the Shriners have to
evaluate we've had these
conversations with them that
it's becoming
you know something of a problem
in my my personal opinion going
forward they're going to need to
re evaluate you know what they
do but that's not for me to
decide it is the Shriners that
that will have to come up and
it's a very of that money they
raise is very important to to
children and stuff so I mean
it's a big fundraiser for them
thank you Mr chairman but
It is a health hazard a public
health risk when you bring some
of these animals and and as far
as the elephants the the the
public is allowed to
Be around them so it's a public
health risk and if it is
prohibited by the city and the
county then there's something
wrong there that you're allowing
it to happen so I just I'm not
sure if I I feel like your
answer is enough but thank you
Mr chairman.
I think that Representative next
we have a Representative Garcia
followed by
Representative dela Cruz thank
you Mr chairman thanks for the
presentation it was brought to
my attention before this
committee came in a little bit
of goal about redoing your pins
for your pages of the to my need
funding for that you know and I
know everybody here madam Mr
chair of talked about safety
for.
People that's number one and for
kids in good entertainment for
kids but we also have to the the
livestock.
This will take care of and the
those brought up a little bit
ago on the money funding to do
that part public the rest of the
facility for the animals that
are being stored to ruffle in
two weeks.
Chairman representative great
question and yet we have made
significant improvements to the
facility such as the junior
livestock billion the dairy barn
there's upgrades not only just
got a new panels new pens but
also to the dirt as well I know
it does sound like that's
important but it is very very
important that you have quality
dirt so you don't hurt these
animals the going forward but
also additional of restrooms we
built in more facilities for us
and restrooms are very important
we redid the pig the the my
swine fellow people we built a
brand new show arena and as well
as made some upgrades in the
batteries with new restaurants
as well yes we would love to do
the the pants were talking about
three hundred thousand dollars
that was in two thousand
nineteen to replace that we have
a capital request in the state
of this year's well and we would
absolutely will put some money
to put those pins in with
someone we love to do Mr chair
that thank for that you know and
then the the City of Albuquerque
got twenty three or twenty four
Representative.
They're on the metro with their
capital outlay money would
probably do that three hundred
thousand pretty easy I just my
thought you know my my district
is.
We need to have the state but if
I can help you will cause like
Representative Chatfield and
everybody else is here it's all
about the kids and and it is in
the state of New Mexico how much
you can better and these
projects that you're doing for
kids is huge through I have a
couple of granddaughters are
four H. and they go to the by
county fair and that's the big
thing to them they want to go to
the state fair but since it was
shut down for a couple years
that changed everything or
almost there for what you're
doing a really appreciate to
thank you Mr chairman.
Representative thank you
Representative thanks will have
Representative dela Cruz to.
Representative the questioning.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Download memory lane.
I think most of us have had a
lifelong positive experience at
the state fair in our families
were the highlights annually I
would encourage you to continue
to move for with a master plan I
think it's essential I think
it's critical to have a twenty
first century state of the art.
Facility facilities and I think
it provides a critical roadmap
that all of them allows for all
of us to be able to fund because
we know what's coming next we
know what phases are involved
and what criteria you views so
that you can arrive at that but
that determination so Mr
chairman thank you so much keep
up the good work that by the way
down what is Mr chairman what is
your title I'm sorry I'm the
general manager and chief trash
taker outer thank you Sir thank
you Mr.
Thank you for that and I don't
see any other hand so we thank
you for The presentation this
morning and the way that will.
Well as the vice chair to make a
motion.
Mr chairman I move the LFC
recommendation.
Okay you the motion to accept
the LFC recommendations on the
floor any opposition to that.
Opposition.
there's one opposition and.
The vote is.
I want some of the most.
Nine one.
Thank you Mr chairman and just
briefly to make this
announcement once a my
opposition to the budgets that
will be presented throughout the
day or really have nothing to do
with the merit of each budget
really goes to the fact that we
our overall budget and overall
year of year over year spending
in the last four years has gone
from about six billion dollars
year over year to a little over
nine billion.
And just concerned that
as we have dollars now we are
increasing
expenditures and commitments for
future years and just concerned
that this is not sustainable and
so once again I appreciate
everything the state fair does I
think it is a tremendous it's
been something my family has
appreciated just concerned that
we because we are flush with
cash.
Make a one time expenditures but
we're committing to an overall
budget increase that I I just
can't agree to so thank you Mr
chairman and I will make that
announcement again I'll just.
Raise my hand in opposition and
not not explained in the future
thank you Mr chairman you.
So that this morning you have
the LFC budget thank you you.
Thank you.
Next we have of the board of
examiners agency number four
zero one.
At the.
If we start I would like to ask
the analyst through the REC us
two points of material were
working and so we're not appear
fumbling try to five of a place
where we're supposed to be with
that of we'll start with the end
of this right good afternoon Mr
chairman members of the
committee I'm ginger Anderson
LFC analyst today were reviewing
the board of examiners for
architects we're going to be in
volume two the big fatty one
that is on page one forty two
and one forty three.
agency code four zero four.
I'm I I will go ahead and start
with a few of the key
differences between the
executive and the legislative
recommendations and then of DFA
will speak for a moment and then
we will turn it over to the
agency.
Okay so the LFC recommendation
for revenue and I'd like to just
noted that the board of
examiners for architects it does
not utilize general fund they
are using their other revenues
the LFC recommendation for
revenue for the agencies other
revenue was three hundred and
thirty one point one thousand.
and then the LFC recommendation
was two hundred and two point
three thousand for the fund
balance this represents a seven
point three percent increase
above the agency's FY twenty
three budget.
the only difference between the
executive and the legislative
recommendation was a four point
two thousand in the personal
services employee benefits
category
and because the executive was a
little bit lower in that aspect
other than that that's that's
really the only difference so
I'll go ahead and turn it over
to DFA analysts on Aviva.
Afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee I do
not have anything to add to that
presentation thank you open
since the director of the
examiners of architects
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee.
It's all is I'm the executive
director the chief financial
officer and the chief
procurement officer for the New
Mexico board of examiners for
architect here in attendance
with me today as our board chair
Mister Jim awful.
I would like to just say that
the mission of the board is to
protect the health safety and
welfare of the public we are not
part of regulation and licensing
department we are in enterprise
agency that operates solely off
of our revenue.
As both analysts have mentioned
my recommendation and thousands
has been.
Five three five point four due
to personal services salaries
filling vacancies and that is my
request for FY twenty four
appropriation at this time I
thank you for your time and I
stand for questions.
Okay thank you for that and they
will go to the committee for
questions.
Representative Garrett.
Thank you Mr chair I just have a
quick question on page one forty
two it says the LFC sunrise
sunset said committee move to
extend the sunset date of the
board by six years from twenty
twenty nine two July first
twenty twenty nine does that
mean there will not be four can
you just explain that.
Mr Chairman representative I
will defer this to my LFC
analysts.
yes Mr chair representative that
that is correct that if the
committee had not moved to
extend the sunset then the the
board would go away and there
was a set of about of there is a
few over ten I think that we
were reviewing that the let the
committee reviewed this year and
there is a on the bus bill
that's been drafted with the
extension dates that will be
sponsored by Representative
Garcia.
Thank you very much thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Any other questions.
Thank you for the presentation
and as I announced earlier in
the meeting the hearings that
we're conducting this afternoon
or preliminary so after some
discussion some things would
change so with that I want to
ask my of vice chair to make
most thank you Mr chairman I
move the executive
recommendation.
Okay the recommendation of the
executive recommendation is on
the floor.
Second we got a second and the.
Oppositions.
One of session so that would
mean eight in favor.
When opposition.
Sir.
Representative Montoya.
Okay.
So with that of.
Thank you for the presentation
that you're awarded the
executive recommendation.
Thank you for your presentation.
We have agency for for six.
Board of medical examiners.
And again Kelly if you would
direct us to where we're
supposed to start thank you
begin.
Appreciate it I'm Kelly Klein
for the legislative finance
committee as the chair stayed
weird agency code for for sixty
Medical Board with me today is
the director of the Medical
Board Sandra Frank she's the
director for several years she
started to retire and I'm
begging her never to.
And then we also have our DFA
counterpart with meat honoree
Vera now I want to know before
we start that this is a non
general fund agency no general
fund is in this agency all of
the revenues basically come from
licensing fees from the medical
field that this board oversees
and Revenue that does not Spence
at the end of the fiscal year
from this revenue doesn't go to
the general fund goes back into
their fund balances so it's a
self sustaining revenue agency.
So with that the LFC
recommendations supported the
board's request for revenue
while the executive
recommendation recommended flat
other revenues from those
licensing fees with the FY
twenty three operating budget.
the executive recommendation
recommend ten thousand less than
LFC of fund balance as well
the fund balance of the close of
the last fiscal year which was
in July we're close project
because to one point one million
dollars so plenty of revenue and
that to sustain this transfer of
fund balance without making that
fund balance at risk for the
operating budget at risk.
The LFC recommendations support
the board's request for person
well the executive
recommendation reduce person
that for positions that were
held vacant since FY twenty
twenty one I will note that in
the agency requests they had
already requested to reduce
their personal and so this is
below that reduction of the FY
twenty three operating budget.
You'll see recommendation
increase contractual services
and other costs for continued
update of the boards I. T.
systems well the executive made
other adjustments resulting in
that seventy six thousand dollar
contractual services and seven
thousand dollars seven thousand
of other cost differences.
the performance measures have
been reconciled.
and if you have any additional
questions on the LFC
recommendation regarding those
I. T. request that can be found
on volume two page one eighty
one with that I will turn it
over to Donna here for any
additional comment she may have.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks
Kelly the executive that
Is there how the presented I
don't I'm open to any questions
the committee may have thank
you.
And then the rector.
Members of the committee Mr
chairman I'm Sandra Frank and I
am the executive director for
the New Mexico Medical Board
I'll just give you a brief
overview of what we've been up
to and to wire request for three
point two million the New Mexico
Medical Board is charged with
regulating and licensing
physicians and other allied
professions in the healthcare
field in New Mexico we had the
largest number of anti DO
applicants them with we have
ever had in the history of New
Mexico when I started with the
board in a ten years ago we had
about six hundred and fifty
applications a year from
physicians this year we had
about sixteen hundred position
applicants in New Mexico
because we've seen this increase
in the number of applicants we
have been desperate for a new
computer system it data system
we have been using paper
applications forever and even
our renewals we we've had online
renewals but the applications
are actually Papen and so we I
in conjunction with our LD the
regulation and licensing
department who is a completely
separate department from us we
have decided to use sales force
as our computer system we were
given C. to funding in the
amount of one point eight
million dollars and we're about
seventy five percent through
that project largely the
increases that we were asking
for more due to an increase in
the three hundred and four
hundred categories to support us
in the maintenance of that
system nothing comes cheap and
so in the future we will have
significant on going expenses in
terms of the computer system
additionally we probably will
need a specialist in the sales
force to help us with any
tweaking of the system in the
future.
I also just want to tell you a
little bit about our staff we
have about nineteen members we
have a lot of contractual
services and we have utilized
one of our board members as a
specialist in policy and
clinical practice but we do have
a medical director position that
has always been in our office
but it has not been filled since
twenty twenty one we were
largely focused on COVID and
getting the applications through
doing during the time of great
need in the state of New Mexico
and just a big shout out to my
staff we actually were able to
reduce our licensing times which
of chip typically been about
sixty days plus to get a person
license state of New Mexico and
this will be reflected in the
debt numbers you have but we
have seen that in the past in
twenty twenty two in our current
fiscal year our licensing time
has kept being cut down to one
half
so just a big shout out to the
agency and with that I will
stand for any questions.
Okay thanks for the presentation
Madam director of.
We'll start with Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you Mr Mr my question goes
to the issue of licensing
military personnel the spouses
of military personnel and move
into our stated with the former
shortage we have a medical
We made some progress into
expediting the licensing of
folks that are they have already
realized in other states Mr
Chairman representative we have
we actually expedite the spousal
license of an individual who
comes in with the military
spouse so we put them on the top
of the pile that's the best we
can do and we've actually had
very good luck licensing people
of who've come in as a military
spouse Mr well as far as.
There seems to be some overlap.
For districts Mr chair
representative the regulation
and licensing department I
believe has about thirty to
boards and commissions they have
they have.
Some health care fields I think
they have the pharmacy board for
instance is there licensee but
we have the bulk of the other
health care boards the board of
nursing is completely separate
so there they are also an
independent agency and they have
they have the bulk of the
licensees I believe but
regulation and licensing does
have chiropractic acupuncture
and several other health care
related boards we're the only
people who regulate physicians.
The the thank you thank you for
that.
Any other questions.
Representative Sarinana.
Thank you Mr chairman thank your
presentation at so tell me more
about your computer system used
its sales force it seventy five
percent complete or seven five
percent funded what so what do
we need to get it
Representative.
So Mister chair representative
we are fully funded so we we do
have our Garcia to funding in
the amount of one point eight
million dollars we went twice
before the do a committee and
received our full funding I can
tell you that we in terms of
expenditures we've spent about
thirty four percent of that we
of the six hundred twenty four
thousand we've been covered
about five hundred and sixty
five thousand so that's about
thirty one percent and we have a
remaining balance of six hundred
and twenty two thousand so we're
doing very well if if everything
goes as planned will be under
budget
are expected completion date is
April first.
Fingers crossed.
But Mr Chairman said but you
said you needed more money for
other things.
Okay so in the operating budget
what we need to we actually will
have recurring expenses every
year.
So in addition to in addition to
creating the system we actually
have to pay for the licenses
every year and then we also have
to have a person to help us with
the system so a maintenance
person sorry expectation is that
the maintenance will be in the
realm of of sixty to eighty
thousand we're not exactly sure
we've we've also it's been it's
been difficult for us because
we've also had RLD had a major
data breach and so we are not
sure if that number is is
legitimate or not in addition we
have to have a contractor who
specializes in sales force
systems to help us to tweak the
system and possibly that
migration of data issue will
also need to be handled by it by
a contractor.
Okay and I think it's terrific I
got everything so thank you and
I'll talk to Russia and see what
else we need thank you.
Okay thanks for that and no more
hands so
let's keep New Mexico healthy
with that the the vice chair to
make recommendations thank you
Mr chairman I recommend the
executive.
I'm of the executive
recommendation.
Okay.
any opposition to that.
Okay what opposition.
With that Mr grant at the
executive recommendation.
Thank you and let's move to.
Of the agency for sixty five
gaming control board.
This issue.
The.
Okay team we're still in the
binder of.
The Browns sheets Agency for
sixty five.
Representative
the end of this Mr chair members
of the committee ginger Anderson
LFC analyst we are on HSD for
six five the gaming control
board in volume to us will be on
page one ninety and one ninety
one we've also got a a bit of
data for you and volume three
pages fifty four and fifty six
for the gaming commission
And with that I will just
briefly run over the differences
between the legislative and
executive recommendations.
So the the LFC recommended.
A hundred and forty four point
six thousand in general fund
below the executive
recommendation and overall this
is a five percent increase above
the agency's FY twenty three
operating budget of the LFC
recommended a hundred eighty
three point three thousand below
the executive in personal
services employee benefits.
let's see here.
And and so the difference there
is that the executive
recommendation is funding all
five of the board positions.
The LFC recommended sixteen
thousand above the exact
recommendation in contractual
services so a little bit more
there for I believe
training and other training and
other contractual costs.
And the executive recognizes
about that twenty point seven
thousand below the exact
recommendation for travel and
training.
And with that I will turn it
over to DFA analyst Senator that
are and then we'll turn it over
to the agency hello Mr chairman
again I would just like to point
out the executive recommendation
provides it includes the twenty
percent vacancy savings rate
because the executive would like
to ensure that the agency fills
positions and continues to meet
its demands to ensure that
gaming is safely run throughout
the state
so with that Mr all turn it over
to the had Garrett who is the
of.
Board chair.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee
thank you for giving me and my
staff the opportunity to
opportunity to appear before you
today I'm again my name is Pat
Kerin on the chairman of the New
Mexico gaming control board and
with me today is my chief
information officer gosh Cloyd
will be testifying for a moment
and I chief information officer
mistook your take a.
I like to I didn't plan on
appearing before your strictly
going to be support staff today
our executive director had a
family emergency and lily drive
away about an hour ago so I'm
here doing introduction and
doing this on her behalf I like
to open up my saying I'd like to
think DFA and LESC for the
recommendations to increase our
budget for the fiscal year two
thousand twenty four.
that we can accomplish much of
what we like to do with the REC
recommendation made by the LESC
of a five percent increase on
we're respectfully request me to
consider granting this
recommendation made by DFA in
amount of seven point four
percent increase in addition to
the special appropriation
requests for the application
development to share information
with the Human Services
Department which is a seventy
five thousand and is mandated by
the federal law by federal law
and cyber cybersecurity
insurance any enhancement of
infrastructure.
These additional funds are not
only make it possible to keep
the momentum of hiring
additional employees but equally
as important to be able to
provide them with specialized
training related to the gaming
we're constantly earning is
needed because of its constant
change a lot of training can be
completed through
Elearning in addition to
traveling out of state our goal
at the New Mexico gaming control
board is to enhance the on top
on the job training with
educating our employees and
making and experts in there in
the field of gaming industry
with that I'd like to turn over
the floor to our chief
information officer Mr Daschle.
And and ensuring that members of
the committee
I just want to talk to guys
today if if you'd like to get to
the speaker so we can hear the
answer thank you.
Good afternoon chairman members
of the committee
I'd like to talk to you guys
today about the two special
appropriation requests that are
agency submitted for FY twenty
four.
While I do respect LFC is
recommendation for both special
appropriation requests I just
want to express how important
these two requests are to the
gaming control board the first
one is for seventy five thousand
dollars for the increased levels
of cyber security this is
related to our child support
enforcement database which is
part of a the administrative
code fifteen point one point
nineteen this really is a real
that this is related to the
payments of winnings over twelve
hundred dollars under the gaming
control act.
The objective of that rule is to
establish procedures to ensure
compliance with section six zero
dash to E. dash six one of the
gaming control act which
provides for leans on winnings
for debts collected by the human
resource department HSD.
I'm myself and my team work
handed had or they just need to
have an online portal accessible
for the race tracks and non
profits to check
people who owe child support in
the state of New Mexico when a
individual at a race track and I
profit Linda jackpot two hundred
dollars a more their slot team
goes into this portal log in and
register information to see if
they owe money if they do they
work in collaboration with our
agency an agency to ensure
payments are taken out of the
jackpot to pay their child
support
the current system I have right
now is severely outdated it was
built in house back when our I.
T. team had well over ten people
I'm now down to right now just
myself do staffing issues I do
not have the operating budget no
or the experience to rebuild
this to ensure people can pay
their child support in New
Mexico
also HSD our legal team and
myself in H. C. have been in
talks because the federal at the
federal level they're changing
the snap benefits so that the
fed level they want to know who
has won a jackpot over four
thousand dollars I don't have
the exact number with me and
they want to be notified at the
federal level and the current
system cannot support that so I
would that's why I was
requesting seventy five thousand
dollars to rebuild that database
so I can stay in compliance with
the administrative code and the
gaming control act.
the second request for two
hundred thousand dollars for
enhancing the infrastructure and
cybersecurity at the game
control board this is related to
the core infrastructure at the
gaming control board and when
I've been back corner structure
is all of the data that I am
hosting at the gaming control
board in our server room all of
that date all of that data it
will be without supports at the
end of FY twenty four so June
thirtieth of twenty twenty four.
after that I am out of support
and the manufacture of the
hardware and software has stated
sent it is sold as an it was
purchased in twenty sixteen
twenty seventeen there will no
longer issue me a contract to
support they have informed me
you need to buy new hardware and
that's the end of the
conversation with the vendor I
have informed Roger over the
department of IT of my issue and
he's fully aware what's
happening the department of I T.
is actually working with me
collaboration to support me in
the event I cannot support the
hardware so over the next fiscal
year I'll be working with them
either to move or that most
critical data we have or all of
it depending what do we can
handle over the next fiscal year
I just wanted to express
My concern for those two special
appropriation request and that
is all I have for you guys Mr
chairman members of the
committee okay thank you for
that
Request.
Incentive for a quick question
Mr chair
I know you mentioned you had a
larger staff of ten did that
funding go away or are you just
haven't been able to hire those
are but I was looking at the
paper work and you have a.
The chameleon dollars and funded
vacant positions.
chairman members of the
committee representative
I would just brought on as the
CEO in July ninth of twenty
twenty two from my understanding
due to budget issues and what
I'm experiencing is finding
qualified staff this seems to be
the problem right now underneath
the guidance of the executive
director right now I currently
just have three positions that
is myself included ninety.
So Mister chair sounds like it's
just you can't find you have the
budgets
also your talked about cyber
security usually do it is are
the ones that are supposed to
provide you a services are they
not doing that how come you're
the one asking for money they
should be.
They should really be asking for
the money and if they're not let
me know and I'll I'll push them
to do that but it's just a.
Doesn't seem like you should be
asking for the that's their job
but Mr chair.
Mr Chairman is committee
representative I yes I do work
with do it I am our agency as
part of their monthly scanning
for vulnerabilities getting for
network and that child support
Enforcement database has been
flagged numerous times by of
auntie for having multiple
servers could issues I've done
my best to upgraded as much as I
can percent it is sold I can't
go any further
I have informed Russia of this
as well they have access to that
portal with all that information
where it is being scanned every
month thank you Mr.
Thank you the next we have a
Representative Gary.
Thank you Mr chair I guess I
need clarification.
Do it as an enterprise
organization to agencies have to
pay them.
I mean does does the gaming
control board need money to pay
do it or is that it's it's off
of Representative Sweetser
question is there a way to get
clarification on that.
Because I mean cybersecurity and
the upgrading.
Is vital to what the game game
control for the state can.
Mr.
LFC overall for recommendations
there is additional operating
money for do it to take
contracted initiative of more
centralized approach to
cybersecurity.
There's also a special
appropriation of ten million to
work the state agency.
Sectors.
Language in the budget is
contingent on them building a
restructure.
General fund dollars.
Of the total budget is twenty
six billion I.
So the stuff.
That was a fund these types of
activities.
So Mister chairman Charles so in
your opinion this.
This is what the LFC is same
will allow them to be covered by
do it without an additional
appropriation.
Correct okay thank you Mr
chairman I want to leave.
Question so as the chair of the
racing commission as an ex
officio member
December eight min has a new
person that appointed for him.
From chairman members of the
committee that his ex no ma'am
okay his ex officio member thank
you Mr chairman Representative
Garrett I think you're talking
to the racing commission it's in
the next eight another agency
coming up Mr pregnant I believe
is still chairman it says the
chairman of the state Mr
Chairman says the chairman of
the state racing commission
serves as an ex officio member
of the gaming control board
chair members of the
that is correct chairman of the
racing commission serves on the
game control board however that
was separating he resigned two
weeks ago to assume the position
as a district attorney
Bernalillo county thank you.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Sariñana
thank you Mr chairman and I
think was my question to ask but
I know it is the dude Act is
being updated and so much is
being done at and for small
agencies do is been helping I
think all of you with a quite a
bit and you don't really pay for
that right some of the things
they do like the the scanning
and all the things do you Mr
chairman members committee
representative I know we do not
pay we do not pay do it for the
multi scanning I will be joining
a do it for their hosted
services for very cybersecurity
issues we will not pay for that
I've already talked with the
Russian his team about that.
Thank you.
Thank you for that we don't see
any more hands up so thanks for
the presentation and Mr so few
with correct me if I'm wrong of
for an organization or an agency
like this where the request is
so close can there be
conversation between LESC and
the DFA to negotiate before we
do the presentation before the
full committee.
Mr Chairman just to be clear for
the public you're not taking
action.
Action.
Direction for the full.
Sir.
Okay.
Thank you for that Mr silly so.
At this time I would ask of the
vice chair to make
recommendations thank you Mr
chairman I move the LFC
recommendation.
Second okay LFC recommendation
second any opposition.
one opposition these yes.
Is it here so there's less.
Okay with that.
Mister director you get the LFC
recommendations.
We have the racing commission.
All.
Okay that would be a agency
number four sixty nine.
Started.
Mr chair members of the
committee we will next review of
the agency for sixty nine point
three seeing.
Commission and they are going to
be.
Right after gaming control in
your book on page one ninety two
and one ninety three and the
LESC volume two and again four
six nine.
So bell again briefly give a
rundown on the difference
between the legislative and
executive recommendation and
then I'll turn it to DFA and
then turn it to the agency
so.
Right so the LFC recommends
ninety six point nine thousand
less in general fund in the
executive recommendation of both
executive and LFC
recommendations include a
million dollars and other
revenue and that amount the
amount of one million is
comprised of seven hundred
thousand and it and revenue for
the resource to fund and three
hundred thousand from industry
racing Revenue
the LFC recommendation includes
a hundred thousand to fund
balance noting that the FY and
testing balance will would
replenish.
With that budgeted amount the
LFC recommendation is a five
percent increase from the
agencies FY twenty three
operating budget and I'll go
ahead and turn it over to Donna
for the base differences.
The executive recommend thirty
two thousand seven hundred
thousand above the LFC for
personal services employee
benefits the LFC applied as a
higher vacancy rate than the
executive and the executive
request recommended slightly
less and the other cost
categories will the LFC
recommendation fully funds the
requested level.
For the employees to work apple.
Regarding language
both the executive and the LFC
recommend language of the low
which would allow the agency to
use I don't know if you want me
to read it all Mr chairman but
basically it allows agency to.
Are in language from the racing
Fund difficulty.
And.
Sorry.
The FY testing fund.
So.
I four six hundred thousand
thank you Mr chair.
Affirmative measures we have
consensus on those as well.
Okay thank you for that.
Mr director thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name's is mild trio
most people know me by is the
have been the executive director
of the New Mexico racing
Commission since March twenty
six twenty sixteen as I always
say before you guys it's an
honor and privilege to serve the
state of New Mexico and the
horse racing fans across the
country that way drawn are
races.
I've had in a home him to know
he one is into horse racing
these days but we are at a major
crossroads and the regulatory
aspects of the industry in which
the.
Our race integrity and safety
act also known as hisa.
How was passed at the federal
level that's federal legislation
that pretty much seems unfair
they're coming in to regulate
horse racing but they want to
utilize our staff and we have to
pay them so it's a great system
apparently and I'm joking on
that but none the less the HSD
is going to be tasked with
With enforcing this new
legislation for the federal
government and the racing
industry is going to be paying
for that through assessment fees
had to the tune for New Mexico
one point seven million dollars
the race tracks and horsemen
will be dividing that in half it
appears how we do have proposed
legislation that we may be able
to pay for the has a fees added
the gaming monies but whether
that passes or not that's yet to
be seen but meantime we can
count on that so the agencies
take it upon ourselves because
we are the regulators in the
state to to put forward to try
to fill all the positions that
we need to regulate horse racing
not only at our state level in
our rules but also at the
federal level with his son so I
we're we're looking for
expansion and employees because
a.
Over the last six years I I
believe the agencies perform
very well we kind of hit a
ceiling though with the budget
that we've had we've had some
new programs in our strategic
plan that we really wanted to
roll out for the last three or
four years which includes the
hiring of of veterinarians more
investigators and that more
testing
But the hitting that glass and
we we really have no room for
for getting better we were eager
to get better at what we do we
just need some resources to be
able to do that
are we really focused on drug
testing over the last seven
years and at the post race
violations in our industries
have declined significantly
since two thousand seventeen
where are three point five
percent of our post race
tests were violations and now we
reached a point in twenty twenty
one where
were below one percent six point
nine percent so we've thought
we've come a long way with and
and use our money smart and we
strategic testing but as I
mentioned before were eager to
get better what we do
really concerned with just
because it focuses on animal
welfare and New Mexico does not
want to get left behind how we
need to.
Make that the highest priority
in our industry right now to
take care of the horses that
participate for the racing fans
day in and day out we got to
assure that there.
They're at their optimum
condition when they perform the
last thing we want is
catastrophic injuries occurring
during the races on the right
track more race fans young and
old part have to see visually
our the line on the track to be
so nice so we've had
conversations with animal
protection of New Mexico
recently we know they're
watching our industry quite a
bit and the agencies just
request and some some resources
to be able to do our job a lot
better now we're we should be
and at that point I stand for
any questions.
You want to introduce your
assistant or yes I'm sorry have
districts are members of the
committee to my right December
Trujillo sees the CFO of the
agency.
Mr you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you so much you
can save your time hearing us
out again my name is amber and
the CFO for the agency
definitely I'd like to say our
agency.
Has done a lot has come a long
way we have a lot of recognition
that we have from various other
states when we do travel to his
and we get to speak with them.
Other colleagues in our
industry.
So with that I'd like to debt
definitely say that our agency
contributes to general fund
coffers last year I believe this
in the tune of nine hundred
sixty three thousand dollars
that we reverted for general
fund a loan money which we're
not appropriated we do not get
to utilize but it's just raise
solely for New Mexico.
We stand for any question under
budget thank you for that we'll
take questions from the
committee we have
Mr Chatfield a whole sorry no
thank you Mr Sanchez get rid.
And.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
all for being here I like best
torches.
Always have been weakness of a.
How many members are there on
the Mr chairman are there on the
racing commission.
Mr chairman and Representative
Chatfield members of the
committee currently we have four
members we have a vacancy with
the announcement of Mr Sam
Bregman as the district attorney
so we're waiting to fill that
vacancy what makes me yes
normally if I yes Mr chairman of
the Russian talked awhile back
about issuing a fifth thing is
fifth sixth racing license of
and I and I know we had meetings
all over and I went to them and
in Clovis and taken care and
Representative Harper I'm not
sure I don't have one last time
can you tell me the status of of
that decision yes Mr Chairman
representative Kafeel the
members of the committee I
currently that matters in
litigation but I I can tell you
that it's progressing forward in
the courts we we just got a
order from the judge I yesterday
and I believe litigation is
going to continue on in that
matter.
New Mexico horsemen's
association Mr Chairman
how do they work with you do
they receive a person portion of
the purse from the racing can
you tell me a little bit about
the about the New Mexico
horsemen's association how they
interface with your
organization what do they do how
do you all work together.
Yes Mr chairman Representative
Chatfield members of the
committee
Right now as far as the New
Mexico horsemen's association
goes they've they've started
a lot of litigation against the
New Mexico racing Commission
they've just to the regulators
on leave three three times over
this past year and submitted a
over five hundred fifty page
ethics complaint at to the
ethics commission against the
racing commission and I'm happy
to say that every charge that
they
mentioned it was dismissed that
hasn't been the rosy est of
relations since the litigation
started prior to that we had a
decent working relationship but
unfortunately that's taken a
turn.
Thank you Mr chair I think that.
And it clears up the the water
for me thank you.
Thank you we have a very thank
you Mr chairman thank you for
your presentation so I just need
some clarification on a few
things so I was told that the
classy track if it paid to the
G. R. T. has to run for days
with nine races pretty per day
and then the class B. track has
run three days with ten races
per day is that happening at our
tracks Mr Chairman
representative sorry on
Sariñana
members of the committee that is
currently happening
there are some exceptions for
that in during the pandemic
those exceptions were utilized
we were running out of purse
money because the slot parlors
at the race tracks were shut
down completely there's no
revenue being generated to
giveaway for prize money and
purses as we call it and so some
tracks were some race meets were
cancelled and as some had to
adjust their days because they
did not hit the eight million
dollar mark that's in the gaming
control act if you give more
than eight million dollars in
gaming tax to the state you must
run
four days a week and at least
nine races a day if you find
less than eight million dollars
in gaming tax to the state you
can run.
Three days a week nine races per
day.
Thank you Mr assert so that is
was it happen during the but is
it happening now I mean the
correct amount of races per day.
Yes.
Recommend races per day there
are variances to happen and
there's some exceptions in the
gaming control act such as work
stoppage weather conditions and
so forth lacked inability to
fulfill the races as published
in the condition book and that's
been the exception realized
there is a our shortage across
the country in New Mexico as
experiencing that as well so the
the race tracks that should run
ten races a day they've only
been able to fill seven races
adequately with enough
participants for the wagers to
to bat on those horses so they
they request a variance based on
that exception we've granted it
because we can't just put
people's horses in races they
have to be willing to ensure
them and they're not so the that
letter from us we'll go to the
game control board for final
approval to run less days than
that what the permitted to thank
you yes ma'am so I guess there's
conservative Mr chairman on if
nine if there's nineties the
race then the racing track
casinos have to close down is
there we we just got a concern
on that is that true or is that
happening or what's happening
that it renewed.
Mr Chairman representative
Sarinana hi members of the
committee I don't quite
understand nine races the the
nine days without races days
that live races the racing track
seniors must close.
I in my seven years I'm not
familiar with any law that that
mentions that whatsoever.
When with the
the broadcast of the races must
be broadcast to all the casinos
is that true.
Is that happening is chairman
Representative Sariñana members
of the committee what I think
you're asking is pursuant to the
horse racing Act is in order to
simulcasted must be running a
live race meet or you must
import a right another New
Mexico racetrack so if the F.
three doses running all the
tracks in New Mexico the other
four tracks must be importing
the Rideau so races so we could
go into down to Albuquerque and
bad on Rideau so there.
And that leads into the gaming
act which in order to conduct
gaming you must be either
running a live race meet or
simulcasting.
So that's the way that to access
work together the horse racing
Act and the gaming control act
in Mr Chairman said that is
happening we're gonna have
problems with the.
Mr Chairman representative
Sarinana and members of the
committee at it did not happen
one time this year and that
track was sanctioned.
By the racing commission thank
you Mr chairman thank you thank
you for that.
Thank you Mr chairman just want
to say of a big supporter of our
Tracy and I've been going to the
resistance thousand pampers I
think my dad liked him a little
too much and maybe that's why
state we but a.
To sum up concerns have been
brought up to me
Just the consistency with the
testing I walked out and I came
back in the talked about that
there's some concerns that
there's a lot of appeals that
are lost in courts what are you
guys doing to address that issue
do you guys have like procedures
formal procedures that people
are are falling for the testing
or for what's going on there.
Yes Mr Chairman representative
Sanchez members of the committee
at happy to address that it's
kind of miss the agency number
that that all the court cases
that we lost were the
commission's fault from us being
in a not having the ability to
do our jobs correctly but that's
furthest from the truth are drug
testing program is outstanding
one of the tops in the nation
we even have the war to say that
and at a national level but that
what happened in the past couple
three years was that the the HSD
experience a lot of losses in
the court room because the
attorney general's office and
the attorney assigned to us did
not respond in several cases A.
B. thirteen cases and so we've
we've taken our hits on that the
AG's office has paid for some of
the sanctions are costs
associated with those losses and
they've contracted with a
private firm to help come clean
up the mess that they created
thank you Mr.
Thank you thank you have a
Representative a month.
Thank you Mr chair
It appears I can't imagine that
we were all contacted by the
same.
constituent so it it does appear
Mr chairman as if the the the
the racing commission does have
some.
Work to do
in repairing relationships with
our association because I think
we've all heard.
very very similar
questions that I was hearing
other folks bring up that seems
to be bipartisan
that so we know our racers
are not Republican or Democrat
there's just New Mexicans.
And so I I think there are some
concerns here that that I would
just suggest that relationship.
Need to be repaired
because a series of questions I
have are very similar
as I have said of a few more of
specific questions that were
brought up considering
concerning
But the stewards and so could
could could I have you maybe
define Mr chairman.
What a Stewart is that a
commissioner what is Stewart in
statute.
Mr Chairman Mr Taylor crews
members of the committee a
Stewart is a.
Basically a judge the there
pointed to there's three of them
their point to teach race meet
to oversee.
The rules and regulations of
racing to see that the racing at
that each race maintenance
conducted in a fair and
equitable manner they they
sanction fines they sanction
people with the other
suspensions as well so there the
the judges they ruled the roost
at the racetracks and
They assure that people follow
the rules and if not those
people face sanctions and it's
all.
All for racing to be fair and
clean we we need people to play
the game that know the rules and
if you don't know the rules
you're going to pay for it
that's the bottom line thank you
Mr chairman that the question
that I have concerning that is
I I've been told that
that when there have been
vacancies among the stewards
that.
that someone qualified Stewart's
maybe temporarily have been put
in place that do not.
that according to statute to
meet the standard of having a
national horse racing
organizations.
just a some sort of relationship
a certificate or connection to a
national horse racing
association
of certificate and so that we I
I'm not sure if that came up.
it's been dealt with but I was I
was told that that has been an
issue in the last couple years
where someone is not eight eight
steward.
Stewart's or for those who have
maybe served in that role.
Were placed there temporarily
but we're not qualified to be in
that role.
Yes Mr chairman to get subject
of Mister David Cruz members of
the committee at a and I know
that staff very well and has
statute.
Stature.
You do there Chris.
Anyways the the statute says
that they must be licensed or
certified by a nationally
recognized.
Racin organization The New
Mexico racing Commission is
nationally recognized horse
racing organization and the
people that have filled and have
been licensed.
That's.
Mr chairman that's said likely a
good reason I'm just once again
I'm sitting here like the other
folks are the complaints of come
rolling in and so
I.
Once again we're.
As we go forward and frontier
this is one portion of oversight
and I don't think any of us here
on this Committee our experts
but we're the ones who are going
to be approving budgets at to to
some degree which is a from the
standpoint of the state a.
Hey a stamp of approval so I
know it's pry uncomfortable
conversations but you have been
in quite a bit litigation and I
also understand we just come out
of COVID supplying with all of
the statutes may have been
difficult but
There have been questions about
the number of race days the
number of days that.
casinos are racinos have been
able to offer gaming when there
was not a racing taking place
and I know how this happens as
well there's probably some truth
to the matter and there's
probably what gets passed from
word of mouth or mouth or mouth
but regardless it's at that
point now where legislators are
hearing it and legislators of
the pressures being put on us to
make sure that of may I have
another question here about.
Purses and I believe you I give
you kind of answered that but
there is concern that the proper
amount of person that is
supposed to be going to the
horsemen Association is it has
not at times been.
matched I don't know if that's
a.
So I I know if you could address
that as well sure Mr chairman
now that I see a placard
Representative Montoya and
members of the committee I don't
believe.
In the in the horseracing Act.
The New Mexico horsemen's
association is supposed to get a
half percent of the retain edge
of simulcasted medical benefits
the other money the twenty
percent net take from the in the
gaming control act is for purses
so it is not necessarily goes to
the New Mexico Horsens
association because of the horse
racing to be divvied out as
prize money so I don't think
they have ownership of that
money at any time they oversaw
that money at one point time but
they no longer do but
That the tracks are audited by
the gaming control act they know
that that twenty percent per
game control for the they know
that twenty percent is accurate
in control board has software
they can calculated to the penny
so I I sleep well at night
knowing that the the purse Fund
not the horsemen's association
is getting paid properly from
the twenty percent that take
from the gaming machines.
some of the questions that that
myself the other members have
asked are the some of the issues
that have been litigated.
Yes Mr Chairman representative
Lente is that there's been a lot
of litigation of which none of
us started by the New Mexico
racing Commission all and I and
I understand what you're saying
that we need to then some
bridges but very tough and
people keep suing you and you
said it sit down at the table
with them and try to extend the
olive branch and they just turn
around and do something wrong
again and see again so but it is
a work in progress I can promise
you that it's it's something
that I think it's healthy for
the racing industry that we all
get along we have some
legislation that needs to come
up and we're not uniformed I
great concerns that nothing's
going to get past this year the
industry is not unified right
now.
Not not to the commission's
fault whatsoever but
Yes I we we do more and promise
you will continue to try to work
with them as long as they're in
organizations.
one last question and just real
quick my commitment and I think
maybe a couple of the other
members who.
R. on this committee I think we
would commit maybe to even if
needed to sit down and help.
Broker in the.
Truths so there could be
discussion because I think all
of us as New Mexicans a horse
racing Association and horse
racing across New Mexico is very
important to us.
And we want to see it succeed we
want to see it be a vibrant I
mean they're very few things
such as hatch green Chile that
we can all agree agree on and
horse racing I think is one of
those and so I think
would be.
All of us to sit down and try
and get this right
we are out of the pandemic I do
see some of the pressures that.
And maybe have been in place
prior to I think can maybe be
over and I Representative I'm
I have one of the Recinos Sen
ray is in San Juan County and so
this is not by any means based.
Appearing to be on one side or
the other this is more about the
industry and I think it's
important for for industry to
succeed
the last thing is maybe
something that everybody could
agree on potentially and that is
currently finds that are
assessed.
go to the school Fund.
Is that incorrect.
Because I think because if if
that is the case of that this
could be a source of funds that
could go back to the board maybe
that we could create something
it was suggested to me is
whenever we create a our testing
fund since our testing has
increased dramatically.
Okay have Mr chairman members of
Representative Montoya members
of the committee
I think that money goes to the
general fund to the tune of
almost a million dollars well
that's what's.
Of taxes licensing but the the
the agency has worked diligently
on trying to collect the fines
the one reason why we we
wouldn't have it come back full
circle to us because people will
say well the commission find
this guy a hundred thousand
dollars just because they want
to make more money for
themselves to spend so the the
conflict of interest line
there's something that we really
wanted to try to avoid.
Okay thank you Mr chairman I'm
just trying to come up with a
creative way since it did appear
one of things that you mentioned
that was the increased testing
and how that has been a success
and you want to continue doing
that that does mean increased
burden.
and cost so if we can find a way
to maybe offset that and if we
could work collaboratively
cooperatively with the our right
our association on maybe
something that could help.
because you're you're you're
you're talking now that
Filling some of those spots in
the races
I think some of that may go to
the relationship that might be
just what they believe are some
expenses that that they're
having to incur where we do to
get our number of races up to
the proper amount to to match
what statute puts in statute.
So we don't have to worry about
the.
Finding a variance because it
does appear there are there are
reasons to not do it such as
weather and other things but if
we're doing it just because we
don't have horses.
In the races we need to find a
way to to that that would be
wanting to make it more
profitable for everyone and more
enjoyable and something that we
I'd like to have a traditional
four thank you Mr.
What that is Mr chairman I
respond yes yes Mr chair of
Representative Montoya at the
commission hosted a meeting on
January fifth with several
stakeholders in the industry and
just address that point we.
we we found that the breeding in
the state of New Mexicos
declined over fifty something
percent since two thousand seven
so number race days has declined
as well that we believe the race
tracks are it here into the
statutes fully with the
exception of those variances
that our current and as I
mentioned before when races do
not feel with adequate number of
forces we just can't force
someone to enter their horses
right now we're bridging on the
on the point of animal welfare
put in our in that really should
be running and then they end up
having a catastrophic it's a
national issue it and it's
something that the New Mexico
racing Commission I think has
been high on the priority list
to try to recruit horses to come
here but the model of our race
tracks the races that are run
each day at New Mexico
racetracks it's it's archaic
it's it's outdated on a ten race
card look at this and then the
pair you run three or four
quarter horse races and in three
or four New Mexico prep races
there's only three races for
people from have what we call
vote horses to participated
you're not going to be able to
recruit anyone from Texas or
Oklahoma or anywhere else to
bring a large stable here
because they don't have enough
opportunities to participate so
it's it's it's a problem that
we're addressing we we had a
pretty nice meeting on January
fifth we're hoping that that
meeting stimulates more
conversation to say listen if
we're going to stay the way we
are will be gone and ten to
twenty years and if people on
horse racing to survive they
better embrace change now
because we're ready to hit the
panic button in this industry.
Thank you Mr chairman I would
just kind of one last comment on
that then maybe yeah I heard you
say that there was potentially
statute changes that you're
looking at that you don't think
we'll get through this year
because of.
No.
All updated effort by the entire
industry it is some of what
you're talking about maybe
reading.
the statute because of this I
mean a lot of this is in statute
since our cake maybe it's time
to revisit this you Mr chairman
Representative Montoya members
of the committee at.
Is that I think flexibility
needs to be built in the
statutes it horse racing changes
just like any other business
during the pandemic we got
caught with their pants down we
don't have a backup plan casinos
or closed personally stopped
coming in we're in a dire
situation.
so I I think built in
flexibility to some extent
It is needed in our industry as
far as number of race days goes
a number of races run per day
which typically across America
on the a lot of race tracks only
run eight races per day and a
lot of them only run three days
a week because everyone's
adjusting to the lack of forces
in their jurisdictions and
meanwhile we have a hardened
steadfast Law and the gaming
control act that mandates ten
races per day for days a week
three three days a week
And nine races.
What those we know what I mean
but so.
We need some some ability to
adjust to hard times.
That because we have to the
biggest thing about this is
maintaining a good product for
for the people that are betting
on these races and a lot of
people forget about those people
they're the ones that put the
harder to dollars on these races
day in and day out and we have
been supplying them about
product and I use this simple
men and I don't like to because
it kind of puts New Mexico just
racing down but on closing day
is the part period to handle
which is in the number of
dollars wagered at that race
track on that day with ten races
was six hundred and seventy two
thousand dollars.
At tracks.
In Arizona turf paradise
racetrack that same day with
only eight races they wagered
one point eight million dollars.
That's the barometer that we can
use of the interest that on New
Mexico horse racing which isn't
much the other day there is for
race tracks running across
America last Tuesday someone
part could even handle five
hundred thousand dollars in
parimutuel handle where church
paradises Phoenix handled one
point four million Mahoning
valley in Ohio pandemic of one
point four million and parks
race in Philadelphia handle
three million.
Here we are we can even break
half a million in New Mexico say
if if you push a lot of our.
A states and races.
You can have less horses per
race.
Your party to have is going to
continue to decline it's going
to look like there's actually no
interest in horse racing here in
New Mexico and my concern is
that legislature's of in the
state why are we.
Given twenty percent of get net
take to an industry that no one
cares about is full of a bunch
of cheaters that's my concern
that's what we fight hard every
day to try to cut all the
cheating out of this racket.
To sustain our racing and that's
what we're here for nearly to
sustain our race in a healthy
way never mind all the hoopla
and the fighting that's going on
in our industry I know our
agency has stayed focused on
building
term to keep Porsches and safe
and healthy and sustainable in
the state.
Thank you Mr chairman and
whatever we do going forward to
make always be mindful that
those receiving this important
communities at the existing as
well and so we want to do
anything that's going to out of
balance and harmony Recinos some
thank you Mr chairman thanks
for.
Thank you Mr chairman the
director call feel free to call
me Representative.
Every time of of here I make a
mistake so forgive me he has
been much better hair.
You know you mentioned the idea
of cheating and I can only
imagine that the hisa is
specifically for the purpose of
avoiding that and the efforts
that you undertake every time
there's a raise to ensure that
there's integrity in this sport
is to make sure that everyone is
going to be treated fairly and
so I'm curious because you you
mentioned briefly that his so
was the a federal mandate.
Unfounded an unfunded mandate
from the federal government
however it's it's a burden that
you almost Kerry how does that
coincide with what you would
have done were there no hisa.
Just simply by your own policies
our state statute.
And if you could do a little bit
of comparing contrast and then
if you could talk a little bit
about the funding around that
issue because it seems to me
that if you have a an unfunded
mandate that that's going to
affect what you're trying to do
and I don't know if they're
going to jive with what you what
what you would have done and
what you will have to do if you
could explain that to the
committee I appreciate yes Mr
chairman Representative David
Cruz my apologies relief for.
Which need I don't see is
practice after but that
Truthfully I we've met several
times with his and they have
complimented New Mexico on the
job we're doing and quite
frankly this is basically going
to emulate what we've already
been doing here for the last six
years which is a strategic
testing focus on out of
competition testing and
cracking down on I cheaters and
so they they have complimented
us quite a bit in their program
is very very similar the only
difference between their program
in our program for the most part
is cost we do our program in the
state of New Mexico but for
between six hundred thousand
maybe seven hundred thousand
every year and and our
expenditures for testing
hisses going to cost one point
seven million for the state hi
that's what the industry is
going to be
tax on from from the federal
government
The hispidus not have the staff
to.
To execute the enforcement of
their laws so they're trying to
get the state racing commissions
to sign a voluntary agreement in
which will utilize our staff
members to enforce this I I
don't think it's quite fair it's
it's not a good model because it
now has put quite a burden on
our agency to try to fulfill
this and our concern is if we
don't fulfill yes then they're
going to start start
prohibiting R. racetracks in New
Mexico from exporting their
simulcasting of which is their
races to all the outlets across
America and in the world so we
got we got a lot of concerns
ifisa chooses for the hammer
down on New Mexico race and it
can be a significant blow that's
what we're trying to do our best
to comply with that to keep our
tracks to have the ability to
export their simulcasting all
around the country yeah because
if we don't that pair mutual
handle they I mentioned at the
part where they met six hundred
and seventy two thousand the
amount back on track is
approximately fourteen thousand
dollars so we depend a lot on
the people that wager on our
races around the country we're
very dependent on that it does
not generate the most revenue in
the world to the tracks only get
a small percentage of that big
chunk of money to grinding
ability to generate some revenue
for the purse money and for the
racetracks.
Mr Chairman director for her can
you briefly describe a handful
of the.
E. legal.
Drugs and substances that are
that are administered to horses
so that they might win illegally
I want the committee to
understand what is what what
forces are facing because of
humans that do illegal acts.
Mr chairman Representative Cruz
I'm so happy to answer that
question.
And it's a crying shame I love
the sport to death.
But some of the things that have
been found in some of these
resources to compete on our race
tracks day in and day out of the
industry should be ashamed of
itself that we let people to do
harm to these forces into the
industry we have had a horse
that had not only rental in in
the system but also
methamphetamine is system.
And the horse was a very
successful winner that day only
to get disqualified when we
detected the illicit substances
in the post race analysis we
currently have a case that
concerns a drug called oxy more
phone which is a a like morphine
we've had a beta agonists which
is help stimulate growth kind
beater also patter all albuterol
they're really supposed to be
used to help our pre the lot
better but people are abusing
those drugs on our animals to
help the horses get bigger and
stronger so you can only equate
that to the Olympic athlete.
Utilizing those beta agonist
drugs to get stronger because
steroids are easily detectable
and their band so that they have
the the our magicians they just
jump from one different type of
drug to another this is we get
the testing to catch them on one
they're already a couple steps
ahead of us that the continuous
cat and mouse game in our
industry and if someone had the
silver bullet solution
there would be no cheating and
horse racing but no
jurisdictions across America
have that silver bullet solution
so we focused on out of
competition testing in which we
look for a class one A. of drugs
which are the worst possible
drugs have no place to be in our
and beta agonist growth hormones
adult blood doping agents we
look for those and we tried to
extract the cheaters the horses
that have been
given those performance
enhancing drugs we keep them for
racing when we do the out of
competition testing those forces
cannot run for a minimum period
of days sixty days and then they
have to test clean before they
can enter back into the race and
population that programs been
really effective for us and and
like I said earlier in my intro
we work really smart with our
our testing in the financing
that we get in the industry to
try to keep the playing field
level and keep the game fair and
honest for the way to the
public.
Mr chairman members like I think
you gather now that that this is
a significant problem for this
industry but director does this
budget addressed this testing on
the level of testing that's
necessary.
Mr Chairman representative
because members of the committee
we we've never been one to
always come up here with our
hand we we've taken what we've
received but as I mentioned
earlier we've hit the glass
ceiling with the budget that
we've been given over the years
and we're grateful for the
little bit that we get once in a
while but now we we need to we
need boots on the ground we need
more staffing to do this job
effectively in our office we
have ten person.
In our downtown office.
Of which we have a CFO no
disrespect but she's not out
there enforcing of rules on Drug
administrations have to
investigators and three Stewart
at the race track and that's our
staff that that helps enforce
the rules we sure could use more
investigators we need to have
more veterinarians to look after
the welfare of the horse to be
advocates for the well being of
our as well that's something
we've been dying to get funding
to do is hire more veterinarians
so they could be the voice for
the horses resources that they
don't they don't speak English
at a point to stand there and
he'll get in need of.
In his neck and just stand there
and take it because he's trying
to stand still and now he starts
acting weird because he just got
an illicit drug a and that
should not be occurring in our
industry.
More resources would help us
combat that type of activity in
our industry and and we're more
than happy to get rid of these
cheaters because we have never
seen.
See that jurisdiction with that
and natural violators than I
ever have in New Mexico and I've
worked coast to coast from
Philadelphia to Arizona almost
coast.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
I I don't know exactly what the
protocols would be as you know
I'm new but I would like to see
us some kind of re consideration
of that budget if it does not
include adequate funding to take
care of these these kinds of
situations thank you Sir.
Thank you for that.
As for.
Motions.
From by thank you Mr chairman I
move the executive
recommendation.
Okay.
But officials.
One opposition.
Sufficient.
Seven so Mister director you go
to the executive recommendation.
At this time.
Thank you folks for having us we
appreciate on.
That flex will.
One of.
Four seven nine.
What is to come on fire.
Okay whenever you're ready
Senator.
Okay Mister chair members of the
committee of moving on to the
board of veterinary medicine.
they are agency code four seven
nine.
And you'll find them in volume
two on pages one ninety four and
one ninety five.
let's see here I'll go ahead and
start us off again with the
executive and legislative
disincentive we're looking at
An agency requests looking under
a quest here.
We tend to be adults thank.
All right so so the HSD had
requested four hundred and sixty
nine point five.
And the LFC recommendation for
HSD other revenues again we've
got other revenues here at this
agency does not use general fund
the recommendation was four
hundred sixty nine point five
thousand a one point seven
increase above the FY twenty
three operating budget the
recommendation is nine hundred
thousand below the executive
recommendation because it did
not include fund balance
recommendation to the agency and
the agency you and DFA it will
talk a little bit more about
that portion of the request and
the the pet sheltering board yes
the children board okay thank
you.
With that I'll turn it over to
done after the fact.
hello again Madam chair of the
nine hundred thousand dollar
difference at the executive
recommends a fund balances from
the animal care and any fund and
that is been a fund created by
legislation which basically is a
fee attached to have food and it
has been collected by the New
Mexico department of agriculture
and the board of veterinary
medicine has collected approx
nine received from the New
Mexico department of agriculture
approximately nine hundred
thousand that we're recommending
be put in other costs plants to
nonprofits which so we'll find
for spay and neuter and also low
income spay and neuter citizens
throughout the state of New
Mexico and with that miss madam
chair I if you don't mind this
is a director of the dram I had
really quickly I just wanted to
make a note that the agency has
occurred the nine hundred
thousand and to the animal Kerr
Fund.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for having
me today my name's William Duran
I've been the executive director
for the board of that mad for up
almost a year I took over in
February of last year prior to
that I was at the board of
nursing as director of
operations so the board the
charge of the board is to
regulate and license
veterinarians and any person
that are in that medicine with
the exception of veterinary
assistance we do not have
jurisdiction over vet assistant
so registered vet technicians
euthanasia technicians.
bovine artificial insemination
technicians and then the bovine
pregnancy diagnosis technicians
we have jurisdiction over those
individuals in twenty seventeen
we took over the and the animal
sheltering board the animal
shelter importance to spend a
committee was formed and placed
under the board of that merry
medicine and twenty twenty the
board of veterinary medicine
establish the minimum standards
for Adam shelters.
The one thing that that both
ladies were talking about that
nine hundred thousand dollars it
was brought in the animal care I
was always funded in the in the
livestock code today sheltering
board of those revenues came
from license plate the spay and
neuter license plates
individuals tax donations at the
end of the year you checked that
little box it says I want to
donate to spay neuter and other
contributions of.
The in twenty seventeen I
believe the the pet food lawsuit
and I'm sorry the pet food bill
passed which included a fee on
the sale of pet food that then
went to low income spay and
neuter that fund also of those
funds also going to spend new
fund so there is a federal
litigation with that right now
the pet food institute along
with other individuals filed a
lawsuit claiming that that law
was unconstitutional that is
still pending in federal court
up when I came in October and
presented to LFC
director Avid kindly suggested
that if if we do give out this
money that money goes into the
animal Kerr Fund those funds are
then given out by a distribution
system where we give grants to
agencies and organizations that
do Spanish for lowincome
last year two years ago they did
they give two hundred eighteen
thousand or last year two
hundred eighteen thousand of
monies that were already in
there.
The problem we have this year is
that the shelter committee when
it was put together was not put
together according to the law so
when I took over and I
discovered that now the board
ultimately the the authority
rests with the board so the
board did nothing wrong they
gave up that money in accordance
with the laws and the way it was
supposed to be given out however
the process is what was flawed
so we disband that children
committee in November we had a
special board meeting we
constantly reconstituted the
sheltering Committee I vote as
it was supposed to be by the
board and then I had my for
sheltering Committee meeting in
December two elected the
officers of the of the committee
now the reason I bring all that
up is because their job and
their main goal is to give that
money out that nine hundred and
it's probably a little more than
that nine hundred seventeen
thousand dollars to those
organizations via grants to to
facilitate spay neuter for low
income housing for low income
housing low income spay neuter
for low income families so
that's where that difference was
we can expect to get the money
last year and then I got a check
I got a check in the mail for
nine hundred thirteen thousand
dollars from New Mexico State
University because that's who
the department agriculture I
falls under I'm so we're working
to that end I'm hoping to have
the new process for the
distribution of those funds done
by the end of this fiscal year
we are going to start from
scratch but I'm gonna model it
after a program that's already
been effective in Maryland I
have a board member and
committee member who have done
all the research they're about
to do a presentation of the
sheltering Committee and then
I'm gonna take the policies for
that because there are no
policies written for this I'm
taking the policies that I use
at the board of nursing it it
has audit mechanisms in it it
has compliance mechanisms it has
a a reversion mechanism if these
organizations spend all that
money that comes back to that
fund and it doesn't go to the
general fund because.
As we are impressed
and and that's about it I when I
took over there's a lot of
things were being done.
That were very archaic we have
increased our fees in nine years
all the applications had to be
mailed there was checks getting
lost there was applications
getting lost so we've now there
was a lot of hurdles were put in
place by the previous agency
administration that made it very
difficult for veterinarians to
come here every piece of paper
has to be notarized
it was just an arduous process
for them to to come here we've
got rid of all that we are now
strictly doing it by rule what
the rule says what we need
that's what we're taking well no
more
over burdensome restrictions and
we're moving forward we are no
longer mailing out renewal forms
we're doing it by email it's the
first step in going electronic
we're switching over are I. T.
system which is a third party
contractor I'm in the process of
switching over to the state
system to do it so we can start
taking credit card payments we
don't take credit card payments
we only take money orders and
checks that's the only we can
get paid so we're taking those
baby steps to get where we need
to be I'm hoping by the end of
this calendar year that we will
have an automated system where
people can just log on create
their profile and do whatever
business with my agency that
they can do online and we rarely
touched so and with that I'll
stand for questions.
Thank you for that.
We'll start with Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chairman I I will I would
just like to express of how
grateful I am that you took over
the animal shelter and board is
a it was a tough deal the and
hopefully you'll get up and
running correctly I just I
expect to deal with the federal
our the situation on that board
also.
Mr chair and Representative we
deal with almost all feral and
so yes if it includes our is it
you know just about everything
now the livestock for does the
wild horses in those courses
that are out there they mainly
deal with that but if it's a
domestic animal and it falls
into the practice act we will
deal with while for two
different to different things to
different creatures yes.
I just want to make that point
How do you pay for the fees for
those of.
Mr Chairman I'm I'm sorry
Representative what kind we pay
for what the food it costs money
to feed an animal it costs money
to so how does the animal
sheltering board.
Get funding to pay for the
animals that they have thank you
Mr chairman Mr representative so
we are not in charge we oversee
the shelters we don't run the
shelters the shelters are
normally run by some of our
private some of our local
jurisdictions local county
governments city governments and
if there budgeting to take care
of those animals we just oversee
to make sure that they're doing
what they're supposed to be
doing that's it the livestock
board then those wild animals in
those horses and livestock that
they pick up they have the
budget for those animals that
they care for before they get
him talk it out.
Of the last of course still have
to come up with food for the for
our Mr chairman Mr
Representative yes they are.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative Sir you.
Thank you Mr.
Thanks for the presentation that
the difference between you and
the executive it's is so we will
be recommending executive
because the lowest what's going
to do to you to your.
Because that's what we did right
we we do the Los recommendation
but it is workable but so.
to huge difference so Mr
Chairman representative I
believe that the the executive
includes at nine hundred
thousand dollars that wasn't in
the LFC because we just we
missed it so it won't really
affect me I the monies that are
that nine hundred thousand
that's restricted funds I can't
touch it the request I put in
it I left it almost flat because
again I took over the agency we
did a lot of cost saving
measures I think we're at a
point where probably in fiscal
twenty five I'm going to come
for ask for more money and maybe
some C. to money but if you give
me the executive I'm gonna be
happy because you know the funds
are gonna get spent.
Thank you.
Mr every Mr chairman.
To clarify with this is current
use.
Is budget on nonrecurring used
which I think it is and I know
that the money's there good to
put it to work but I would
suggest to the committee to work
in a way that doesn't make
sense with one.
And so for example it might be
better the special
appropriation that record just
you don't have to solve today
but we could certainly work that
ordinary for to get to the point
of what you don't want to spend
money on files and the bacteria.
Yes.
So Mister chair of the so the
funds are going to the animal
care fund the distributions are
done by application of an
organization has to apply to us
and we give them whatever that
we request up to the amount that
we have so if that money were to
run out and we didn't get any
more money there is no more
money to give
so let's say we give up this
total of nine hundred and
seventeen thousand dollars in
this fiscal year which I highly
doubt we will but we will carry
that over because the fund will
exist because contributions go
in there whatever we have left
will give up the following year
and it'll it'll just continue to
to work that way so the funds
are gone but again.
The license plate fees tax
contribution fees all those fees
are still gonna go to the animal
Kerr Fund so that I will always
exist that that's statutory that
money is always going to exist
the amount will differ so it
just depends on how much money
we get into that fund in fiscal
year.
Thank you.
Thank you for that next we have
a Representative Chatfield of Mr
chair just a just.
asked if we could work together
with staff in the agency to make
sure that the the paper trail
looks appropriate exposed to
look for the utilization of this
money and just give us staff
approved without.
Okay we'll put that in our
report we report back to the
full committee.
So with that
Yes our motion would be to have
a group discussion and report
back to the full committee.
Mr chairman I move the LFC
recommendation with continued
speaking with
the committee staff.
And so the recommendation is to.
Approve the LFC with further
discussion.
Thank you thank you.
I
the state.
Hey this is our final
presentation.
Agency group for.
Numbers of people for real world
commission.
Okay.
All right.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee again Amanda Dick
Peddie with the legislative
finance committee we're joined
this afternoon by Donna Rivera
she subbing in for Simon Miller
for a DFA we're also joined by
Scott gives president of the
comprising till tech Commission
and he'll introduce his team.
I would like to direct members
attention quickly to some pages
in your volumes so for volume to
have some information on
conversing till type can be
found on page one ninety six and
then on volume three we have a
really nice chart on page fifty
nine that looks like this as you
all probably know who present
Holtec is an enterprise agency
so just five percent of their
funding comes from the New
Mexico general fund the
remainder of their about six
point three million dollar
budget is all from revenues from
ticket sales so you can track
where that money's coming from
and where it goes as well as
they're kind of capital outlay
requests and how those monies
are spent on that page.
with that for the different
sheets we have hopefully
something very easy for you this
afternoon other recommendations
are identical both the LFC and
executive recommendation support
the agency request which was for
a budget flat with FY twenty
three and I will let miss Rivera
add any additional comments for
the executive before turning it
over to the agency.
No additional comments thank you
Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you for
having us here this afternoon
eleven days ago I was in front
of your counterpart Committee in
Colorado doing the same thing.
We had an interesting year this
year I think many of you are
aware of or delayed opening due
to the wildland fires in New
Mexico and the recommendations
of the for service to open July
one.
The Village Chama had its
challenges with water so was the
end of July before most of us
living in trauma have water we
can drink.
and that.
Because there's a downturn in
the our ridership and revenue
during that month.
we recovered very very well
throughout the fall
and our full season was as good
as pre pandemic so that was very
encouraging and we were covered
revenues very well.
so financially we're we're all
right
our ridership was down because
of the delayed opening in the
the loss of of many writers in
July.
We
Or on task to add an additional
premium court this coming season
thanks to a lot of the capitol
funding from you all and in
Colorado we're going to add an
additional fifth large
locomotive to give us more
flexibility and right now as
we're speaking a group is
converting a second locomotive
to burn oil so we don't have the
kind of problem we had this last
year with the wildland fire
situation.
So we're encouraging to be able
to move forward.
So.
With that.
Any.
Questions for me.
Mr chairman I think
Representative Herrerra would
like to make a couple comments
that's true thank you Mr chair.
I I I just came in to you know
support
the committee tell take it is in
my district it is a wonderful
asset to the state of New Mexico
and has been supported by both
the states have come New Mexico
Colorado for years because it is
such a special or about and
we're proud to have it I don't
know if they mention I apologize
for stepping in a little late
but I want you to know they have
two thousand friends of the
river of these are people that
just give donations to the
to the railroad I you should
also know that every summer
about two hundred and fifty to
three hundred mostly retirees
come to trauma risk houses and
work on the railroad there's all
these like Rio road addicts all
call them from all over the
country that kind it that this
is their summer you know they
just love coming in during the
during the COVID I was so proud
of this group going online and
they put together a ten thousand
dollar food bank for the people
and trauma suffering during the
COVID I mean they're just a real
part of this community mind you
a summer this summer in flex but
they just kind of bring that
town to live and it's all the
time I got to say it's a lot of
people but it's all these older
guys that love rural roads in
the lead kind of getting out
there and tinkering with the
engine and doing all that stuff
sitting around talking every
time the railroad takes up the
crowd gathers to watch it it
does happen twice a day you
think people get a little years
to no average time it takes up
there's a crowd out there
You know they hired twenty seven
people in the in the year long
and then that workforce
increases to over a hundred in
the summer so it's a huge
economic development engine for
five counties in the in the
northern part I just want you to
know they did a study and
economic development said a few
years ago they bring seventeen
million eight hundred and eighty
thousand to the five county
region in the north so
I am obviously coming here every
year and support this it's in my
district but you couldn't have a
better job for all the railroad
fanatics in our nation they just
love coming to see the COVID
until technical recinto tech
reference thank you Mr chair.
Okay any questions from.
Cool Representative sudah you
guys are great and
You don't have a bigger support
on this committee than me born
and raised Reba
People know a no one fights
harder.
Representative it affects pretty
hard but thought for that
company but thank you for what
you do in the I'm I'm happy to
support your request thank you
Mr chair.
Representative since there's no
more questions all I can say is
keep smoking.
We'll do that.
One of them could be the last
year to make a motion thank you
Mr chairman I move the.
This is in the LFC recordation.
And one of the.
For.
Seven four
seven.
You are.
Recommendation.
Thank you.
We'll make over one of the
better Neri.
