In brief, if possible.
And we look forward to hearing
from all of you. So whenever
you're ready, precise, alright,
Chair members of the committee.
My name is Eric Sr and I am the
LFC, analyst for the Commission
for the Commission for the Deaf
and Hard of hearing Persons
Sitting next to me, is the
executive director Nathan Gombe
and sitting next to him is the
executive budget analyst.
Laurie Ski, aka
It took me three years I got it.
Alright, Cool. So moving Madam
chair moving into, um, their
budget.
We're looking at agencies six or
four.
We're looking at agency 604.
In your packets. I think that's
behind Top six.
Um
I just wanted to point out too,
that you can find volume to the
page number for the lfc right up
and documentation and Volume two
on page 264.
Your book, LFC recommendation
maintained General fund revenue
for the commission while the
executive recommendation
increases revenue to the
commission.
By 30% over the FY 24 operating
budget. Both LFC and the
executive recommended decreasing
other transfers revenue because
of continued decreases in
revenue from telecommunications
relay services revenue.
LFC recommended spending levels
are 12.4% decrease from the FY
24 operating budget.
But it's 41% above actual FY 23
spending levels.
The executive maintained
spending levels commensurate
with the FY 24 operating budget.
LFC recommended a 200,000
decrease in personnel spending
because of nearly 600,000.
And funded vacant positions, and
you can see more about that on
the PS Calcutta on Page four in
your packet there
The analysts reach consensus on
performance measures and
targets, as indicated.
Uh and on the language, the
executive recommended language
specifying that 456.4000 is for
deaf and deaf blind services.
And with that, madam chair, I'll
go ahead and pass it over to the
executive analyst for further
commentary.
Madam chair members of the
committee. Good afternoon. The
only thing that I would like to
state is that the executive gave
the General fund increase to
offset the decline in the TRS
revenues. It is a trending
downward trending.
Revenue. Sorry. Is this better?
Okay?
Madam chair members of the
committee. The TRS fund has been
trending downward by about 5%
year over year, so the executive
thought it was prudent to ensure
their ability to maintain their
levels of standard.
Um, standard levels of
operation. Your pardon?
By offsetting those declines
with the general
And with that I will pass it
over to director Gone.
One. Sorry. Ah.
Madam Chair Members Committee. I
understand what you already
explained earlier, so I'm just
going to touch on a few things
briefly.
The
this time shows a actual
increase from the actual revenue
that we received.
In really surcharge last year.
And this year, so the issue
actually right now. It's uh it's
actually projecting an increase
in our PRS revenue women have
shown about 5% increase every
year. Investment consists
So the concern here is that if
we don't have the general fund
to make up for laughing, and we
will obviously be able to
Come in Commandments Agency and
for the federal services that
respected to provide
We also as of yesterday, um,
have a new staff person so we
have 14 fifties at this time
with one network going to be
posting in early February.
So that means that we won't have
those vacancies savings that
were mentioned, and that is a
concern because of all the
awesome declining revenue that
would continue to sing.
So overall, I have those
concerns with the L C
recognition. I understand that
you're going to accept it. I
just want to make sure that
we're clear on that and that
being as clear as possible that
if we continue to see decline
And we're going to see increases
in the cost per minute for relay
services. Then obviously we're
gonna have a problem come very
early and 25.
Without stand for questions.
That field.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Madam chair. I just want to make
sure
That I understood correctly.
That the LFC recommendation is
less
Then last year's appropriation.
But it's 40% more than actual
money spent.
Last year.
Is that true?
Madam Chair representative.
That's correct.
Thank you.
Since the question,
representative Marcy
Thank you, Manager along the
lines of what you
just asked.
Is it correct that
You're very percent 41% over of
the 28 3 budget to 20 for the
correct
Madam Chair representative
believe that's right.
And
This is is he here?
That Madam chair.
Spindle level
0.4% decrease in 24, but yet it
went up 41%. So that's uh, 29.6%
increase in my correct
Madam Chair, representative.
Correct? Uh, one last question.
It also states here that you
have a vacancy rate.
Of 600,000 and funded vacancy
positions.
Where? Where is that balance
that money going to on the
vacancy rate?
Mr Chairman, represent you want
to answer?
That's wrong. Mr Chairman,
Representative. Yeah. No,
there's six.
As you can see in the PS Cal at
the time of the budget request,
There was 300,000 or I'm sorry,
600,000 and funded vacancies
right And so
That's a big chunk of y. They
probably didn't spend their
entire budget in FY 23.
Madam chairman of presented. You
know the reason I'm bringing
this up because you know it's
not that we want to cut
anything.
These are these are people who
means
But
The number that are here. That's
why there's so much difference
in price in not just making the
public aware of that. We're not
here trying to cut their budget
into
the members here that they're
not spending with.
And vacancy rates are so high in
the savings there. Where is that
money going to businesses?
$600,000 there?
Yeah, Madam Chair and
representative, Um
So what? One thing is that?
They do typically get non
reverting language and so the
balance of that money ends up
going back to their, um, it's
basically ends up in fun balance
for the next year.
Uh um.
Yep.
Matters if I may.
Um, So the biggest the llama
that we have is that were
expected to provide relay
services for the entire state,
which is not something that we
can predict, or
Even limited to an extent
because it's a federal mandate,
So we have to put aside that
money in order to provide those
really services.
Now, Mr. Um, near the
recommendation reduces the
number of minutes and the
legislative measures.
But that actually doesn't have
any impact. I still have to put
aside that money to actually
provide those relationships.
Mrs. And the statutory language
has a as not reverted, so we put
Cumbre at least say, Here's what
happened. We're going to cover
this relay services and then
Nobody's gonna decide if they're
going to actually use the relay
services are not
And where expected to do that,
because of federal law.
Now.
The history has shown that is
decline over the years because
it's old technology. But the
Okay, damn it, starting increase
in the number of re luminous
years, So we had to explain that
money there.
As part of the F D A s. We have
14 filled positions are 16, so
I'm not sure exactly what her
600 thousands coming from.
Madam, Procuring presenters, You
know the one that brought it up
to the public is aware of what's
actually going on.
And these are organizations to
read.
I really don't want to cut
anything from you. But
With the numbers are showing.
That's why the
No other questions.
Okay, so I guess I don't
understand.
So like like representative
Garcia was saying, we have 6.4
funded vacancy FTE s requesting
16 more FTS.
No on the wrong one chair. Um we
have 16 ft positions. As of
yesterday, we filled 14.
Okay? Or half 14. So how many
people do you have in your
agency right now?
Unfortunately, positions sold.
I guess I don't understand.
Madam Sheriff. I can walk you
through real fast. The PS count
that you're looking at on Page
four there.
So you'll see online or in
column N
That the FY 24 funded vacancy
dollars was 592,000.
Right?
Um, we calculated that based on
the number of positions that
were filled at the time of the
agency's budget requests, so
that was back in September,
August timeframe.
At that time they had 11
positions filled and so you can
see that number there. On column
B.
Um, what the agency is saying is
that they filled three of those
positions.
Now.
Which, if you were to take that
at an annualized rate, it would
be right around 300,000. So you
would still have you know, these
are just rough numbers back of
napkin, but you would still have
about $300,000 left and vacancy
savings.
Uh, um. Based on the average,
uh, FTE cost right. And so
Um
Well, yes. You know, you're
you're seeing, um Javan General
Fund Revenue recommendation from
LFC on that first page.
Is flat with the prior year.
It does actually decreased
funding, um from other
transfers, and that's that
surcharge revenue, But that's
because that surcharge revenue
just isn't coming in like it
used to.
So you're seeing a decrease in
the LFC wreck, but it's not
necessarily it's not a cut in
general fund revenue.
Um, it's reduction in that
surcharge revenue because it's
just not coming in like it used
to.
So, but we do think in that
recommendation that there's
about
Roughly $300,000 that would be
left over any other questions.
Alright. I'm gonna go to my vice
here for us for a
recommendation.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair, I moved the LFC
recommendation in second.
Representatives Garcia seconds.
Okay. Is there any opposition?
Um, So you have the LSC
recommendation.
Remember, you can always come
back.
Oh,
Just to let you know we're still
having trouble with your
microphone. I think still can't
hear you. Very well. Where it
breaks breaks up. Okay? Alright.
Um Next one is commissioned for
the blind. Alright, madam chair
members of the committee again.
Uh, well, just go ahead. It's
tab 606 or agency 606 and your
your books there.
Should just be the next one next
agency in your books there.
Um, sitting next to me here is
Okay. Jim Solace, the deputy
director.
The director was actually out
today with with some family
stuff going on, so he wasn't
able to make it. Um And so the
deputy director is here today
And then again, I have the
executive analyst Laurie Ski,
aka with me.
Um, and just to keep this nice
and short, there were no
differences between the two.
Recommendations. Um
Um and the analysts reached
consensus on all performance
measures and targets.
With that I'll pass it over to
Laurie if she has any comments
Hello, madam Chair members of
the committee.
Eric summed it up their
differences, and with that, I
will pass it over to Deputy
Director Sinless.
Good afternoon. Thank you very
much. And is Eric mentioned Greg
trap. He's our director.
His wife is receiving medical
treatment out of state.
And so he is, of course with his
beloved
We do have some other folks that
I'd like to introduce here at
the hearing.
Member of Our Commission board
of directors is Katherine
Chalice.
Kevin Romero is deputy director
over Finance administrative
services is whether he's also
our CFO, Kevin
Daphne Mitchell is a program
manager on my team deputy over
in independent living and
vocational rehabilitation
programs.
Southeast program manager over
the vocational rehabilitation
counselor.
Unit.
Kelly. Burma is a coordinated
with our skills center in
Albuquerque, Kelly.
And Ryan. Miriam doesn't myriad
of different things for us and
Albuquerque. He's our
Dr came up from Santa Fe.
So I'd like to give you a couple
of highlights yesterday and some
highlights of tomorrow.
And one of the things I'd like
to highlight for yesterday is
our audit.
Um, findings which, of course
they were not. Which is what I
like to
Emphasize. We've actually been
audited by the office of the
state auditor.
And just over the last four
years, for example, we've had
clean audits and 2022 and 23.
And then
It's called 2021. We had
A non material finding.
And so we're really excited
about
About this.
That kind of audit.
Situation on the federal side
were also very proud that we
actually haven't had any
monitoring
the federal government uses.
To kind of
They refer, in essence, an
audit.
But they call it monitoring.
From the U. S. Department of
Education, the Rehabilitation
Services Administration.
And actually, when they usually
have about a five year
monitoring cycle, we actually
haven't been monitored.
In 13 years.
And I think it's primarily
because
Despite the complexity of the
federal audit, or federal
Grant process.
We federal government sees are
good audits here with the state.
They see that we submit our
Federal reports accurately and
on time.
And as a result, they consider
us to be really a low risk.
Organizations, so that's
Really credit to our staff or
administrative staff, especially
Kevin and his folks really do a
great job in our finance office.
Another online annual report
that was distributed here.
Today.
Has some really good information
about heart.
Robbery nation on our highlights
over the last year.
Another highlight is gonna thank
you to the Legislature for
providing the capital out there
to build a Fort Flex apartment
building.
Adjacent to our dormitory in
Alamogordo. We have an adult
training center in Alamogordo
and about 20 years ago, the
Folks that owned a vacant lot
next to our dorm donated the lot
to the conditions for the blind.
Fantastic. It's actually taken
literally 20 years to clear the
title.
And again. We appreciate the
funding from the Legislature.
Yeah, Again. We got architects
involved drawings and actually
had got in the way of
construction.
But we had a grand opening last
spring. This unit this
department is going to provide.
Really a great opportunity for
our vocation relocation clients
as they come to the end of their
training, which is usually
between six and nine months in
length.
And it's great that we're able
to place them in an apartment
for more independent living
experience so they can practice
a lot of the skills that they've
been learning.
Another advantage of having the
apartments there or for
families.
If we happen to send a client,
Alamogordo, who has a family
than we would otherwise rent a
house or apartment.
And this gives us again
capability of having that, uh,
housing situation right on on
the campus.
So that is really fantastic.
We're so appreciative that
Another highlight is our
vacancies, or I should say lack
of vacancies.
We actually have build all of
our our counselor.
Positions positions on Daphnis
team. It's probably been 10
years since we've had all of
them filled at the same time.
We have filled all of our
assistant technology specialist
positions.
Again. These are these are jobs
that are really difficult to
fill that the qualifications,
especially specialized
experience.
Is really challenging to fill.
So we have those still.
And are flying the skills
instructors. And these are the
folks that work
With
Clients in their own homes and
communities. Most of those
clients are older in their
sixties seventies eighties
nineties, incidentally, not in
the workforce and so trying to
help them to become more
independent.
As independent as they want to
be in their own homes in their
own communities, So we really
have a great there. Another
highlight is some of our rehab
closures this past year, the
federal fiscal year we worked
with 326 location rehabilitation
clients again. That's a
cleaning.
For helping them to obtain or
maintain or advancing employment
were able to have 30 of those
almost 10% closed, rehabilitated
and another 45 in employment so
currently and jobs not quite
ready for closure, but really
optimistic about those being
closed.
This year.
So we're really excited about
that.
Destiny. Our performance targets
related to the number of
closures and the average wage.
And another important
performance measure that we met
was related to helping to help
Some of them are again
Individuals, mainly older,
blind, avoid moving into a
assisted living facility or
nursing.
Again that helps to keep them
off of Medicaid keep them off of
other kinds of benefits.
And keep them in their own homes
So we're really excited about
that.
So many sorry. Some of the types
of jobs I mentioned we had 30.
well, we have closures.
No, they really made from the
executives to professionals like
engineers and computer
scientists.
Administrative positions.
technical positions, clerical
positions, people in retail
nonprofits, government what area
That was especially kind of
interesting this year, where
college instructors so out of
those 30
Five of those were college level
instructors now.
We We have had college
instructors in the past.
Certainly, but finally, in one
year is just a little unusual.
Just the way it worked out.
Good for them.
Other than the different
colleges where some of these
folks are employed some of the
other employers this past year
included Los Alamos National
Laboratory.
The V, a medical center.
Department of Defense at
Kirtland Air Force Base, and
even the commission for the
Blind. We hired some of our own
clients last year, we also met
We as this is the state again.
This is a kind of a partnership
with the division of vocational
rehabilitation.
With the Workforce Innovation
and Opportunity Act.
Performance measures. The state
of New Mexico met. All of the
performance measures were
excited about that.
And then I'll move on quickly to
tomorrow's highlights again. I
talked about independent living
and older, blind, We're
expanding services.
To the independent living and
older, blind population and
we're going to be adding an
additional position.
Why not skills Instructor is the
official title.
And we're not sure exactly where
we're going to place it yet.
We're conducting some analysis
to decide where we're going to
place that.
Another thing that we're doing
to expand services to the again
over Applied independent living
population is to provide more
tools.
Uh, one of the popular tools
again. We work with people that
are we call them no vision in
some with low vision.
And for folks that have low
vision.
One of the devices that we
provide as a device like this is
called a smart Lux.
Video magnifier.
And you're familiar with optical
magnifier zooms in the curved
lenses. Those are pretty one
dimensional. They come in
certain powers, of course.
You know two x five x seven x up
to about 14 X. Yes, electronic
video magnifier.
With a five inch screen, which
allows the user to change the
magnification on the fly to
change the foreground and
background colors. Zoom in, zoom
out and even take a photograph
of whatever it is. They're
they're looking at.
To help them get a better look
at it like being able to move it
closer to their face.
Um, this particular you know how
little kickstand here
Which allows the person to
Look at something and have hands
free depending on except the
little kicks there, So if
they're reading mail if there,
uh, maybe writing a check, some
people still do write checks,
and so they might want to use it
to Ansari to write a check.
And so this device is really,
really popular. People really
love this.
And we're expanding, um,
services with video magnifier by
Um, also adding, what we call a
portable size, which is more of
a this is a five inch screen.
The ones we're adding are going
to be more of a we call a
portable, which is 12 to 13 inch
screen, kind of sort of what you
might find in a full sized iPad.
That's roughly a 12 inch screen.
And then we're also buying.
Units that have a 24 inch screen
again. They're they're going to
be just like I said this time,
you know they're not. They're
not meant to move around.
Uh huh. So they'll do how we're
going to be expanding some
services for our independent,
older blind.
And lastly, we're going to be
expanding services to our
location, Rehabilitation.
Consumers by
Uh, adding and filling a what we
call it business outreach
coordinator. It's currently
being advertised on the state
Personal Office website.
And this particular position is
going to again. The
representative of the commission
and the business community to
help with business development
help employers with business
development career development.
And also to kind of create
opportunities, job opportunities
for blind and visually impaired
job seekers.
So this is some of the
highlights mentioned Katherine
Chavez.
Is one of our commission board
members and Katherine. Do you
have any couple of comments
you'd like to make
Thank you, Captain. That's more
important. You happy to take any
questions? Thank you. Do we have
any questions represented
Garcia?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks
for the presentation. I really
don't have any questions. You
want to commend you on the work
you're doing.
Because you're helping over
76,000 Mexicans, whether I
problems
And no right now. I'm I'm one
step away from being legally
blind right now.
Because the mountain problem
with my eyes, you know, and I
appreciate what you're doing for
these people.
Because, you know, we take it
for granted how good it is. I'm
losing it and you say Whoa!
What am I gonna do next? And
No, that that number 76 108. It
should be 76 1 or nine because
I'm right there.
And you know, I really commend
you for what you're doing. Thank
you, Manager.
Madam Chairman, representative,
we, You know, we're always
available to work with, um, with
individuals. We have working.
Legislators and senators in the
past, um happily
And, uh and so.
You family members, neighbors,
friends can send them our way
again whether they are part of
that. Maybe that over
Like population. We kind of
older, blind but older.
Sometimes severely visually
character, more independent,
learn about different tools and
techniques, You know, kind of
like this smart lux magnifier
that I just demonstrated.
And for folks that are
interested in maintaining
employment.
Or or obtaining employment or
advancing in employment. That's
actually where the big dollars
are, because we, you know,
that's the
Major funding that we get for
our agency is for a vocation
rehabilitation services from the
U S Department of education, So
send them our way.
Thank you, Um any more
questions? Not see any. Thank
you for your presentation. I'm
gonna ask my vice chair for
recommendation. Madam Chair and
move recommend are moved The LFC
recommendation.
Represented Garcia. Seconds. Um
So you have the LFC
recommendation and thank you for
coming before us today. Thank
you.
Next step will be the commission
on the status of women.
Whenever you're ready.
Alright, madam Chair members of
the committee.
Will be starting on commission
for the status of women, and
they are 601 agency 601.
Sitting with me here is, uh, the
executive director Jennifer gets
and sitting next to her is the
executive analyst for the
agency, which is Mary Beth
Densmore.
What's that? I'm just gonna go
ahead and jump into the
Um, presentation. Um, I also
wanted to mention before we
start that you can find the
right up for this agency in
volume. Two on page 260 lfc
recommended a 5% general fund
increase while the executive
would increase General fund
revenue to the commission by
about 73%.
And the base. Both
recommendations largely
maintained personnel
expenditures.
The LFC recommendation would
allow the director's salary to
be adjusted through the
statewide compensation
compensation package.
LFC maintain contractual
spending while the executive
would increase contractual
spending 26% to hire contractor
for programming work.
And increased funding for
marketing and communications.
Both recommendations increased
the other category to allow for
increased spending on the
women's summit.
The executives recommendation
for this item is 82.4000 more
than the lfc s.
There were no differences in
performance and executive
recommended expansions to
increase the director's salary
and to add one FTE and you'll
see that in that expansion table
at the bottom of page one.
With that, madam chair. I'm
gonna go ahead and pass it over
to Mary Beth Densmore for
further comment.
Thanks, Eric.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair.
members of the committee. Um, I
don't have too much to add. I
think the executive director
will speak to some of the things
that are in the executive rack
that will help her fulfill the
mission of the agency. But I did
want to put on your radar.
That's an agency has a request
for farm language this year.
To use fun bounds from previous
years, and this is something
that would help them achieve
some of these things that, um
even she's been trying to do
over the past couple of years. I
just want to put on your radar
That's one balance exists, and
it has been requested that she
can use it. So with that, um
Eric covered all the
differences. Um, very well so
Turn it over to the drugs.
Well, thank you very much. Madam
Chair members of the committee.
My name is Jennifer gets and
I'm, the executive director of
the Commission on the status of
Women and I appear before you
today to make a brief statement
and request for your
consideration in supplemental
funding.
Um, if you'll bear with me for a
moment, many people don't really
know much about the commission
on the status of women because
it was dormant for over 10
years, So I just like to take a
moment to tell you just a little
bit about who we are and what we
do.
We were created in the 19
seventies and consist of a
maximum of 15 bipartisan members
representing seven regions in
New Mexico.
We currently have 11
commissioners representing those
seven regions in our state.
It is important to note that the
commissioners live and work in
the regions that they represent.
And the commission currently has
one full time employee. Me.
Um, and when the commission was
shut down in 2011 just for a
comparison, there were 15 full
time employees working with a
$2.5 million budget.
Um, I also want to point out
that the commission is unique in
our state government because it
has influence and connections as
a state commission, But it is
also a bipartisan commission.
It has representatives from all
regions around the state. It
serves a constituency of more
than 1 million women in New
Mexico.
And the commission has the tools
in place to disseminate
information to more than 2000
legislators, nonprofit state
funders and individuals in our
state regarding new laws,
current issues and opportunities
for women and their families.
I want to statutes that
established the commission,
which are 2831 stimulate and
encourage throughout the state.
the study and review of the
status of women
Recommend methods of overcoming
discrimination against women in
public and private employment.
Promote methods to enable women
to develop their skills,
continue their education and be
retrained.
Cooperate with and assist public
and private entities dealing
with women.
Conduct periodic conferences
throughout the state surprise
women of their rights and
opportunities and to learn from
them of their needs and
problems and finally to secure
recognition of women's
accomplishments and
contributions in New Mexico.
We have several areas that we
focus on. And these areas, um,
come from the listening and
learning tours that we conducted
around the state to learn more
about the issues affecting women
in some of the more regional
portions of our state.
And those four areas are
ensuring access to the full
spectrum of health care services
for women providing information
and help in acquiring safe and
affordable childcare.
Providing information and help
in acquiring access to support
services for sexual assault and
domestic violence victims and
providing information about
access to economic security and
fair working conditions,
including equal pay. We strive
to achieve this mission through
the following annual work of the
commission.
We hold an annual women's summit
event this year's summit on
September 29th 2023 brought
together legislators, funders
and nonprofits.
To discuss ways these
stakeholder groups could work
more effectively together and
bring more money into the state
of New Mexico.
We had over 300 people
registered for the event, and we
had over 50 speakers and
Panelists that participated
We also hold listening and
learning it tour events in six
of our seven regions in New
Mexico, and this year's focus of
our listening and learning tour
is on economic security for
women.
Event locations, Um, this year
have been in Espanola, Silver
City, Clovis Farming tonight.
Roswell and Las Cruces.
We also advocate during the
legislative session for bills
that will have a positive impact
on New Mexico women.
During the 2023 legislative
session, joined with we joined
with coalition partners to
support 20 bills, and we saw
passage of 15 of them.
We ran information campaigns and
subject matters to support women
around the state. And these this
year's campaigns include
information about new childcare
laws and child tax credits.
Access to economic security and
job training for immigrant women
in New Mexico, information about
reproductive and gender
affirming care laws and provider
protections.
Information on red flag laws and
how they can be better used in
New Mexico to protect women.
Excuse me, victims of domestic
violence and sexual assault.
And final campaign on expanding
access to school based health
centers in rural communities.
We also hold monthly meetings
open to the public and have
speakers that work on the front
lines of the issues that we
support.
Um, to help the commissioners to
better understand the issues and
also to help participants who
joined the meetings who are
interested in our subject
matter.
We also maintain a Web website
that we used to disseminate
information, provide resources
by region and highlight the
organizations in New Mexico
working to support the needs of
women.
We also provide an annual report
on the status of women in our
state. And finally I want to
point out that we have had clean
audits with no significant
deficiencies or material
weaknesses in 2022 and 2023.
We are asking for supplemental
non reoccurring.
Increases to the LFC budget
recommendation in several areas
to include one part time
contractor to provide accounting
services, which the executive
director myself currently spends
10 or more hours a week on
This is have not been included
in the LFC budget but is
included in the executive
budget and this would cost us
$17,000 to fund that part time
position.
We also would like to expand our
base of contract services to
include a part time program
coordinator to help plan events
are seven events around the
state. That would include the
six regional events and the
women's summit.
This is also not in the LFC
budget, but it is in the
executive budget and we need we
would need $60,000 to fund this
position.
Additionally, funding to cover
the cost of state benefits for
our one full time employee. Me
we are looking for an additional
49,000 to cover these benefits.
I received a salary increase
after working at a reduced
salary because we had no budget
when I came on board and the
agreement was that when we did
have a budget, I would get the
salary. Um, that was promised to
me when I was hired.
Um we are also respectively. So
I'm sorry. So respectively we
are requesting a total of
126,000 additional dollars of
non recurring supplemental
appropriations that would allow
the commission to continue to
function at its current level of
work and fiscal year. 24
additional funding was available
to us through the junior bill
and allowed us to complete the
work we were committed to this
year.
Without junior bill funding at
an end at our current fiscal 25
lfc budget allocation of
$318,000. We will need to cut
programs that we are currently
providing.
I would also like to draw
attention. As Mr Dennis more
pointed out to a request for
$73,000. It's page two of the
information you've been provided
of non reoccurring
appropriation.
Be released from the General
fund. This money was donated to
the commission sometime before
it was shut down in 2011.
It was made up of contributions
intended to support a girl's
fund and a conference fund for
the commission.
This money was submitted to the
General fund when the commission
closed but is still reflected in
our annual reports as being an
asset of the commission.
Madam chair members of the
committee. I want to thank you
very much for your time and
consideration today and I stand
ready to answer any questions
you might have at this time.
Thank you for presenting for
your presentation. Start with
represented bucket. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I just have one
question and it's on the to 60.
The volume two
It's on the general fund
transfers. Can you just
Um, tell me about are just kind
of give me more detail about.
The General fund transfer. I
believe that the agency request
is for
$611,000
Can you? Can you explain that to
give me more detail about that
request?
Yeah. Madam Chair and
representative. Yes. So the LFC
increase for General fund
revenue is a 5% increase that's
largely in line with the LFC.
Um, budget guidelines, and
that's how we increased it.
Madam. True I used to Yeah, I
do see the lfc recommendation of
that's 5%. But it's the agency
request of the 600.
11. Is that correct from my
reading that wrong?
Madam chair and representatives
correct.
Thank you, Manager. So one thing
that you said as far as the on
paper, um, Commission on the
status of women may request
budget increase. Can you expand
on that? It's just third page of
this thing I just wanted to
understand so big, so it's
looked at as you have it, but
you don't really have it and you
want it.
Is that correct? Go ahead, Madam
Chair members of the committee.
So this is over funding from at
least 10 years ago from when the
commission was operational
previously, um they must have
had some sort of language that
allowed them to keep
You know a balances? Um, and so
what they have in the fund
balance Right now. It's about
$73,000 that is left over from
about 10 years ago. It's just
sitting
Um, And so the agency is just
requesting to be able to
increase their budget during the
year they would do a budget
adjustment request to bring in
this money one time that would
just allow them to do those
additional things. You know,
during the year Um that's all it
is. It's It's money that they've
had sitting in front balance for
quite a while.
They could access would be would
be helpful. Thank you.
Madam Chair. I just add the LFC
hasn't made a recommendation on
the on bar language at all yet,
and so what's moving forward in
the process that's a HFC and so
you can look at adding that if
that's if that's what the
committee wishes
Thank you for your presentation,
So we as far as, um right now
we're on it. We have to be
We are having to do lfc
recommendations, so I am going
to leave it to my share to do a
recommendation. Madam Chair I
moved the LFC recommendation.
One second and the second by
representative AKA All Right, Is
there any opposition?
Thing. None. You have the lfc
recommendation. Thank you for
your presentation.
The next speakers will be the
governor's Commission on
disability. No, right
Governor's Commission.
Madam chair. The analyst is in
the other subcommittee. Okay, um
Yeah. Looks like we might have
to jump down to so we might. We
don't have the kids. You want to
skip ahead.
The second. You just don't have
the analyst for the next two.
But do we have the analyst for
the office of the People we can
do the opposite of family
representation advocacy?
We do that? I'm sorry. We can
Not says
All right. Do we have everybody
we need
Yep. All right. Go ahead.
Whenever you're ready. Thank
you.
Right, Madam Madam Chair members
of the committee. Good
afternoon. Uh, can you hear me?
Ok, okay. My name is Rachel
Mercer Garcia and I'm the LFC
analyst for the Office of Family
Representation and Advocacy will
refer to them as opera during
this conversation. They are
agency code. 680 should be
behind Tab six.
And as we walk you through the
differences will primarily
referenced the different sheet.
Um, but I'll talk about
something in the LFC
recommendation related to the
what we call the expendable
trust. And so you also have that
specials different sheet in your
packet.
And here with me today is back.
Gillian, the executive director
of opera.
As well as the L S. D. F a
analyst Lorries.
So for you all to know Oprah was
in its first year of operations
as an independent agency and FY
24. So this was their very first
year operating. Um, and so that
they're they're different sheets
may look a little bit different,
Um Overall, the executive
recommendation includes a total
of 5.9 million more in revenue
for the agency next year.
4.3 million more in General fund
and 1.6 million more and in
other finds, specifically us the
dry down of federal title four
revenue.
Um, overall, the LFC
recommendation is a 10% budget
increase, um, where they 17%
general fund increase as the
organization is scaling its
operations, whereas the
executive recommendation is a
74% general fund increase.
The executive and the LFC.
Recommendations include 49 F T E
in the base. However, the LFC
recommendation for personnel
budget is flat, whereas the
executive recommendation would
increase the personnel budget by
1.7 million to fill vacant
positions.
Both recommendations increased
contractual services and given
that the agency experience an
increase in the number of cases
they were representing, as well
as the need to seek emergency
funding from the board of
Finance. This year. However, the
executive recommendation
provides 4.1 million more in
contractual services in the LFC.
Finally, this is where you're
going to see the biggest
difference. You may be looking
at that sheet and think
thinking, these numbers are
really far apart. But the LFC
recommendation. This is one of
the agencies where we moved some
of the requests into the
expendable trust. And so you
will see in your packet. The
special sheet, which includes
8.2 million over four years.
For the agency to pilot and
evaluate the implementation of
multidisciplinary legal services
teams. This is a research based
strategy and one that we think
is promising, but one that we
may want to pilot as a state
over time before moving it into
the agencies operating budget so
that this is one of those first
examples of an expendable trust
recommendation.
Um And then, finally, in your
package, you will see, the
analysts have reached consensus
about the performance measure.
targets. I will turn it over
First to my DFA counterpart for
any additional comments are
narrative about the executive
recommendation.
Madam chair members of the
committee. I would just like to
know that the increase on the
executive recommendation in the
personnel category.
Is mostly just to bring their
existing funded positions up so
that they could have filmed more
so it would take them from a
78% funded vacancy rates, right
And then in the 300 C executive
recommendations accounts for the
border Finance Brandt that the
agency had as well as the $1.5
million in federal funds that
was awarded for appropriated to
the agency this year that they
will never material materialize.
So it's not necessarily
A large increase as much as it's
just reallocating how it was and
then in the other category.
There's an additional 555 in the
executive recommendation to help
facilitate the agency and
establishing at least one, maybe
two physical office locations
because huge the way that their
budget was appropriated for 24.
They have had to re allocate
their resources and have not
been able to one hires or open
up any use.
Physical office location.
And with that, um, this
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee.
As you've already heard. My name
is Beth Gilliam, the executive
director of the opposite family,
representation and advocacy.
Um, an agency that you know, is
created to improve safety,
permanency and well being for
Children and families involved
in the child abuse and neglect
system in New Mexico.
Um, as was mentioned. We came
into existence on July 1st of
this year and we've been working
very diligently to build the
agency's infrastructure while
actually delivering the services
services that were statutorily
required to deliver, for
example, we've created practices
and policies and procedures. Our
practice manual training and a
training plan to address our new
practice expectations.
A case management system that
will be fully implemented, but
as being beta tested right now
will be fully implemented. On
July, 1st established fiscal
controls. We developed our
strategic plan theory of change
in logic model. We're finalizing
an evaluation plan as we speak.
We've developed a grievance
process and feedback loops for
our clients and for other
stakeholders.
And on July 1st our first day of
opening, We provided lawyers,
all Children, youth and parents
involved in the abuse and
neglect system. This is
approximately 2000 Children, all
of whom are entitled to counsel
and their parents, Guardians and
custodians. We're talking about
thousands of clients on day one
In November, we began limited
social work services and pure
mentoring services in Virgilio
County.
That is interdisciplinary part
of our program that we seek to
expand. It is also the part of
the program that has been
researched and has been shown in
other locations to be effective
at reducing Children's time and
care. Increasing rates of
reunification without repeat,
maltreatment and with, um
increasing rates. Sorry,
increasing the rate of
permanency. Whatever that
permanency outcome is so even if
a child doesn't go home
They get to adoption or
guardianship faster, which
serves there will
Because we have provided legal
service on July 1st without a
gap in coverage for existing
cases we had to contact with all
of our attorneys. We were not
able to hire staff attorneys to
start on July 1, which is why we
had to make those balls got
Loreal wanted to the, um from
our personnel category into the
three hundred's category.
That also was the result of this
increasing number of cases being
filed rather unexpectedly, and
we'll talk about that in just a
few moments.
I'm going to highlight just a
few more things, and then I'll
answer questions. We have hired
seven full time staff and we
have additional positions in the
spoke pipeline at the moment we
previously thought, and I think
it's probably in your package
that we might hire an additional
17. But as for monitoring our
expenditures, we anticipate
hiring a total of 29 positions
before the end of the year.
So that would increase our
heart. We would actually hire
attorneys, peer navigators,
social workers, additional light
and administrative staff and our
language access coordinator and
now just ask you to turn to one
of the handouts I provided that
looks like this. That looks like
this. Sorry I covered my mouth.
I'm second just
Highlight a couple more points
on the first page, You'll see a
chart of new cases, filings.
We don't need to go through this
in any great detail. The punch
line is simply that
The highest number of case files
in any recent year was in 2017.
There were 610 cases filed that
year.
From 2018 through 2022 the taste
Violence were on a steady and
regular downward defined. That's
a national trend. It wasn't
unique to New Mexico, but it was
clearly what was happening here
in 2023. We had 100 and 40 more
cases filed nearly at the 610
case high from 2017.
That marked an unexpected
increasing case filings meant
that we needed significant more
attorney contracting. That is
the reason why we had to move
all the all that funding into
the contracts line and why they
needed to seek funding from the
state Board of Finance.
The next slide shows, um
Our thought about 300
recommendations. So LFC has
recommended that, uh, we be
funded in the three hundreds at
65% of the AOC s budget for
attorneys in FY 23.
There's well. We are grateful
for funding. There's a number of
problems with that approach. In
my opinion, and and we agree,
and it is our plan to shift some
of the contracts into permanent
staff attorney positions so the
contract should come down.
Phil never go down to zero
because of conflicts of interest
by the amount that's been
recommended is not enough. It's
based on the wrong figure that
23 budget is not the actual that
AOC spend first of all.
Secondly, AOC model was
drastically different than our
model and the Legislature.
Enacted over because the OSI
model wasn't working. So why
would base our budget
recommendation on data that is
older?
Budget based not actual space
and on a model that didn't work
effectively. I'm not really
clear
But even accepting 65% of the
total budget.
Um as
For contracts. The amount would
be 5,000,007 79 605 not $4.4
million, So we're starting off
with a nearly $1.3 million short
shortfall if we assume the 65%
target that LFC recommended
So the budget for the three
hundreds
We would suggest to be higher,
closer to 5.8 million.
On the next slide.
I won't talk about this in any
detail. I just want to emphasize
that the amounts in both budget
recommendations. Um under sorry,
overestimate the amount of 40
reimbursement that we're likely
to see.
And you'll see in the analysis
that the reimbursement is likely
to be $1 for every $3 spent or
33 cents per dollar, and that's
not really accurate. The put the
funding formulas in the slide
for you so you can see how they
work.
Reimbursed for two kinds of
costs.
Client based services, which are
the administrative costs and
training costs. The client is
services or the much higher. Uh,
Dollar amount but the lower rate
of reimbursement and it turns
out given our penetration rate.
That's the number of Children in
our state custody who are for
yellow doble.
Our return is 25 cents on the
dollar.
For training costs. It's more
like 37 cents on the dollar, but
as you can see from the notes,
we only in the first quarter
build $7000 in training costs to
for so that return is very
small. It's the administrative
costs that are much higher, and
that's more like 25 cents on the
dollar, So the punch line here
is
No 43 amounts in the draft
Budget recommendations are too
high, and they we will not
collect that amount, so it's the
dollar amounts totaled in the
budgets that you see are what
you think we need, then we
should be putting more money in
State General fund and reducing
the amount in the four year
line. Okay unless anomalies
Um The final slide indicates
that what I mentioned before
that research shows that the
over model of interdisciplinary
research representation is
effective. There are quasi
experimental research studies
from other jurisdictions New
York City and Washington state
in particular.
Um, that use a propensity
matching approach to minimize
fired. Those have come back and
show remarkable.
Um, outcomes that you can see in
the little chart I provided
Given that research, I would
suggest that we don't need to do
a pilot. We already are planning
a phased implementation largely
for financial reasons, but we
will be doing a robust
evaluation of our own as we go.
We don't need to have this done
in a pilot form, which creates
Um some administrative burdens
and also would look like two
people that we would have to
hire in time positions, and that
will be very difficult time
people permanently. So with
that, I would just suggest that
the amount that was, um included
in the LFC proposal or
recommendation.
Be included in the base budget
and not in the special
appropriation.
And with that I presentation of
first question will come from
representative Sanchez. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Sabako few questions just to
understand a little bit more
about your agency. I'm not too
familiar.
I see you guys provide legal
representation to Children and
youth.
Can you give me an example of
Ah, case that they represent. Of
course. Thank you, Madam Chair
and representative Sanchez. We
represent all the Children and
used in all civil abuse and
neglect cases. So these are the
foster care cases that C y f D
is involved in
We also represent their parents,
guardians and custodians, and we
also represent what are called
eligible adults. These are young
people 18 to 21 who have aged
out of the foster care system
and who need additional support
and who have cases involved in
Children's court. So those are
the cases we work on. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Uh,
Was this something that C Y f D
was supposed to be doing before.
Is this something they weren't
doing? And they created this
department or
Madam Chair, representative
Sanchez. No. There have always
been attorneys for Children,
youth and parents that were
provided. They're independent
contractors, historically with
the court system.
And they those attorneys, most
of them have come over and
become contractors for us. So
this is a long standing practice
of providing counsel. It's a
statutory requirement in the
Children's code and its
standalone feature, regardless
of C Y F D s actions.
Thank you. We will next go to
representative Garcia.
Thank you, madam Chair, thanks
for the presentation.
Look at this 20 almost 29%
vacancy rate.
What is that ramp? What? What is
that? Madam Chair
representative. Would you repeat
your question? We just couldn't
quite hear, you know on this, Uh
On the bricks from Alessi says
You're at
28.6 funded vacancy rate.
And the temporary stoppage of
the ramp program. Murray MP,
What is that?
Ah!
Madam Chair representative and
We? You may not be looking at
the right sheet in front of you.
Um you should have a PS
Calcutta she for agency code
680.
Which is opera?
Sure. So, Madam Chair
representative. You should have
the PS Calcutta for opera or
agency 680 in front of you. And
in it, you'll see, um according
to our analysis in the way that
we calculate the vacancy rate
they had 49 authorized FTE last
year. As of the time when we
pulled this data, which was last
fall, when you all were hearing
this agency they had four filled
F T E 45 bacons.
Um And so then, if you look at
how much their personnel covers
in terms of their funded, they
can't positions. It's a
according to our analysis,
86.9%, and that estimate maybe a
little bit high because the
positions that they have
currently filled or some of the
more senior positions and But
that is the PS calculator. You
should have in front of you.
You know, Madam chair people. We
need to talk off line on it a
little bit because I still don't
understand what that R E M
fears. What is that
organization?
Ah, Madam Chair representative.
Could you repeat the last part
of your question, MP?
It says due to the vacancy rate.
Temporary stoppage of the R A. M
P program.
All right.
Um
US.
Madam Chair representative.
We may need to look at the shot
you're looking at just to make
sure we're looking at, um the
same thing.
Yeah, Madam Chair
representative. We may be
referencing a different agency.
I'm sorry. The wrong piece.
That's right. I'm sorry.
Represent of no problem. We
switched up the order on you.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you,
madam. Your
Chickens. You've got up.
Thank you. Representative Garcia
will now go to representative
Baca.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
have one question and it's going
to be in our wanting to page
374. And it really is, um Madam
Chair.
Regarding the expansion.
Okay, so right now we've talked
about that. We currently have 49
ft. E. Um, As we say, we've done
we've made good progress towards
filling those but an additional
30 FT.
What are those? What is that?
What are those positions going
to be doing? And how are they
serve our kids and I do want to
say is that I am a total
advocated and supporter of
Children and especially in these
very difficult times, But
We've just this is a new
Um, department.
And already work standing by.
Almost doubled the number of F D
s. So if you could just give me
some information regarding the
expansion from 49 to 79, Madam
chair
Madam Chair, representative
Vodka.
As you probably saw in the
various recommendations, neither
the executive nor the LFC
supports any expansion
positions. So at this point, uh,
I think while we think we could
actually expand to include
additional positions, attorneys
social workers, the peer
navigators that will make the
difference in our representation
the quality of our
representation and the outcomes
at this point.
We are willing to work on
selling the 49 positions in the
coming year. The difference is
that we will not be able to roll
out as quickly are are enabling
statute requires us to open five
offices statewide.
And our initial plan was to do
that over three year period. If
we don't get that additional
staff in that time frame, it
will take us longer to open
those offices. But at this point
given the the challenge we had
with the contract attorneys this
year and the rising caseloads,
um we did not hire as many staff
as we anticipated.
So we are happy to come back
next year have all 49 positions
filled and ask again for the
additional 30 positions. Thank
you, madam. Think that's my
point is, you know, and we're,
you know, being a new agency.
It's important that we actually,
you know, start to do the job
that we
Our mission. Our mission, which
I read, make sure that we're
doing that and doing that. Well,
before we expand out into other
areas.
And you know, we're, um
Jack of all trades. Master of
none And then we were just
talking about hiring more
people. So I do appreciate you
saying about the recommendations
and
And yes, at some point in time,
if we if we, you know
performance measures we've met
those we've set out women to do
then by all means. Come before
us and let us you know, see how
we can expand or what we what
Our next steps are so thank you,
madam Chair.
Thank you, representative back
and we'll go to representative
Montoya.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Um, Miss Delia, that pronounced
correctly, Okay?
Um So I understand what I
understand you to be saying is
The pilot program. You don't
believe that's necessary.
Um and
But and the LFC budget
As it exists, you'd be willing
to
Or are you are or what? Or are
you asking that we give you the
the administration's
Budget recommendation. I'm
trying to figure out
I misunderstood you or
misunderstood You. Um Madam
Chair, representative Montoya.
Of course, our preference would
be that you adopt the executive
branches recommendation. We
think that would give us the
room to develop the program and
fullness and with a robust
evaluation, which is, I think,
ultimately what the LFC is
interested in us doing
Um are we point is that the LFC
has added a special
appropriation that we did not
request we we requested funding
for interdisciplinary services
in our base budget. They put it
in a special request because
they want to see a piloted so it
could be evaluated. This model
has been robustly evaluated.
With quality experimental
research design other
jurisdictions, So we feel like
the research base exists, so we
don't need a pilot. But we do
need the funding so we would
like it to go in our base
budget. So I appreciate that,
Madam chair. I think the reality
is
If your if your department was
stand alone and
And it was the only department
that was asking for this type of
expansion. But across the board,
the administration is asking for
Expansion to based budgets and
new programs. And the reality
is, um
I think I think the appetite
from the Legislature across the
board
Is just running out.
On
The the idea that it's been
tested everywhere else.
And I just don't know that.
We've seen money go out.
All budgets, including yours
having dollars, reverted.
And then just looking for a
expansion. I think I think this
idea of whether or not
When you when we're looking at
doing this, if if the
I think that justification is
Put it in a pilot project.
And if it works
We can have that discussion as
to whether we permanently funded
I believe that's
And all the meetings that I've
been in, that's been the
justification for trying this
just because we have expanded.
Government like crazy.
The administration.
All departments has expanded
dramatically. And what we found
is the more we fund
The more diversions we get.
And so I think, rather than
doing that, and putting it in
based budgets, and so so when
you come back next year
And I think we'll still have
this discussion as to whether
This deserves to be a pilot
project.
Because once it gets in the base
budget
Politically.
Folks don't have the temperament
to say Okay, We're not spending
that money will cut it out of
the budget.
I think this is a way to maybe
try and find a little bit of
oversight from
The legislative branch. So I
think this discussion
Will happen again next year.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Madam chairman. I respond just
briefly.
Madam Chair, representative
Montoya. I wholeheartedly agree.
Don't don't find flaws with your
argument. What I would say is
that in a year I hope that we
come back and I fully anticipate
that we will come back and we'll
be able to show cost savings
from this actual from this
expansion, whether it starts as
a pilot or starts in the base
budget.
Because that is what other
states have shown is that they
have reduced the costs because
Children custody for much
shorter periods of time and all
the related costs of kids and
Carol the increased medical
costs. All the priests increased
behavioral Holocaust. Those all
are reduced. So in the end, I
think our goals are aligned.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
I would love for just one
department in the administration
to come back and say We saved
you money from our actions, but
that has not been my history and
I This is my 10th year. Thank
you, madam Chair.
Thank you, representative. Next
as representative Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you for what
you do.
Uh, I just want to understand
your program a little bit
better I used to take in
treatment foster Children, and
they've seen a lot of bad stuff.
And each and every one of them
believes that their mother,
usually
Uh, there that there are
greatest goal is to
Bring them home.
Usually not true, I have said in
the courtroom.
Watch someone who had been given
their Children chance to have
them back.
Lock yourself in the bathroom
didn't come out for eight hours.
Uh, just
It's no you've seen
How? How can
How do you represent the parents
and the child when they
oftentimes people that are not
involved in the system? Think
it's the state against the
family that's not true State of
New Mexico does not want to take
your Children. They want you to
have your Children and take good
care of them.
It seems to me like it would be
a very
How do you represent the child
parent? It seems like a hard
thing to do when they often may
have adversarial interest, Mhm.
Many of the Children are
institutionalized.
So tell me, X help me understand
your program a little bit. I
know we're talking about budget
but to deal with budget I need
to understand what you're doing
out there on the ground, Madam
Chair representative Chatfield.
Um, this is a question that we
get regularly and it's not a
surprising question. Um, I think
there's two answers. One is, uh,
philosophical answer and illegal
answer that is embedded in the
United States. Supreme Court
jurors burdens, which is that
Unless proven otherwise.
Children's and parent's
interests align.
And that is for the reason you
said kids they love their
parents, even when their parents
are not the most functional and
parents even when they don't
express it well and do bad
things to their Children. They
love their Children. So we start
from the premise that unless
there is evidence that the child
just cannot be safe, we're going
to work towards reunification,
and our Children's code reflects
that.
So that's our starting point.
that said the attorneys for the
Children are independent from
the attorneys for the parents.
We do not as an agency direct
what the goals of the
representation are so if the
child's needs and the child's
wishes are not to go home, that
child's attorney is doing
everything that attorney can do.
To make sure that that
relationship is severed.
If the child's desire is to go
home, then that attorney is
arguing for that the parents
attorneys are likewise doing the
same. They are following the
direction of their clients and
making sure that they're arguing
for what the client wants.
Whether that is counseling them
to do A, um relinquishment
because sometimes that is what
the parent wants, but they're
embarrassed that they can't
raise their own Children.
So
Our attorneys will in the right
circumstances, Counsel for
relinquishment and make that a
dignified uh
Path.
Sometimes they will fight for
reunification to the nail,
because that's what the parent
wants. But all the attorneys are
doing what their clients drive
them to do. There's no sort of
agency approach to every case
Does that help?
Thank you, Madam Chair That
helps a lot. I appreciate your
answer.
Representative Garcia.
Madam chair.
I just have one question first.
I have to apologize to Lubango.
But gender got switched around
for lighting. Catch them
apologize for that.
When you have hearings on these
kids.
Who hears the district judge, or
we're hearing officer.
We're hearing officer because
you know, I've heard horror
stories that the hearing officer
you know what he's doing yet?
You'll see that child goes back
to the mom and Dad. That child
doesn't go back. How do you
explain that?
Madam Chair, representative
Garcia.
It's a both and kind of answer.
So the District court judges the
ultimate decision maker in all
of these cases, But in some of
our courts, there are hearing
officers that are there are
statutorily committed here.
certain kinds of hearings so
they will hear things that are
sort of interim hearings that
don't have evidence.
That are less formal that don't
decide the ultimate questions in
the case, so they sort of
monitor the case. And then they
report to the judge, but the
judge makes the decisions. There
are some occasions when the
parties when the parents and
Children
Say Okay, the hearing officer
can hear the trial. But those
are, but that's not the most
common experience.
Thank you, madam. True. I've
heard
Rumors.
People that I know that the
hearing officer will make the
decision and
Hearing offshore. Tell the
moment Dad or whatever, if you
don't agree with me, you need to
file a petition within the
chords to appeal over to my
ruling, and that comes into
having attorneys and stuff and
people just can't afford it.
That happens. And are you aware
of that?
Madam Terra Representative
Garcia there, there really are
no Juries in these cases, so
these are all hurt by judges
with sometimes they're being
hearing officers hearing in
Jerome matters and then
recommend making recommendations
to the judge, but there's no
jury's involved in these cases,
and there are some matters that
do have to go up on appeal. But
but that's typically at the end
of the
At the end of the case.
Thank you, madam. Turn
presenter. But you know you're
you're staying there never
happened. But, you know, people
say it does happen.
You're saying and what they're
saying is two different things
on I'm hearing officers you
know, hearing officer has a lot
to see. So with what's
happening, and
They go that round? It's kind of
hard you thank you.
Thank you.
Represent your Herndon. Thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you,
madam Presenter and Miss Celia
just to understand a little bit
more about the office of family
representation and your
interaction with C Y f d Exactly
How do you get your cases?
Madam Chair, representative
Herndon, So the cases come to us
after their filed in court, so
see why FDA investigates they
determine whatever prevented
services they want to use. And
if they decide that there's a
Reason to file a legal case
against the family to keep the
child separated.
Then they filed the case with
the court and then the court
appoints the office of Family
representation and advocacy.
Once we are appointed, we assign
attorneys to the case.
So that when the decision is
made to give a child back to a
parent, are you involved in the
case at that point also.
Madam Chair? Yes.
And what role does the
commission play?
Pardon me, Madam Chair. Um um
Ms Helium. I'm looking at the
statutory authority and it says
you have 13 member commission
Exactly What role does it play?
Yes, Madam Chair Representative
Herndon. The commission is an
active oversight agency for us.
They were meeting monthly.
They're required to meet four
times a year, but they were
meeting monthly up until a few
months ago. Now they're meeting
every other month. I make a
presentation to them about
Our progress where we are on our
budget. They formally approve
our budget. Um they approve our
policies. They make
recommendations about policies
so they're an active oversight
agency for for over.
And Madam chair and Ms Healy a
do. They also oversee the types
of cases that you will or will
not take. Madam Chair
representative Herndon know that
statutorily determined
All right. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Right? I don't see any more
questions. Um so
I just want you to remember as
you here are answers. This is
first time we'll be hearing this
agency and it will make
adjustments later, so we will
have to take one recommendation.
I'm in. I'll go to my vice chair
for the recommendation. Madam
Terror I moved the LFC
recommendation.
Second
Garcia seconds. The motion.
All right. So you have an lfc
recommendations. Thank you.
Thank you.
Motivation.
All right. Our next one is the
governor's commission on
disability when you want to do
next or no.
Either one is fine.
You can do the brain parts.
Which one do we want to do,
madam? Sure. I'm gonna let my d
f a counterpart Laurie opened up
with a different presentation.
Actually want me to do it and
got it. It's your voice. I think
so. You're gonna have to just
like, eat the microphone. I
think we can hear you. Okay?
Sounds good. All raise my voice
a little bit. Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair members. The
committee. My name is Isaiah
Taurus. I'm the general
government fiscal analyst for
the Legislative Finance
Committee with me today is my
DFA counterpart Orissa Kata and
executive Director Stan Ross or
the Governor's Commission on
Disabilities.
Um, if you could please turn
your booklets to tap six agency
code.
645
And then, um, Madam chair, I'll
begin the difference.
Presentation for G C. D.
Um
The differences for the
recommendation for General fund
revenue is about a $45,000
difference, um in total for the
overall budget request. It's 100
and $45.4000 difference.
Um, in regards to fund balanced
usage. Um the lfc, um,
recommended $100,000 less than
the executive recommendation for
fun, balanced usage, and that is
related to the agency's ramp
program and their taps program,
which stand would be able to
inform you about, um, in regards
to that there is 100 and $22,000
difference in personnel.
Um, in the personnel category.
Um, a $6.9000 difference for
contractual services.
Then a $15.6000 difference for
other costs.
Um
And then with that, for all
performance measures for G C d
Me, my counterpart were able to
reach a consensus on targets.
And then with the alternate over
to Lori
Madam Chair. Members of the
committee will now review P.
698 the Governor's commission on
disability. I believe this in
the base the LFC recommendations
for personal services and
employed 9000 less than the
executive recommendation can
hear you.
Start again. Yeah, thank you
again. Okay, Now I can hear
myself better. Um, so we're on P
698 Governor's Commission on
disability.
In the base. The LFC
recommendation for personal
services and employee benefits
is 1 22.9000 less than the
executive recommendation.
The LFC recommendations for
contractual services is 6.9.
And the LFC recommendations for
other costs is 15.6000 less than
the executive recommendation.
Again. We have reached consensus
on all performance measures and
targets.
Um, I would like to note with
the executive recommendation,
the executive supported a fully
funded vacancy rate.
Um, I'm sorry that wrong program
supported and funded vacancy
rate of 93.8%, and the increase
in the three hundred's was just
for risk rates that have
increased this year.
And in the 400 it the increase
was again to support ramp
projects. And with that, I'll
pass it back over to Isaiah.
And then for, um
And for the other p code for the
agency. It's going to be P code
698. And this is for 700. My
apologies and this is for the
brain Advisory Council and with
our recommendations, the
executive the LFC recommendation
is aligned and performance
measures and targets are aligned
as well.
And without turn it over to
executive director Stan Ross.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee. My name is Stan Ross
on the director of the
Governor's Commission on
Disability Approaching the end
of my second year.
I began my career as you cannot
hear me. Oh, that little bit of
Alright, madam Chair members of
the committee.
I feel like I'm in a baseball
stadium, but trying to stick
with that.
Um
I want to just touch briefly on
some of the things we do.
My background is an architect
and I was with the agency says
2017. My specialty physical
access.
And I was managing North ramp
program. Uh, towards the end.
uh, the last few years.
Uh um, I want to talk a little
bit about some of the things we
do.
Hmm.
We had a conversation a few
months ago with
Uh, GS e and r l D regarding, um
Who
Um, provided review
accessibility within the state
government and this statement,
Architect Martin Kuzio with GS
CS highest architect in state.
Jested.
Oh, everything every building.
Within Santa Fe. That's a state
building would be the business
of the GSC, and he also
suggested that the rest of the
state would be businesses of. I
think disability.
And I went down just green. We
might include the buildings and
the city of Santa faith that the
state has often private or
public buildings. We will pay
attention to, and we will
respond to questions about
accessibility and concern from
government or private industry.
I just wanted to
Mitch because they they
Um, we're small agency and we
currently are shy to positions
are architect to which is my own
position and the security high
level hard to recruit position.
architects to, um
Or it's a lot. It's time in the
field. Uh and
They
Not many people apply for our
jobs were fairly low paying, so
I hate to make that a detriment,
But, um we also have
All right open position for a
disability specialist, which was
previously held by definitely
director Lisa is with me and the
road behind us and the specialty
of that person's position was
emergency preparedness. So we
are live king are
Emergency preparedness
specialist and we're lacking
are, um, site inspection. Eight
D, a compliance expert as well.
Uh, one of the
First things that
I was tasked with when I
started.
I had a call from the Department
of Health and they had to call
from GSD and they were talking
about and also facility which is
being remodeled in the head. Put
in a, uh about through new
showers and they sent me
pictures before was very steep
and they had a deep
Drain.
Um
They rebuilt it two times.
Ah!
Alright, better talk and love
trying to find a specific slump
ratio just to make a black and
like, yes, you know, and I never
said anything, uh, that actually
address it.
Blossom mentioned that
The government's commission has
seat of the International
Program Council Committee, which
writes the accessibility
guidelines, in effect that the A
D A is based upon and I
submitted. That is a item to add
its commitment stage.
every six years.
They rewrote building code
International building code, and
they rewrite the and decode
which is accessibility that the
A D, A is based on
Um So I brother a do that in two
minutes and it it was shot down
at the time.
Because they believed another
amendment was appropriate.
As far as the um
Preparedness. Um
We're not gonna emphasized there
and I think that we all are
familiar.
With the farms here in New
Mexico and the
Just the and extra threat that I
think everyone feels now and
that's the farce California
Uh, I think there was a
Hungry? Um
Interpretation of what with the
best practices regarding persons
with disabilities or elderly.
I wonder the cases that came
forth.
Was a, uh, a story, young girl.
Wheelchair bound in her home and
then, for instance, area
Which, uh, upon need for rescue
her father would have to return
home and get right out of the
house. The founder got into
apart wreck on the way home and
the child passed in in the
burning of the house. So
There is a lot of talk at the
time of
Having
Persons with disabilities or
elderly who might need to be
rescued. Um, register first
responders so they would know
where people are who need to be
rescued and we're trying to
perpetuate that here in New
Mexico.
How did that process is
state and we're doing
presentations with that deputy
director who has a specialty
presentation on emergency
preparedness has contact with
and Red Cross and the emergency
responders.
Erin is to get around all the
way
not just the big cities and, um,
Erin is to get around all the
way
not just the big cities and make
presentations to the local, uh,
senior centers, first responders
and just build networking in the
event of a future catastrophe.
Um
I want to mention, uh
Um, the
Uh, programming residents
Accessibility modification
program, which was virtually
sobbed during the pandemic for
close to two years.
As I come back in, and with that
experience, uh, have
Um, my organizational chart to
be a little more efficient and
management of the documentation.
Um
The program's been going on
since 2016 or so 16 or a dozen
projects onto I believe 2019. We
did 64 projects.
This year.
Um, we are
And
and this is still year,
completing 30 projects and and
the 2025 fiscal year. We're
anticipating, uh, completing
Uh, six. I mean, 60 projects,
please.
The I don't have to tell you
that costs have gone up and
really depends.
Your member going to Home Depot
and this supplies come by.
All right.
The costs are up a little bit
overall in our modifications.
It's uh, radical, though.
Most of our modifications or
actually bathroom modifications,
which were running about
$100 each before hand, dammit! I
don't ever never now, but it's
It's probably more like 6500.
The ramps we do. Maybe
Mm. Brand.
For every
Um five or 10. That's your
modifications. So, um, it's a
great program. It's our best
program in my opinion.
And that's why I would love to
have that architect to come in
because it breaks and sign
inspection expertise around
stayed and
The disability specials was
emergency preparedness will
bring in that, um
That angle of
Notification and education and
reaching out and I would mention
that
Our manager of the program came
out from age and is a, uh, huge
injection of management skills,
and that's running the program
like we might
Imagine a few years ago.
So I'm urging that we were all
be able to fund those two
positions in the near future.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I and
I'm asking the analysts this
because it's not quite clear if
I'm looking at the FTE
positions, the LSC and the
executive or the same
But if I'm looking at the at the
Change or in the LSC and the
executive. It's very different.
Are you requesting a decrease in
the
In the pay of some of these
individuals.
Explain.
Madam Chair representative. No,
That is not the case. Within our
recommendation, the initial
agency request was a little bit
slightly higher than the
executive and the LFC
recommendation, so there was no
recommendation to decrease. Um,
any personnel services and
funding.
For the agency.
Okay. Thank you. For the
explanation, Madam Chair.
I don't have any questions,
either. So I'm gonna ask my
advice chair for recommendation
before I start Do that,
Remember, this is the first time
we've seen the agency and we've
heard from them and, um, we are
saving a space for any
adjustments that need to be
done. And today it's just
actually taking
Specific recommendation. Okay,
Vice chair for that
recommendation. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Madam chair have moved
the LFC recommendation.
Representative Sanchez and
represented vodka. Thank you for
your second. Um, do we have any
opposition?
Aren't you have the LFC
recommendation for now? Thank
you, madam. Turnaround Chair
Commission members.
Yeah.
Don't people
are last presentation is the
Developmental Disabilities
Council whenever you're ready
Thank you, madam Chair.
Um, with that, I don't know.
Need to reintroduce myself. I
think I've been talking this
committee all day.
So, um, with that I'll just
entered, introduced the
executive director Ellis Lou
McCoy for the Developmental
Disabilities Council, and this
is going to be tap six agency
code 647.
And I will begin doing the
overview of the entire outlook
for the agency. And then we're
going to go by P code and
alternate.
I mean, with that I'll begin the
presentation, Madame chair.
Um, the lfc recommendation is
1.1, or $1.7 million below the
executive recommendation.
In regards to personal services,
The LSE recommendations under by
$692,000 in regards to
contractual services.
The exact the Alexey
recommendation is one point just
probably about a million dollars
below the executive
recommendation.
And then for other costs. Um,
the LSE recommendation is
$74.8000 below the executive
recommendation in regards to
base expansions. Um, the LFC has
requested to fund two of the
four basic expansions one for an
attorney position.
For O G. And as well as for a
social worker, and I could
provide them and also the
executive director could
probably provide information for
why those are needed.
Um, and then with Al turned over
to Lori.
Madam chair members of the
committee first. Can you hear
me?
Is this any better? Okay. Um,
Madam chair members of the
committee. We're now going to
look at P. 7 to 7 Developmental
Disabilities Council.
For revenues. The LFC
recommendation maintains
spending in general fund revenue
commensurate with FY 24
operating budget.
While the executive
recommendation increased general
fund revenue by 370.1000.
In the base, the LFC maintained
spending levels can measure it
with the FY 24 operating budget
because of a 29.2% funded
vacancy rate in FY 24.
Um, and for performance
measures, both LFC and DFA
analysts were able to reach
consensus.
Um
With that I will pass that along
to Isaiah should go over P 737.
Thank you, Laurie. Madam Chair
for, um P code 737 for the
Office of Guardianship. The LFC
recommendation for General fund
revenue is $1.4 million below
the executive recommendation in
regards to personnel category.
The LSE recommendation is
$490,000 below the executive
recommendation.
In regards to contractual
services. The LOC recommendation
is 82 or $882,000, below the
executive recommendation.
And for other costs. The L C
recommendation is $34.7000 below
the executive recommendation.
um, in regards to base
expansions for the Office of
Guardianship. The LSC again to
reiterate has requested funding
for and an attorney position as
well as for one of the two
Social worker positions as well.
and myself and my DFA
counterpart were able to reach
consensus on performance
measures and targets.
And then I'm with them, Madam
Chair, I would like to turn it
over to executive Director Liu
McCoy.
Oh, thank you,
Okay.
Madam chair.
Um, I wanted to ask if you would
like to go over him non
recurring spending for the
special appropriations for DDC.
Is that something that you would
like me to go over for the
committee?
Okay, Great.
I'll be quick.
In regards
In regards to a special
appropriations for DDC. Um, they
had four special appropriation
requests one for, um for the
special education. Oz bondsman
Support one for a right study
for guardianship services. Um,
one forum, guardianship,
weightless management and then,
lastly, for the prior year,
shortfalls for O G.
Um, the Alessi recommendation.
Um
Recommends funding three of the
four special appropriations the
only appropriate the only one
that we're not recommending is
for the special education.
Osborne myth support before all
the other ones we are in support
of Thank you, Madam Chair.
Good afternoon, madam Chair
members of the committee.
Switch microphones.
Is this better?
Worse.
Just kind of lean in. I think
that's what people have been
doing
so I wanted to review very
quickly the programs under my
agency, so you have, um, an
overview of what we do in our
agency as we move forward with
my budget presentation, um, so
the developmental disabilities
councils are mandated by federal
law, there's one in every state
Mexico's is exceptional. It's
unique because we have two major
state funded programs housed
under the office.
And I apologize for my aunt.
Lack of voice today, getting
over a cold.
So the two I'm speaking of our
the Office of Guardianship and
the Office of the Special
Education Numbered Officer
Gardner ship provides
guardianship services to income
eligible new Mexicans who may
need a guardian meaning they
need decision making support
somebody to make decisions on
their behalf. Is this better?
Um
How about now?
Great.
Ah, ah, and the office of the
Special Education on board. The,
um birds are also a statewide
program. They
Advocates with students and
families for special education
and other services for students
with disabilities.
There is an overview of what
each of these programs and ddC
does. I won't go over them, but
I wanted to make sure that you
had them for, um, for reference.
I want to give a guardianship
snapshot. This is, uh, a
snapshot that is really through
the end of the calendar year, so
end of December of last year.
Um, I want to know that
throughout guardian, the office
of Guardianships history. I'm
going to call it O g throughout
yogis history. We've stayed
right around 1000 or just under
1000. Individuals that were
serving with guardianship
services here in New Mexico. Um,
we're at record highs.
Currently. There are over well
over 1000.
Um 1121.
1121 individuals with
disabilities receiving our
services, including
1038, who are already appointed
guardians and 83 applicants
receiving guardianship legal
services. So in addition to
providing professional guardians
to serve folks, individuals who
require guardianship, um we also
provide legal services. Um,
usually attorney to petition for
guardianship services and
attorney too.
Serve as the guardian and light.
um and a social worker or some
other individual to serve as the
court visitor.
Legal teams are necessary in
each guardianship case, and they
are required by law to petition
for guardianship. Um we
currently have 143 applicants on
our wait list.
This is unusual for us. Um,
usually we have about two thirds
applications for professional
guardians and the third for
family. But as you can see,
we're right at half and half
currently. So this is a new
thing that we're seeing a new
trend. Um, think that's a good
thing. You know, we do want to
keep a lot of these services
within the family if it's
possible for the family.
Last year, we received 364 total
applications. That's an average
of 31 a month and this is
notable because it is 300% of
pre pandemic levels when we're
seeing about 10 new applications
a month we last year we saw 31
this year. We're seeing 35 per
month so they are increasing
year after year. We're seeing
trends towards greater
guardianship services and a
couple of reasons for that are
demographics are changing. We
have an aging
Population. And, um, we also
Have been doing
A lot of work across the state
to talk about our services. Talk
about our agency and what we do
and that the final um factor
that we think is causing this
rise in guardianship
applications is the rapid
allocation in the DD waiver.
We're seeing a lot of new
families request guardianship.
Um as they enter the DD waiver
system.
This year.
Or excuse me in FY 23 we
appointed in the entire year We
appointed 132 new guardians. Two
individuals were already in fy
24 at 147 new guardians
appointed this year, So we've
already exceeded our our total
from last year.
We did, um, stop processing
cases at a certain point last
year due to budget shortfall,
We're doing it again this year
earlier than ever so assuming no
new applications are processed
and fiscal year, 24 were
actually projecting now a budget
deficit of 340,000 the reason
why this is happening is because
we've become better at do
providing our services. Um, in
the past, we were estimating
about a six month turnaround for
garden You guardianship case is
being processed.
That was an improvement from
about a year sometimes more.
In prior industry shins in the
current one. We had reduced it
to six. We're now at 3 to 4
months for a new guardian, so
we're really good at their jobs.
But that means that, um
We need to stop and when we have
a budget shortfall, so last year
again because of how quickly the
applications are being
processed, we saw a $95,000
budget shortfall. We did ask for
a supplemental of $330,000,
which we did not receive. Um and
so we did the best we could to
Um
Prevent the shortfall. But we
did still end up with 100,000
about and this year we're
projecting about 340. We did ask
for a special appropriation. Um,
for about 650,004.
This year and next year.
In the special education on bed
program. It was established by
law in 2021 2021 legislative
session. We launched the program
in December 1st of 2021, and
since then, the office has
served over 436 families and 62
school districts and 28
counties.
Um, in the first year we served
80 the next year. Um, fiscal
year, 23. We served 238 families
And this year we are serving so
far 118, But I got this
information last week, so I'm
sure it's higher than that. Now.
Beginning of the semester is
always really
Um, active time for armpits.
So the embeds Ah!
Staffing. I wanted to go over
that because the Legislature has
we're grateful for your support
and increasing the program needs
here. Um, to give you an update.
we started out with the special
education state on bed. Her name
is Michelle. Try Jimbo. She does
work statewide. We had another
FTE come in, and intake
coordinator for her because as
you
Can see we have a lot of need
for services.
Um, And since then the
Legislature has funded regional
coordinators for our, um for
agency and three in the last two
years to which were created this
fiscal year. Um, we've have
offer letters out. So if you see
some kind of vacancy rate in our
in our records, and that should
be, uh, a lot lower once we get
the two new on beds in in the
next next next couple of weeks.
Uh, we also have, um, one after
the that we hired last year.
So we haven't asked for
additional s ft this year, but
what we have asked for is non
recurring support in contractual
services. Um, in the law for the
embed, we are required to have
legal counsel to counsel us on,
um
Special education law, but
specifically, the council and
the ombudsman on how they can
operate within
Within the legal structures and
within the spaces that they work
in. And so this is not to
provide, um, being very explicit
here. This is not to provide
legal services to students and
families. We do refer those
cases out. We do not provide
special education, legal
services. We do provide advocacy
services.
Um, sorry, provided a overview
of our budget requests and with
some historical information with
actual operating in our final
request, And so this is just for
your information, so you can
see, um, are passed.
Spending in our past revenue
sources. I want to go onto the
budget differences as, um, my
esteemed lfc and DFA analysts
have pointed out there is quite
a big difference. 1.7 million
between the L C rack and the
executive recommendation from
what I've
Discussed earlier. We are seeing
rapidly rising applications. We
are we are seeing deficiencies
every year, and it is
Really difficult to stay on top
of this rising rate of need, and
we are talking about some of the
most.
High knees. Individuals in New
Mexico. These are folks who are
who have disabilities pretty
severe ones enough that they
need a guardian if they're
seeking our help, that also
means their income eligible.
They don't have many resources
to get help any other way. And
these are folks who are very
susceptible to being taken
advantage of its abuse, neglect
and exploitation in the
community. They really do need
Um, that kind of help, and we
really do require a lot more
investment from the state of New
Mexico to ensure that these
folks are getting the services
that they need.
Um, So, um, I wanted to give you
an overview of the differences
between our requests and
executive recommendation as well
as our requests and the LFC
recommendation. Um and I want to
know that these differences
don't even include my expansion
requests. These are just my
request to keep the current team
that I have.
Um so going over very briefly.
The budget requests Um I just
wanted to show you the buckets
where they where they land a big
chunk of our requests is or
wait. List management as I, um
as I, As I said, not only has
the rate gone up our new
applications, we are able to
process these cases a lot
faster. But that means
That we are having to stop
processing cases earlier and
earlier every year in order to
avoid budget shortfalls. Um, the
second, uh,
Item that we've requested in our
increase. Um are increased
guardian rates for complex
cases. This is incredibly
important because guardians by
law are allowed to turn down or
take cases. Um, you know, they
have to accept a case and we're
having a lot of trouble getting
guardians to accept really
difficult, complex cases.
Typically cases of individuals
who are on housed or have pretty
severe mental health challenges
or
Um, addiction challenges. Um,
And when? When our guardians see
a case like this come up, it has
been increasingly difficult to
find to find folks to serve
them.
And one of the reasons is
because rates for services have
gone up across the board and
many different healthcare
sectors and industries many
different providers, this
services and support providers
as well around medical and
healthcare. Um, we're not seeing
the type of rate increase for us
that we need. I'm very grateful
for the LSC recommendation for a
new rate study.
Um
However, I think temporarily,
there needs to be a special
rates for complex cases.
Uh, we also have administrative
services. Cost increases. Um,
there. We just switched to a new
data system. Um, and they have
increased their costs and this
was a statewide, um, across
different agencies and
negotiation that they did.
Unfortunately, the being the
tiny agency that we are
Um you know, other agencies
could absorb this additional
cost. But we cannot so 275,000
for that. And then the critical
staffing needs that we have, Um,
I have kept the deputy director
for my agency Unfunded since
2020 to find the programs, which
I think are really important.
But as you can see for high, um
My voice. I really do need some
backup here and would really
appreciate funding for this
particular position. And
finally, the expansions and one
of the ways that we can keep
guardianship expansion from
getting out of hand is to ensure
that we have alternatives to
guardianship, very effective
ones here in the state, and so
we've requested.
Additional social workers to
figure out alternatives.
Guardianship for people. We
already do that work, but we're
doubling up on people and
they're getting burned out. You
know they have. People are doing
that work as well as the job
that they are assigned and
finally for staff attorneys, um
we do need
A staff attorney as we are doing
careful reviews of guardianships
and ensuring that the legal
support is there for the judges.
As as we figure out, whether or
not a person still requires
guardianship, whether or not
they need more guardianship
support less or whether or not
the gardener ship needs to be
terminated. All of these require
attorneys
To go to court to figure this
out.
And that is the one that is also
the one resource that are
guardians have told us that they
really can't afford to do so
even if they recommend
termination of guardianship,
which we support when there's a
recommendation for that, Um
If there's a good reason for it,
we support it. You know, it does
require legal and attorney work,
too.
To make that happen. And finally
for the special supplemental
preparation requests as I
mentioned, um, we had asked for
656 $148,000 and for wait. List
management, um, recommended 324
and L. C recommended 200. We are
already this year looking at a
projected $340,000 shortfall. Um
And so, uh, we really do need,
um non recurring funding to get
us to the year and to and to
help us next year as these wait,
lists grow.
As I mentioned the office of
Special Education on Bed
requires legal counsel, um and
according to law, their
statutory required to have it.
We don't have the budget for it
at this point, and so we have
asked for at least temporarily,
um
Recurring funding. The reason
we're asking for non recurring
this year instead of putting it
in the base budget. We're trying
to figure out and test how much
support we really need before we
go in for that based budget
request.
And finally, um, the rate study
that Elsie recommended. We do
believe that it's necessary for
us to have one of those, um with
that I stand for questions or
cast. I'm sorry, madam Chair
because the the recommendations
are so far apart. Um,
respectfully requests if it is
the pleasure of the committee to
have sort of sort of either
conference or working group to
discuss why the
The recommendations are so far
apart as there is a great need,
and we are looking at budget
shortfalls every year, probably
for the foreseeable future.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Thank you And and remember, this
is the first time we hear from
your agency, and they will save
space for adjustments needed, Um
Determined by the committee.
Really? But, um
For today. We're just looking at
There's hope. Okay, Thank you.
All right. Any questions from
the community?
I do, Madam C. I have this
state.
Quick question, actually, with
respect to the
To the year. $340,000 shortfall
I would like to know what's
going to create that shortfall.
Thank you, madam. Chair of
represent Herndon. Um
So what I discussed earlier was
that the shortfall was caused by
essentially our efficiency. So
when we do our budget
projections that better when we
do our project projections, we
have to estimate because these
are legal services and the were
often, um, hampered by. You know
what the courts scheduling is
and how quickly our legal
contractors are legal. Um,
services can work through these
cases. We've been working really
hard to make.
Our legal services as efficient
as possible. In the past, we
were estimating a six month
turnaround for guardianship.
Cases. We are now looking at, um
3 to 4 months We've gotten a lot
more efficient and so because of
the shorter timeline, it did
cause us to not only have a
shortfall, but we're now holding
cases. We usually stop, um,
assigning cases right around
this time of year. Um, with how
efficient we've been. We should
have
Started holding cases earlier in
the year. We didn't do that. Um
and so we are where we are
because
We're really good at our jobs,
essentially.
And thank you and Madam Chair
and madam Presenter.
Respective your cases,
particularly in the Office of
Guardianship.
A
I'm trying to understand in
terms of what you do with the
office will do if there is a
complaint about the Guardian has
been assigned
Does your office in represent or
the individual who is bringing
the complaint?
Thank you, Madam. Chair,
representative Herndon. It
depends on which complaints
system they're used. We have a
internal complaints system. Um,
that is required by law that we
have for guardians that are
state funded. And so if there's
a complaint, specifically about
a state funded guardian for
guardianship services, provided
we do have a a complaint system
that they can
Um, they can work through for us
to resolve the issue. Um
The ultimate arbiter of
How well a guardian is providing
services is the judge Every time
there's a guardian assigned
there, signed in District Court
and the judge in District Court
has continuing jurisdiction over
this case until the guardianship
is terminated for whatever
reason.
And so if the complaint is made
to the judge, we do not provide
legal services to anybody except
to represent the office itself.
So we do appear in these cases.
Ah!
On behalf of our own office. Um,
but if the complaint is
specifically about the Guardian,
we may make statements about
what we have done to try to
resolve that issue. We don't
represent either the Guardian or
the complainants or the
individual receiving
guardianship services.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, madam President.
More questions. Thank you for
your presentation. I will ask
the vice Chair for
recommendation. Madam Chair, I
moved the recommendation of the
LFC representatives second. Um,
is there any opposition?
And so thank you, manager.
Yes, I've got
Fantastic
