All right. Uh, looks like we're
gonna go to committee members.
OK. Representative Silva.
Uh, thank you, Vice Chair. Thank
you, Chair. Um, I just want to
name my support for this. I've
been out there a number of times
with my own kiddos and
separately out hunting javelina
in and around,
kind of thing. There's some
really neat features just a
little bit to the west of the
area of the slot of the proposed
state park that are heavily
promoted and heavily visited
within the region, both sort of
locally and also regionally. Um,
and then right now there's uh
there's several businesses where
a lot of folks like to go uh
after they visit this area.
Right now it's publicly owned
state property, but there's not
a great deal of good access to
it.
Um, those businesses now get a
lot of uh visitation, um, we'll
think they'll get a lot more
with the bill. And so I was,
yeah.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, is there
an opportunity for off-highway
vehicles to traverse the area or
is that not allowed there?
that's a great question, Madam
Chair Representative Brown, um,
there's not, uh, there, there
would be vehicular access onto
sort of the portion uh that's so
it's sort of if you can
visualize it split by a state
highway that goes north south.
Um, there's, uh, to the, uh,
going to the east, there's
opportunities for uh different
sorts of recreation, including
uh off highway recreation, and
then, uh, there's some areas,
um, uh, there's private land in
different parts, obviously,
where folks choose whether or
not people can go through there,
there is, um, off-highway
vehicle and uh like biking and
different things on some county
roads.
foods that's a little bit south
and a little bit north of where
the proposed st. Thank you for
that and and Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair, I guess.
If I have any concern at all
here with this bill, it's that
our state parks are
historically, I think,
underfunded. We know they have
need for manpower funds to take
care of the, the physical plant,
so to speak.
Uh, is there
The encouragement, um
Comfort you can give me that
this is not going to detract the
creation of this park would not
detract from what we're doing.
For the needs of our existing
parks Madam Brown, great
question. Yes, I think, uh, in
the capital budget this year,
there's a full $40 million for
state parks that's been set
aside, uh, that number, um, the
original sort of LFC
recommendation, was it 16 and
based upon a lot of the feedback
and support from all folks for
state parks, there was a great
deal of additional funding for
maintenance. Um, the
the new, the 3 new positions, I
think that were identified in
our budget. Uh, we hope that one
of those can be used for capital
needs sort of statewide and
Madam Chair, representative, I
think this helps us set the
stage for even more investment,
both sort of the capital
investment, but also the people
power needed to make sure the
capital dollars are used
effectively, but I think this
helps increase that.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative Duncan
and then Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
was just wondering if you could
tell me how much land we're
talking about here altogether.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Duncan, um, I
know Mr. I believe Mr. Velasquez
is here, and I, my, uh, Senator
Steinborn is as well. Um, I
guess I could maybe go back up.
Um,
The question is how much of
land?
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Duncan
approximately 922 acres across
three separate parcels in and
around that area of the Rio
Grande in Selden Canyon.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That was
all. Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My
question was off of that cause
the um new set 783 acres. I
wondered, um, is there more land
available for purchase. It's,
looks like it's about a square
mile and a half maybe spread
along the river, which is not
really big, and it's an
incredible area. So is there any
chance of expanding it.
Mr. Chair, Representative, the
answer is yes. The legislation
author authorizes that.
For a willing. Thank you.
Great, thank you. Uh, any other
questions?
We'll go to Representative Jeff.
Mr.
Chair, I make, I'm, let me.
We're gonna do the, the move to
a do pass
which move would do past.
On House committee substitute
for house bill.
44 or 21, 219.
Second,
OK.
Uh, motion by ranking member
Chatfield, uh, and seconded by
Representative Silva for a due
pass on House Bill 219 as
amended. Any, uh, as amended,
any opposition to that motion.
OK, please represent Pettigrew
in opposition.
Thank you, Senator.
Thank you very much to Mr.
Velasquez and thanks to the
committee for their support of
state partners. Sorry.
Mm
Ah,
Mr. Terry, are you ready for me?
Mr. Chair, thank you, uh, for
waiting for me. I was next door
building,
um.
So, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, what you have
today is Hospital 21 Lane Grant
Mered Assistance fund changes.
And let me give you a little bit
of background.
Sorry, I ran over here.
Um,
So Lane grants are political
subdivisions of the state of New
Mexico.
So in that sense, they're
equivalent to a county or
municipality.
But
Lane grants have no source of
income.
They don't have taxing
authority.
They don't receive a share of
GRT.
From, uh, their well they were
county they're in, and they
don't receive um property taxes.
So they have no income and we
have a situation where we have
political subdivisions of the
state of New Mexico who were
literally having big sales and
yard sales to fund their
operations.
And so in order to address that,
a couple of years ago, we passed
the land grants assistance fund.
And the way the land grant
assistance fund works is, oh, by
the way, I'm joined by Arturo
Artoletta, who's director of the
Hawaiian Grand Council.
Um
It, it takes a very small
percentage of GRT.
But it may fund, and if your
land grant is, um, audit
compliant and doing all the
things it's supposed to do as a,
as a political subdivision, then
it gets a share of the fun.
And
You know, we're talking about,
you know, in the order of about
$100,000 a year for a political
subdivision. So you can imagine
how that's not very much, but
that's way more than, you know,
what you're making from a bake
sale.
So this allows land grants to
hire attorneys, to hire uh
accountants to be audit
compliant, maybe hire a
surveyor, maybe, you know,
repair the community center, you
know, really basic operating
expenses.
And what this bill does is it
makes two significant tweaks to
the land grants assistance fund.
First, um, the way the fund
works, if a land grant is
earning other money.
There are certain tears that the
fund pays out.
Um, so, for example, there's one
land grant that earns some money
from a cell tower that's on land
grant, uh, common land.
Uh, there are other land grants
that earn a little bit of money
from uh grazing leases or lumber
sales, things like this.
If you're doing well and you're
earning some money, you get less
money from the lander and
assistance fund.
So you might get a 75%
distribution instead of a 100%
distribution.
This bill does two things.
First, it changes those
categories a little bit and
Arturo can, can, uh, talk about
that if, if you're interested.
And the second thing it does is
it tries to capture the
leftovers from the fun. So if a
land grant only gets a 75%
payout.
That means there's several $1000
that don't get paid out and
under current statute would
revert to the general fund. Um,
this bill would make the fund
non-reverting.
And so that money would just be
kept in line grant assistance
fund and added to the amount
that's collected in the
following year and paid out in
the following year, and
We're not talking about a lot of
money, uh, last year, they left
approximately $61,000 in the
fund which reverted to the
general fund. So we're, we're
just trying to enhance the way
the the existing land grant
assistance fund works.
Um, Mr. Archuleta, would you
hear anything?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you again. My
name is Arthur Arad. I'm the
director of the Ban studies
program, I think, uh.
Um, the and the land grant
council, I think, uh,
representative McQueen did a
really good job of explaining
it. Um, I think one thing that
just to point out, I know that
there was a little bit of a
discrepancy in terms of what was
reported in the FIR, um, it was
incorrect and it was based on
the way they did the sort of a
math, um, the way that the fund
works is it's a calculation
based on the total number of
land grants that are eligible,
um, and the FIR sort of there
are 27 land grants that are
political divisions in the state
and it it used that as the, the
way to do the calculation. So it
came out with a a really
You'd number um 590,000, um,
which is incorrect, um, is
Representative McQueen pointed
out the reversions are are
actually smaller than that, um,
this year's the, it'll be
61,000, uh, last year it was
27,000. Um, so we're not talking
about huge numbers, it would
just be a little bit and then it
would get redistributed in the
subsequent year. Um, so each
landgra would maybe get a couple
of $1000 extra. Great, thank you
very much, Chair McQueen. Thank
you, um, Mr. Archuleta.
Where we, uh, we don't uh have
nor need an amendment for this.
We'll go straight to the
committee starting with
Representative. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Oh, sorry, son Duncan, I
apologize. Thank you for the
reminder from the vice chair.
First, can we go to public
comment? Anybody here wish to
make public comment, please come
on.
OK. Um, Mr. Chair, committee
members, my name is Andrea
Padilla, and I am president of
El Consejo de las Mercedes and
president of the town of Dome
Land Grant, and we stand in full
support of this bill because it
will allow us to seek other
funds, grants to complete our
projects without getting
penalized for doing so. Right
now, if we hit the threshold by
$1000 over it, we stand to lose
30.
$5000. So this increase will
help us complete our projects.
Thank you very much.
OK, and we have, uh, Mr. Don
Bustos online, Mr. Bustos.
Permanent members of the
committee. My name is Don
Bustos, and I live in the
village of Santa Cruz.
On the Santa Cruz de la Cannada
land grant, and we stand in full
support of this bill for the
reasons mentioned before. Thank
you.
Thank you. I will conclude with
Joaquin Arguello.
So, uh, members of the
committee, uh, my name is
Joaquin Arguello, um,
representing the uh village of
Valdez in the northern part of
Taos County.
Um, uh, Marcela Arsea were
standing in favor of this bill
and um this.
Just the reality, you know, that
historically we have more
infrastructure needs than than
we even know how to access
formal support and funding for
um everything from water,
domestic water needs to
infrastructures and
infrastructure sharing to assure
that our seciaparianes, um, who
are also land rep members can
actually access the historical
um cultural practices that we
need to maintain our culture.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. OK, we'll
go to the committee, uh, first
Representative Duncan, then
ranking member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, representative for this.
Um, I think you're witness was
in text a couple of days ago.
So let me, let me go back to
some of the same things that I
asked then. Representative, um,
can I ask, why didn't you just
bring a, bring a bill forward
that would allow them to tax
themselves.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Duncan, uh, that would be a
major change, uh, from the way
uh Lang Langer's currently
operate. Uh, so Lane grants.
Um, you know, a lot of languages
we all learn languages predate
the state of New Mexico.
Um, you know, they have had ups
and downs. Uh, we have treated
them, I think, with uh more
respect of late, uh, including
recognizing them as political
subdivisions of the state of New
Mexico, and more recently
providing the land grant
assistance fund, um, you know, I
honestly, it's never been
suggested to me before that we
give them uh taxation authority,
um, one question would be,
What would be the scope of their
authority?
Um, so some land grants, uh, own
a fair amount of their original
granted lands, and some owned
very little.
So could you tax everyone within
the original boundaries, or do
you only tax land owned by the
land grant.
Could you checks errors and
non-errors alike.
Um, there would be a lot of, I
think, difficult questions to
answer, were we to go that
route. And as I know that the
grants assistance fund is
existing law.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
representative for that. Um, I,
I guess my question is,
And, and you, you answered part
of it there would be, but
I mean, if, if they're allowed
to have a sale.
And I don't mean to.
To offend anybody by this, but
why don't they have?
The ability to tax themselves.
I mean, is, is, does our
Constitution keep them down?
Um
Mr. Chair, I can, you know,
it's, I think it's an
interesting idea, um, uh, I, I,
you know, I'm happy to turn over
to Mr. Archuleta if he wants to
give us some more history, um,
they, they don't, uh, currently
in the reality is, uh, there are
a lot of land grants actually
pay taxes.
Uh, on, on their holdings, so.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Duncan, uh,
that's correct. So we do have
land. First of all, land grants
are, are creatures of the
legislature. So their statutes,
um, what sort of creates them
and governs them is all decided
by this body, um, by the
legislature.
Um, if a taxing authority were
to um I guess come about, I
think there may be some
constitutional questions as to
whether or not that would have
to go before the voters, uh, to
allow for that additional tax. I
don't know that the legislature
itself could impose or or give
them that authority, um, without
going through some type of a
referendum, um, as
Representative McQueen mentioned
land grants do pay taxes, um.
In a variety of ways, uh, some
pay directly, uh, property
taxes, um, and I know we had
that discussion last time. Uh
some of them don't just pay at a
uh agricultural rate, there are
some land grants that do have
the pay a commercial rate to pay
higher. In fact, one of the land
grants it has some of the
smallest holdings um in Tijeras
Canyon, um, they pray
approximately 200,000 a year in
taxes, um, and the.
In addition to that, Langren
heirs, which make up a large
portion of, of folks here in the
state, um, those are all
taxpayers as well, um, and they
pay taxes, uh, either grocery
receipts taxes or um income
taxes and the grocery receipts
taxes which is what funds this
is a very small percentage is
0.05% um of the grocery receipts
taxes collected that are put
into this fund, uh, and so those
land grants have been paying
taxes, um, for centuries and in
fact, um, that's been one of the
issues.
as to why Land Grant's lost
common land initially uh was
once they started, uh, taxes
were imposed on them, and these
were land rich cash poor
communities, and so a lot of
that got actually um seized for
delinquent tax seizure, uh, and
was lost. And so this is sort of
one way that land grants are
able to now make sure they can
maintain um their common lands
and also support their
communities.
It was turn and thank you
Representatives. So, so then
like a uh in intact, so I said,
what separates you from the um
community and rural part of the
county.
Um, except for you cannot decide
you're going to incorporate tax
yourself and do that. So then
what would separate you and what
would keep you from going to the
county commission and say we
need um we need a water line, we
need a sewer line. We need
something.
Um, why wouldn't you do that?
Mr. Chair
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Duncan, uh, so I, I, for
example, live in, uh, the town
of Galisteo, uh, Galteo is
unincorporated Santa Fe County,
um.
You know, it's a village of, you
know, maybe 250 people on a good
day. Um, I, I suppose we could
incorporate, uh, but there's
obviously a lot of overhead and
expense with doing something
like that. Um, if we want
capital outlay, uh, we have to
go through, you know, usually
Santa Fe County or someone like
that.
Um, so that's the way that
works. One of the big benefits
to the land grant community, to
the different land grants of
being recognized as a political
subdivision of the state in
Mexico was the ability to
receive capital.
Uh, and that happened, uh.
2004.
So that's been going on for a
while, but of course, like
Capital Alley is, is one thing
for water and things like that,
but, you know, the ability to
hire an accountant, you know, to
hire a lawyer, to hire a
surveyor. You serve professional
services generally aren't going
to be covered by Cape. So having
some operating funds has been
important and again, that's what
led to the land grants
assistance fund.
sure I'm, I'm just not wrapping
my mind around this at all. My
ditch company when we need
money, I double, they doubled
the rent.
You know, a year, year ago. So
we doubled the rent, we are able
to pay for a million dollars
project.
And, and so I guess I just don't
understand.
Why we should create another
fund or a group of people that
should be able to go to the
county and and and ask for it.
And if the county doesn't deem
that that's high on their
priority list and I just, I
guess I can't understand this,
so thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much for Duncan.
Next we have ranking member
Chatfield and then uh send down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, there, there are
several kinds of lay grants.
Uh, there's private land grants.
Community land grants.
Native American land grants.
Do, are we talking about all of
them, or are we talking about
just one kind?
Uh, men in Chaffield, we're
talking about the 27 named land
grants, uh, they're named in
statute as political
subdivisions of the city of New
Mexico.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
gentlemen, is, are those 27 land
grants all community land
grants.
Mr. Cha Chailas.
Mr. Chair, gentlemen, are we
talking about creating a new
fund or increasing the uh amount
of funding that goes into an
already existing fund.
Uh, Mr. Chair, we're in
Chanfield, it's an existing
fund. We're talking about making
a non-reverting, so there isn't
this sort of leakage of the
funds, and we're talking about
tweaking the, the payout tiers
within that fund, but all of
that is existing law.
So Mr. Chair, does tweaking mean
increasing or tweaking just
means changing the
apportionment.
Um, Mr. Chair and Resident
Chatfield, it means changing
who's eligible for a full payout
from the fund. It doesn't
increase the dollars in the
fund. It just increases your
share of those dollars. It
allows for land grants to earn a
little bit more money on their
own.
In these land grants, um, you
know, my experience, they do a
lot with very little, um, and,
you know, there, there are out
there trying to earn money, you
know, as a political
subdivision, which is, you know,
a little bit different than how
most political subdivisions work
because most political
subdivisions do have taxing
authority.
So, Mr. Chair,
Uh, gentlemen, I, I, I agree,
um.
Mr. Chair, if I
At a little place and it was uh
urban old land grant and I had
an aaa running, coming down
through the land gran through my
place.
Can, can this fund
So, he maintained that safe,
clean it up.
Make the water run in it.
So that we can raise a crop.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Chatfield, the
Seas are also political
subdivisions of the state, uh,
there are separate funding in
different communities. Uh,
certainly a lot of the land
grants work very closely with
their acas, but they are
separate entities.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much for bringing
member Chatfield. Next we have
Representative Dow and represent
good.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Chairman. Um, what, what
percentage of land grants are
for ag use.
Um
So, uh, Mr. Chair sent out, you
know, I think land grants are
communities. I think most land
grants had agricultural
activities, but they're, their
communities, their political
subdivisions, they, um they
might own community center, they
might know that, um, you know,
common lands, um, common lands
are often agricultural. I mean,
I, I wouldn't describe their
purpose as being used. Well,
the reason why I asked you
because there was a reference to
agriculture production and
I, I just was trying to
understand so.
Mr. Tay, uh, Representative Tao,
um, land grants historically
have paid taxes on their common
lands.
Which, which I think is
questionable, um, but because
they've been paying taxes on
their common lands, some of
those lands are eligible for the
special method evaluation for
lands used primarily for
agriculture, so it's a lower
rate.
Uh, some, some of the line grant
land, says Mr. Archuleta said or
not.
Um, and then I know, you know,
some of the land grants I used
to represent, you know, they
make a little money, uh, by, uh,
heirs who have grazing leases.
So there's agricultural
activity. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank, thank you very much, uh,
Representative Do. Next we have
Representative.
Thanks, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I realized we
need a um presentation on land
grants during the summer, maybe.
Because it's like I know the
Triscoland brand they gave land
for high school, all the owners
got a lot of money or, you know,
that's what I know of in Berlio
County, which is in part of my
district. So just, it's in the
FIR it says there's
26 statuary land grants, and it
says 27 community land grants,
are those two different
categories or did someone just
mess up their math?
Mr. Chairman Representative
Garrett, the, um, there, there's
two statutes, um, that govern
land grants that are political
subdivisions, 26 of the land
grants are in the general
provisions, Article One, and
then we have one land grant, uh,
the Chile land grant that is a
political subdivision in its own
statute, uh, and that's in uh
Article 4, and there's a long
history and I'd love to go
before the committee this summer
and give you guys a presentation
as to why there's different
statutes and how that has sort
of panned out over time. Thank
you. And then it, it mentions
that 41
land grant Mercedes, uh, we're
able to update their capital
infrastructure. What, where does
the 41 come from?
41 is um
Oh, it's on the top of page 3,
the uh in 2023, the land grant
Council assisted 41 land grant
Mercedes to update their capital
infrastructure plans.
Mr. Chairman, uh, I'm not sure
where that figure comes from.
It's like it's an incorrect
number.
OK, cause it's, Mr. Chair, it's
hard to know what we're talking
about, who we're talking about,
uh, Representative Chatfield rep
uh mentioned there's Native
American, there's private,
there's the ones we've heard
around Chocolate Canyon, so.
It's, it's just, it seems like
it's a simple build, but as I'm
reading it, it's like I'm not
sure what I'm we're talking
about, just, that's it. Thank
you.
Thank you very much. OK, I don't
see any other questions. Wanna,
uh thank you for bringing, oh,
I'm sorry, Rose Verrera, do you
please, I apologize. Uh, yes.
And I have about 10, I don't
know, 12 land grounds in my
district, and I, I just want to
explain that these go back
centuries, you know, generations
and generations and
And people have guarded this
very carefully and, and worked
worked very hard to to get these
laws in place and to align them
with federal legislation. I
mean, there's just a whole
history and yes.
I would welcome all of you to go
to a land grant committee
meeting and we could arrange
that so that you could really
understand the depth of the work
that uh these people do in their
communities, and they're real
leaders.
The leaders I said they all have
5 jobs, they, you know, they run
the land grants, they, they're
on the Asea commission, they're
volunteer fire department,
they're on the school board. I
mean, these are the leaders in
in the rural north and I, I know
that's also true in in the
south, uh, we have land grants
throughout the state, so, but it
is a complex.
situation,
uh, but, but they've worked hard
to, to codify uh laws and
regulations that make it work
for these uh uh association, so
I'm, um, I would uh
Proudly recommended to pass. OK
thank you very much,
Representative, uh, with that
said, I don't see other
questions we'll go to
Representative Sanchez for the
motion, Representative Verera
for the 2nd.
OK. OK, uh, motion for due pass
on House Bill 21, uh, say from
representreta. Is there any
opposition to that motion? It
please show represent Duncan in
opposition. Thank you very much.
Thank you and thank, OK, great.
Uh, now we'll invite up uh thank
you, Chair Sarato for being
back.
Uh, excellent. Um, OK, uh, we
know you're back uh
committee had some questions.
Uh, we've already gone through
public comment, so we'll go back
to you, um, and for
Uh
The
Uh, for on House Bill 7 now.
Yeah, so, yeah, if you could
come back to us with House Bill.
Uh, yes, thank you, uh, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you committee. I
do have an amendment to move to
move. This would be the 2nd
Amendment on this. OK, so we've,
we've adopted one amendment,
while obviously not adopting the
bill. Uh, can you tell us the
new amendment 231 number,
please, it's 231-725.1. OK,
we've got that, is everybody got
that in their books?
OK.
Can you uh explain that
amendment, please.
Thank you, excuse me, sorry, can
I have a motion in a second for
to discussion purposes for this
amendment.
OK, it's been moved, uh, by
Representative Silva, same by
Vice Chair Dixon. Now, if you
could please explain it. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you. I
appreciated the conversation we
had last week, especially around
eligibility requirements and
really making that very clear
what what the parameters are for
this um for this program, and,
and what this amendment does is
it creates that eligibility
requirements section, I'm making
it very clear that um the folks
have to have a have a
continuous.
primary residence in New Mexico
could successfully completed a
financial literacy course,
obtained a high school
equivalency credential as well,
and then it also clarifies that,
uh, the interim committee task,
or sorry, the task force I
should say, um, will provide
additional guidelines on that
eligibility, ensuring that any,
you know, what qualifies, for
example, as financial literacy,
etc. would be contained in this
as well. I also want to uh
mention this is my expert for
today. This is Teresa Madrid.
She is the interim executive
director for Partner.
for community action as well,
uh, with that, we stand for
questions.
Uh, great. Thank you very much,
uh, Chair Sarato, uh, for
questions on the amendment.
We're going to go to
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Representative. I really
appreciate the amendments you've
left out. What's left to
determine about eligibility.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative, from my
perspective on this, I think
this is the eligibility, but we
say continuously reside in New
Mexico, for example, uh, what
does that look like, for
example, someone spends summers
away, would that be considered
continuously residing, um, you
know, we're talking about, uh,
financial literacy, for example,
what, when we say financial
literacy, what does that look
like as well? So that's
primarily what we're looking at
as being those specific
parameters.
Mr. Charon Representative, what
about financial eligibility?
Mr. Chair and representative um
I'm sorry, I don't understand
the question. Well, Mr. Chair
and Representative, uh, you
clarified everything but income
eligibility of the families. Is
this for all New Mexico children
or is this for low-income
children? Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. This
is for all New Mexican children,
and that's why again, we have,
again, that's yes, it's for all
the Mexican children. Mr. Chair
and Representative, I, it
doesn't
what, I don't think there needs
to be any other eligibility.
It, it
What other eligible, I mean.
I appreciate the changes. The
primary residence of the
beneficiary must continually be
in New Mexico.
The requirement that they
graduate from high school to
obtaining in high school
equivalency. That's awesome. I
think that's great. But then
direct the task force for
additional guidance on
eligibility requirements and
eligibility requirement is
different. You're, you, if
you're talking about financial
literacy, that's a curriculum
choice. And if you're talking
about whether they're having a
high school graduation or an
equivalently credential, that
is, that's defined in other
statutes. I, I, I am concerned
that cause
Because of the testimony, I
heard equity, social justice. I
heard these terms that this
isn't going to be for all New
Mexico children, but whether
someone is low income or whether
someone is is moving up.
Because we're giving them
scholarships and we're helping
them get jobs and we're giving
them loan forgiveness and we're
helping them, you know, direct
their dollars away from
childcare to investments. Maybe
it's the committee staff that
are serving with us this year
that aren't married yet. Today
they're low income, but when
their children graduate, they
may not be. I'm wondering why
there is an explicit language,
just saying this is for all New
Mexico children, Mr. Mr. Chair
and uh Representative, I believe
that the fund is very clear that
it is for the benefit of New
Mexicans that fit these
parameters again.
is the task force that's going
to offer recommendations. If
those recommendations are beyond
what has been laid out in the
bill, then that, then we do not
have to accept those
recommendations, but those are
recommendations from the task
force that this body will be
able to vote on transparently.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
could the task force choose to
make it income eligible based on
eligible on income. Mr. Chair
and Representative, this bill
specifies that it's for all New
Mexico children, and that again
that this is that what they're
going to be doing is ensuring
that we're able to fit that.
There are aspects of this that
include equity, uh, the conclude
the consideration of equity, but
at the same time, should there
be pieces of this task force,
which is done through in a
transparent process that are not
approved of through this body,
then we would not accept those.
recommendations.
Mr. Chair and Representative, I
know what the majority of the
body would pick.
Everything else that we've been
putting through this body has
been income-based.
So, I mean, I'm in the minority.
I want to know that this is
gonna keep families, keep
children in the state. I mean,
we talk about the exodus of New
Mexico and it's our, it includes
our productive uh degreed
workforce. And so I, we want to
keep the families in here. I
just have a simple yes or no.
Could the committee, based on
developing new eligibility
standards choose to make this
income based. Mr. Chan and
represented by I feel that I've
answered that question,
but I can get,
I think we're
um, appreciate very much sort of
the conversations, uh, if you
want to sort of, if you have a
sort of a an area that you'd
like to see perhaps maybe, uh,
sort of a conclusion on that, on
sort of that question, you, we
are asking, appreciate
Representative Sarato,
appreciate expert, um, if you
want to sort of lay out what you
would like to see perhaps you're
welcome to. I think the, yeah,
go ahead. I know it's, we're
going back and forth.
Fairly rapidly, which is totally
fine. Uh, we'll go back to you,
Representative Doo, um, and then
uh, yeah, help us, we'll keep
going, Mr. Chair,
Representative, all I'm asking
for is a yes or no.
Does the, does the committee
have the ability to limit the
eligibility to low income.
That's, that's all I was asking.
OK. Thank you, uh,
yeah, Mr. Chen representative in
committee, um, this is for all
New Mexicans. They cannot limit
it to a specific group and
should those recommendations
come back in any way indicating
that it does not benefit New
Mexicans, then this body would
not have to accept those terms
in there, Mr. Chair and
representative. OK. OK. Uh,
thank you, uh, we'll, we'll go
back for, and if we need to come
back for any other questions, we
can. We're gonna go.
To, uh, Representative Luhan and
then Vice Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I mean,
Mr. Chair, um, representative, I
would, I would.
thinker or agree that if we have
a task for a task force making
recommendations they could.
Make these recommendations, and
I'd also concur with the speaker
or the presenter that we didn't,
we wouldn't have to accept those
recommendations, so.
Yes, to, I mean, that's how I'm
understanding whenever we put a
task force together, having been
on a few.
Um, so,
My question, Mr. Mr. Speak, I
mean.
Where are we right now
HAFC Mr. Chairman, thank you. So
you made, you made the, we're
just talking about the
amendments right now and so
mis Mr. Chair, uh,
representative.
Um, you struck the lang the
language related to the powers
and duties of the vice-chair and
uh remove the requirement for
the
Task force to elect a vice
chairs that just like clean up
work, Mr.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
uh, yes, and just to be clear,
that was on the amended
amendment from last time that
I'm on the wrong amendment, Mr.
Chair. Um, so you, uh, you
removed the provision that the
primary, this is what we're
talking, primary residents of
beneficiaries must be
continuously in New Mexico since
birth. So,
If
So if they um.
They leave.
And come back. How does that
work, Mr. Chair? Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you,
Representative for the question.
Um, so on the back, this is also
why we put in there, um,
including any and you'll look on
07 on the back of the amendment,
including any clarifications on
residency requirements and
possible processes against state
against across sorry across
state agencies to meet those
requirements, um, that language
was specifically that was the
specific point that I had made
when we were talking to the
drafter to make sure that again,
um, you can
nu ous ly for a child, what does
that mean? What does that look
like, for example, if you spend
every summer away, if, if your
parents are divorced in other
states, you know, there, there's
a multitude of what that could
look like. And so we wanted to
for them to offer that guidance
and make sure that it felt fair,
um, you know, for those that
would benefit.
So Mr. Mr. Chair, uh, rep, that
means that there is flexibility,
is that correct? Thank you, Mr.
Chair and thank you,
Representative. Yes, that's the
intention that, you know, we
we're trying to capture everyone
that that identifies New Mexico
as home to come back home, but
again, what that is
continuously, you know, that,
that varies in modern, in our
modern communities.
Yeah, I think that that
flexibility, Mr. Cha, it could
even be modified later because
we want.
People to come back and maybe
they had to leave for for
financial reasons with their
parents and then they, they came
back at a later time and maybe
this would offer them that
eligibility with flexibility. So
thank you for that. So you
change the requirement from
graduating from New Mexico High
School to obtain to obtaining
high school equivalency
credential.
Um, can you explain that a
little bit, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. So that again,
you, you all have mentioned that
as a concern that, you know,
what is a high school graduate?
what do students look like, you
know, various things that come
up and again making that just
very clear, uh, to the task
force that our intention is that
if someone were to achieve their
GED, but you know, our New
Mexican, um, they should be
considered for this. And again,
allowing the task force to, you
know, provide any more
clarification is needed.
So Mr. Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, that means that
both of those um are in
agreement either they can
graduate from high school, they
can receive a GED, Mr. Chair
Representative, yes, that's
correct. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, the other thing is you
direct the task force to provide
additional guidance on
eligibility requirements.
beneficiaries, including
clarifications on residency
requirements and processes
across state agencies, you
clarify that for me. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative for that
question. Um, I found in the
past that we've done
legislation, oftentimes what is
available to TRD, they can't
just utilize that in workforce
solutions or DFA. There's very
strict guidelines and laws, um,
that guide that exchange of
information. In addition, when
you're talking about um saying
that a child is residing here,
continuously whatever.
that looks like, um, access to
that information varies, right?
So, um, a foster child's access
to, um, their, their, their,
their personal records can may
be difficult. And so really
providing again that
clarification, um, what, what,
uh, departments and agencies
need to be communicating, and
again, what materials will be
required to to show that these
people meet those requirements.
OK, Mr. Chair, um,
OK, so where we are today is
this is the new amendment in the
previous amendment that I was
starting with is, are those
amendments still included in
your bill, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair
and Representative, yes, those
were adopted, I believe, um, and
then this, this is being
discussed that's, that was my
question. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you very much,
Luhan. Um, next, we're gonna go
to Representative Garrett, then
represent Duncan, then Brown.
OK. Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Representative, I'm sorry to be
picky back on the high school
thing.
Because when it says this is
lines 9 and 10, page 2.
The purpose of the fund is to
assist beneficiaries who obtain
a high school equivalency
credential, there's an
implication that is for people
that did not graduate
traditionally from high school.
It's for people that dropped out
and did it, so I would just
suggest keeping who graduate
from high school or obtain a
high school equivalency
credential, just somebody might
say, well, it's not meant for
people that did the traditional
path, just my personal reading.
And I wouldn't want someone to
be left out because someone
strictly interpreted it. Thank
you.
Thank you.
OK, next we're gonna go to
Representative Duncan, then
represent Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm gonna
harp on that a little bit more,
um, Mr. Chair and Representative
on the uh high school graduation
versus the GED.
Are we actually, Mr. Chair and
Representative, are we actually
trying to um
What's the right word I'm trying
to think of here? We're trying
to to um
Reward
Good behavior?
Or reward bad behavior or just
reward anybody that's born.
Yeah, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. This
is intended for all New
Mexicans. And so again, you
know, from that perspective, and
it, and that makes it different
than what we've seen in other
states, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, other states
specified for Medicaid
recipients or it's for other,
you know, specifics. As we know
in New Mexico, um, a lot of
folks don't necessarily have
generational wealth per se, but
a lot of folks are, are coming
from, uh, building paycheck to
paycheck but pretty middle or
even upper class. The objective
here
is to ensure that when those
kids get out, you know, or or
facing the the the real world,
all kids in New Mexico have an
opportunity to um
Reach for goals that will make
our state thrive overall. So
really this in my, from my
perspective, and I believe, I, I
think we would agree on this, is
a benefit to the state that if
everyone has access to, um,
funds that are specifically for
education, investment in a small
business, investment in a home,
etc. these that we've laid out
here that um that benefits the
state and it benefits everyone.
So I would say it's across the
board, not necessarily merit or
meredith or not.
Mr. Chair and thank you for that
representative.
Um
I, I guess I have a hard time
wanting to to do this, number
one,
but
I, I went to high school with
some guys that just partied
hardy all the time. Didn't worry
about their grades. Uh, I've, I,
I've known him after, afterwards
for the next 25, 35 years, still
the same way in life as well.
Tell me why I would want to pay
someone just because they were
born.
And they goofed off 18 years,
and now they have have an
opportunity to get a check just
because they were born.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representatives. So I think
there, there's two pieces to
that. Um, how I behaved when I
was 18 isn't necessarily the
same as how I behave now that
I'm, you know, nearly 40 or how
or how I behaved in a separate
time. Leading up as a child is a
very different thing. And the
second piece of that is that
this is very specific. this is
for someone who's investing in
their education, their housing,
entrepreneurship, retirement, or
investment opportunities. This
is not for individuals
carelessly throwing their money
on the latest sports car or
carelessly throwing their money
at something that, that, um
Doesn't, doesn't invest in their
future. So that in and of itself
makes it different. And, um, in
a lot of ways, I think of how we
have as a nation something like
Social Security that ensures
that everyone has something to
survive on, and that makes it so
that, you know, pre-Social
Security, there were, you know,
elders that were, that were
dying in the streets because we
didn't have any name for this in
a similar way, I believe that
this will ensure that students
will have confidence confidence
to invest in their future, um,
and, and make bold decisions
that that they know, right?
They.
know they have this one
opportunity to make good. And so
I believe that's why we should
invest in anyone who's willing
to invest in education, housing,
entrepreneurship or uh or or
investment. All right,
Mr. Sharon and Representative, I
hope you're right.
I sincerely do, but I take that
bet.
I take that bet. I would rather
pay someone who actually
graduated from high school
because that that individual
actually showed a little
initiative.
As opposed to somebody who was
just born.
Um, and that's, I guess that's
the crux. It's easy to help my
kids when they're helping
themselves.
And if an individual hasn't
helped themselves for 18 years,
yes, they can change, but at
some point in time, that
individual's got to sit on a
chair, it's got to pull up his
bootstraps by himself.
And say I gotta change.
I've got a change in huge way if
I'm going to get married, if I'm
gonna have family.
If I'm gonna do all of those
things.
So, with this money just be
specifically Mr. Chair and
representative for buying a
house or renting an apartment,
Mister Chair Representative,
this is for uh for purchasing a
home. Again, entrepreneurship,
educational investments,
retirement or other investment
opportunities. What, what I will
say, well, I'll I'll get that,
that is for those specifically
to buy a house.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I hope,
uh, I hope these individuals
don't use their money to go out
and open a pot shop.
Thank you, thank you very much
for representing Duncan. Uh,
we'll go next to Representative
Brown and then represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman Rever of
Serato.
Um, hm, I, you know, I, I have
some reservations about this
bill, the whole concept.
At first glance, it sounds
really good.
But
I, you know, and maybe it will
incentivize.
Some parents to have their
children see life and all that,
and I think that's a good thing,
but
Um, I, I think there's a lot
here that that I think needs to
be looked at again, and I, I
won't go through the details on
this first comment, but
I think I would recommend you go
over at some point the excuse
me, amendment.
And make sure it's tracking with
the bill. There are a couple of
places there, 11 was mentioned
already, Mr. Chair, about the,
um, is it a high school degree
or a high school equivalency.
Uh, so there are a couple of
places where I don't think we
caught the change. I could be
wrong about that. I'm just
trying to blitz through this
bill.
Excuse me, um,
So, Mr. Chair and
representative, so it says here
without a guarantee. In other
words, it's not a property
interest.
I think Mr. Chair representative
that's important language, but I
have a feeling it's gonna be the
grounds for some litigation.
Even though it says this,
because some people will say,
well, OK, so I stayed in New
Mexico, um, I've taken this
literacy course, um, and, you
know, and I have this
credential, and I just think uh
that might end up being a point
of contention. I wanted to ask
you, Mr. Chair Representative,
about these eligibility
requirements, it says,
Continuously had a primary
residence in New Mexico since
birth.
And I'm thinking of the very
common.
Really, truly common situation
where parents divorce one, say
one parent moves to Texas, one
stays in New Mexico, and the
child uh spends time in both
locations. So what would happen
in the case of that situation,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you representative. Um,
those were concerns that I felt
that the committee had had
brought up essentially part
partially last time as well,
which is why in. 7 of the
amendment, we say that
clarification on residency
requirements in particular, um,
for, for that exact reason.
that if there's a divorce and
that separates their time, um,
you know, what that would look
like.
Yeah, I, I think, um, Mr. Chair,
we've got really a
Uh, kind of a
A thin framework here for what
this will end up looking like if
it goes through, and then I
guess my, my other comment, Mr.
Chair, is
I would rather we take the $7000
or whatever it ends up being,
and make sure that
Our children, our students leave
school being able to read and
write and do the basic skills
because that's how you prepare
for life.
For success
And um this.
check is sort of like a
It's like a carrot on a stick in
a way, and again, some good
things can come from that, but
I'd rather we invest this money
and it will end up being
considerable amount.
And making sure our students are
prepared for life, and that's
not just basic skills, but I
would also include financial
literacy, and I do like that
part of the amendment. So, Mr.
Chair, I guess that's kind of
where I stand on the bill. Thank
you. Thank you very much,
Representative Brown, uh, next
to Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Madam
presenters, I just want, I have
a couple of clarifying questions
if I may, with respect to the
financial literacy requirement.
Uh, it says approved by the
department and I'm uh my
question to you is that means
that it doesn't have to be
completed while they're in
school, but it has to be
completed before the money is
distributed.
Mr. Chair and representative, I
believe that is the, yes, that
is the intent that I that I
have, yes. OK, because I met a
Mr. Chair and presenters, I just
wanted to make sure because
credit unions have uh incredible
great financial literacy course
that they offered to their
members so that would qualify.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I, I would agree
and I, I believe it also goes
back to uh Representative
Duncan's point as well that you
have somebody who may have not
taken financial literacy in high
school, maybe they, they weren't
that focused, but when they come
around to it.
And they become focused, they
decide to take these steps to
improve themselves that that
they can take those steps, um,
you know, before they're able
to, uh, utilize this fund. All
right, and just one more
clarifying question, Mr. Taylor
and presenters. So with respect
to the, the money that's given
to the students after they
graduate, um, MFA also had a
similar program that they would
make available to first time
home buyers without all the
other uh stipulations that you
have in your bill and uh but
they required that they live in
the home for a certain.
period of time. Is that a
requirement in this, Mr. Chair,
uh, Madam Presenters. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. At this time,
that is not included as one of
the requirements for what home
they buy. However, because
they're expected to live in New
Mexico for a certain amount of
time or continuously, um, that I
believe that.
I believe that it's the intent
that they are that they're
familiar with New Mexico in
general, but not necessarily
with a particular home. All
right, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Great, thank you uh
very much from Sam Henan. Next,
we're gonna go to Vice Chair
Dixon.
Oh, sorry, uh, we'll go to
represent Pettigrew and then
vice chair.
Represented group, please.
Thank you, Chairman. Uh, thank
you, Representatives. Thank you
expert for being here. I'm
Trying to wrap my head around
this.
Chairman and Representative.
Your new material in your
amendment.
Set some interesting boundaries
on it.
One of which assumes that 18
years from January 1st of 2025.
Financial literacy will be
something that's taught in our
high schools or schools.
And how would you address
The change of that.
Over time, if 18 years and 2043,
um, that's no longer a
requirement.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative. That's why we
lay it out here because it laws
do change, especially around
education and what is a priority
for our students. Um, as I
mentioned with um Representative
Herndon, the, uh, they would be
able to get a financial literacy
course through a credit union or
some other opportunity to make
sure that they're able to
fulfill that opportunity or that
that um that that requirement, I
should say, to receive this
opportunity. At this time, we
know that financial literacy is
required in New Mexico, but.
I can't predict that in 18 years
it will be as well.
The chairman representative, is
it safe to assume that you
expect the statutes.
If this law were to be
chaptered.
The Statues would could
potentially change dramatically
between 2025, January 1st, 2025,
and the first potential payout
of January 1st.
2043.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh, I,
I agree that statutes will
definitely change. It should
this become, you know, be
chaptered and be made into
statute. I don't anticipate that
this would change dramatically.
I do believe that the
clarifications provided by the
task force may require us to,
you know, provide again in
statute some more parameters,
but again, um, that's again,
that's where we have the task
force to do it very publicly in
that sense. I don't believe the
goal is, nor do I anticipate
that should this become statute.
Constantly changing.
Mr. Cherry's representative,
thank you for your presentation.
I'll hold the rest for the floor
if it gets there.
Great, OK, uh, thank you San
Pedro. OK, we're still on the
amendment, uh, OK, uh, I think
those are the questions on the
amendment we've got vice chair
and we may have other questions
on the bill. Uh, I'll go now,
um, I'll ask for a motion to
adopt, uh, HAFC Amendment 2 to
House Bill 7.
OK, it's been moved, seconded by
Representative Garrett. This is
only on the amendment, any
opposition to adopting the
amendment.
OK, please show uh
representative Pettigrew in
opposition on the adoption and
the adoption of the amendment,
OK.
The amendments adopted. OK, uh,
now, uh, we're back on the, uh,
twice amended bill, we're gonna
go to uh representative
Hernandez for questions on the
bill.
That was the chairman, thank
you, um.
Uh, representative and your
expert, uh, I'm hearing a lot
about financial literacy, uh
which I'm really glad is
incorporated in this bill, Mr.
Chairman. I learned a lesson
when opening up a bank account
for my campaign. I was told I
had to create a EIN, get, get an
EIN number.
And Mr. Chairman, I was never
taught what uh EIN number was,
and I ended up Googling it, Mr.
Chairman, I ended up, um.
Purchasing an EIN number through
a third party, and I didn't
know, Mr. Chairman, that, that
you can get these for free, Mr.
Chairman, uh, are these the
types of financial literacy that
we're gonna be teaching, uh, in,
in, in this concept, Mr.
Chairman, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative,
especially for that question.
Um, I believe so. Yes, the the
the objective here is to make
sure that people understand how
to responsibly use their money,
um, pay off your credit card,
pay off your credit card every
time, you know, you, you make.
purchase you're not earning
interest. Um, you know, uh,
you're just kind of these, these
principles here as well. I, I,
I'll hand it to my expert as
well, but I think the incentive
is to or the, the approach that
we're trying to do is to make
sure that people understand
what, you know, the basics of,
of finance, which a lot of times
isn't necessarily passed down,
I'll hand it down to my to my
expert. Thank you, thank you,
Mr. Chair Representative. So
financial literacy can include
concepts such as, um, budgeting,
saving, investing, and managing
debt. And then the financial
capability.
component is the ability for the
individual to manage their
finances in a way that aligns
with their values and
self-interests, so allowing them
to make that choice on how to
utilize these funds on, um, the
decision between education, home
ownership, or entrepreneurship.
It was term I don't want nobody
to make the problems I made.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you very much, uh,
Representative. OK, um, uh, vice
chair.
Did you
I just wanted to make the
motion. OK, great. uh,
Representative Silva and any
other questions?
Represent Silva.
Thank you, Chair. Uh, thank you,
Representative for the bill. Um,
I just want to name like
governments give and restrict
opportunity, whether we like it
or not.
Um, we do, uh, as a state
entities and
There are programs that help
people get their high school
diploma like my parents who had
me when they were 17. There was
a program in the high school
that helped them finish.
The high school and get their
diploma. So that's why they
don't have GEDs, and it's not
cause they worked less or were
lazy, um, they had me. And so,
uh, and so they were still able
to get their high school
diploma, and that was a
state-sponsored opportunity for
my for my parents. Same with
food stamps, uh, now we call
snap, but food stamps helped get
my family um across, you know,
by the end of the month, uh,
when work
requirements kicked in. My mom
had to stop going to school so
that she could go to work. And
so again, opportunities either
restrict or create opportunity
or adversity, um, and I think
something like this, uh, in
particular, is life changing for
a child and for a family,
whether they were born on first
base or on 3rd base. And so I'm
really glad to see this bill.
Um, we're not self-made
creatures. Um, I, you know, I
like to think that I am
sometimes, but we're not. I'm,
I'm a product of all the
opportunities and all the
adversity that has been placed
in front of me. And so I'm
really proud that the state of
New Mexico is creating and
carving out additional op
opportunity um for all of our
new Mexican kids, so thank you,
thank you, chair. OK, thank you.
OK, uh, Representative Serrato,
anything to add thank you to the
committee for really good
questions and thank you for
coming back before us. Uh,
anything to add before we go for
the motion.
No, I appreciate the discussion
that everyone's had and and the
input it truly was shaped by
this committee as well. So thank
you. OK, thank you. OK, to the
vice chair, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I would
move the committee adopt House
Bill 7 as twice amended.
OK, it's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, sent in by
Representative Silva. Can we go
ahead and call the roll on that,
please?
Representative Baca.
Representative Brown. No.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Doo.
Representative Duncan. No.
Representative Garrett.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Herndon.
Yes.
Representative Herrera,
Representative Little, yes.
Representative Lujan,
Representative Pettigrew,
Representative Sanchez.
representative Sariana.
Representative Silva, yes.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Chairman.
15.
OK, we have a due pass. We'll
get the vote right out, uh, and
representative, thank you very
much Representative.
Thank you, Speaker, uh, and
again, thanks to the committee
for great questions. Do we have
that final vote? Yes, the final
vote is 9 in the affirmative,
and 5.
In the negative. OK, great. Uh.
We have a DuP pass there and
House 7 is twice amended. Thank
you, Representative Vincent for
doing House Bill 336.
Excellent. Go ahead, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
committee.
I am going to be presenting uh
House Bill 3364
Uh, Alan Martinez represented
Martinez.
And what this bill does, and
then I'll pass it on to my, to
my experts and let them
introduce themselves, uh, what
this bill does, it's relating to
public employees, expanding the
definition of peace officer to
allow retired members that are
employed.
By the state and who have peace
officer powers to return to work
under certain conditions.
And then I'll, I'll turn it over
to my expert to introduce
herself.
Good afternoon, um, Mr. Chair,
committee members, I'm the
executive director for the New
Mexico Livestock Board. My name
is Belinda Garland. So, uh, we
actually tried to hire a retired
peace officer this past summer
and um after reviewing the bill
that was passed last year during
the session, we found that we
were not qualified to hire a
retired peace officer. So I'll
be honest, we're feeling a
little left out here, so, um.
We would like to ask you to
include not only ourselves, but
other small agencies around the
state, um, as a very wise man
stated to me the other day,
never discount the miles. I
think it's very, very important
that some of our experienced law
enforcement officers that have
been very successful in their
careers, lead the new people
coming forward. And so we, um,
respectfully ask that you
support this bill. Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much, Miss
Scarlet.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
members, uh, Greg Trejo,
executive director of uh PERA,
uh, I want to say the board, um,
is neutral on this bill, um, but
it does have all the uh
characteristics that we look for
to make sure it does not harm
the fund, uh, the legislation
that was passed last year was
largely supported by the
Association of Counties, um, so,
yeah, there's some groups got
left out. This is one of them
and.
Happy to answer any questions.
Great. OK, thank you for being
here. Um, OK. Uh, is there
anybody who wishes to make
comment on House Bill 336.
OK. I don't see anybody, anybody
online?
OK, I don't see anybody there.
Uh, any questions from the
committee?
OK,
go to motion, uh, motion. Oh, we
have a question from the ranking
member for the motion, but first
we'll go to representative
Garrett. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for presenting this.
Just a quick question on page 3,
section 3.
Um, except as provided in
subsection F of this section,
retired members shall not become
a member and shall not accrue
service credit, and the retired
member and that person's
subsequent affiliated public
employer shall not make
contributions. So in this bill,
when they're hired by another
agency, neither that employer or
that person needs to make, um,
Contributions, but they will
also not receive their pension.
Am I understanding that
correctly?
Mr. Chair and Representative
Garrick, uh, so they will have
to the employee and the employer
will have to make non-refundable
contributions, and they will not
be accruing any additional
benefit.
OK.
OK, so that's in the other
section and subsection F.
OK, thank you for that
clarification.
Great. Thank you very much, uh.
OK, we'll go to the ranking
member.
Mr. Chairman, I move a do I
wanted to clarification, Mr.
Chair, if you don't mind, no,
not at all.
So her question was, uh, Mr.
Chair, representatives, uh,
whether or not the person would
still be drawing both their PERA
and their salary, and I didn't
hear that answer.
Apologies, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Representative Herndon. But yes,
so these members would be
getting their pension as well as
a salary plus making the
non-refundable contributions
while not increasing their
pension benefit during that
time.
All right, thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr.
Great. Thank you very much.
OK, uh, seeing no further
questions, we'll go to the
ranking member.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
I move a do pass on House Bill
336.
OK, it's been uh moved by
ranking member Chatfield sang
byent Brown and Orson Sanchez,
any opposition to that motion?
See none.
Represent Vincent continues his
unbeaten streak.
Thank you and thank you Saint
Vincent for stepping in. Thank
you very much.
Um
OK, uh, and thank you. I see
Chair de la Cruz here. Uh, come
on up for House Bill 444.
Please go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, uh, HB 444 is
an effort to modernize an
outdated system for running
athletic commission and Mr.
Chairman, I'm hoping that my
My expert witness and primary
author of the bill shows up at
any second. He did text me just
a minute ago, but I think we can
move forward with uh time for
question.
OK, great. Uh, we've got a, a
gentleman behind.
Um,
OK, let's, let's do this. We'll
go to um anybody here who wishes
to make comment on House Bill
444, please come on up.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
committee members. I'm Melissa
Salazar, and I serve as the
director of boards and
commissions at the regulation
and licensing department.
The boarding commission division
supports Bill 444, House Bill
444, and is prepared to take on
the mandate contained in House
Bill 444 without the additional
employees, which will eliminate
the need for an appropriation
for the additional employees as
the board and commission
division is already managing a
significant portion of the work
with the staffing that we
currently have.
Great, thank you very much.
OK, uh, welcome to Senator
Maestas. It's great to see you
here.
Uh, we're in public comment, um,
is there anybody online who
wishes to make comment on House
Bill 444.
OK, see now, we're gonna go
first represent vaca, then the
representative Sanchez for
questions from Sam Barker. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman and thank you
for bringing this forward. So,
Mr. Chairman and uh Senator and
Representative, what sports is
this targeted for? What
specifically?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Baca, so it's
defined in statute as unarmed
combat.
So we're talking about uh
primarily boxing, MMA
kickboxing, and sports
entertainment wrestling.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So this
commission would have oversight
of all events in New Mexico. Is
that correct, Mr. Chairman and
Uh, Representative Senator, Mr.
Chairman, Representative, yes.
In fact, the commission
currently has oversight. This is
updating language within uh the
actual uh statute.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for this. Do we know
how many
Events do we have currently in
New Mexico.
That fall into one of those
categories, Mr. Chairman.
And Mr. Chairman, if you don't
have that number, then I'm, I'm
fine with that. I just wanted to
To, to really uh see kind of the
scope of it, so.
Um, Mr. Chairman Representative,
so on page 15 of your bill.
Section B
Uh, it says this section does
not apply to any sports
entertainment wrestler who
appears not to be competing,
honestly, or in the best of the
wrestler skill and ability. So
Mr. Chairman, is that like what
I used to watch at the Civic
Auditorium, Ricky Romero for
professional.
Is that, is that really what
that Representative Ricky Romero
beat the destroyer that day and
and I'm sticking to that, but
um, but you broke a lot of
hearts sometimes uh sports
entertainment wrestlers are not.
Trying their best to win. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman and thank you.
I just have two more
closed-ended questions.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Senator, we talked about with
this commission also be
sanctioning events, as we talk
about oversight, would they be
sanctioning events throughout
the state.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Rosanaka. They, they currently
do, and they will, uh, uh, we're
transferring a lot of the
responsibilities from the
volunteer board to the
department, um, but I think as a
result of this bill, MMA and
boxing will, will reach a higher
level here in New Mexico, and
Representative Senator, I, I
agree, you know, as we talked
about it said many times that
any event or any activity that
brings family and communities
together, I support 100%. I did
have one question as far as Mr.
Chairman and on page.
Uh, 19.
Um, when it says the commission
self declared a state champion
professional boxer in each
weight class, um.
So mister, there were some, some
of the language there, so Mr.
Chairman.
And representative. Could that
also cross over to like these
club boxers that are still maybe
in.
High school.
So it, it really doesn't do much
related to amateur, uh, but the
reason that you want to have
state champions and rankings
specifically is because any time
that there is a bout or fight
held in New Mexico, those
fighters and those promoters
want to know that it helps them
reach a certain level of ranking
within the nation.
Um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Senator, uh,
thank you. I look forward to
supporting your bill. Great.
Thank you for that, uh, members,
I wanna, uh, before going to
Sanchez, I apologize. We do have
a committee substitute, uh,
before us, which we, uh, we, we
want to adopt. Can you read the
231 number.
Chara de la Cruz.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is
231-763.1. OK, we've got that.
Can we have a motion in a second
to.
OK, great. Yeah, let's, we've
got a motion to adopt from
Representative Luhan, 2 from
Representative Sanchez, any
opposition to adopting this for
discussion,
saying no, we've adopted the
committee substitute
Representative Sanchez, please
Mr. Chair.
Uh, well, let me, yeah, we're,
we've, uh, um, when we're gonna
go back to the motion, I'll go
with you, uh, Representative
Duncan, and then, uh,
Uh, Brown, did you have a
question as well
Great. OK, we've got a list
going. We're gonna start with
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, sir. Um,
Nacho libre will not be.
Affected by this bill, correct?
Mr. Chairman, it, it would not,
but I do want to add something.
There is a specific note in the
the bill that talks about real
competitive wrestling, and the
reason that we added that is
there is historically been off
and on, professional leagues
that are real wrestling, not,
not entertainment wrestling. And
so while there isn't in one,
group that's doing that at this
moment, it could happen next
year, year after.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative, you passed a
bill last year to do with this,
and is this just finalizing that
or or or whatever you're doing,
can you explain that, please?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So what
happens is the previous board
was sunsetting. We need to keep
it going, so we did that. Uh,
there were some minor changes,
but we, we told everybody on
both sides of the house that we
would be back this year with
real rules.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative.
I
Thank you very much for
representing Duncan. Uh, next,
we have Representative Garrett
and Representative Herndon.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Um, where, who has the authority
of the New Mexico Athletic
Commission now.
Uh, what are we transferring it
from to RLD. They are currently
under RLD, but there are RLD
doesn't have any real direct
oversight of them, and this is
going to change that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, because
then on the on the FIR on page.
3
Second paragraph.
Um, it says, you know, it grants
the athletic commission
rulemaking authority, but
requires the RLD to oversee
regulatory changes which could
lead to some issues.
Um, so I just wondered about
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Representative Greg Garrett,
the, the crux of this bill is to
transfer a lot of the duties
from the volunteer commission to
RLD to no disrespect to the
commission, but to
professionalize it and so that
out of state folks don't.
Don't, uh, freak out. Um, so
literally over time, the
commission and its wonderful
leadership have created all
these rules. They vote to give
people licenses. It's very
onerous on the promoters and the
fighters and the references and
stuff like that, so now they'll
just uh simply fill out a form,
RLD will process it so.
Um, so a lot of those, uh,
bureaucratic governmental
functions will go to the
government RLD and the oversight
and leadership will remain with
the commission.
Thank you for that explanation
and, and then along with that,
Um,
All the professional athletic
competition acts are on paper,
so the estimate is $40,000 to
transfer that to RLD's existing
uh New Mexico flu electronic
system, is that correct?
This chair remember
the FIR that was prepared there
was about updating the, the
regulation of licensing
departments NM plus electronic
licensing system. It will
require some updates to be made
to that system as we make these
changes, but it is an existing
system and that's just the cost
of upgrading the software
basically. Thank you, and it was
a misspell it was should be
plus, they wrote flu
Thank you. That's my questions.
Excellent. Thank you,
Representative Garrett
Representative Herndon and
Representative Brown. Thank you,
uh, Mr. Chair, and, uh,
presenters just for
clarification, so a few years
ago, uh, there were a group of
people who approached the
athletic commission regarding uh
sports and the way in which
women were not being treated
equally and receiving equal
access to the types of
competitions that are made here.
I don't know how you are
addressing that at all. Would
you please speak to that, Mr.
Chair, members of the chair, uh.
Representative, this particular
Bill doesn't address that
directly because much of this is
done by the promoters
themselves, uh.
The state is more of a segue uh
pass through for these
activities. We're hoping to get
more activities, uh, but some of
this is, is out of our control.
We're not trying to get into
what private businesses do on
that, in that capacity.
So Mr. Chair, uh, Mr.
Presenters, thank you for that
explanation, but that doesn't
address the issue of women being
treated fairly with respect to
these competitions and how
they've been promoted. Can you
please address that, Mr. Chair,
representatives. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman Representative Herndon,
the, the bill is
The bill is equal for all the
fighters, I think as the market
develops, if you're a smart
promoter, you'll put 1 or 2
female fights on the card.
And that's kind of happening
organically. There's a lot of
great female fighters, boxers,
kickboxers, two women on the
commission right now or former
fighters, um, so that is
changing, uh, in a wonderful
way, but we didn't statutorily
require.
You know, every other fight to
be a female fight.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you very much,
Representative Herndon, uh,
Representative Brown.
Mr. Chair, representative
center, this is not my
bailiwick, OK? Um.
But I do have a few questions
about the bill. So it says that
the commission shall
Advised the department, the
legislature and the governor to
promote the growth of unarmed
combat sports in New Mexico.
Mr. Chair and and legislators, I
have visions of Governor Lujan
Grisham punching her way through
a paper wall to promote this
sport. Am I, is this what I'm
asking is what is this going to
look like?
And we talked about the
governor, the legislature, the
department.
What did they do, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um,
Representative Brown, so the
sunset provision on all these
little agencies, as you know,
allow us to review them every 5
years or so.
When we did the sunset provision
last year, we realized the
statue was 40 years old and that
there was a lot of barriers to
entry for for promoters and
stuff. So that's why we're
modernizing the statute, um, but
the commission will be active in
that they can't promote or they
can't fight, they they don't
have any economic interest, but
they can be, uh, they can build
that bridge between the
commission and the legislature,
the commission and the governor
that.
That has been kind of distant in
years past, like we haven't done
this, we haven't adjusted this,
uh.
The statute and gosh over 45
years, so it'll build that
bridge between the commissioners
and and the appropriators and
how to build this industry once
Albuquerque has a modern indoor
arena, like the, like a real
city, uh, I think that this
sport will take off.
Mr. Chair and Senator, what if?
The governor doesn't want to do
this.
I
It just
Maybe she does or maybe she
doesn't, I don't know, any
thoughts, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Representative Brown, this is a
private sector business. And
this is simply a way to regulate
the business in a more modern
professional way, uh, the
governor doesn't have the
authority to outlaw.
This
Part of the private sector.
So, so along with the rules that
make it fair that boxers have to
be the same weight and things of
that nature, headgear, all the
roles that, you know, we're
lowering the, the rounds from 15
to 12.
Uh
There's the regulations to make
it a fair fight, but fighting is
legal in the state of Mexico
and.
The governor can pay attention
on.
Thank you.
Excuse me.
Mr. Chairman, I, um, I'm also
looking at the part of the bill
that talks about physicians and
licenses that they can obtain
without a fee.
Um, it says here that um these
licenses would authorize them to
monitor and evaluate
participants and confer with the
referee when necessary, and I
think that's probably a really
good idea. It before that, what
did we have? Did we have
Positions on hand, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, I actually was
on the athletic commission.
prior to being here?
And what the commission did is
they actually selected a
physician.
And that position was in
attendance at all fights.
And and Williams. And so now
it's gonna just
branch it out more so it's not
just a person.
So I think it makes it a little
more fair.
And Mr. Chairman, I, I, I just
add one more thing. Thank you
very much. Also, the, the
commission itself will have a
physician on on the commission.
my final
question, Mr. Chair, and uh
Senator Representative, there's
a a new uh bit of language in
here. It says the commissioner's
present at a fight shall not
enter the technical zone, and
I'm just wondering why that's
there. Have we had a problem
with that in the past and, and
actually what is the technical
zone? Is it the cage? I guess
it's cages or um ring perhaps,
Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, that's a
great question. So the technical
zone is defined everything that
is just immediately outside of
the ring itself, previously.
uh commissioner sat along the
apron.
And would sometimes get involved
in decisions or with uh
disagreeing with what was
happening in there, that is not
appropriate. So you want them
outside of that area and only
the timekeepers, the judges are
allowed in this zone, and the
zone is imagine that the ring is
right in front of you, they sit
along this apron along the edge,
so commissioners will not be
there any longer.
Mr. Chair, I guess I need to get
a life. I'm missing out. Thank
you.
I think we're all getting a good
education uh here uh Brown, um,
we're going next to
Representative Dow and then
Representative Represent Do
please. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator
Representative. Are the
commissioners paid?
I'm just curious. Mr. Chairman,
Commissioner, no, they're not,
they are volunteers. There is
some per diem when they have to
go to a meeting, uh, but they're
not there. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and
you, that's a big commitment,
says there has to be one present
at every game. How many games
are there or matches?
Mr. Chairman,
uh, representative, it's, it's
really an act of love, like for
me being on the commission, I
love combat sports. I was in
combat as a professional
kickboxer, so if it was not a
chore, and I got to see the
fights free.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Senator.
Excellent. Thank you,
Representative. Next we have
Representative Ereta.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. This is
really above my pay grade too,
but I'm just gonna ask, what's
the catalyst for making this
happen. It's just not cause it
was a 5-year ending. I mean, I'm
assuming it's money, but I, I'm
just trying to find out.
Why do we want all of this to be
happening. Thank you, thank you,
Mr. Chairman, uh, Repent
Verrera, well, for one, we have
a state rep who's a former
commissioner, former fighter in
uh de la Cruz, when I looked at
the statute just as a lawyer, it
just read horribly and the the
sets were all wrong. When I
found out the commission was
literally voting to give people
licenses as opposed to this
software system.
That just seemed archaic to me
in talking to the promoters.
Um, they've shared their
concerns with regards to the
fights and there's a lot of
great promoters, a lot of great
fighters. We could be uh this
this industry, I think will
grow, and that was kind of the
precipice for us doing the
build, uh, last year we tweaked
the statute a little bit, this
year we.
Moving forward in a in a much
larger way, Mr. Chairman, if I
might add one other component.
If, if we get this going right,
it, it's an economic development
driver. There's a lot of money
for the state to make on grocery
receipts tax and for the rentals
of of of venues as well as
hotels. It's, it's an economic
development driver, if done
correctly, we can go from 30 to
100, there's a reason that Las
Vegas, Nevada, uh, New York,
other places tend to be more
hubs. We were over regulating
and micromanaging what was
happening from the
Athletic commission level. And
it became very subjective. This
takes much of the subjectivity
out of it and puts it more into
the hands of the professionals.
Sure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for those answers. So
Can you, what is the promoter
get paid? I mean, I, I'm, I'm
just curious when, when you
promote a boxer fighter. How,
how does that work, that they,
they take the if they win they
get a percentage. Is that how
that works? I don't even know.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Vera,
just kind of the economics, you
rent the venue.
You pay the fighters, you pay
the referees and the
timekeepers.
Uh, you pay for hotel rooms for
the fighters, things of that
nature, and you.
Get money off of tickets and
sponsorship, so let's say if you
rented the Colosseum.
And it costs $50,000 and you
sold 5000 tickets at $25.
Uh, you know, then you make a
quarter of a million and you.
You know, and you
Go, go from there. But if you do
TV, Mr. Chairman Rosen Vedra,
you can make a heck of a lot of
money. There's only been a UFC,
which is the major mixed martial
arts uh leagues has not been to
Albuquerque, has not been to
Mexico in over 12 years. Top
Rank came last year, but they
hadn't been there, they hadn't
been there 10 years prior to
that. We believe we could bring
national promotions as well as
the wonderful local promoters
and promote our fighters, we.
We have some of the best
fighters in the world, training
or born in New Mexico, and I
think this would be a wonderful
opportunity for them.
Well, thank you for that. I.
Learned a lot. Thanks, Mr.
Chair.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Uh, I don't see any other
questions. We'll go to ours for
the motion. Repent Baca for the
second, I'd move on.
Do not pass the House government
election in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill 44 in a due pass for HABFC
Committee substitute for House
Bill 444.
Mr. Chairman, I second.
Uh, there's a motion and a
second for the House Corporation
Finance Committee substitute for
Hospital 444. Any opposition to
that?
I know see it
we'll, we'll show, uh please
show Representative Fettigrew in
opposition, there will be no.
No violence here.
Although
we know house house uh.
No jokes, just thank you all
very much, uh, committee, thanks
for a wide ranging meeting
and a lot of work. We're
adjourned for today, uh, and
