Mr Joseph Simon from the
legislative finance committee Mr
chair minor from the department
of finance administration
this is informational presented
that we will not be taking
action today members this is
informational an opportunity to
hear to learn if and as our
questions we want to raise and
we won't go too deeply into it
finally after we conclude and go
through on the staff side we do
want to as we've been doing
reserve about twenty minutes for
public comment and to make sure
that again we're we're doing
this a little earlier we want to
do this publicly and have a full
sort of a deep dive and with
that I think we can turn it over
to Mr justice Simon to orientis
in our packets and take us
through.
Yes good morning Mr chairman
members of the committee so
before you you should have a
packet that looks like this the
big sheet that has forty seven
pages of special supplemental
and efficiency our
recommendations from LFC and at
the executive so just before we
dive into this in more detail if
you just turn to the very back
the very last page.
Of the.
Your packet you can see totals.
So the LFC recommendation
includes a total of two point
seven billion dollars that's two
point four billion two point
five billion from the general
fund and an additional two
hundred fifty five million and
other funds whether federal
funds other state funds or or
other things that includes one
point three seven in fund
transfers two different funds to
the is to set aside dollars that
can be used for a more
sustainable revenue source that
it also includes eight hundred
and eighty five million dollars
in general fund recommendations
for special appropriations
thirty six minutes at point five
million for supplemental
appropriations and hundred
ninety seven million for special
transportation appropriations
essentially general fund
projects for the department of
transportation.
and I just with that very brief
overview of the total out Mr
chairman I'll just a as Dr minor
if he has any on introductory
comments real quick on.
Thank you joy good morning Mr
chairman members of the
committee that I chair minor on
the W. state budget director and
the here to discuss the
nonrecurring appropriations with
you we have today also with us
from DFA with us in the Martinez
state budget director New Mexico
Misia's very veterans more and
Simon Miller and the rest of
Representative Representative is
for many state agencies here
answering questions per the
committee's discretion so
just a few opening notes here
the executive recommendation for
nonrecurring general fund
appropriates approximately two
billion dollars taking in the
construction with the executive
recurring general fund
recommendation and other
allocations such as one billion
dollars for tax rebates concur
with Senate bill ten this
maintains FY twenty four in the
reserves at thirty four point
nine percent I like to note that
some executive nonrecurring
appropriations that you see on
the sheets are identical to
funding contained in legislation
that's currently working through
the legislature these include
seventy five million for the
land of enchantment conservation
funds those are established by
Senate bill nine and two hundred
million for the rural health
care delivery fund established
by Senate bill seven and these
funds establish permanent
specific and long term uses of
for the current general fund
surplus the executive also
recommends to use the remaining
one hundred forty million
dollars in our for funding and
three important areas and that's
twenty five million dollars for
rental assistance and eviction
prevention a hundred and twelve
point five million dollars for
various water projects and two
point five million dollars for
broadband administration and
you'll see those appropriations
as we work our way through the
sheet one final note there are
certain cases where executive in
LFC recommended language for
appropriations differ so in
general you'll be seeing in the
language column on your sheet
you'll be seeing the LFC
recommended language but there
are a job we did put.
In some substantive differences
in language over here on the on
the far right column where the
executive and the LESC language
deferred a little bit for the
same appropriation so do I think
Joey for doing that I know that
was no small amount of work but
also and if you would like to
see the executive language fully
for all appropriations you can
find them on table for that's on
pages fifty four three sixty
eight of the executive
recommendation document this
book here.
that concludes my opening
remarks thank you alternate Act
joy thank you writer Mr Simon
perhaps we can
Can you we give us a quick
summary of sort of the special
what special appropriations are
sort of these different sections
the special supplementals and
deficiencies focusing on special
yes certainly Mr chairman so
just a little bit about the
specials that that process so
the bulk of the agency budget
Representative a request to the
legislature and and executive
come in at the beginning of
September and so what happens is
LFC spends the fall looking at
all of those budget budget
requests to bring the agencies
before the committee and you
know scrutinizing those requests
in and identifying priorities
for the upcoming fiscal year
specials and supplemental
requests come in a little bit
later in the year and I'll just
note this year I I know I I
joked a little bit there forty
seven pages before you there
were a lot there were a
significant number of requests
in in the past year that in in
terms of dollar amount that was
roughly double what what you all
heard last year you know the
recommendation before you are
are pretty C. R. significant
normally you know we could be
looking at spent a special
scenario of.
Fifty two hundred million
normally that you know this the
specials in this recommendation
from LFC is eight hundred eighty
five million so just the just to
orientate you a little bit that
this is a very large amount
versus what you normally here
and
and part of the reason those
numbers are are usually shorter
is because of that
of all of the budget work that
you all do in the fall the
scrutiny scrutinizing those I
agency budget requests.
so
just.
Very briefly organizationally
section five the special
appropriations are generally is
sort of one time non recurring
items that agencies are
requesting section six the
supplemental and deficiencies
section those are for current
year or prior year shortfalls
that the bulk of that in this
particular these recommendations
are not seeing the executive
relates to issues that you all
have heard about with the the
state group benefits plan
and that's why that number is so
large this year section nine
includes the special
transportation appropriations at
that I talked about those
general fund infrastructure
problem projects generally of
the department of transportation
is funded with
state road fund revenue but in
recent years the legislature has
set aside general fund
additional general fund dollars
to make improvements to the
state's roads finally section
ten those are the funds
transfers not so those are
appropriations that's moving
money into specific funds for
specific purposes later.
Mr Abbey the only other point at
the revenue source for specials
supplementals roads is not a
requirement all this spending is
scored in FY twenty three
specials or for FY twenty three
and twenty four but because the
revenue source again is for
general fund recurring in FY
twenty three it is customary.
Other cardinal but the
guidelines to use it mostly for
nonrecurring round.
Thank you very much Mr thank you
Mr Senator.
And so Mr chairman with that we
can begin I don't know if you at
your preference Mr chairman if
you want members to ask
questions as we go through the
sheet or if you want to stick to
the and do everything I might be
able a bit much I think we're
thank you yeah we're we'll we'll
sort of work and feel our way
through members I think let's go
through start maybe a couple
maybe three pages pause and have
questions we don't want to skip
past questions that members have
but let's try to go at least two
hopefully three pages at a time.
Okay so with that Mr chairman
I'll just actually start with
the very first one very briefly
the LFC recommendation includes
one point two million to the to
LFC and the department of
finance and administration to
Fund a study of the state person
act in the state system of
classification and compensation
as you all have been hearing
throughout the agency budget
hearings there are a lot of
concerns related to the ability
of the state to recruit and
retain it staff in a competitive
manner.
and that with that I'll turn it
the first page over to Mister
money if you have anything thank
you join Mr chairman members the
committee on that first one as
you can see over there on the
difference column the executive
did recommend five hundred
thousand dollars to the state
personnel office for basically
the same purpose there as you
can see the first bulk of
probation on the first several
pages of your hand out are for
the judicial branch and my only
comment on those is that you can
see there at the bottom item
number ten the LFC recommended
four million dollars for come
back full cooperation to AOC for
technology and security
appropriations the executive
recommended funding for
specifically for basically every
specific information technology
and security request that was
received from district courts
and that's for a total cost of
approximately two point five
million and the executive just
takes this approach because it's
as sure as the course specific
needs are met you know what they
requested that the funds are
being used specifically for what
they were appropriated that's
all and I'll turn back to join.
So Mr Chairman on page two.
On line number fourteen you can
see the LFC recommendation
includes four million dollars to
the administrative office for
the courts to pilot universal
screening offer treatment courts
and district courts this was one
of the recommendations of the
at interim LFC criminal justice
work group and so many of the
recommendation I'm gonna be
speaking of today came from that
work during the interim in the
different subcommittees and LFC
I'll just also note Mr Chairman
online sixteen through page four
line plan.
thirty six.
All of those yeah executive
recommendation or rolled up into
a single appropriation at AOC
you know for for them to
distribute to the courts.
And did you have anything on
page four.
So Mister chairman turning your
attention to page I just I want
to briefly highlight line forty
six and forty nine.
So the between these two lines
there's a total of four million
dollars have to the
administrative office of the
district attorney's and have to
the office of the public
defender this is for the public
attorney workforce capacity fund
to try to
You know build some some
additional capacity into our
legal workforce.
Mr secretary can I stop you
there so we've members we've
gone through a couple of pages
and and it was a great that sort
of the bottom of page one.
Line number ten.
Where we saw a Mr Chairman and
Mr minors you explain sensually
LFC did a four million dollar
book appropriation to AOC for
technology Mr might as Mister
miner explained when we turn the
page over the page.
Two and three and and this is
written into sort of our
difference note on the right.
These are all of the.
Various techniques technology
requests that have come from
individual districts the biggest
difference here for us is from a
budget perspective is that
actually the LESC was one point
five million higher than the
executive in terms of the
overall
Investment for this area is that
accurate I yes Mr chairman
that's echo also you I would be
neglect to point out that this
also include security so you
know physical physical Security
Act assets as well thank you for
that and members as of oil we're
gonna be kind of turning pages
back and forth but thank you for
that and and these notes here on
the right the difference notes
are going to be helpful I'm sure
that that also know there for
this any other questions for
these first few pages.
Okay seeing then let's keep
going.
the term general no good to.
you Mr Deifik sure the twenty
that you're.
Representative Herndon go ahead
please.
Of this I want to make sure that
I'm understanding in terms of
what's appearing of the State
with the courts everything that
they ask for that wasn't
included on the LFC
recommendation is on the suits
that my assembly corrected not
thank you Representative turn
and
Their their requests for
specials that were that aren't
really included in the different
sheets that were briefly noted
but weren't have we gone over
those will be noted here but
and then as we look over to the
right we're going to see if the.
Executive has recommended those
if the LFC is recommended and to
what level and if there's any
any difference yes
Representative Montoya and
course Mr Simon just Mr Chairman
on that on that note for
Representative Representative I
actually asked the state a
similar question earlier these
are items that went through the
process during the interim that
were specials or one time or
whatever but items that were
brought up by
organization the the different
departments that we've heard
since the session began and they
identified things that were not
in there those will be addressed
potentially at a later time but
that's not what this is.
Is that correct
Yes there there's some there's
some elements of that but so
let's let's keep going this is
going to show us yeah let's keep
going okay.
Mr chair committee members I
will start on I'll go to page
six and discuss a couple
appropriation to the department
of finance and administration.
item number sixty two.
For a comprehensive language
support program six million
dollars recommended by the
executive this is part of the
that of housing it package that
was a Senator nonrecurring
appropriations that were
recommended by the executive and
then item number sixty four this
is for statewide food
initiatives executive recommends
little over twenty one million
dollars in general fund for this
program whereas the LFC as you
can see by the language there
the LFC recommend seven half
million dollars from our phone
as I have.
Yes so Mister chairman I'll just
note that that you know Dr minor
earlier referred to the use of
our profundidad one area where
the LFC REC uses that I also
know in addition to the seven
and a half million there's also
seven and a half million in on
the public school budget to
address to address public school
meal quality.
click over to the next page
Online sixty nine you can see
the LFC recommendation includes
additional forty million dollars
for regional recreation centers
and quality of of life requests
again this is one of the
probation to that get to the
hundred forty million of the
unused are money.
and we don't have a seventy yeah
I think so Mr Chairman committee
members under seventy right
below that this is a and other
are for an operator mediation
from the executive that's twenty
five million dollars for rental
assistance and eviction
prevention through fiscal year
twenty twenty five and that's
the the deadline for using our a
and then a couple below that you
see item number seventy two and
that's is that discussed earlier
that seventy five million
dollars earmarked for the land
of enchantment conservation
funds there were other
established by the Senate bill
nine this currently yeah in the
legislature.
And not just very quickly Mr
chairman before you turn the
page I did want to address a
couple of LFC recommendations
related to some of the capital
outlay issues that you all heard
this summer online seventy one
you can see five million dollars
for state and local matches
system for federal grants as
well as on line actually this is
on the previous page
Line sixty five eight million
dollars for cost overruns for
local capital outlay projects
finally also in this area online
number sixty eight the LFC
recommendation includes two
million dollars for the
operating costs of info
infrastructure planning and
development office and that's
contingent on passage of let
legislation creating that
office.
moving on to page eight of their
members any questions.
Representative.
All just Mr chair and enjoy what
legislation is that so you can
mark that.
Do for the infrastructure Office
of mine sixty eight.
Madam chair and Representative
sorry Mr Chairman representative
Garrett that is Senate bill one
ninety seven as I believe what
our staff is saying thank you.
Representative Lujan but why not
again so that was my number
sixty eight.
And can you.
Mr chair
One sixty five of cost overruns
capital outlay can you.
Is that it's.
So
that is thank you.
You're right here Representative
Lujan so that yeah you're right
line sixty five eight million
dollars for cost over runs for
local capital outlay projects
essentially allowing
local capital outlay projects
because of inflation and and
supply chain issues there's been
significant spikes in the cost
of those projects are thought to
thank you thank you
Representative Lujan
Representative dela Cruz.
Projects are we talking about I
mean.
Capital.
Doesn't include infrastructure.
I apologize Mr chairman I don't
know I don't have my mic on.
This represents a wide variety
of I'm just curious what it
entails.
This Kelly Cardwell Mr chair
members of the committee on
Kelly cars all in capital outlay
analyst LFC so last year the
legislature appropriated eight
million dollars for overruns for
state agency capital outlay
projects local projects which
are those projects in the
capital bill outside of the
statewide framework so
Legislature legislator and
executive discretionary spending
in the capitol bill have lacked
a mechanism to address this well
most of our under other funding
sources for public
infrastructure have had one so
this would be basically the
equivalent of the appropriation
for state agency projects which
went to DFA which budget
abolition kind of criteria for
administering applying
increasing those funds thank you
Mr thank you very much of the
day a group Representative
Pettigrew them services.
Thank you Mr chair.
I had a couple other ones but
the last statement chairman
makes me ask a different one
now.
Last year we appropriated eight
point five billion dollars.
How much of that money was as
been spent or and or authorize.
And then the follow up to that
is.
If I understood the the answer
just a second ago.
We lacked the ability to.
Manage some of those funds and
how we've been able to do that
for fifty five legislative
sessions up to this point in
time but fifty four and not.
As of the fifty fifty thank you
thank.
Mr chair representative
Pettigrew so
specifically lately cost
escalation has been a major
source of delay for projects
because of the supply chain
delays labor shortages and
basically steeply escalating
construction costs so projects
that might have intended to be
fully funding fully funded
suddenly more because of those
cost increases so the
Legislature provided this pot of
money for state agency projects
to address those issues and keep
the project moving also fund
sources like that you're more
fun so the water transport
colonias tribal infrastructure
fund Water transporting colonias
have set aside of I think five
percent of their annual costs of
money to address those issues
with our those projects local
capital outlay don't have any
mechanism like that that so this
was intended to address that
your question about the eight
million for state agency
projects it has not been spent
yet
the DFA capital outlay bureau
has done an initial award from
applications for those projects
and my understanding is they're
going through the process right
now of that was our money so
completing all the kind of
federal paperwork associated
with being able to start
spending those funds.
Question.
yeah okay Mr chair
representative Pettigrew C. were
also wondering about project
management bottlenecks.
So this is a another significant
issue for local capitol park
project one of the probation we
have to start addressing that is
on.
Winds sixty three.
So this would continue and new
grant program through DFA that
the legislature at the start of
last year with an appropriation
to provide grants to councils of
government technical assistance
providers to provide capacity
support for local governments
also the central infrastructure
office bill that is LESC
committee endorsed legislation
would be focused on building a
structure within state
government to provide more
project management support to
those communities that need it
on the back end of
appropriations thank you
chairman thank you for that
answer so.
The Dow was down I look this
line sixty three.
Nine six five.
Line seventy one.
I can.
Is there a reason why a each and
everyone of those could just be
put into one pool of money.
What we have three line items at
all deal in some version of the
same.
Problem.
Chairman Mr chair representative
it is so that the.
So that that specific intention
of the legislature with that
money is clear.
Thank you thank you chairman
thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew thank
you very much because of okay
members let's keep movin
Mr Simon and actually I'll at
the start on a project.
the jury Mister chair members
the committee item number
seventy three.
On page eight I see this is for
law enforcement recruitment
issues the a hundred million
dollars recommended by the
executive and the twenty six
million by the LFC I can speak
in terms of the executive
recommendation is the intent for
this hundred million dollars to
be distributed according to what
I believe to be substituted
language in Senate bill two
eighty eight it is currently in
the legislature if that
legislation is enacted then that
would go out for law enforcement
and for law enforcement support
an exhilarating decisions
statewide and also seventy six
items of the six on this page
technical assistance and
initiatives to local governments
offers up a zoning policies of
thirty million from the
executive and this is again a
part of the housing housing
package recommended by the
executive.
And I just go back to up to one
seventy three real quick Mr
chairman and and note the
language they are included in
the LFC recommendation to the
twenty six million includes no
more than five point two million
dollars in each fiscal year
between through twenty twenty
seven and I did there's
additional language they're
addressing some of the concerns
raised by LFC during the interim
on the previous appropriation
related to this.
I'm moving on to page nine.
Mr chairman I just very quickly
go to the bottom of that page
and see you see both LFC and
exec have recommendations for
grants under the crime reduction
act
and on for the LFC
recommendation online lined
eighty to thirty million dollars
for public private partnerships
enter thank yous Joey Mr chair
committee members I'm on page
nine the first one there item
seventy nine it's a hundred
million dollars recommended by
the executive to provide match
funding for federal
infrastructure projects and
that's just to help state
agencies hi you have some money
to go out there and get some all
that federal money matching
money that's that's available in
the next couple years and
actually can I just
thank you doctor minor for
knowing that.
A number of these are intended
to match federal funds that can
we an analyst can we please note
that and also as we follow up I
know there's been even some of
the that we've already passed
through in previous pages that
are meant to leverage
significant federal funds
briefly is there a way to sort
of quantify what those federal
funds might be as we work
through this process so Mister
Mr Chairman I unfortunately
don't have that information for
you but that's something we can
we can get with our analysts and
get you a list of New and
quantify that for you thank you
I think that's something that
that the committee would
appreciate and again not just
for particular line items but
for the areas that are intended
to match federal funds for us to
see essentially what that
returned might be in is ten that
could be any other questions.
State police and moving on to
page ten very quickly the LFC
recommendation includes several
different items for the
department of information
technology and the both the
broadband and cybersecurity area
you can see online number eighty
seven twenty five million in
general fund dollars for
broadband expansion coupled with
twenty five million on line
number eighty eight
from the connecting Mexico
funded for the office of
broadband access and expansion
in addition to that there's a
fifteen and a half million
online's eighty nine to ninety
one for cyber security a broken
up a little bit for statewide
for state agency activities
online ninety one school
districts on line ninety and a
higher education institutions
online eighty nine.
And this was this was a area
where
the LFC recommendation on the
broadband expansion activities
Mr chairman is you know include
sixteen point five million to
match federal broadband dollars.
yes thanks joy Mr chairman I
just add and committee members
the line eighty seven for
broadband you see the second
edition there is hundred forty
six million of that one hundred
thirty five million would be
used for federal matching in Mr
chair you're asking about that I
can tell you believe that is a
twenty five to seventy five
match right so the total with
all the federal funds would be
little over five hundred million
dollars.
Good Mr forget too far away from
page eight we go back to page
eight.
One seventy six.
Can we expendable but on that
descriptor that says to offer
technical assistance and
incentives from local
governments that update their
zoning policies to align with
federal preference what what
local governments are we talking
about.
Thank you Representative Cruz
and if there are if additional
folks from a agencies want to
add to or are yes answer please
feel free if you don't that's
okay.
thank you Mr chairman and
Representative accrues I believe
it would be basically any local
governments but we'd be happy to
get some more information on
that's that's a technical
question we have to have it gets
more information for you on that
thank you Mr chairman I I think
that's kind of important I I
understand that certainly for
smaller Manasseh municipalities
they might have of certain kinds
of businesses that would affect
this category but on the other
hand you have municipalities
like City of Albuquerque
Bernalillo county have very
robust zoning criterias and
processes Mr chairman so I would
like a little more information
thank you Mr thank you
Representative Cruz
Representative Garrett and
Representative yeah Mr chair
online eighty seven on page ten
here's the incredible
discrepancy between executive
and all of this hello FC a one
forty six versus twenty five.
I just want to note that we
really need to look at that
thank you for noted.
Representative Pettigrew please.
Thank you thank you chairman of.
I think I have an overall.
in question for both the
executive and for the LFC
Brandt.
Each of these requests chairman.
With the receipt of of the
numbers that you have and what
suggestions what's placed here.
All I just want to verify that.
Each one of these numbers has a
solid back up.
For the request and so if I'm
requesting one point two million
dollars I can tell you how I
want to spend that Fund
requesting.
A hundred million dollars I can
back up the justification I
could tell you where I'm wanting
to spend it over the next year
chairman.
Yes thank you Mr chair
representative pedigree I can
tell you that when these
requests are submitted
and a lack of choice said around
November first or so they go
into the budget system in the
agencies that Rick submit these
requests to submit a lot more
detail that you see on the
packet we do ask them to provide
you know rationale data the
backs of how are they going to
use this money and usually and
then also although these
appropriations generally are not
don't appear this way the J.
they do have to tell us break
out of your approximate break
out of the expenditure
categories like okay is this all
going to contracts or other
costs or this is on for person
things like that so there is
quite a bit more information
that the analysts and all the
executive in the LFC have have a
access to yet chairman I
understand that today we're
taking no action with respect to
that the intro just received I'd
like to see the documentation
received and justified from LFC
and exec for every line item for
every page on here.
I'd like to have that before we
go any before we do start taking
action that I'd appreciate the
presentations but based on the
answer I just received I
understand the third back up for
each and every request on here
and I'd like to have that back
up for everyone of thank you the
representative group
okay I don't see any other
questions let's continue on.
tourism.
So Mister chairman directing
your attention to page eleven
line one to the LFC
recommendation includes ten
million dollars for the tourism
department for marketing and
advertising activity
and the gentleman.
Note that the executives at
twenty million on that sheet of
these that if the U. joint it's
a it's a twenty million and Mr
chair that that at the executive
does not specify that twenty
million for all for fiscal year
twenty twenty four I generally
section five appropriations are
for the remainder of fiscal year
twenty twenty three which you
know by the bill is signed is
only a couple months and all of
a twenty four this one decided
to recommend specific to twenty
twenty four so that that that
whole pot is available in that
year.
I'm moving on down economic
development Mr chairman online
one of seven there's ten million
dollars in the LFC
recommendation for requests for
trails and outdoor
infrastructure.
And turning to the next page you
can see on
Where is line one ten so three
million dollars for for G. tip
and on line one hundred and
twelve ten million dollars for
Lida and thank you join Mr
chairman committee members I A.
C. those recommendations there
for J. tipping lead others are
nonrecurring amounts put into
those programs pretty much every
year some amount and you can see
the executive recommendation is
six million for J. tip and
thirty five million for Leah I
also want to call your touch the
item number one eleven
So this is not General Fund as
you can see and this is for
money that the EDD has received
to the Economic Development or
sorry to the energy transition
economic development assistance
fund so they have already it's
my understanding they already
receive that money however the
statutes that establish that
fund require legislative
appropriation for them to be
able to spend it for statutes
that for the purposes that are
outlined in the statute so
that's why they requested
authorization from from the
legislature to be able to spend
that five point nine million
dollars so that's why you see
that there.
And and just very quickly on
that item Mr chairman I believe
of the reason that item wasn't
in the LFC recommendation was
there was some we were looking
to work with the department to
get some more information on
that item and R. Annalise's been
been working with the department
that needed basically.
To see a plan on how that I how
that money is going to be spent
thank you very much.
so do you have anything on page
thirteen
Thanks to a Mr chairman I don't
committee members on page
thirteen item one seventeen
that's for two OSI in this is
again not general fund ninety
two million this from actually
I'm sorry I apologize can we go
back so on page twelve.
On.
Line one thirteen.
So I I appreciate the
clarification on line one twelve
we want to make sure that those
funds are available this year we
I think to points that have been
made we want to have clarity and
detail on what they're planning
to be used for online one
thirteen
This is non general fund revenue
is that correct Mr chair that's
correct that would be from the
regulation and licensing
departments boards and
commission funds basically I
think a consolidation of all the
fees and such that the boards
bring in okay they just write
it.
Moving forward if this is going
to reduce the the sort of the
hurdles for licensure for folks
seeking to to become license and
whatever profession is regulated
by our LD
it be great to know if that if
this will help hinder or doesn't
really affect that.
Representative huh.
I I.
And.
One I want.
There.
Of the fact that.
So maybe Mr Chairman
representative so Mr Abbey just
tell me there's a there's a
council that is supposed to you
know here applications of and
and make awards.
So Mr chairman and and
representative of the executive
recommendation includes you know
it's basically the veteran who
said you should you should
approve that for fiscal year the
remainder of fiscal year twenty
three and and twenty four so
that doesn't so Mister chair
representative Lujan if the
legislature did decide to
include this appropriation they
could it would be valid as soon
as the bill was signed and they
could start moving on it if if
if the all the provided the
statutory processes were
followed suit.
Thank thank you for that
clarification and for line one
thirteen to the five million bit
being.
Coming from a different again on
general fund is that.
It does is that the same case I
mean what what is the difference
there Mr chair replication thank
you Mr chair representative
Lujan that that's correct is
that given that this is the
agency's own funding as soon as
the bill is signed that
appropriation is valid and
assuming they can you're
basically show us the DFA that
they have the money their own
money to support this they can
go ahead and budget thank thank
you very much please continue.
So did you.
Third page thirteen if we do
that yes all of real I think
with let's let's do this real
quick so Mr chairman committee
members page thirteen I one
seventeen I just want to point
out that some health care
affordability fund so here you
see that the executive
recommendation ninety two
million
and and as you saw the those who
were here for the OSI's Agency
hearing the the exit or the
sorry the LESC put that in there
recurring budget so that's why I
don't see anything recommended
there it's only.
I yes thank you thank you for
that and
On to page.
On page fourteen.
the
On one one thirty for the energy
minerals and natural resources
department you may recall
Mr chairman of the executive had
seventy five million dollars to
the land of enchantment Fund
that is included on here thirty
five million is included in the
LFC recommendation on this line.
just nothing on that page just
real quick Mr chairman and
committee members if you were
here for Department cultural
affairs hearing the other day
just to point out again item one
twenty four the LFC recommended
five million dollars for exhibit
Development executive
recommended a million dollars
for it broader purposes to
approve visitor amenities at at
various museums and historic
sites.
So Mr Chairman on the next page
the office of the state engineer
so I'll just note.
Our beginning online forty and
moving on to the next page
you'll see
a number of differences between
the LFC and executive
recommendation I just know it
over the difference calling you
can see
the executive authorizes these
funds for a longer period of
time the where is the the LFC
essentially is is putting in
first year funding for some of
these programs
and indeed you wanna have a
comment on the the engineer yes
thanks joy Mr chairman committee
members so joys correct for the
for the state engineer items
that you see such as item one
thirty nine one forty one forty
one and those were recommended
for a little bit longer years to
give them the ability to kind of
just really get those programs
going and you know important for
things like addressing the Texas
risen to Mexico actions and
things that are going on are
part of the state and that way
they don't have to if you've
been on this I and those of you
have been on this committee for
several years know that they
kind of come back every year for
similar nonrecurring requests
this is just kind authorize them
to to not have to do that and
really get those programs going
item number one thirty six.
I just no real quickly this is
another Executive operate
commend Dacian forty two point
five million dollars of of our
for funding for state engineer
and together with the department
of environment to address water
and drought emergencies that
arise.
And Mr Chairman just real quick
on some of these state engineer
recommendation also note the LFC
recommendation for capital
outlay includes fifty million
dollars for some of these
projects so it's in addition to
the money you see here there's
also additional capital outlay
dollars.
Thank you
Thank you for that thank you
both any questions here.
I guess one question that comes
to mind for me
If we're we were sort of
treating the specials as you
said Mr Simon as a as a one year
sort of focus there is that
three to four year focus at
least on these from the
executive is there sort of a
meeting place.
Is there a two or three years
sort of time window that that we
might look at for a few of these
that are that are not able to be
completed in one year but maybe.
Mr chairman I would have missed
because all come up real quick
on the capitol.
Mr chair are you asking
specifically about LFC I have
little and specials exactly yes
yes so we we did consider those
requests together in the
purposes of them and making both
recommendations and
first of all the the general
specials rule for those would be
two years if there are specific
items in here that you feel like
you need a longer expenditure
periods we could do that for
specific appropriations without
doing it for all of them as a
whole understood that thank you
very much and thank you for the
Mexico.
briefly Representative Pettigrew
where our phone a little bit
behind but go ahead.
Okay for free on that the
chairman on line one thirty six
the forty two point five the
this discuss their comes from
our for.
So I guess.
If we get the recovery money
with respect to that then that
money goes back into the general
fund and then the second phase
part of that question is I
understand the LFC you put it in
cap put fifty million in capital
outlay if that's the requests
those if we if we did without
one we would automatically have
it any other we did in the other
we would automatically not
whichever you wanted to balance
that if they got both they would
end up with ninety two point
five million dollars would that
be an accurate statement
chairman.
Thank you I think it's sort of
put in both together and so
there there there would be
additional funding if they get
both for sure Mister at and and
it's.
I.
Yes Representative Mr chairman
so the our but state really
funds were transferred to the
appropriation contingency plan
which is in the general fund you
all appropriated virtually the
entire balance there was about a
hundred and forty million left
out in the last session of the
failed engine.
that money is recommended to be
appropriated and you'll see that
in the language of the
appropriation as a committee
coming the probe agency's Fund
the original sources are and the
other thing to keep in mind with
the they are the state really
funds is that money was used to
repay lost revenue to the state
so that's an important
consideration you're not
spending in according to the
article of rules that defensive
and laid out got a little bit
more flexibility because as we
pay lost general fund revenue
during.
They.
Thank you Mr Slee in back to the
point as we sort of bring things
together capital and specials
and the general appropriations
act all fits together
Representative Pettigrew to your
point as we're working with our
agency partners to make sure the
needs are fully funded.
Mr chairman my eyes that I
everything Mr sleep said was
correct I just like to add that
just a reminder that the there
were funding is only valid
through fiscal year twenty
twenty five so anything that
would not be spent by the end of
that time would the loss to the
state less the legislature re
appropriated and we spent.
Thank you.
So Mr Chairman moving on to page
seventeen one one fifty two UC
fifty million dollars to the
Indian Affairs Department for
tribal project this is one of
those areas thank you chairman
with the LFC recommendation
included funding for agencies to
see or in this case tribal
entities to see federal matching
funds
and
you Mr minor do you want to talk
about early childhood here let's
see so Mr chairman committee
members on the bottom of page
seventeen item number one fifty
four I see a twenty million
dollars recommended by the
executive to ECECD for
prekindergarten per child rate
increase and then also for ECECD
on the next page the page
eighteen at the bottom line one
fifty eight see about a hundred
and twelve million dollars
recommended by the executive and
that would go towards expanded
eligibility co payment
restructuring in childhood
provider minimum wage increases.
Thanks and I just don't
Mr Chairman on some of these
early childhood the executive
recommendation
it includes language directing
those appropriations from the
distributions the permanent fund
so the
And I just would know the LFC
recommendation look at these and
and
Any of these are recurring
expenses and we're not included
in section five for that reason
thank you very much let's go
Representative Trujillo did you
have a question.
Your comment joy and I'm
concerned because these are
needs and how do we address the.
The fact that they're not
included so
Mr Chairman representative G. O.
that Mr Saly.
Chairman representative that's
where you'll see big differences
in the operating budget
recommendations.
Hello.
this is the LFC budget all of
the school for and fund revenue.
The operating but because that
is.
And then also the.
Asian and has use of the funds.
we have.
That is that.
So Mister chair then the money
is there it just this coming
from a different line item and
then before we continue Mr chair
on page seventeen line.
Forty eight one forty nine one
fifty one fifty one.
You know we listen to the
commission of the status of
women and the recommendations
and you all did not include any
any kind of.
Of of money for them and they do
need is a statutory
Commission so how do we
reconcile that.
There was a recommendation for
funding for operations in the
office.
Which is a all the
Is that there are a lot of
recurring appropriation the
fact.
Is that Act section was that a
lot of then the other is.
Thank you.
Mr chair Dr minor and let.
Let's keep moving okay I just
real quick Mr chair
representative tree I just want
to point out that you can see
that the executive does
recommend these nonrecurring
items for the executive our
sorry excuse me for the
commission on the status of
women but also of course has a
as an operating budget recurring
operating budget for the
organs as well so these would be
additions to recommended by the
executive thank you Mr chair
thank you Sir thank you very
much Representative.
Representative Garrett.
The question of Mr chair is it
possible to get a break down of
the child trust fund just see
what money is going where like
to send a separate something
absolutely thank you.
The one.
So
I need everything before aging
Mr chairman I'll just direct
your attention to page twenty at
the top of page twenty the LFC
recommendation included forty
million dollars for the keys
Vader's senior dignity Fund
contingent on and acting of
legislation making that fund an
endowment fund the executive
recommendation is a little bit
different which is
explained some of the
differences that the requested
they recommended funds for FY
twenty four and US subs would
fiscal years for specific
service and doesnt tied to the
endowment.
And did you wanna thanks Julie
Mr chairman committee members
real quick item one sixty seven
two hundred million dollars
recommended by the executive for
rural healthcare delivery again
that's duplicative with Fund
Senate bill seven that is in
this working its way through and
item one seventy twenty million
dollars for the leakages program
at Human Services Department
that's also part of the the
housing that.
And Mr chairman just in response
to your earlier point I just
want to point out in human in
the Human Services Department
this is an area where you'll see
there is a
the recommendation includes non
general fund in several of these
that's that comes from federal
matching funds just you know in
response to your earlier point
on the line for example.
One one sixty nine one seventy
four one seventy six
those all of those other funds
are federal matching funds.
You have a.
I have a question on the Aegean
are.
The emergency fund can you
describe
All that will be used in the
needed.
But
Sir which that it's eight
hundred per emergency
when I don't sorry I was one
sixty three the tension.
Representative at the end of the
night I don't I'm here
Representative Sanchez I think
we have to get some more
information on that one what we
have we have the secretary
secretarial from of that is if
you want to briefly at the.
As a secretary for the long term
services the emergency funds are
very important to us for the
reasons that are natural
disasters that happen that you
want to be able to support
individuals or seniors with that
the family specially in the
northern part of New Mexico
where we always have always
seemed to have Garcia you're
snowed in once or twice a year
or power outages this actually
helps us stop would be increased
to prepare for our seniors to be
Hawker down in their home make
sure that we have those sorts of
things that I.
I.
This also helped us during that
time.
Or what if we can bill that and.
Thank you Secretary.
Representative.
This is the first secretary
receive up in my part of which
is.
Areas of dealing with our
problems.
Three years
ago.
Where we put you.
General.
we.
Interject historical view of of
these the.
The necessities of life.
Right now we're we we have
these guys are trying to get our
senior citizens what your
medical.
So we don't have lost.
There's a line for Iglesias.
So they're really coming out to
the remote areas will be one of
them before and I appreciate
that thank thank you very much
Representative Chatfield let's
go representative Garcia and
Representative thank you Mr
chairman madam secretary thanks
for all you do for the state of
New Mexico I've had the honor of
being with the young lady.
In Houston is appears to in
grants and other surrounding
areas and.
This funding and sufficient for
what you need to operate to take
care for seniors.
Mr chair representative Garcia
we you know as you know we've
got a client aging population
the that this is Dennis of ISIS
for a year or two a total
probably gonna have to ask for
more and that's because we are
increasingly seeing more
vulnerable seniors want to stay
in their homes as long as as
long as they can and we want to
make sure they remain in their
homes our.
So we know that this will
increase but we think that this
piece is a good start.
Mr chairman and madam secretary
we spoke briefly a couple days
ago when you told me there was a
waiting list for seniors to get
help physical Mr Chairman
representative absolutely true
found out during this process
with our our northern triple a
that we found out recently that
they're reading this in places
like house we also have their
weaknesses indemnity and other
places against this problem will
continue once we set our budget
we're gonna find individuals who
then qualify in the next year
we're going to need our services
at two eighteen.
Just living in it.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee you know there should
not be there's no reason wish we
could have a we this person for
the.
Another what's happening here.
How do you get when we just
don't in the Mr Chairman
representative Garcia we try
hard to work with the troubling
to some dollars around to make
sure that the funding stretch so
if there is a little less for a
little more available funding
and one part of the state we
tried we just but we're seeing
that those adjustments are
becoming harder and harder as
people are accessing our
services so we we do have a
slight the bank to cover about a
hundred and seventy thousand
dollars which is the projected
we list at this point however
that is going to continue that
start looking at the state agent
in Mexico especially in the
northern area of the state we
will have a waiting list just
take care I have okay not
tomorrow.
Thank you for that thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative Garrett and
Representative heard.
Yeah Mr chair this kind of on
going question but looking at
behavior health spending Anthony
Allison has a bill
to fund clinical supervision of
mental health providers
counseling and behavior health
is that.
Where is that money.
Like is that in the other budget
or is it should it be here or if
it's not here he's not going to
get that money thank you
Representative I think if if
it's a recurring costs and back
to Mr sleaze point if we think
this is a recurring budget than
it probably shouldn't be in here
it should be in
in that section five in the
general appropriations okay
thank you.
Representative thank you Mr
chair and for echo one of the
things that were first the
majority of what Representative
Chatfield had thank I appreciate
you I appreciate what you do for
seniors yes we have a population
this continuing to age
Hi you guys accomplished and I
think you're aware that I
continue to give money to our
senior centers and then my
district and want to continue to
have some conversations with
you.
Chairman I've seen some stuff in
here we're we're looking at
specials that go well outside
the two year.
I would I would suggest that
there is an opportunity maybe we
somebody has a conversation with
secretary and talk about yes we
may be able to take care this
year but.
If we can appropriate and and
the funds are there right now.
This is I talk about our
population are used with respect
to them being our most valuable
asset.
our seniors are the ones to pave
the way for us.
And we need to make sure that
we're doing for them what they
did for us and kept us close and
and dry.
through our use as well so I'd
like to have a conversation if
we can if there's a chance we
can extend that appropriation a
little bit the gives some
comfort ability.
Over the next couple years I'd
really like to be part of that
conversation thank you
Representative thank you
Secretary thank you let's keep
going through if you want to I'm
sure Mr chairman committee
members and this is a time I
will go ahead and go to page
twenty three.
Starting on this page you'll see
several appropriations for the
environment department just
point out a couple of them item
one ninety nine
it's five point five million
dollars recommended by the
executive the.
To connect activities to address
it to advance all water re use
the states and then on page
twenty four at the top line two
oh three eight point five
million dollars recommend about.
Or
the groundwater environmental
cleanup of contaminated
groundwater.
Now.
So Mr Chairman on page twenty
five of money to twenty I'll
just note a noted several items
in the LFC recommendation
focused on workforce development
this item includes three million
dollars for the children youth
and families department
to support their workforce
development plan.
Anything for you sure that
you're Mr chairman committee
members will go to page twenty
six item to twenty for the first
one there for the corrections
department this is to continue
hepatitis C. treatment and
planning few been on this
committee you might remember
those appropriation similarly
for a few years ago for this so
this would be to continue that
executive recommends thirty
million dollars all from general
fund LFC is twenty three million
from general fund and seven
million from the penitentiary
income fund.
Yep and you want to take.
I don't have anything okay.
So Mr chairman and members of
the committee there's you're
gonna see a a bit of a
difference here in how the
executive and the LFC dealt with
public education so you see the
LFC recommendation includes
recommendations the public
education department while the
L. at the executive I included
items in public schools support
so for that reason there's not a
lot of exact matches here but
we'll just go over a couple of
items input in PED online two
thirty eight fifteen million
dollars for from the public
education reform Fund to for the
career technical education
initiatives
on the following page you can
see support for community
schools on lines to thirty nine
and
Teacher loan repayment on line
at two forty two I mentioned
that before the meal quality
initiative on a lines to forty
three you'll notice that
particular item is from our
public funds not from the a
public education reform Fund.
and I wanted to highlight money
to forty five for a twenty
million dollars for out of
school learning so you.
Just as I was saying before Mr
Mr Chairman this can be a a
little deceiving because the
executive does have some money
for out of school learning time
it's just it doesn't match up
perfectly so well that Andrew
highlight that if he if he
chooses at a later time
And online two fifty no page
thirty five million dollars
additionally for teacher
residencies.
And did you want the safety of
public education items for yeah
I think you join Mr chairman I
will highlight some public
educational items when as Joey
said when we get to them in the
executive recommendation.
Higher education so Mister
chairman online on page thirty
one one to sixty the LFC
recommendation includes twenty
million dollars for the a higher
education institution building
for renewal and replacement of
the executive recommendation
also in includes amount for that
you want to comment.
Moving on to page thirty two and
continuing with the the
workforce development team and
Mr chairman you can see online
two sixty two ten million
dollars to endow faculty
teaching positions of an
undergraduate and graduate level
nursing programs in addition to
the endowment for nursing's I'll
point out online two sixty three
on the next page and comments
and to for support financial aid
and scholarship for social
workers enter thank you Joey Mr
chairman committee members I and
also on page thirty three is
item two sixty six at the bottom
for the health professional loan
repayment fund a little over
twenty eight million dollars
recommended by the executive and
five million dollars for the
LFC.
and then on page thirty four.
Item number two sixty nine.
That's to the teacher
preparation affordability fund
and that is a five million
dollars recommended by the
executive there thank you doctor
right let's go to Representative
Trujillo for questions.
Quick question Mr chair and the
service on page to a page thirty
three to supplying to do for.
The Burrell college of
osteopathic medicine is it
explain to me why it's
Not on the LFC budget is it
because it's going to be
recurring so now Mr chairman and
I represent feel actually that
was not a request that we
received so that was added
by the executive I'd are these I
don't remember seeing quest on
it to my knowledge that was
added by the executive that's
that's correct this is so
Senator late edition Mr chair
representative Trujillo that the
executive thought was important
to include for the for the
college thank Mr chair like to
ensure that we continue to
discuss that it's included.
Thank you Representative.
I apologize Representative Brown
and Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman
I should have asked this
question at the.
Getting of the session this
morning but under the language
from LFC column some items
shaded most are not it is
there's what is the significance
of the shading Mr chair Mr
Chairman representative Randy
can see at the at the top of the
page it the language from
executive reckons also **** so
essentially the shooting means
that language was from the
executive recommendation not the
LFC.
Thank you great thank you very
much Representative Lujan please
thank you Mr chair line item to
forty five Public Education
Department for a school learning
summary researchers.
And programs to just learning
gaps the.
Like I'm just look at the
language of water.
Other programs is what are there
is a specific just.
To tutor tutoring and enrichment
or is it's also able to out
other summer programs for for
children Mr chair.
So
Mr chairman and representative I
don't have any information for
you on that but we can get that
we can get that for you Miss
Mister so we have something to
thank you I appreciate that
because if we need after school
programming and summer programs
and and I need to be so limited
Mr chair thank you very much
Representative Lujan but let's
follow in this test if you have
anything that that's.
As for us we'll are intact
programs.
Time.
Maybe going.
Participate.
Districts more flexibility to be
able.
Learning programs three.
Thank you Mr like to follow up
with you on that thank thank you
Representative.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair all to thirty
eight page twenty seven on the
CTP I think originally
Education Committee New Hope for
around forty million it says
just fifteen.
And I wonder if there's other
places where that's occurring.
Forty million Zespri tional but
fifteen million doesn't do it.
So
so Mister chairman and
Representative I'm I'm I'm not
aware of it another
recommendation in addition to
this one
That's something that there is I
was just part of our capital S.
there there is some money in
capital outlay for for career
technical education.
Seventy five million.
Mr chair representative so that
there are a total appropriations
of a hundred five million from
the public school capital outlay
funds consistent with
recommendations from the public
school capital outlay task force
that includes seventy five
million for us CTE pre K. and a
general distribution general
distribution for school
maintenance to districts.
Mr can you just clarify is that
the physical stuff for
programmatic.
Mr chair representative Garrett
that would be for the physical
infrastructure to support CTE.
Okay so Mr chair that's
something we can look at in the
working group get thank you.
Thank you thank you miss because
of Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr apologize for doing
the right
Is there anything on this list
that's.
Addresses funding for careful
supervision of the role health
providers I have a little for to
address that.
That let's let's keep a flag on
them for that we are we
will look at that Mr chair and
the Mr chair my second question
would be is there anything
addressing your credit for
tribal colleges.
We're getting to that point I
think that.
Mr Chairman representative
Allison at our expert here tells
me there's four hundred thousand
virtual credit in the executive
recommendation.
So actually on that.
we so so do credits on on page
thirty five line to seventy
three Mr chairman so I think
we'll just pick up from there
so I'll just note Mr Chairman
very briefly on the
On the higher education
institutions so LFC as as we
said before there were some that
were we're sort of last minute
ads by the executive that we did
we didn't look at however there
that we did receive some that
were looked at and I would just
note typically and special
appropriations there's not a
large amount of requests from
higher education institutions so
the LFC recommendation as you
can see on pages thirty five
thirty four.
Thirty three and thirty two
those those recommendations were
typically to the higher
education department department
for statewide programs rather
than funding individual programs
that individual institutions
so that's what you see in the
executive recommendation sorry
in the LFC recommendation some
of these items that we want
weren't included.
And I'll just handed over to a
document and making member of
thank you Mr chairman on two
seventy four can you tell me can
someone tell me why specifically
there's five million dollars
specifically for you NM and NMSU
and other colleges aren't
included in that.
So Mr Mr chairman and
representative I believe that
was
Those based on the interest of
those institutions
Representative those are the
only two institutions that have
colleges of population and
public health.
thank you.
And we have a thank you.
the average.
Okay I have a Representative.
Yes Mr chair and looking at the
higher education department
amounts that are on here can you
please tell me if the requested
amounts by the higher education
Department for six million and
mental health ten million in
workforce training in the forty
million for research is in this.
Because of the six.
So Mr Mr Chairman representative
I should have mentioned online
to seventy one
sorry page thirty four line two
seventy one you can see the LFC
recommendation does include a
forty million dollars that to
provide matching funds for state
research universities another
area where there's money in the
LFC recommendation for federal
matching funds.
And
I would I'm sorry Representative
over the other the pharmacist
here the other mounts had to do
with the six million for mental
health and it was ten million
for workforce training.
So Mr Mr Chairman representative
Hernan as I mentioned before
There were some some specific
appropriations for
workforce development in infants
in the social worker area and
and nursing but not that not a
general one I I don't believe
and I I think the mental health
requests if I'm recalling
correctly were from you were
from institutions and that
didn't end up in the LFC
recommendation.
yesterday testimony
for requesting funding that
didn't go through the normal
process the higher education
department LFC I don't even
know.
By the time.
The bachelor's but.
Thank I don't see any other
questions I want to note outline
to seventy two it's great to see
that were looking statewide at
graduate student support it
within sort of the science
technology engineering
mathematics or health care is
is there perhaps we could look
and see if covering it this
would only be eligible for for
master's degree students is that
correct that's what the language
says yeah would it take and and
what with the fiscal
implications be if we included
doctoral students can we just
look at that Mr chairman I just
we can.
Eight.
Representative.
That.
Seventy five to seventy.
Our.
my remarks on so did you
specifically say that.
Thank you let's keep going.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members on the just real quickly
so starting here on page thirty
six you can see is this joy
mention the executive did
recommend appropriations to
specific higher education
institutions throughout the
state you could see a few of the
larger ones item two eighty one
I just needs the time I'll get
into more details allow these
are for endowments and
scholarship funds the bigger
ones like item two eighty one
I am too eighty to both you and
them at the bottom of that page
two eighty seven
for public health and I'm a to
New Mexico state.
And then some for the once a
good side with that thank you
first Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chairman so that I
was looking at here that that's
important to me is New Mexico
state originally built a Ag
motors of the modernizations lab
and there to the rising cost of
the building costs a I think
last year was ten percent per
quarter the building faster
going up so they come out with
not enough money to fully
equipped that lab it takes a
bill without a forty million
dollar led the need about two
point one million to continue I
will just buy for the for the
lab so if we could consider that
I would I would really
appreciate it thank you
Representative Chatfield
Representative Trujillo than
Representative yes page thirty
six ninety two eighty six
I know that this is for
nonrecurring money and I've been
coming to this committee to ask
for support for the human
papillomavirus
registry and thank you for
including that in the LFC
recommendation I can make sure
that this gets follow through Mr
chair in the future I would like
to request that you and them
actually put it in its
priorities list because it is a
recurring recurring issue and I
believe your name is the only
one the only university that has
that registry it's really vital
so I hope you'll consider that
in the future but thank you
thank you representative
Representative.
Thank you chairman
That goes through.
H. thirty six and.
Thirty seven.
Thirty eight thirty seven of the
New Mexico state
Help in in other areas I don't
see any special appropriations
Representative Chatfield Scott
comments on the supplemental
with respect to the facility
but I don't see anything in here
for war the Aggie Department
stations that we have and I'm
curious if that's all and the
higher level budget Mr
yesterday.
It's.
Mr Chairman representative
Pettigrew so I'm I'm not sure we
might have to get back to you on
information about the experiment
stations Mr Abbey.
Percent increase or.
Chairman and director I
appreciate that yeah so this is
the majority of the I. good for
in the stations Gen three
percent that's not going to get
us anywhere near where we need
to be together I guess for
legislation.
Where where they need to be in
any form or fashion I'm looking
at the document from the program
from New Mexico state under act
programs and looks like they
have an eighteen point two.
Another request that's probably
the percent to your to your
talking about I'm just highly
concerned.
With the amount of rates the
that I've listened to over the
last year from different people
the come for different that are
involved at the different
stations we should be looking
somewhere between forty to fifty
million dollar ask to get our
facilities were where they need
to be and doing what they need
to do so I just wanted to bring
that come into thanks thank you
very much.
Representative heard and then
looking move.
Thank.
Thank you Mr chair and and if
you have covered this I sorry I
didn't understand it and I just
want to clarification on the
on the funding for the
opportunity scholarships where
are they in here and then that
we get the one hundred fifty
seven million increase Mr chair
the representative of her name
Joey can you take us back and
those are the the opportunity on
recurring.
It's on page thirty four yeah I
on page thirty four Mr Chairman
representative sixty million
dollars for the opportunity
scholarship program you'll
notice there's no executive
recommendation here I believe
that's because that is in there
recurring section for budget
thank you joy Mr Chairman
representative heard in so
there's two parts to the
opportunity scholarship so there
there's a fifty three point
eight million dollar general
fund supplemental appropriation
for fiscal year twenty three
that'll be on one the insulator
pages you'll see here in just a
few minutes and then also in the
recurring budget I believe
there's a consensus for a
hundred and forty five point
nine million dollars in the for
opportunity scholarship that
you're you're not seeing here
because that's the in the
recurring budget thank you Mr
chair thank you very much
Representative Lujan.
Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr chair hi to also
missed the question my question
was answered that was in
relation to the funding for
clinical supervision of
behavioral health.
On page twenty under the house.
Mr Chairman representative we're
gonna follow up on on okay.
Thank you very much this can go
okay thank you Mr chair let's
see so page thirty six you'll
see go through these pretty
quickly bills if you are
appropriations for New Mexico
state
and the going to the next page
you get into more New Mexico
state and starting with other
other universities item number
two ninety five is over twenty
three million dollars
recommended to the board of
regents for online degrees and
programs.
Going on to page thirty eight
item number three hundred other
the twelve this is to yes you
mining and technology and this
is another arpa item recommended
by the executive for it to get
into water issues the jewel
brackish wells Anil and am
else's and things like that
see is the other hi read
appropriations here I'll go and
turn back to Jackie good.
To publish okay sure sure so
thanks joy so again Mr chair
committee members on page thirty
nine so join mentioned the
public school appropriations are
divided a little bit
functionally they're the same
and they'll be reconciled when
you all see see the bill of
course but here starting online
three eighteen you can see that
the Executive recommendations
for public school support
specials.
Like on three twenty four career
technical education community
schools on three twenty one
etcetera so you can see all
those you don't have to believer
that point
so you can see the rest of those
through on to the next page so
join pick back up so the the
last item and section five madam
chair and members
online three thirty seven you'll
see a transfer to the computer
system enhancement fund you do
that every year to fund IT
projects in section seven.
so just know that for you
briefly and with that we are on
to section six unless you madam
chair would like to go to
questions.
Representative Trujillo and then
heard a male.
Here is to you know I.
I was looking is try to keep
notes but I think we need to
have in online to thirty eight
the because of the committee I'm
sorry the CTE programs are
critical everyone in the
community in the state have
recovery has raised concerns
about the fact that we need to
fund them and at adequately I
believe that we need to raise
the funds further and it it
needs for the conversation fifty
million dollars miss madam chair
is not sufficient possibly forty
million and I know that we
talked about that just recently
but I think we need to really
stick to those
Guidelines of the community
schools ten million two eleven
I
lying to forty six the principal
residencies which is something
we've talked about public
education really needs to bump
up from two million to four
million.
Lange fifty to fifty four and
this is one of my important ones
obviously is the one million for
Hispanic Education I mean that's
a statute and needs to be at
least three million at this
point in time and then when you
started public school board the
other issue of concern for me is
line of three twenty six and
I've been speaking to Dr David
Abbey about this the feminine
hygiene products issue.
Has to be recurring.
To be three million or more and
I know that Dr David Abbey and I
talked about he felt that there
are other options.
But it needs to be funded and it
isn't about.
Pencils and other other.
Issues that are consumables
these are women's products that
are continuous weekly monthly
and we need to we really think
about reconsidering where that
money's going to come from and
and make sure that it's there
thank you madam chair.
The representative next we go to
Representative how to meals and
Representative.
Mr chair I am looking at all of
the public schools support
and executive and nothing LESC
I'm I'm really new to this
committee so can you explain to
me why there is no LFC
recommendations for I.
Number three eighteen all the
way to three thirty seven yes Mr
chairman and and Representative.
And and Representative so
We we should've done a better
job in pointing to the
the differences between so the
LFC recommendation funded
specials appropriations to the
public education department.
And the executive recommendation
funded those similar
appropriations to public school
support so it's just they're at
a different place on the sheet
just that kind of a technical
issue because of where the
numbers are so for example if
you know there's fifty million
dollars in the executive
recommendation for career
technical education on line
number three twenty there's also
fifteen million dollars in the
LFC recommendation way back on
page two twenty seven.
Online to thirty eight and so we
can get you a copy of the high
level sheet by our at our public
education was that shows these
are side by side a little better
and you can see the differences
of a little clearer.
So Mister speaker so are you
saying that you have all of
these recommendations on the
executive or you have are they
are they different are they the
same so many of Miss Mister
chairman many of them are the
same I think Mr Slee might have
some additional context at.
Here
look at the public school
recommendations.
See that.
It that for you.
The
nation's issues are.
Thank you great question great
question Representative the next
we're gonna go to Representative
Cruz and Representative else
thank you Mr chairman.
First I want to offer support
and reinforcement to
Representative trios
dialogue a minute ago related to
line two thirty eight career
technical educational
initiatives.
Our community college
particularly have undertaken
these type of efforts.
And in a way that is very much
needed very much appreciated and
is very refer fruit for for our
students and for state however
we also at the same time you to
understand that and many of our
charter schools are are actually
founded on principles that
reflect this notion it to
underfund M. I think it's a
disservice to showman in New
Mexico students who want to
particularly focus on an area of
expertise I think literally walk
out of school with a diploma
that I think that's ready to
work and I think that this
effort.
Is exactly what's needed and so
I would like this committee Mr
chairman to.
Really focus on this for a bit
thank you Mr thank you very much
of Santa Cruz next we're gonna
go to representative Allison.
Thank you Mr chair for give me a
fair tests of water referred to
line to thirty eight on page
twenty seven there's an
appropriation made for the CTE
and there was also a
recommendation from the L. E. S.
C. I suggest that the of the
analyst revisit the L. E. S. C.
recommendation through maybe
we'll set up with that thank you
thank the representative Allison
representative from.
Mr chairman I have been saying a
lot there are some.
Areas where I strongly believe
we need to change up some of the
funding maybe go even above what
either the exact where the LFC
is suggesting in CTE is one
example of that I I am hearing
that from other members of the
committee and I've felt for a
while now that there's a
procedure and coming on CTE we
really need to have that for
students and so my question is
Mr chair do you want to hear
everyone of these from a seat
during this hearing or I've been
keeping a list I've been
highlighting my my booklet when
do you want us to weigh in with
that kind of information from
each of us the thank thank you
very much Representative Brown
thank you for keeping a list
this is we're taking no action
today this is the public hearing
so please as we bring especially
as we go through
either revisiting some of the
departments that would if
budgets we've already heard
where this may apply like public
schools or as we look into the
future whether its workforce
solutions or other so we can
look backwards to budgets we've
heard please bring up the
supplementals and budgets that
we're going to hear so that we
make sure to have it all on the
table.
Mr.
Hello verification are these so
these are supplemental non
recurring I.
Thank thank you Representative
how to meal
yes broadly speaking everything
we're hearing today it will is
not a recurring is not meant to
be a recurring meters not funded
in a recurring way it.
During the in which case we need
to look at dealing with it and a
recurring.
Mr chair so how do we do that do
we raise concern now like to
feminine products the behavioral
health
Because.
These are this is a recurring
basis yeah where were the thank
you Representative we're
tracking these very closely and
so
both being raised now but also
being raised during our regular
budget hearings and going back
to some of the points that we've
raised Mr silly in Mr Abbey we
want to make sure as there are
important executive requests for
funding that and that have broad
support in.
And our recurring if those
requests have been made through
the supplemental non recurring
process we're trying to
reconcile to make sure that
there is the state noble
recurring funding and to right
size that thank.
And thank you Representative
thank you all very much
Representative this is why we're
doing this sort of in a public
process taking some extra time
to go through it
Representative Sweetser.
Mr chair I it was last year a
few years ago and I know
Representative Trujillo as been
bringing up the feminine hygiene
since then so I think the the
really need to look at it.
Whether you're carrying.
Thanking this keeps being
brought up thank you thank you
very much.
Okay let's keep going so I'm
just Mr chairman we finished up
with a section five that's the
special appropriations now we
move on to section six which are
the supplemental and efficiency
items and I'll just add in nope
very quickly you'll see a number
of items on here for magistrate
judge salaries that's related to
legislation passed in the last
session and you need to go back
and find that for the current
fiscal year.
On page forty two.
Mr chairman and you will see the
first of two appropriations to
the General Services Department
for shortfalls in the employee
group health benefits fund and
just to clarify for members so
you're going to see two of these
for for two different reasons as
I mentioned section six is both
supplemental which is current
year shortfalls and deficiencies
which are prior year shortfalls
so this first item you see on
line three fifty three is a
supplemental appropriation for
shortfalls in the current year
and the employee group group
health benefits Fund you'll
notice differences between the
executive and the LESC
recommendation.
Both the executive and the LESC
recommendation include a total
of thirty million however there
funded differently and the
reason for that is because it is
due to the funding source for
revenue going into this fund so
the General Services Department
provides health benefits for
state agencies as well as some
universities and some local
governments the LFC
recommendation includes nineteen
point one million in other state
funds
brought into it to the
Department from of those other
entities as well as from the
state agencies that receive
funding from other sources
whether federal or other state
funds the executive
recommendation funds the this
appropriation fully out of the
general fund
and you'll notice similar on
page forty three that language
is quite extensive so take that
the the whole page there's a
similar difference there between
the LFC and exec and I'll just
ask Andrew if he has any any
comments on that no man Mr chair
members a joy explained that
difference will.
You'll notice a similar one
though for much smaller amount
Mr chairman on page forty four
for look for life insurance do
you have a minute and any other
supplements you want to have it.
Thank you joy Mr chair committee
members the only supplemental I
will point out which mentioned
earlier but just the but I
Representative heard in on page
forty five item three seventy
three for the higher education
department that is the fifty
three point eight million
dollars current year
supplemental appropriation for
the opportunity scholarship.
So Mr Chairman you can see it at
the bottom of page forty five we
move on to department of
transportation a for the special
appropriations so you see you
can see the LFC recommendation
across these different line
items of total of a hundred
ninety seven million dollars
for a projects including our
wildlife corridors for air
service and airport projects as
well as large road construction
projects.
finally Mr Chairman on line on
page forty six at the bottom you
can see some Senator large trick
funded transfers that were
included in the LFC
recommendation that I referenced
back in at the beginning of the
meeting so online three eighty
four there's a billion dollar
transfer to severance tax
permanent fund that it is for
you to
Time to move the money over the
severance tax permanent fund to
have that available for spending
in later years additionally
online three eighty three
there's a three hundred million
dollar transfer to the
department of finance finance
and Mr administration to
establish endowment funds based
on provided recommendations as
well as online three eighty five
a fifty million dollar general
fund transfer into the tobacco
settlement permanent fund
contingent on
making that fund the permanent
fund so with that Mr chairman we
worked through the entire packet
and
However you would like to
proceed.
Okay great first we're gonna go
to member questions and we want
to make sure that we have time
for a public and agency another
comment first we're gonna go to
Representative Trujillo that
we're going to go to
Representative.
Chair the forgot way back on
page twelve regarding the
regulation and licensing
department we've got the about
the about the twenty five and
okay never mind.
Thank you let's go to and in
reference this was the the other
state funds transfer yes
question around
licensure and and updating the
licensure process.
We're going to Representative
Pettigrew you're next any other
questions will.
Sure.
Representative Chatfield.
Of.
Sure.
Line the three eighty three.
Damage funds by the legislature
can you tell me about this so
Mr Mr Chairman representative so
one of the goals of the LFC
recommendation were to take this
one time non recurring money and
turn it into money that could be
used in future years right and
so this does not make a specific
recommendation for the type of
funds that you all would you
know would create but it creates
just establishes
I tried part of money to make
those possible right so it
doesn't specifically pick and
choose what what areas you're
looking at but provides of
funding source for those it.
Thank you very much
Representative Chatfield other
questions Representative Garcia
please.
For.
I'm sorry Mr Chairman
representative yeah let's go go
ahead please Garcia.
A rate forty four thank you the
I think it's three fifty six
three fifty five can you explain
local government.
yes I Mr chairman and
representative so the General
Services Department doesn't just
cover state agencies they also
cover a number of the local
governments you know counties
municipalities and so those
entities purchase health and
life insurance through the
General Services Department and
and pay into that fund of Mr
chair
The general.
Governments what kind of entity
is a big city.
Mr chair of like say all.
Yes.
Most but not.
Thank there was a little land
grants that are.
Bill the state could they
applied.
So I'm Mr Mr chairman and
representative I believe there
are
A number of so do you mentioned
cities before yes there are
there are cities but I believe
there are a number of smaller
entities as well I can get you a
list of of those that are that
are covered by the General
Services Department I do I don't
know specifically their land
grants but there are a number of
you know small government
entities you know at you know
association things like that and
I need to a list of that.
What one one last question thank
of the unit up to our village
read out of the city of drugs
no just a smaller if you would
it be eligible for this protect
funded.
So
I don't Mr chairman and
Representative if you're asking
me what that particular group be
able to purchase insurance
through GST I'd have to check on
that
I do know there are some current
small entities look like that
but I'll does have checked the
rules on if that's permissible
or not thank you to review get
back up on that I would just
need to thank you the state
representative Garcia
Representative.
Thank you chairman thank you for
your patience with me chairman
my first question is requests
dealing specifically chairman
with section six.
for LFC I would like any
anomalies.
The conflict with
with this this request with the
reversions that happened in
twenty twenty two so we're
asking for more money here
versus how much we were reverted
in twenty twenty two chairman
and if that request make sense.
So.
Here's the reason why we want
the money and then maybe go back
to twenty twenty two how much
should we actually give back and
and one in.
Because of the lack of planning
what what was it.
More maps I'd like to see those
and really not not the little
ones the anomalies.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew will pull together the
reversions that have happened
it'll be up to the members to
sort of look and sort through
that but will make sure that we
have the reversions.
And and we can see where.
The
Yeah well if if there are if
there any connections conflicts
etcetera.
Chairman thank you
chairman the other question is
is we go through this looks like
we're putting somewhere around a
billion dollars in the severance
tax permanent fund and this year
it looks like
Capital outlay which is usually
Them from the bonding side of
this is not going to come out of
the general fund and so chairman
my question would be how much in
total are we looking at putting
in the severance tax on.
Right Mr chair representative
Pettigrew so the transfer of the
severance tax permanent fund you
see here would be additional to
any transfer that would also
happen by not using as TV is for
capital this year so we're
likely going to have a companion
bill to the capital bill this
year which is the same thing
that we did in twenty nineteen
the last time capital projects
were funded with general fund
that would insure that there is
an annual transfer of basically
the avoided that service from
not using FTP is this year.
To the severance tax permanent
fund likely over the next ten
years which is the typical times
benefit that service and that
amount in addition to what
you're seeing here we're
currently estimating at around
ninety million per year.
Thank.
Excellent thank you very much
Representative Pettigrew
okay I don't see any other
questions let's uh thank you Mr
Simon doctor minor thank you
very much for for going through
this there's a obviously a
number of areas of follow up but
this is been an excellent
process getting us started with
plenty of time to both look at
past budget agency budget and
future budgets will be here in
this coming week and integrating
how these these requests and
recommendations fit into the
larger picture okay with that
members we're going to go
straight into public comment
we've been setting it at two
minutes for comment
and what will stick to that I
want to make sure Preciado
everybody taken time on their
Saturday what we've done Dr
money or actually you can you
can this move to another seat
we're gonna ask folks to come up
please state your name give your
comment I now start the timer
when you begin we want to work
to limit this to twenty minutes
although we also want to make
sure to hear everybody so if if
they extend a little bit that's
just fine who wants to be the
first one.
If I see someone.
And members again we note yep
okay
Thank you and we're was.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members the committee my name is
Kerry robin printer and the
register for the New Mexico
Medical Society we just have
three things that our priorities
for us let's start with we're
pause in the time just to make
sure
Great please continue I thank
you Mr chairman the physicians
across the state to have three
priorities and the specials and
supplementals that we wanted to
point out to you the first one
is on page thirteen line one
hundred and eighteen the patient
compensation fund the
superintendent of insurance has
requested thirty two million
dollars to help with the deficit
in the patient compensation fund
and the LESC recommendation is
at sixteen and a quarter putting
money into the patient
compensation fund is incredibly
important to keep the
malpractice insurance costs
lower for physicians across the
state and that's something that
we wanted to fight for the
committee the second one is on
page twenty one one hundred and
sixty seven the world health
care delivery fund
Representative Armstrong has
shown incredible leadership with
this fun to make sure that start
up costs are included in this
delivery funds so that we can
really focus on expanding and
starting new independent
practices and rural communities
across the state what we know we
have a drastic shortage on the
last one that we wanted to fight
for you is on page thirty three
line two hundred and sixty six
the health care professional
loan repayment fund this is the
fund that we use for all health
care professionals to pay back
their higher education loans as
they're entering their residency
or their nursing programs across
the state this year we have one
point six million dollars in
this fund over six hundred
health care professionals
applied for loan repayment and
only thirty three were able to
get an award the executive
recommendation has taken the
fund up to what would be
necessary to actually grant
those awards for all of
applicants across the state this
is important because the state
of Arizona pays back a hundred
percent of loans for health care
professionals Colorado will pay
back ninety thousand Texas and
Oklahoma will two hundred and
sixty thousand our state is at
fifty so we need to expand
access to these loan repayments
increase increase the overall
awards and we feel the executive
recommendation gets us closer to
that thank you so much Mr
chairman for the opportunity
thank you.
Very much.
Please come.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Katherine Kirk shot and I'm a
registered lobbyist for the
water foundation we just wanted
to fight for you line one forty
one page fifteen which is the
strategic water reserves
recommendation
would like to draw attention to
the executive recommendation
it's critical that the executive
recommendation million including
the broader language in the
executive recommendation are
considered Water transactions
are complex and take time to
negotiate an adequate funding is
necessary for planning purposes
the fund has never been
adequately funded since its
bipartisan creation in two
thousand five New Mexico needs
the reserve funded to address
the water crisis thank you thank
you very much.
You are falsely registered
lobbyists for the brown college
of osteopathic medicine
Our our.
Speaking to you but page thirty
three item two sixty four
Senator happening dollars
dedicated to brown college of
osteopathic medicine to help
create pathways to get more New
Mexico students into medical
school
UNM and the broke college of
osteopathic medicine devote a
lot of resources and into trying
to get more doctors into our
communities
and creating pathways through
the junior high school high
school programs to get kids
interested in college and
medical school is one of the
programs will be bonding with
this and additionally we're we
working to
call back the students we lose
to out of state Jimmy programs
and get them back into the
communities in New Mexico this
money is really critical to beef
up that deficiency that's going
to occur when sixty percent of
our doctors retire in the next
five years and so we know we're
in a medical crisis already and
to beef up programs that.
Get more doctors out there is
really critical to the overall
state of New Mexico we're also
supporting the health
professional loan repayment
program and scholarship programs
that's another important part
about keeping in getting doctors
into New Mexico thank you thank
you very much.
Hello Mister chair members of
the committee my name is
Brittany separated you know full
by meditating Mexico Center on
poverty as we move forward with
the special appropriations
process we urge you to adopt the
executive special appropriation
request of one hundred twelve
point six million dollars for
child care assistance that's on
page eighteen line one fifty
eight so that you see if he can
continue with historic is
expansion to child care
assistance that has helped
thousands of kids and families
the special appropriation will
help children receive quality
child care which helps brain
development and reduces
government program costs later
in life and it will also allow
parents to work which helps our
economy for these reasons we
support the executive special
appropriation request for health
care systems thank you thank you
very much.
Mr chair members the committee
marks rather with the New Mexico
councilmembers presidents I just
want to just I think the higher
departments the executive Faye
and the legislative finance
committee and their staff along
with the members of working with
higher education is as mentioned
by joy that we did work through
this system a lot more than we
have in the past as we really
thankful for the reps from both
sides and I saw the highlights
and things are more statewide on
behalf of the council members
present in the other situations
the deferred maintenance which
we call B. R. and R. twenty
million dollars we don't have a
facility Fund prior to cation so
that money goes a long way
towards improving and
maintaining our facilities and
Irish statewide cybersecurity
there's recommendations and both
we wanted to build that you're
an example from highlands unit
New Mexico tech we've had
cyberattacks are universities
this continues a statewide
including tribal schools both
sides agreed to be able to
maintain and help ensure that we
have cyber security in place are
institutions I'm also forty
million for research that's also
something we continue to build
and grow so thank you for that
support as well and so and of
course this the funding for grad
students and our scholars are
down as that help support our
students and is really tough
Financial Times as well so again
we would appreciate that I we
support the recommendations for
for funding the opportunity
scholarship as well as an
incredible for students think
it's grown enrollment is anyone
continues to happen as well so
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and both the staff
the executive and the LC for
working with higher education
thank you thank you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Jim Tenney New Mexico
environment department cabinet
secretary just wanted we're
gonna be together on Tuesday to
talk about our budget so I'm not
talking about that but there's a
number of special appropriations
that we're they go to our
operations in terms of how
quickly we can get money out the
door and it with the money
coming into from B. I. L. and I
are a
our efficiency internally
reflects our ability to get
money out the door to
communities none of those
projects were funded on the
special appropriations were
funded by LFC they will
significantly aid to Turner and
hamper our ability to get
to gain efficiency within the
department and again it's all
about getting money out the
communities when we're efficient
we can do that well we're not
efficient we slow down so I'd
ask that you consider those
internal operations special
appropriations there in my
number one choice of the of the
monies we put forward and
they're not funded thank you.
Thank you very much Mr secretary
great to see.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Lawrence
guy it was and I actually work
with the national Latino farmers
and ranchers and west landowners
alliance and I have a background
in in ranching rancher thirty
years on that New Mexico
Colorado state line and I am I
am here to that ask in thank
thank you for actually putting
in the the planet Chapman
heritage Fund and I I I just
want to mention that that over
thirty years at a ranch that
that that would that always is
getting harder because of the
of the.
The district.
Excuse me Sir that of all the
things that the climate change
that's causing different.
Aspects especially in our water
supplies in in New Mexico and
New Mexico and Colorado and I I
just made up I I know the fund
is too great that the way it is
and I hope hope that that that
it a past passes in call in
Colorado I I I was a member of
the rocky mountain farmers union
in and I know it's the case that
in in Wyoming and Colorado have
had the funds like this to to
help out with.
With conservation funding for
example in white Wyoming their
their trust fund that they're
not to research trust fund and
while its trust fund has
put it in the last fifteen years
almost a billion dollars on the
ground in in conservation work
and then in Colorado they have
to two different funds the
caller Representative
conservation board which is
funds water projects and also
the goco funding they they they
put it and almost seventy seven
million dollars a year in in
state money and and I think we
just need to make sure that.
Good catch up with with their
neighbors thank you thank you Mr
gonna go.
Okay members I don't just
I apologize to the seems to
convince them to see you Mr
chairman members of the
committee on criminal Donna can
Donna serving as a cabinet
secretary designate for
department of Veterans Services
of first of all let me thank the
three committee members that are
so
just veterans that are serving
on this committee as well as the
other four throughout the
legislature thank you for your
service I will have the
opportunity and the pleasure to
present the department's
operations budget to this
committee on Tuesday but I do
ask cordial respectfully your
support of a line item to twelve
page twenty five it is eight
hundred thousand to department
Veterans Services that will
ensure that we have adequate
resources to reach out to our
veterans throughout the state of
New Mexico definitely in light
of the fact that the pact Act
that has been recently passed at
the federal level allows for so
many veterans to receive
benefits that they're eligible
for this eight hundred thousand
will ensure that we have the
resources to get that outreach
marketing efforts thank you for
your support appreciate that
thank you very much grouping
them.
Good morning Mr chair members
the committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak today.
I'm great frosted from the
public education department and
I wanted to advocate for line
three two nine which is two
hundred and fifty thousand for
and plants which are statutorily
required for our school
districts line three three two
which is three million dollars
for our learning management
system that we use to support
professional development with
their teachers across the state
and line three three three which
is one point one million for
micro credentials which we use
as an option for moving teachers
up in licensure advancement
thank you very much thank you
very much for.
Mr chair members of the
committee I figured I'd jump on
the train
I'll be very brief I did want to
highlight one thing that is
extremely important for the
state of New Mexico a one time
investment that I think could be
transformational for the state
and for the students in the
state that is line item I'm
sorry in line to ninety five New
Mexico State University to
expand online degrees composed
Ms as New Mexico State
University online.
The.
Another item on page forty five.
Is.
Line item three seventy four we
consider this to be a deficiency
everyone knows we've been
experiencing inflation over the
last couple years and that
hasn't picked impacted us as
university in particular in
terms of our utilities size one
of like those two items and I
appreciate your time thank you
members thank you very much.
You Mr Simon has scan.
Okay members I think that's
going to that's going to wrap us
for today thank you members
first of all for taking extra
time thank you most of all staff
for being here and always taking
the time course that goes with
the LFC and the DFA staff this
is been a good educational
process both baseline as well as
saying many of the F.
opportunities some of the
additional differences and the
ability for us to sort of look
at multiple capital these
budgets and then our recurring
budgets together to come up with
the very best budget that we can
so with that thank you all very
much and have a great rest here
Saturday.
And the regular M. Armstrong
reminds me for our workgroup we
will be continuing later this
afternoon so keep an eye on your
schedule.
One PM.
All.
So.
Just to get an.
