Thank you great to see Mr Smith
Petersen from what
From I. Essie and as always we
ask our LFC analysts and then
the to sort of start out the
presentation also introduce the
DFA analyst and the members
there one quick no I know there
may be folks out in the hall
we're really happy to see
everybody here today if not for
the sergeants have advised us
that in the room and also
outside if you're not here for
this part of the hearing and we
know there's a lot of folks for
HSD six eleven early childhood
education and care if you
wouldn't mind finding another
place where you're not standing
in the hall where in the room we
want you back in here when we
get to that agency budget so
that we maintain safety until
the.
With that we're going to go
straight to Mister Scott Sanchez
from the LFC.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Scott
Sanchez on the LFC analysts for
natural resources sits with me
today Mr Mike Hammond the state
engineer Rolf Schmidt Petersen
the director of the Interstate
Stream Commission and to his
left brain Chavis from the
department of finance and
administration.
the office of the state
engineers overall budget request
for FY twenty four included of
requests increase of three point
six million or eight point three
percent over FY twenty three the
LFC recommendation included a
budget of forty four point nine
million or four point four
percent increase for the
executive increase the budget by
forty four point seven million
dollars the LFC recommendation
target seven hundred and thirty
five thousand dollars for
vacancy rate reduction and
targeted pay raises which were
not included in the executive
recommendation additionally the
LFC recommendation reduce
expenditures from the
improvement of the Rio Grande
income fund placing two hundred
thousand dollars a fund balance
revenues with general fund the
HSD submitted nine expansion
requests totaling three point
six million dollars the LFC
recommendation supported six of
these for a total of one point
two million still the executive
recommendation included an
additional five hundred thousand
for several under partially
funded expansions in the LFC
recommendation with that I'll
turn it off.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
of the committee branch this
executive analyst so for P. code
five five one in the water
resource allocation the LFC
recommendation includes a
hundred eighty five thousand
dollars for targeted pay raises
but not but does not include the
for additional FTE recruit
requests and the agency's
expense request.
Both the LFC and executive
recommendation include an
increase of approximately a
hundred twenty three thousand in
other state funds for water
master salary increases one
thing to note for the executive
recommendation is Pico we
included an expect inspection an
inspection of the three FTE.
which is one for countess
current staffing on that's
currently an unfunded mandate
and to for the lower Grande
depletion program.
So moving on is Pico which like
cuttings inconsistent as.
So moving on into the P. code I
I to Interstate Stream
Commission.
The LFC recommendation increases
general fund revenue by six
hundred fifty thousand or twenty
one percent and you basis the
use of fund balance as previous
stated this revenue swap is
consistent with the agency's
long term goal of reducing
operating operating budget
reliance on fund balance and
improving the funds fiscal
health.
The LFC recommendation also
includes three hundred thousand
for targeted pay raises and to
reduce the programs funded
vacancy rate further the
executive recommendation provide
six hundred thousand dollars for
the implementation of the fifty
year water plant where the LFC
recommendation provides two
hundred fifty thousand dollars
with that I'll pass it over to
Mr census thank you Mr rose in
the litigation education program
the LFC and exec recommendations
both include funding for
personal services and benefits
from the water project funds
neither recommendation includes
requested one hundred and sixty
five thousand dollars in general
fund increases for inflationary
increases requested by the
agency in program support the
agency requests a four hundred
and fifty thousand dollars
pension to fund for new
positions in the capital project
management unit including three
new regular staff positions and
one deputy chief of staff
position to oversee the unit the
committee recommendation
includes full funding for these
expansions well the executive
recommendation funds on the
deputy chief of staff position.
And the LFC and DFA
Representative both reached
consensus on the performance
measures for this agency thank
you and with that Mr Hammond.
Thank you Mr census and so
that's a thank you Mr chairman.
It's a pleasure to be here with
you this afternoon to discuss of
our agencies budget request as
well as to share with you some
of our accomplishments and
challenges
that we are facing yesterday I I
have my one year anniversary of
the in the state engineer and I
have learned an awful lot about
being inside the agency I work
with agencies over my career in
New Mexico in the water world
and that a lot of respect for of
the O. S. C. I. S. C. from from
afar but being part of it and
the and working closely with
everyone we have a tremendous
mission a tremendous workload in
a tremendous staff
and I also like to say as I go
through this that
but I also came to a new
Mitsubishi addition for the work
that the legislature does yeah
the volunteer a citizen
legislature the that we have
only one in the United States I
think right of of you guys
contributing all of your time
and efforts to balance the needs
of New Mexico and also hear us
with our requests and needs is
is is very impressive and so
thank you forward for that
I wanted to also acknowledge of
the side Ralph we have raised
the white issue deputy director
in the audience so we also have
manual Hey Chris whose my my
my general counsel and the and
the head of our lap Division and
then John Romero is the head of
our water rights allocation
program.
And also Mr Jeffrey is our
program director for program
support.
And we also have Jim Walker here
this is the of program support
for the Interstate Stream
Commission.
I have a presentation this go
through that real quick as far
as our accomplishments and
challenges we completed a
hearing of on Monday of a with
the the special master of the
Supreme Court relative to the
Texas The New Mexico's Supreme
Court case which is the final
step in the process of looking
at the proposed consent decree
by the three states to settle
the case the hearing was
originally well we expect to
report up maybe in a couple
months yes a lot of issues to
balance the with the United
States positions and and the
positions listed by the
irrigation districts to weigh
and then make a final
determination as to whether he
will make a recommendation that
the Supreme Court except the
consent decree or not have if we
with the do not they were back
in litigation which we hope to
avoid at all costs.
But the the code Rolf was so
attending the meeting and the
with but it was able to get back
and join us for today's hearing.
with federal water so
settlements and implementation
processes of moving forward of
the we thanks to the legislature
we retrieve the federal fund
matches four of the major
projects for the Navajo Gallup
water supply project what you
really project and and the Tulsa
area implementation we we also
have a couple of other
settlements waiting in the wings
for Congress to consider as
well.
Of the the Interstate Stream
Commission fifty year water
plant has been fully drafted and
is being reviewed by
the the office of the governor
and in relation to her budget
request so that we will talk to
your doctor in a minute
read it ready to put that so a
plan out and put it to use going
forward
Along with that of.
The Interstate Stream Commission
commence Commission a very I
opening report called the
climate change in New Mexico
over the next fifty years and I
think of this document is been
put in everybody's box I hope
you have a chance to take a look
at that it's very sobering
information but it form the
basis for the fifth year water
plant and the work of the New
Mexico water policy
infrastructure task force the
that is also been put out and
you hopefully have seen the
executive summary of that in
your box as well
that that that was another major
work item over the last part of
of the two thousand twenty two I
want to thank the legislative
advisors that participated in
that
Representative Armstrong
Representative small
Representative Lujan and I don't
see anybody else in this group
that participated but we but
right Representative Chatfield
yeah is here
that the was was involved in
that as well so we we sure
appreciate that as well as the
members of the Senate that
participated in that process and
it for quite frankly is form the
basis for of the Executive
recommendations that will talk
about here a little bit later
also I just wanted to again
compliment of the agency staff
we stayed open during the
pandemic we served our our
constituents with all of their
water rights transactions
throughout this entire period
and we continue to work at a
high level irrespective of the
challenges that the the pandemic
and other issues Representative
and it on the on page three we
talk about our our water
resource allocation program
in relation to that we continue
to keep our water rights
transaction backlog below five
hundred which is our our our our
performance metric in that
regard and almost a hundred
thousand transactions occurred
in FY twenty twenty two.
We also have process to over
three hundred thirty cannabis
applications and usually it's a
fifty percent approval rate so
they go back out they come back
so it's not like this just three
hundred thirty the the cycle
back through so the the the
there are very that is the
challenge to the agency as well.
go through a rulemaking process
New Mexico produced water
consortium that we have a
participated in and completed
the test area Water Rights file
abstract the process by entering
of of paper water rights files
into a permanent digital waters
database that helps us comply
with the water data.
also
the proved to our our dam safety
program of the statewide office
has identified a hundred million
dollars plus the public then we
have this there's there's
seventy one.
Specific projects that we've
identified that that have some
sort of deficiency some of them
are very
The for the you know of
the packed full of projects that
that could of both the movie be
a source of potential failure or
loss of of of property and and
and life that we're very
concerned about and and we'll
talk more about that in the end
of the well we've also expended
are actually outreach under
water come through conservation
program.
In our litigation adjudication
program as I mentioned earlier
we have pending that the state
and the pueblos and the
communities with them those
settlements have agreed to of
for the hammers and the problems
on the M. S. river the outcome
of the gonna publish on the real
San Jose and then we're in the
midst of three other of on going
Water Rights association.
there's a number of other things
going on in terms of of.
The resulting from claims in the
Roswell artesian basin in the
coverage area and then an
updated list of the meniscal
Water Rights has been developed
and and the rules will
participation as well.
Of our staff and accomplishments
and challenges of our our many
we process the record number of
recruitment and retention
actions and we have lowered our
vacancy rate from twenty one
percent that actually if you
round up to sixteen percent now
in the process of under two
forty plus recruitment
which is a large percentage of
our actual at the
members
Some of our bigger challenges
are that recruitment as it is an
issue relative to that type of
stuff that we need to again
echoing higher we have of on
going programs intact this week
we're at the UNM
on a recruiting
effort associated with
of bringing in the students and
and interns and we we're also a
New Mexico state a week ago
doing the same thing
so we we need to move forward
with the recruiting the high
level staff that that our agency
needs going forward but we have
an outstanding HR group that
just works essentially nine data
make this happen for us so thank
you for that and and I'm gonna
turn it over now to Rolf Schmidt
Petersen to discuss Interstate
Stream Commission
accomplishments I want to.
The others were more one more
page two on page six I just
wanted to
assure you of the number of
recruitment that we've made we
have twenty one process we have
of vacancies of seven the are
funded.
And we have thirty one fourth
bacon's for lack of funding
and when we we talk about.
Questing additional FTE ease
we're not actually asking that
are total agency numbers of
three twenty four are increased
well rescue for actually is for
the funding to fill those force
vacancy numbers so that's a a
new wants that that we are are
wanted to discuss and then also
of the CIAC as utilize all but
three hundred and thirty eight
thousand which is one point
eight percent of our general
fund operating budget in FY
twenty two.
So with that I'll turn it over
to grow thank you doctor whose
district commission explained
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee it's
good to see you all here today
I don't want to start by saying
thank you
at I have a I've not been for
this committee for the last
twenty four years but I've been
coming to the legislature for a
good part of last twenty four
years dealing with water issues
all with the I. S. C. in the
last four as director and
in the resources that this
committee the legislature to the
governor's office has provided
us in the AG's office for the
Rio Grande litigation Texas V.
New Mexico one forty one I think
has made a really significant
difference for New Mexico for
the long term in this three
states proposed decree that that
might the state engineer it
talked about early on and I I
won't go over the same things
that he did I will mention that
you know there's no there's no
payment by New Mexico to Texas
under that to create we heard
very large numbers of a I will
go into here but there's no
payment for that on the other
hand New Mexico is not getting
back water surface water that we
alleged you know was
inappropriately going to the to
the state of Texas and other
education district.
This settlement sets out the
framework that New Mexico gets
fifty seven percent of the Rio
Grande projects imply Texas gets
forty three doesn't interfere
with the project operations
themselves down there the right
grant project but sets that
overly in place and so if the
project over delivers in one
year than there's a process to
ratchet that back so that New
Mexico gets more water in the
subsequent years and and the the
same goes the other way we under
deliver The New Mexico has a
need to provide more water
it is based upon of the time
period of the nineteen fifties
dropped in the water supply
situation in that time period
nineteen fifty one to nineteen
seventy eight and and if the
conditions in the lower rate
requests a day were the same as
they were in nineteen in that
time period I think we would do
a really reasonable job of
meeting the decree requirements
but but we know that's not the
case we know the groundwater
table has been significantly
drawn down in the last twelve
years in particular with
throughout that reduces the
efficiency of water moving
through the system and we know
we're consuming a little bit
more water maybe five percent
today than we were in that
nineteen fifty to seventy wait a
time period of those issues are
really at going forward assuming
the decree is accepted by the
Supreme Court which we we hope
but that could take a year from
where we were with our hearing
on Monday
but assuming they do
then there's really a need in
the lower rate grant to get all
of the New Mexico water users
together the major ones and come
up with a long term plan for
that region it's not part of the
settlement itself it's just
something that we as the
technical advisors and others
been involved saying we need to
reduce consumption and we need
to prop up that aquifer system
and if we do.
the lower Rio Grande will do
really well in the future so big
portion of our request going
forward and that you'll see
special especially the the
special request and the capital
go to those things we can talk
about those more if you'd like
to little later on
I want to talk and move a little
bit well there's other things on
the right grant we've been able
to reduce the accrued debit of
the middle Rio Grande to in
deliveries tell from the
reservoir of primarily through a
one time crediting from another
litigation issue that started
actually in two thousand and
eight and so instead of being
close to a a condition of non
compliance with deliveries Intel
from the reservoir and we're we
we will have a debit of about
ninety thousand acre feet in the
the violation would be a two
hundred thousand acre feet so
we're quite a ways away from
that we have some opportunities
and we have another request that
in the in the specials to help
us in that regard
moving from there to the
Colorado River basin many of you
may have seen there's a lot of
reports in the papers about the
drought really hitting the
Colorado River system and that's
really the lower Colorado River
system below lake Mead in the
city of Las Vegas the areas to
the north of like us have are
kind of we have to respond to
the vagaries of drought and
climate change because they
happen we don't have a big
reservoir upstream right but the
the lower basin hasn't been in
that situation we have the two
largest reservoirs in United
States upstream that that
basically have been able to to
the blunt or or kind of diminish
the effects of the drought well
we're no longer in that position
those reservoirs are nearly
emptied and we are engaged with
all seven basin states on some
very involve negotiations about
what comes.
Next when alternately those
systems can't rely on storage
and very large cuts need to be
made in the lower basin to water
supplies in that area and I
bring that up because we have a
request in yeah and part of our
specials that the executive
recommended but it's not part of
the LFC request and I would just
highlight that's really
important for New Mexico looking
forward in the next ten plus
years as well as a a request
that we have for continued money
for relief at least what they
the Apache nation this Lisa
water on the San Juan ultimately
hopefully will help us with
endangered species on that river
system but also to get an
exchange operation in place so
that we have water supplies you
forever in a compact for
Telemann and then I will another
piece I'll talk about really
briefly is the Pecos river basin
one of the that across the board
might think staff and I have to
do that for everybody also in
the Pecos river basin our staff
working with the the partners in
the two thousand and three
settlement agreement we're able
to pump oil fields and provide
water into Brantley reservoir
that forestalled or that the
need for a priority call in that
river system last year and with
the rains we've had in the
pumping that's the same case for
this year so we have a very
significant credit on the rate
goes and we have of don't have a
priority call in that area and
we've had some very significant
drought conditions that in my
mind shows the the really the
value of that continued
commitment in that area
I'll talk briefly and that'll
and on our safety program I
think the many of you are aware
that the IOC has a small group
of people agree that manage
about a hundred and seventy five
capital projects right now and
then numerous other projects
under a state community ditch
infrastructure fund act that are
actively working to help
volunteer communities across New
Mexico with irrigation
infrastructure issues the the
the fires from this last year
both you know the packing
interments peak and the black
fire and others in the Rio dosa
area you call some significant
damage to a safety is we have
about five million dollars
available what of money
available to us right now we're
kind of staff limited but we're
looking at ways to utilize that
money to help repair some of
these a safety is a community
ditches so that they can operate
in the upcoming year even if
it's just you know by moving
some third around I just want to
make a we're you may make you
aware of that specific issue and
with that Mike I think I'll pass
it back to you.
Thank you I appreciate the the
The discussion on the other
states can stream commissions
challenges and the compliments
we've of we will get into the
really the the the the the the
dare talk about our our budget
request of that the executive
put forward I wanted to say that
it's it's scaled to a five year
period and I know that presents
some challenges when we're
looking at the special request
relative to what
the legislature can do but we
can talk about that too as we
present those items I also
wanted to say that the the the
seventeen recommendations and in
this report
as well as within the fifty year
water plan really helped guide
the executives of discussion and
and their need to to fund the
agency with the with the longer
view in mind
and so some of the bigger
challenges obviously feared from
all agencies but us and
particularly we have human
capacity of investments that are
needed across the spectrum to
address water issues we need to
build a lot of water workforce
throughout New Mexico at the
local and state levels of to to
address a number of the
challenges that we face with the
local water systems and
infrastructure in general we
need to do good science and
planning well we need to figure
out how to protect our
watersheds and aquifers and
address you know some of the
larger infrastructure projects
going forward as well we are
going to continue to tribal
water rights the litigation and
settlement going forward so we
need to think about that too in
terms of we have funding now can
we reserve something in general
for that purpose even though we
have reserve funds for the and
and that settlement and and also
the to do the construction on
the hotel cetera but there are
more coming
we also want to leverage the
historic level.
Federal funding that's available
it's it's incredible but we need
to do it that we need to do it
smart and we need to make sure
that we fully capitalize on it
because in New Mexico
unfortunately we have the lowest
rate of utilize vision of
federal funds in in in the
particularly in the state
revolving tricking Fund that
you'll hear from the NMED here
next but those are some of the
bigger challenges and I just
wanted to highlight our our
budget requests through the
executive
we we initially submitted a
barebones staffing requests for
operational budget of eleven
FTEs with a heavy focus on
beginning to develop or lower
Rio Grande staff both at the at
the
OSC and I just see in order for
us to get out ahead of what we
know we have to do in the lower
Rio Grande regardless of what
happens from the Supreme Court
case going forward we need to we
need to move move that forward
just as quick as we possibly can
but we do appreciate with the
LFC is recommended in that
regard we do hope that we can
discuss you know that staffing
the as we move forward as well
the the heart of our our our
presentation really is
discussing the executive
specials request in the I and
and the ICAP
that
the the the the LFC is already
discussed
But I have on page eleven really
the highlights of of of our
special request of both the US
and the executive requested
thirty million dollars for the
middle Rio Grande to address a
number of issues that has to do
with meeting our commitments
under the species Act of
eligible opinion can continue to
drive the conduct river
gentlemen's
and local can this channel
maintenance and flood control
projects in in a very
inefficient reach of the Rio
Grande
we we need to of the prove that
in order for us to
March are way out of current
compact debit it also helps
lower your granny because we're
actually delivering more water
work consistently under what
we're required to deliver under
the compact so it all fits
together as a comprehensive
approach and we appreciate the
LFC is recommendations of six
million dollars because we know
we can't spend thirty million
all at once but will we do what
is a commitment in the out years
to continue to add those dollars
in and that also applies to the
second request on the list and
that seventy five million for
the lower Rio Grande the the
covers any residual what of
medication on going but also to
really get out ahead of the
settlement and begin to do all
the things that we need to do
their to capitalize on storm
stormwater to capitalize on
proving the efficiency of the
VIP drain systems to take a look
at a new sources of supply.
And to continue that but that's
that's kind of a five year
outlook right so we super
appreciate the LFC
recommendation of twenty five
million again the same case
where we would we would hope the
commitment and we need some
documentation that we can point
the the you United States to and
and the water uses the lower of
grant in Texas to that that
really illustrates the
legislature legislature's
commitment to that amount
transmitted
thank you Mike and
Mr chairman members of the
committee I would remark on this
having been in cedar rapids for
the hearing there was quite a
bit of of questioning and
discussion about New Mexico's
commitment to lower a grand and
the and the decree and in
particular the seventy five
million request and and even the
twenty five million there go
directly to those questions and
so the legislature recognizing
that and putting that money out
there I think makes a big
difference and would make a very
big difference in how that that
decree goes forward.
Thank you the third item on the
list is this is a is the need of
a to do some repairs that you
down there's a lot of a
reversion of some other issues
going on there you you
reservoirs are really critical
piece of infrastructure for the
eastern New Mexico pipeline that
in other the other needs for
those water users in that area
so that that degree of
maintenance this is important to
to accomplish and then the the
fourth item the four million
dollars for Colorado River
interstate compacts as Ralph
mentioned.
We need some funding there
again to make sure that we are
in a position to address some of
the
the modeling work that's going
on by the six basically states
and cut California there's all
these things in motion we want
to make sure that we have both
the right
of the.
Litigation avoidance approaches
and also some hi highly
technical staff available to
help us address those issues
we appreciate the the LFC is
reckon recognition for the need
on the on the take a settlement
the request
we have we have a nine hundred
thousand requests for our our
building relocation expense the
executive building is going to
demolish ultimately lead to the
demolition of the of our country
if you know of the building we
have lots of stuff there that's
where my offices in Santa Fe as
well as my general counsel and
his team are hydrologists are
located there as well so we're
going to need this an
alternative place
to live so to speak until a
permanent.
Of the places of of made
available to us there
Thank thank you to for providing
one point five million for the
hickory Water lease that's an
ongoing need for Colorado River
as we discussed earlier
and I wanted to address the
seventy five million the the
executive put forward coming
from from the again the task
force report that will
illustrates that there's several
federal of funding the
leveraging opportunities out
there that we know about and
that we could take full
advantage of if we have the that
reserve of funding and we we
certainly can list a number of
those but there's some key ones
eastern New Mexico pipeline is
one well as of the Bernalillo
table eleven system could could
fully could could utilize some
of that and then we have a
number of other projects
Carlsbad irrigation district and
other places around the state
that that our of our our
employees together
federal funds that need some
cost here from the state
then we have another the item
there that is not funded yet by
LFC request or is of the six
million associated with future
water planning I'm just going to
put it in terms of all water
planning there is a bill coming
forth Senate bill three three
seven it's called the the
The regional regional water
security planning act and and
the what what we need the in
just this short period of time
is probably somewhere around one
point five to two million
dollars to stand that program up
we fully expect that the bill to
make its way through this the
session we were we were expected
to so we want to be prepared to
address that and then there is
for highlighted are vitamins
that we have various programs
available already lined up to
where we can we can put those
dollars to use of prior to
twenty twenty six when they
would expire essentially from
from what's been a hello through
the the the federal program
there
of five thousand of for brackish
water re five million for
brackish water re use in the
Cuba area
there's a an excellent project
there that we could participate
in where the company would
actually make their money of
processing the minerals like
lithium and fertilizers and one
not and the water would be free
to Cuba but it would be to claim
to put in their system so we
need an alternative treatment
plant to essentially add
additional minerals so that it
can be used appropriately in
their system so that that would
be with that funding would be
for
additional funding for community
in a second ditch of programs of
that we know we can consume in
the sense that we can utilized
before twenty twenty six and
then we also have twenty five
million set up for fans
I mentioned that we have well
over a hundred million of
dollars of the for top tandems
not to mention many others but
this would be a nice down
payment for that we're we could
address one upstream from here
called Nichols rather for that
the this bill replace.
Smith and then there's one in
Santa Rosa call the power late
them that that through the show
already as well as the bear
canyon down that's efficient and
again Affairs structure it's.
With.
Then one more there's a forty
two point five million that are
for dollars of a number of of
community
of water use water projects that
would join the allocated to NMED
so that with that Mr chair
stand for questions thank you
very much in state engineer
Hammond St Peter said it's great
to see you and thank you for
going through these we have had
one chance to go through all the
specials this is a great thank
you for having as part of the
conversation today we're gonna
go straight to questions first
we're gonna go to Representative
Sanchez then Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chair got to city
see we still have a real
engineer as our state engineer I
think there's a push to allow
anybody to be the state
engineer.
Mr chair but a real quick I know
we have we had cannabis for a
year.
this was passed recently you
guys have the the staff to
support this and enforce any
issues regarding water rights.
Mr chair Representative Sweetser
the answer's no we've been
observing that this unfunded
mandate that that we've of that
passed on to the agency and and
we we've done our best to the to
process these applications but
it's put other work of on on
some of it on the backburner
because of it but but we've
we've done what we asked to do
but we certainly we've asked for
to keep the campus positions and
the this year's request and we
were we were provided one
through the LFC so we appreciate
that thank you Mr chair
I know you guys oversee down
projects I have a few in my
district
How are your resources to
Oversee those.
Mr Mr chair representative such
as we we have.
Of the regulatory staff that is
designed to do inspections and
identify problems and work
closely with the dam owners but
we do not have a pro project
management staff we we we if if
we really want to tackle this
issue it would be an incumbent
upon some agency and and likely
ours would be appropriate to
have some kind of project
management staff to address the
backlog and help these entities
that
would possibly receive funding
to actually get the construction
completed and then our
regulatory stuff would oversee
those and inspect them and make
sure they're they're done in
accordance with the design
standards.
Mr chair got to hear you guys
talk about a secular as at
several questions that
I had a chance to the most of
them I think that's an important
area that we need to make sure
you guys continue to support
whether it be through a funding
some more stuff for that.
But
I think when I was here a few
years back you guys were
understaffed and I I still see
it see that as an issue so I
hope that's something we can
look at supporting you on thank
you Mr chairman.
Very much Representative
Sweetser next representative.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
like to to welcome the state
engineer here and I appreciate
the good job you guys are doing
I specially want to run up
welcome Ralph but I am
astonished that you've been able
to avoid that chair for all
these here.
Because I've I've known you will
a lot of years and and you've
been doing a good job for a lot
of years so one of the things I
want to mention when you talk
about deliveries to Texas you're
actually talking about
everything below elephant Butte
dam is that true or false Mr
chairman wrecked Representative
checked Chatfield that's correct
under the proposed decree we
have a very specific delivery
point I think it's a stab list
at the el Paso again right at
the border so all of that to
lost crucis the farms the the
vegetables the
the cons that is irrigated with
water that we have already
delivered is that true Mr
chairman and and Representative
Chatfield it yes and no there
there's a delivery obligation
under the Rio Grande compact
into elephant Butte reservoir
which is that kind of the middle
valley delivery piece and what
the decree does is establish The
New Mexico apportionment hello
there we call lower in New
Mexico I guess now and and then
within that a delivery to Texas
so everything in the hatch
valley Misia valley is all New
Mexico there's no aspect of a
compact Texas in the Rio Grande
compact for New Mexico.
What's the state of Texas
chairman I just want to make
sure that the.
That
Because sure that of a lot of
folks don't know that some of
that water Mr we get to deliver
it and use use some at least
some of it too and so that makes
a difference
my second question is to whoever
takes and I know that we're
probably going to fellow some
land to increase our delivery
and I hope that there's funding
included to
put that land back into native
vegetation Mr chairman is is
that is that a focus without
their.
Mr Chairman representative
Chatfield there but a lot of
discussions in it internally and
then with a number of parties in
the lower rate grant about how
we you look at the kinda Water
Rights acquisition and what
happens to land in part of it
could be the you know the
healthy lands initiative type of
approach that that's you just
indicated other parts could be
related to areas that are maybe
closer to some of the
metropolitan areas and the
growth of those and and we try
to look strategically with our
partners at Act that
opportunities in the in those
areas and things that maintain
the intra integrity of the
irrigation system.
So so thank you thank you Mr Mr
chairman I my concern is this
that when we acquired water
rights that we have a plan for
the water for the Landis left
behind in and there are probably
as several plans that are
appropriate depending on where
that water right was stripped
but just that we have a plan
that that is not just a result
of the dust storm thank you Mr
thank you very much
Representative Chatfield next we
go to representative Garcia.
I think chairman thank for the
presentation I have a question
on on dams how many dams in New
Mexico for the repairs right
now.
Mr chair representative Garcia
we've identified seventy one
them throughout the state of
some kind of deficiency.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
representative I've been working
with Senator Campos since taking
office in two thousand sixteen
issues in my district on the
amendment that's there and that
the one point there was a list
of where you go up on the list
to get the repairs has that this
trunk in a are we still in the
same place.
Mr Mr chair representative
Garcia unfortunately the the
list is still pretty much the
same.
And and and and you know it it
depends some some work is done
and then they drop down for a
bit but not everything gets
completed because there hasn't
been in the funding to do that.
thank you Mr chairman you are
you are you asking for a hundred
million dollars for December's
tuition.
Exactly you know because there's
a lot of problem with the what
county with the with the fires
and floods out there and there's
problems there were loads of the
sec is been washed out.
What is your plan to help the
people love to move this list
down somewhat and is there any
federal funds at that speed is a
hundred million dollars of us.
Mr Chairman representative
Garcia there there are some
specific programs with them that
RCS and of course the storm
stormwater of collection dams of
the there's many of them in New
Mexico that need some attention
and then also the corps of
engineers has a program but it's
focused on loans for non.
Federal dams that could be
leveraged we'll have to take a
look at that program closely and
people's capacity to enter into
loans if there's a gap that
needs to be filled but the the
the need is very low very long
and I think you you make a good
observation that because of the
excessive floodwaters coming off
of us birds Koreas that could
threaten of them facilities that
are in those watersheds so that
that's an excellent observation
there thank you for thank you Mr
chairman and as you well know
all of northern I mean western
New Mexico got really hammered
with close is here to fund from
just right the bridge card but
we have issues.
But we do addressing these parts
of the country
One one one more question Mr
chairman you all on your request
you are requesting for a pay
raises and new mention targeted
Rees's what what do you buy
targeted for you targeting for
pay raises.
Mr chair representative Garcia
it's it's really the across the
board kind of approach to the
retain or or or our staff and
and and that means taking a look
at the kind of the inbound
increases and and to make sure
that we're staying and and touch
it and on pace with the
competing outside world you know
County cities Landel I mean
there's a lot of different
entities private sector of the
pay better than the state so
we've been doing inventing
creases to help retain our staff
and it's been successful so far
Mr chairman and with that you
know I just hope that these
target increases aren't just
targeting on administration.
Do we need to try to get the
ball to the ground that are
doing the work more than a
ministration that is my thought
the Mr chair I haven't gotten a
raise yet so.
Thank you Mr mayor you very much
Representative Garcia next
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr chair it really
appreciate the time and the
message you sent the this is the
time we have to talk through
these issues and to get into it
so
seven a dive into it Mr chair
first thing when you're talking
about the leverage of the
federal funding.
in here in New Mexico we have
the lowest rates of federal
funds being leveraged Mr chairs
I believe it that's what I heard
correctly can you elaborate on
that and and and tell us.
If we leave how much money we
potentially have to leave on the
table if we don't leveraged this
funding Mr chair.
Thank you Mr Representative
Lujan it's it's really hard to
give you a hard number on how
much federal dollars with the
left on the table but there's W.
I. L. dollars the two
significant amount that have
been allocated by of the EPA
through and and you'll hear from
the environment department
regarding their program for the
state revolving fund of of
there's there's other programs
that we fully hope to capitalize
on a particular day of the lord
grant with the with the
department of interior with
their fifty fifty grant the
crusher programs that sometimes
the local entities can't
come up with the funding on and
that's where I think the state
could help with on those types
of of of grant applications but
to to give you our number on
exactly how much.
The luster of opportunity lost
is is hard to say because they
really it really hinges on how
much hello addresses were able
to find that car sharing of life
for those requests with you like
this and Mr chairman
Representative Lujan I just give
you an example that it's related
to the B. I. L. funding south
right now is we've been looking
for a specific methodologies
that are necessary to apply for
some of these requests and to
get some money and it turns out
that there's you know there's
not a whole lot written in that
regard but when we were looking
at the lower rate grant
initially talking with United
States about Madam if they have
the potential to bring money in
and match New Mexico dollars
right but with the United States
not being part of that
settlement through the justice
department what we've heard from
department of interior in
particular is you know to the
extent that New Mexico brings
money forward in the grant
opportunity then they think they
have the ability to match that
so it's a it it's like well if
you have money you're bringing
money forward you have a higher
likelihood of getting a half
that's the message we're getting
thank you Mr really appreciate
that we're seeing that and other
applications that we're we're
looking to get this this grants
to get ahead of it and really
put the money for it I think I
know that we'll see other
legislation move forward with
that same application of having
the money available so that we
move ahead and we know that we
are we have a we have greater
needs some of the greatest needs
here and the southwest as well
so I think that you know when
you're asking for this type of
money
if I'm looking at this correctly
is a seventy five million
dollars is that correct Mr.
Mr chair of Representative Lujan
is that the executive request
and and the the the idea on on
that would be that if we can if
we can develop the capacity to
apply for those grants and to
administer them
then we we could capitalize on a
lot of federal opportunities
that we know exist out there
both on the on the drinking
water wastewater stormwater
side as well as some of the
projects that we're working on
with Madam and and other other
areas of such as the
one hundred other so the so the
capacity Senator of it is is it
is a concern as well.
Thank you Mr chair I mean
there's just so much here and I
am very.
Very proud of the mission and.
Oriented approach we have here
under this under this
administration and under under
your leadership Mr state
engineer I think that there's so
much here that I'm looking at
but I you know particularly
looking at
on your page eleven when you're
looking at the water litigation.
I think this is this is we're
going to find ourselves and even
potentially more litigation and
we're going to we need to have
some some real funding there for
that are you gonna be coming
back to us and looking for some
source to get that covered I'm
also looking at.
You can hear the the C. O. P.
building relocation expenses I
think that that is something.
A lot of these things are is
been talked we've been
discussing specially we're on
the.
The task force what else am I
looking at here Mister chair for
the state's fifty year water
plan particularly of course in
being a part of that and seeing
how significant we all came
together across the state to get
some of these recommendations
four I think that this is
something that
really needs to be looked at
really look to be funded so that
we can really move forward on a
a lot of those initiatives that
I've already been
vetted across the state
I'm also looking at.
A question I have to the
community and insecure ditch
infrastructure fund or plan can
you can you talk a little bit
about this state is because we
see this I see this running in
different places and just
wondering
What that means because we have
a bill in place we're looking to
build the bureau and how that
would leverage or help anyway
your
your department chair.
Mr Chairman Representative Lujan
thank you for the question
through the efforts of the
Legislature of last couple last
year we received the
authorization to hire two more
to staff and we're currently in
the process for doing that
recognize the bill that's there
for the bureau for peace and
with and without a doubt the the
there's a capability capacity
issue relative to moving
projects we found that when we
have the large number of the
small really in many cases very
small monetary amounts for
capital projects on individual
sake is that our volunteer you
know organizations
Sure they have a an idea in mind
they get a little bit of money
and it's not enough to do very
much and so our staff work with
them almost on every project to
say given the funding that's
here what can we do and we get a
piece of what's necessary right
each one of those takes in can
take a very significant amount
of time in order to moving
forward it's almost like a two
hundred thousand dollar you know
help project could take you as
much time and effort as a fifty
thousand if that's just the
nature of those and so with
three staff and a hundred and
seventy five of those projects
with well over twenty of the a
safety committee did
infrastructure act which is Act
that the legislature put in
place a couple of years ago that
we've just stood up that allows
through a series of guidelines
actually our staff to look at at
at the needs of some mistake is
and put them into the
appropriate place a planning or
does the planning or design or
construction and that actually
then helps to set up the process
to make request the legislature
for you know a projects that
will actually fulfill all of the
we we barely have enough people
to take on those things and then
the fire on the effects come
into play and and we have staff
being pulled off of those.
Rightfully right that to help to
find ways to get money to repair
a sake is
been working for six months to
try to figure out ways to move
money to do that and and perhaps
just recently with the part of
transportation and homeland
security we found a way that
makes a ton of effort right so
all of those things take time
and effort we anticipate
unfortunately with the warming
from climate change that the
types of fires that we've seen
are going to continue in these
types of in impacts going to
continue and staffing up to be
able to take that on is is
something we're trying to do
with the new staff behalf
I'm not sure how big the overall
the it's going to be in the
future though.
Thank you Sir I really
appreciate that and sharks
wanted knowledge that
Representative.
And that is here in the audience
for this today because she's
been a champion of the
leadership on our water issues
and across our state and I just
want to thank her for being here
and and you know laser focus as
well on these issues and.
Go I just want to go back into
the projects and going back to
the line item you have for the
the executive asking for seventy
another seventy five million
dollars how many what are those
project or how many practice
projects projects that we have
now or that we need to
Are not able to even focus on
because we don't have the
funding there Mr chair.
Mr chair Representative Lujan.
We came up with a list of
fifteen projects at the request
of the executive that tell me
about a hundred forty million
dollars with the which kind of
help them put together their
executive request as well
and and they're scattered
throughout the state and and
some of them are really critical
like making sure the the Gallup
area continues to improve their
well system while they're
waiting for the pipeline to be
constructed down to Gallup and
twenty twenty nine I think is
the the new date
and and several other things
along the lines small small
communities calls rather gate
cation district as well
and several others along that
line so so there there there
there's a big need and and I
think there's great
opportunities to leverage the
federal side of it in that
regard thank you Mr chair and
I'm just seeing different dates
that you have allocated here
using those federal funds as
well and.
And please correct me if I'm
wrong but it is don't we have to
uses are for the opera
And say this correct incorrectly
are friends of by twenty twenty
six but I've seen some different
dates allocated various is there
something that we need to
Representative Lujan that's my
understanding is that the
federal you know authorization
of the use of the opera dollars
essentially read you know
replacing the lost revenue of
the state government
the the the been authorized can
be thanks would have to be
expended by December of twenty
twenty six is my understanding
so I think we need to come back
with some more information
regarding that on some of these
these is allocated dates Mr
chair that just puts a little
more pressure on you and your
resources and and how how we're
going to get those the use of
all those resources I also want
to say that you know I see in
the LFC budget that we're we're
on from the general fund for the
operational
Part of this that we are we are
we are funding above foot.
I think it looks with.
What we did last year for sure
and I want to say I'm I'm happy
about that but I would also like
to say that you're even last
year as Representative Sanchez
said we're really focused on
getting increasing those
findings as well and I think we
still need to work with you a
little bit more but I want to
stay and commander staff I'm
working on getting us to the
place we're all here and I just
I just want to say Mr chair.
This is our water this is our
life this is this is you know
the most one of the most
essential resource we have and
we need to protect and this is
the agency that is is working
towards that doing just that so
I I just really feel like.
as I said last year and I'm
gonna continue to say it in in
part of your mission is we need
to do as much as we possibly can
to support those efforts and
looking at your budget we're
probably gonna have to talk a
little bit offline a little bit
but this is the opportunity for
us to get this all out but I I
am moving that you know we look
a little dig a little deeper a
lot of these lines to help help
we need to go thank you Mr chair
of the thank you very much
Representative Lujan next we're
gonna go to Representative debt
accrues and Representative
Trujillo and representative
Alice thank you Mr chairman.
I imagine the.
State engineer Hammond that the
the the difficulty the
complexity of delivering water
downstream is made.
Much more difficult because of
drought.
So that's just more of a bit of
a stable can you describe a
little bit of the fifty year
plan that you're proposing or
that is under way now Senator
says to the key elements
obviously needed but what are
some of the key elements.
Mr Mr chair representative
electors that I think really of.
The the other tools that the
that we have at our disposal
we're primarily a regulatory
agency from a water its
management perspective the I. S.
C. is the the planning and
implementation of of our agency
but I I think it's really going
to take a essentially a work
with an all of government
approach similar to what's being
to the
devised with the regional water
planning
built to really re energized
that we we have we have a unique
opportunity in the next you know
five to seven years to really
get everybody up from the local
government up to of the state
government really situated so
that that we we we can get over
the the home fund infrastructure
needs and then also fully
capitalizing on the federal
state resources so that we can
position New Mexico to address
address and and continued water
shortages and some of the
impacts like fires and one that
we do have this great
opportunity and and we've
identified you know seventeen
recommendations with a lot of
strategic initiatives in here as
well as in the fifty year water
plan and I think through
implementation of the very
strategic way working with all
of our local governments we we
can develop those partnerships
and develop the priority so that
they come to you and you know
they've been vetted in all the
regions and and and you know
that those those folks have a
have done their homework and and
can implement what they need to
preserve their future and and
and their water availability in
each of those areas.
Gentleman in your.
One of the concerns in the
community statewide is a
transfer of a water right now I
know they fall under western
water right law.
will your plan tackle address
recommend.
Water right transfers.
Both surface and sub surface.
Mr Chairman representative
occurs the.
Each you know through this
planning process and also with
the tools that the state
engineer disposal includes
alternate resource water
management a when they call it
and others the settlements that
would occur and mutual
agreements between water users
there's there's a number of ways
to address shortages and each
region should be in a position
to design and determine their
own future in that regard and
the state engineer would be a
supportive entity as well as the
Interstate Stream Commission to
effectuate the needs or their
desires in the region in that
regard transfers in and of
themselves are transactions that
a willing you know water right
owner can do with someone that
needs that water right and so
will continue to administer
those on a case by case basis
but in the totality concept of
what's best for each region is
going to take a coming together
of of of the local governments
about how to manage you know the
bill water supply and and going
into the future so the
combination of water rights
administration and regional
planning that I think is going
to get us where we need to go to
address shortages.
German state engineer it appears
that on occasion you'll be a bit
of an order.
I'm sorry I missed the last word
in order the situation that I
Arbit emitter thank you hi
Richard okay the yes Sir that
that that would be the goal of
of the state engineers office is
to is to work with the the water
users and and and find
solutions.
Chairman of last question are
your infrastructure needs are
tremendous seventy five million
was one of the numbers so wrong
dams I'm sure there's it's much
larger when you take into
consideration all the merry of
sectors that we have in the
state.
have you requested and received
are for funds for any of your
efforts.
Mr chair of the Representative
electors I think there's been
some of the dollars the come to
the agency it through the
budgeting process last year
there's some in the request here
from the executive of those four
items on our list that that that
have an R. Peroni label on them
so so you know we'll we'll we'll
see you know how that plays out
through the budgeting process
but we've made that request
thank you Mr.
Thank you very much
Representative a cruise next
we're gonna go to Representative
Trujillo than representative
Allison.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Sir
for presenting this afternoon I
have a.
Somewhat of a long question I
know that there's legislation
that's being
drop that would need a double
the current two point five
million do are you aware of it.
Yes we are thank you Mr and Mr
chair and Sir that's going to
allocate
That's going to be allocated to
this second community ditch
infrastructure fund from the
irrigation works fund right so
given the given the additional
demands related to the disaster
recovery and general of
increasing costs this seems
necessary does this use bit more
closely with the intended
purposes of the arbitration
works of construction fund.
Can you elaborate let justice
know.
Mr Chairman Representative
Trujillo so right now for the I
see with this is the first year
that we have begun to fully
implement of the safety
committee to ditch
infrastructure fund act and so I
think you'll notice even from
last year we didn't spend very
much money out of that at all
this year we've essentially
encumbered all of it and we're
getting projects built subject
to final cost estimates on that
so we we see the that there's
interest in addition to the
capital appropriations and
certainly you know more could be
done if we as we get some of
these grant writers on on on
board and other staff will be
able to take on more of that now
for concern relative to the the
two point five million is not
the necessarily the number it's
the source really and the you
know the there is a big Mr
Sanchez indicated a little bit
of the replacement money two
hundred thousand being replaced
in our budget from trust fund
monies to general fund money you
know that back going back to two
thousand and eight have been an
issue when general fund money
wasn't available in the agency
was essentially put on the trust
funds for a lot of the
administrative costs are
concerned with the two point
five million in using their
addition works construction fund
is that it results in that same
kind of a declining balance of
that fund and the bump it's not
a sustainable in that regard
given the other draws on it and
so we're supportive of the need
for the funding just not that
source.
Mr chairman than Sir what source
are you looking at because this
really would be impactful
Mr chairman Representative
Trujillo we we see that is
really the legislature right of
saying we're what funding
sources are available for that
type of work
and aren't you know as I
mentioned that if you go back
again like the the trust funds
could be utilized at a higher
level if some of the the if
there was more general fund
replacement to some of the
agency administrative actions
CENIC but our our concern is
with the two point five million
that that that comes out already
with the I think it's two
million they come out for the
forestry Act one of the
improvement of the rebranding
Fund in other of the irrigation
works construction fund plus the
HSD burden that basically makes
is concerned about the
sustainability of the funds Mr
chair may as of the date of.
Our madam chairman Steve to.
Speak about it David Abbey.
We will okay rules for rules.
The
question of.
For.
They have last year they did
use.
For LFC for.
To have this.
According to the start of the
rest of the day.
That's one to.
It go of your options all of my
different okay Representative.
Well this also if the phone.
It is working okay.
I thank you balances for future
years.
Yes please.
At my last thought so I think
you talked earlier about the the
lack of staff is that one of the
reasons why it was expended.
Mr Chairman representative
Trujillo not really for last
year the the act itself
required guidelines to be
established and so we have the
funding available we didn't have
guidelines and that guidelines
required essentially public
process and in interaction with
the acequia commission secured
association which we did and we
had got really tremendous input
and we did a number of revisions
in front of the Interstate
Stream Commission ultimately
resulting in the guidelines that
we work under today but that
took a good eight months to put
in place.
Madam chair I guess my final
comment is that I would love to
see you work much more closely
with the sick yes to ensure that
they get the supports that they
need because there seems to be a
very big difference in.
What is being allocated in
Houston what is.
It actually exists.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you for that I I would remark
that there is a we have a five
million dollar appropriation
from last year that we're just
starting to draw down also and
we have all of the individual
capital projects that we're
trying to gather together
there's a significant amount of
money that's there in the
executive request has another
five million in it that would go
to these activities and I
believe with the additional
staff will be getting on board
will will be able to move more
of these types of projects some
through the ACD I have some
through capital some through
specials.
Thank you madam chair thank you
sirs.
The representative trio next
representative Allison and
Representative me.
Okay thank you Mr chairman Mr
secretary.
Many many years before the
COVID.
The this this nation is going to
freeze Water his life.
Always conservative.
In recent years.
That point raised still remains
water is life.
And the question that I have for
you today Mr Secretary and of Mr
chair is that there is no
mention of Indian water rights
settlement fund appropriation as
I look through your spreadsheets
and of.
Some of the people that are
asking to have that.
Added to that requests address
would be the pueblo of Acoma the
pueblo of Laguna yes level of
city of requests the village of
Milan and association of
community dishes of the Rio San
Jose.
And you and I just briefly touch
base a few minutes ago and you
said that the some of the New
Mexico tribes and pueblos are
awaiting congressional approval
for water rights settlements
that's why you have not done
anything with or not too much
about him anyway but if no
funding has been.
adjusted for the Indian Water
Rights fund.
And over the if we continue not
funding over the next few years
the state's contribution to
those settlements with three to
over one hundred million so the
the longer we wait to make
annual contribution.
The state might get so far
behind that they would know what
to do so what is your thoughts
on making appropriations for the
Indian Water Rights settlement
fund.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Allison
we had the the certainly of the
full intentions of of taking a
look at what would come from
Congress and what the the could
commensurate component of what
the state sure should be that
would have come forward in a
request had these settlements
been of the approved by Congress
of prior to our setting our
budget we we we'd fully expect
to request that in the event of
of that action going forward but
as you and I discussed trying to
plan a little bit ahead and
build up the kind of a I guess
you call it into a new one what
rates settlement fund the that
doesn't necessarily have a label
specific to the settlement.
Could be an option to for the
Legislature to consider of but
we we didn't find ourselves in a
in a position yet to to be
requesting the funds from our
agency at this point okay and on
one of your slides I was glad to
see that you're working on the
of Taos beta project and that
needs state funding now to
finish the wells and the
pipelines for the mutual benefit
projects that benefit the state
kia's so I'm glad you're working
on that I wish you well on that.
But that project still needs.
We're sending the shortfall of
at least thirty four million
dollars so I hope that.
We're able to help with some of
the funding that will help you
meet these projects.
And then the.
That's my question for the
secretary and then my second
question will be directed at Mr
Peterson Mister Peterson is very
much familiar with my project of
a the farmers mutual ditch
concurrently New Mexico.
It is an irrigation that also
doubles the drinking water
supply for the community of
Fruitland curtain water flow.
And the that this is
continuously being caved over
because it's still there of
blood.
We have spent all of our money
removing the debris from the can
from the canals and we have not
been able to maintain of all the
canals down down river.
So my question to you is
What can the state engineers
office or the I see us to to
help us because I have been
making this request ever since I
came here four years ago.
So Mr Chairman representative
Allison I there's a number of
things that we can we can do and
and and actually
We are doing some work with the
farmers mutual right now with
the San Juan water commission
and we have a number of existing
projects that are going forward
to see most of them are intake
structure related but there the
the there was a larger
approximately three million
dollar appropriation that I
haven't tracked most recently
but but a number of those have
been moving forward with farmers
mutual I'm not quite sure and I
I know with the bluff issue and
so on but I I I haven't seen a
project specific to that but
with the monies that we have the
five million and so on if there
was more communication really
about planning or design or
construction piece of that
through the ACD I have we now
have a process to fit those
things into the appropriate kind
of planning a process and then
move them forward so we could
definitely use that also.
Okay Mister chair Mister
Peterson of I think this is some
of that I will visit with you
offline.
Thank you for speakers and thank
you Mr chair thank you very much
Representative Allison next
we're gonna go to Representative
Lujan meal than Representative
seven Jana than reserve Montoya
some part of you.
Mr chair there's is there a plan
for a minimum pool for elephant
Butte.
Mr chair representative of the.
The state does not have a direct
plan for that per se but but I
do know that
the the combined of operational
work that that we're putting
forward of would give the some
flexibility to the water users
the the OpenView is a single
purpose project for your
addition you stand there but but
I know that the operational
plans of the irrigation district
for releases from elephant Butte
have currently allowed for a
carryover supplies so to speak
that has kept a level in the
lake there there's no of the
express of level that they
operate tuned with somewhere on
a fifty thousand acres but
minimum pool seems to be helpful
for for four for the recreation
and fishery and and and those
those needs but it's it's
strictly kind of operational
voluntary
you know operational fund of the
districts and there is no
permanent pool of designated
that there there was one back in
the eighties they have to do
with the San Juan Chama project
supply that was put in there by
the state but it's build one L.
to be spilled at that time that
was one of the requirements of
that that water supply and has
not been refilled.
Thank you and
is there when there is a deficit
at.
Elephant Butte believes that
they take the the onus of this
is it when there's a water
deficit is it spread out amongst
all the other water areas or
does elephant Butte take the
heavy onus on this.
Mr Chairman representative
Hotmail you're talking about the
debit from the Rio Grande
compact from the middle Rio
Grande
it's essentially of a collective
of the state of New Mexico and I
can of Mr some of the address
that.
from the perspective of the
Interstate Stream Commission
Mr Chairman representative from
Karmiel it the the impact of
that is spread out all the way
up the system
so under the Rio Grande compact
there's a recognition that
elephant Butte reservoir is the
senior larger as we're on the
system right nineteen sixteen
completed in an operational most
of the dams upstream our junior
to that they were put in much
later and as a result under the
compact there is a prohibition
on storing in those upstream
reservoirs whenever elephant
Butte reservoir is low this is
something we call the article
seven restriction that relates
to just a storage aspect so no
reservoir upstream constructive
after nineteen twenty nine may
store in those situations that
includes a large portion of
nickels and poor reservoir here
in Santa Fe.
Over two thirds of their storage
space is not available to clues
elevada reservoir on the Rio
Chama and if we ever stored Rio
Grande water in Avid cue or
others it would apply to them
also so that piece of it.
X. everybody now that devotees
is a is a is a slightly
different part of that the the
debit requirement is actually
something that the state of
Texas can engage in and what it
requires us to do is to store
water in let's say a lot
reservoir to the extent of that
debit we have to hold that water
in storage and it is at the call
of the Texas commissioner for
delivery downstream so even if
you store upstream can be used
in the middle valley alternately
makes it needs to make it down
to health reservoir and so it it
really is that when L. from
viewed reservoir is low or we're
in a debit it affects everybody.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank thank you very much
Representative how to me
Representative Sarinana please.
Thank you for.
This is for Mr Hammond there's
been work on the strategic water
reserves under the Interstate
Stream Commission right as
mentioned not sure if Juventus
question do you have enough
money to purchase the water
rights that you had the chance
to buy is there been a problem
there.
Mr chair representative will all
the roll for distributors is
secretary Mr Chairman
representative yes in hell
on the generally on the Pecos
river we've been in a in a
position where we can acquire a
Water Rights and we can do we
can do that acquisition within
the time period where the
appropriations are you know that
are allowed for
we've not been able to do that
on the Rio Grande our
acquisitions on the Rio Grande
are all through leases
and in the end so they're lesser
amount of money
but the big part of the issue in
the middle Rio Grande is having
a corpus of money available when
the offer comes forward
that two months ago we had an
offer to sell two hundred acres
of senior water right lands and
we were not able we have a small
amount of money not enough to do
that full acquisition and our
Stephen was what we would have
to wait to we had appropriation
and the land sold in the water
right sold before we're able to
do it so in those types of areas
like the middle Rio Grande
having you know the corpus and
like the the get the executive
recommendation for a longer time
period allows us to actually be
in that market I guess is the
way I would say that that
executive only.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Sarinana I don't
see any other members on the
list first I want to comment
from some Lujan said madam chair
chair Susan at a we're very
appreciative that you're here
chairwoman at at a from the
acequia and water resources
committee is and has been a
leader in this area and we
appreciate very much your
continued participation and
leadership
we're very well served with the
two of you I have a few brief
issues to know first
the vacancy numbers perhaps
Mister Sanchez you can see where
the vacancy numbers that we saw
because the vacancy numbers that
all of that we were provided as
of last year were significantly
higher.
We were shown three point five
million dollars in vacancy in
funded vacancy dollars that is
in use dollars that overall
funded vacancy rate of eleven
point five percent in in a few
of these areas particularly high
and program support litigation
and then highest at twenty one
percent in inner stream
Interstate Stream compact
compliance Mr engineer you've
done in a an outstanding job
bringing water stakeholders
together from across the state
and I'm sure having a Department
HSD where folks are wanting to
come to work understanding the
updated vacancy rates you show
this much lower rates would be
very helpful
Second
I think the it would be great if
you could communicate with this
committee what you think sort of
the starting Texas The New
Mexico Madam Basil sort of
floors are that we need to reach
we've come part of the way to a
five year recommendation we want
to make sure and sort of see
that
Include and and the stranger if
you could include the additional
the money that was appropriated
last year for drought
contingencies the amount that's
on use their and if some of that
may be available to purposes
well.
And then finally
Yes I I think that we we've had
a very full hearing.
The the five year horizon that
you've laid out I think we have
a unique opportunity to sort of
me as a state we want we don't
want to be we want to get a head
start knowing that we're not
going to make me the full five
years in in this first year but
we want to get a head start so
with that will it will ask for
the LFC recommendation we do
know that Mr Sanchez please for
chairman small one quick
technical correction if it
considering the recommendations
if the LFC recommendations what
the committee moves would drive
we would request that we be able
to transfer the if you look on
your differentiate the two are
thousand dollars it's currently
listed in fund balance would
actually need that to come out
of the transfers line item to
have the intended effect of
potentially offsetting those
revenues of the general fund.
So it doesn't change any of the
differences there is a technical
correction we want the committee
to reflect.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr
chairman of the LFC
recommendation with the
correction regarding the fund
balance transfer.
There's been a motion and a
second with that thank you Mr is
for making sure we cut that is
their opposition to adopting the
LFC recommendation saying none
thank you very much Mr.
Okay now we're gonna go ahead.
Members and invite up our
secretary of environment.
this is agency code six six
seven.
Department of Environment.
and I would have over there they
can just Representative was
cover for the.
For the.
By.
The.
I appreciate.
That's my notes.
So.
Thank you good great to see you
Mr secretary
and we'll go to Mr Sanchez to
start us off.
Thank you chairman small my name
is Scott Sanchez on the LFC were
analyst for natural resources
with me today is environment
secretary James Kenney
my co worker my colleague from
the department of finance
administration is right Chavis
and the deputy secretary for
administrative services at
Daniel go
the overall LFC recommendation
for the environment department
represents a three point one
increase over FY twenty three
the executive budget
recommendations provides a two
point eight percent increase
over the FY twenty three
operating budget the LFC
recommends a general fund
increase of two million dollars
or ten percent over general fund
up from last year well the
executive recommendation
increases general fund usage by
one point six million or seven
point eight percent.
We'll see recommendation
includes four hundred and fifty
five thousand dollars over the
exact recommendations for
vacancy rate reduction
contractual costs as well as
recruitment and retention.
The LFC recommendation funds
high priorities in line with the
LFC guidelines such as
recruitment retention request
occasion of existing FTE to meet
more urgent needs in the water
protection and resource
protection programs and with
that and as of right.
On Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee in the
water protection division the
LFC and exec revenue recognition
recommendations are very similar
however the LFC recommendation
includes an additional five
hundred thousand dollars for a
combination of vacancy rate
reduction efforts and to hire
contract engineers for project
management.
In the resource protection
division the LFC recommendation
exceeds the executive
recommendation by six hundred
eighty eight thousand dollars
which it also targets for
contract services and vacancy
rate reduction.
Mr chair members of the
committee and the environmental
protection division the LFC and
executive recommendations are
identical both included general
fund increase of four hundred
ninety one point three thousand
to hire him and cannabis
permitting monitoring and
enforcement staff.
And finally Mr chair in the
resource management division
which houses the agencies
administrative services division
this is the source of the most
significant differences in the
LFC and Executive
recommendations both
recommendations support the
agency's request for to transfer
revenue from its other programs
into the resource management
program to consolidate IT
services improve workflow
however the LFC recommendation
did not support the US seven
hundred and sixty five thousand
dollar increase in other costs
for the space and LFC and DFA's
staff reach consensus on all
performance measures with that
wanted to secretary can.
Afternoon
Thank you good afternoon Mister
chairman and members the
committee it's going to be
before you again it's good to
see you all
With me today well first let me
just say we have a flyer that we
handed out on a slide
presentation excellent I'm glad
to see that you have it for
those following along either at
home or in the audience you can
just go to our website under
comments in testimony and pull
up that do exactly that's before
you all today with me today I
have a number of folks from our
from the environment department
in the room but sitting here
with me is Daniel Gilliam are
deputy cabinet secretary of
administration so over
everything related to budget
hiring at such a Daniels here
and I'll introduce others as as
we go through this presentation
or through this flyer.
So Mr chair members of the
committee
I intend to be brief on in going
through the the flyer here going
to this booklet but starting on
page one I always like to remind
folks of our mission and values
because our department is very
diverse so whether it is our
ocean program our air quality
program our water program our
cannabis program it's a juror
we're always focused on public
health and that's the way we
implement our purpose of we use
that we implement our programs
our mission using four core
values science innovation
collaboration and compliance
those kind of guide our decision
making on a day to day basis.
On page one just underneath that
blue box where we talk about our
mission and values.
We did we did a lot of
comparative analysis just to
show where New Mexico
Environment Department is today
compared to where what where the
the state is
and as you can see when you look
at the yellow box there NMED's
budget did not keep pace with
the state budget and now we're
short about two point three
million dollars so we are
operating
with a lot of funded and
unfunded mandates if you will I
have a comment for our little
factoid to share with we share
Dixon after hearing some of the
questions that she's been asking
the secretary so I'll hold off
on mentioning that until she's
back in the room if she's if
she's back or I'll share with
you all.
On the right hand side of page
one is just effectively you know
director Avid actually mentions
to me and you know budget is as
much about numbers as it is the
story and I wanted to write you
all letters that just kind of
highlights where we are as a
department and what's what is on
at stake for FY twenty four
and and Mr chair members of the
committee effectively you know
work complex agency with a
hundred and twenty five funding
sources
and and it each one of those has
their own guard rails to its or
on like many other agencies that
come before you but with that in
mind what we're hoping to do in
FY twenty four again not only
through the LFC recommendation
but above the LFC recommendation
is to basically.
it's like let's make a deal is
is what I'm saying to you I have
two point six million dollars in
federal funds that I am putting
into bricks and mortar those
federal funds could could be
better served putting them into
people that implement our
drinking water our surface water
our air programs our solid waste
programs and what I am saying
that you is if I can take those
federal dollars and stop paying
for space and put them into
people I also generate an
indirect off of that which then
again helps me with attorneys it
helps you with HR professionals
it helps with budget
professionals so essentially I
want to stop using my federal
dollars for the purpose of
benefiting
bricks and mortar and start
using them for their intended
purpose and it's in alignment
with what federal agencies want
us to do it's better to use
general fund as opposed to those
federal dollars
and with that I I would say that
once we hit that two point six
million if if we're going to go
in that direction which I hope
we do
with two point six million
dollars I think.
It's the you can do this
committee and the legislature
and and in general can have the
greatest impact on our budget
that we've seen in many many
years with the least amount of
dollar investment because we're
going to going to right size
services for New Mexicans with a
minimal risk and maximum return.
So with that I'm gonna move to
page two of our of our little
booklet here.
And
again there's another factoid if
you will there and and the green
arrows to indicate thank you
because you have helped us
increase our budget you have
helped us over the years get out
of the whole but we're not out
of the hole we still have more
to go
So that is to just to point out
that if All Things Considered
we're still about three point
five million dollars less than
where we should be and what's at
stake when the environment
department is struggling to to
to implement its mission well
first our jobs and economy are
at stake and I know Mr chair and
Representative Lujan raised the
question with the state engineer
you know what what would we be
leaving on the table well we'd
be leaving on the table for my
department you know in in the
range of just sixty plus million
dollars for clean water state
revolving fund projects we'd be
leaving on the table what EPA
just announced recently for
climate programs that there is
billions of dollars available to
state air pollution control
agencies I don't have somebody
who can pursue that money so we
would be leaving that on the
table but again the two point
six street in like let's make a
deal I'll give you I'll out
there if we can use that for we
can pay general fund for two
point six million dollars that
gives me a half million dollars
to put in my hair program to put
to so that we can have people
who can pursue those federal
dollars
so those are the types of things
that we're talking about when we
say what's at stake in addition
Maintaining our federal
permitting programs I I can
point to letters that have come
to my department since twenty
nineteen be it EPA department of
labor
department of defense that's it
you're not performing as we
expect you to your your to
implement these programs New
Mexico Environment Department as
a delegated or privacy agency
for the federal government and
and they're saying you're not
you're falling short for example
they've told us that when we
find a problem at a restaurant
your job is to go back in a in a
certain amount of time to make
sure to fix we're not doing that
and we're trying to do it but
we're under we're under funded
and under staffed to get there
And finally what's also at stake
is is just a fair compensation
of our of our staff our staff
are some of the best
They are also the folks that
make sure that you know whether
it's a chemical biological or
radio-canada risks that are
presented whether that's again a
spill in Silver City or whether
that is something related to you
know air pollution or something
related to you know even comment
we had the skill set to to focus
our focus on those threats to to
New Mexicans and and I think we
did a really good job but we can
always do better again with with
more budget.
I do I do I don't mean to be
offensive about what you see on
page two but but really when we
sat down with our budget team in
our and our folks and said how
do we convey to you the
legislature the the best way for
to to go forward and we laid out
a we we took a screenshot of of
the budget book and we said
here's exactly if you were so
inclined to to take us up on
this offer here's here's what we
would do here's how we you can
make that happen so we provided
that on page two and that's
again with respect there are
recurring funding.
As we go on to page three Mr
chairman members of the
committee
we we are looking for one time
money in terms of special
appropriations that will
facilitate a number of things
forward for communities across
the state one is.
the special appropriations and
again I know you heard this over
the weekend and I'm appreciative
of of the time you spend
thinking about our special
appropriations but as you look
through our special
appropriation requests we have
about three almost four million
dollars to make the environment
department more efficient and
why do I say that you and I
always think you know it's it's
a I mean even as a homeowner I
don't really always want to pay
for things that are inside the
walls you want to spend your
money on the things that that
you really have a tangible
benefit on and this is
foundational work and what I
mean by that is if we can spend
money faster by increasing how
were accounting for the dollars
coming into our department if we
can improve our operations that
only benefits New Mexicans
because we are passed through
agency for communities be it on
water or many other things so
that's what we're asking for
this is not a an experiment in
how do we make government you
know more functional without a
purpose this is an experiment in
making sure that we get dollars
out the door as quickly as
possible so those foundational
items were not they were funded
by the executive and not funded
by LFC and we think that's a big
mistake with respect to the
other programs on here in our
special appropriations one of
them that I would like to
highlight for you of the many is
just are abandoned or orphaned
Don't think wells we are not
EMNRD abandoned or orphaned
sites around the state that are
contaminated these might be
gasoline stations that there's
no owner operator they don't
meet super fun definition
meaning we can't get federal
dollars for them right now we're
asking for eight and a half
million to revitalize those
those sites to clean them up and
revitalize them so that we can
work with economic development
we can work with the economic
developers to get more business
on top of those states but make
them safe so that that is one
really important program of the
many in our special
appropriations
and again highlighting the LFC
is not funded that one as well.
On page where the last page of
of our budget booklet here I
wanted to just give you a
glimpse inside the environment
department and and we're really
big on measuring and we work
with the LFC to redo our
performance measures a couple
years ago and I think our
performance measures are really
working and those performance
measures to tell much of the
story but not all of the story
and and what I wanted you to see
is this workload snapshot
so it's it's we're measuring
effectively how many regulated
entities we have compared to how
many staff members we have to do
the work so a number of these
focus on if we really wanted to
tackle let's say every business
or every leaking store petroleum
storage tank you can see that it
would take twenty four years
here is for us to get our OSHA
folks out three years for
petroleum storage tanks six and
a half years to go visit all our
err err permitted facilities
two and a half years for
groundwater at such a so you can
look down that list one of the
ones that keeps coming up and
and it's you know we're not
we're not excited to ever tell a
legislator or a member of the
public we can't do something but
the reality is we can't lot of
things and when it comes to our
construction programs again our
engineers are managing a hundred
and twenty six projects per
person and when we look at the
capital outlay for water
projects that's gonna only
compound their workload so we
really had to move to contracts
we had to move to contracts and
we're contracting out some of
that work but it's it's it's
more costly to contract out
engineering work than to do it
internally but we don't really
have another option and the the
amount of of federal dollars
coming into the state will also
compound that problem.
and I know Mr chair and and
sitting here listening to the
last presentation with the
the state engineer I know
Representative Sanchez who just
I just missed he asked about
cannabis come back to that
when you look at the workload we
have it's no wonder in the
bottom left hand corner of page
where you're seeing the employee
exit interviews focused on
staff.
Just frustrated that they can't
implement our mission there
there for that reason and they
don't always have the resources
to do it so that's a big reason
why people are leaving despite
that as you'll see we're not as
good as state engineer Hamann
but but what are vacancy rate is
now nineteen percent I hope that
does match what's in the your
materials but that's as of
January twenty twenty three word
five hundred and thirty six
actual people out of six hundred
and sixty two possible people
and that six hundred sixty two
possible as are funded vacancy
rate.
so Mr chair as I wrap up here
and members of the committee I
wanted to just spend a moment
talking about recruitment and
retention we are one of the
agencies I think the only agency
that is under delegated
authority from the state
personnel office right now
we are spending we like just to
give you a comparison when we
were routing our personal
actions through state person and
and and DFA for budget purposes
we were processing maybe six
hundred and some odd State the
person actions here
again and some of that the I'm
not implying or I don't mean to
imply that day were slow that's
not what I'm saying I'm saying
that that's a process when you
have three agencies involved but
now that we are processing all
our own actions under our own
authority
we are about three and a half
times more effective so instead
of six hundred some odd of
transactions were now processing
two thousand two hundred sixty
two transactions
That I think is helping reduce
vacancy rate as well as our very
innovative recruitment retention
incentives where we're pro
planning if people are retiring
we're giving them a state pay
increase if they tell us twelve
months in advance we're giving
them that pay increase so that
we can do some planning ever
lose continuity of service even
as people are leaving and then
we're offering new employees
a a five day personal time off
as well as any employee who
refers a potential candidate a
day off as well a some personal
time off as well Mr chairman
that pretty much summarizes
where we are as an agency and
with that I'm happy to stand for
questions thank you.
Thank you very much Mr secretary
thank you to your in your team
first we're going to go to
Representative Lujan for
questions.
The chair
Thank you secretary can for
being here and staffing for LFC
staff for all the hard work that
you've you've been in just
really dealing with this huge
lift.
I want to thank you Mister
chair.
To basically something's up
you're you're working under some
some seriously hard mandates
because not only our local
economies going towards what the
work is that you are asked to do
for mandated to do also through
that the funding through the
economy of our our federal
government and what a big time
and what a great time it is to
be part of how everything is
coming together moving towards
those climate goals and and and
being able.
The leading in the state in our
state of New Mexico and
something I'm very proud of I
think most of it all this should
be proud of this because.
We have the leadership we have.
We have wonderful resources in
the folks that we we are
recruiting however I personally
know of two personal close
friends of mine that have
recently left your
Different divisions there for
the state and they went on to
get the bigger better paychecks
and I don't blame them the IBM
families they have they have a
lot of the plate and the the man
was great they love to work.
And I just want to and you know
I'm looking at our budget again
going back to LFC saying you the
ten percent increase for the
operational I I want to say
thank you for coming up with
that but it just leaves on the
table as we're talking leaving
funding and things on the table
there's a lot on the table to be
to be gate I'm gonna say it that
way and I'd like to move in in
in any direction we can to to
get those funding is in place
and I'm sure we're going to be
working with you to do some of
those things with the reality is
we can do everything and we have
a you know we have a lot of
other agencies that we're
looking at and have such great
need in the state across the
board which is why again I'm
going to point back to this
agency EMNRD and The OCD.
as.
As this this hub of where we
really need to be focusing for
it because we are under the ETA
and other mandates and because
we are in a limited time with
climate change.
And I just wanna say Mr chair
thank you for the time but.
Again I would be here a little
bit longer than I do I want to
speak but I want to say I want
to support your efforts and what
you're doing and I can hear you
I hear you and I just want to
say thank you to the Santa Fe
are Santa Fe county or county
commissioners voted in Adams
unanimously on a resolution to
support your budget.
And so as a representative here
in Santa Fe and I think the only
representative on this committee
from Santa Fe that this is this
is so so important and you have
our support thank you.
Thank you Representative Lujan
next subset of seven hundred.
Mr chairman and thank you
Secretary for are you do you
I've I think I've heard from you
through every interim committee
I have and I heard the
frustration for P. fast and I
think you are the whole
committee understood how
frustrated you are not being
able to do what you really need
to do but
This is the other this is the
brother to the sister yesterday
EMNRD that's been underfunded
for years and we have to fund
them at the level they need to
be funded unlike Representative
Lujan said Mr Chairman this is
the we're losing good people and
and we need to get good people
we need to continue it so as a
committee this is this is
important that we Mr chairman
for them at the level they've
asked and you said it perfectly
I think you said that what you
need and we as a committee need
to really look at this climate
change is real like
Representative Lujan said Mr
chairman and we as a committee
have to support our environment
department they're very
important to everything we do
the air the water the land this
is something we have to do seven
point question
need to Mr Chairman but we take
for your I am here to do a full
greenhouse gas rulemaking
process does your agency have
the funding to do something like
that Mr Chairman Representative
first thank you for your
comments
I would agree we have good
people to great people in our
department so thank you to
answer your question what would
it take for us to do that type
of work we we last year we
through this body we stood up
our climate bureau and for much
appreciated we got another
funding for about four people
instead of the closer to the
eighteen fifteen to eighteen
people we we requested so if we
were to take on page that would
be new work we would probably
need one to one and a half S. T.
E. to to focus on that in the
climate bureau and then again we
we need an attorney to help
shepherd that through the legal
process and again we have
attorneys that could potentially
work on that as well but it's
it's if we don't add capacity
it's then in lieu of something
else so let's say about want to
have people.
Thank you Mr chairman one more
question so it's my
understanding is that the agency
is slated to do clean car and
truck rules if we get them done
this year the rules would apply
to models here twenty twenty
seven correct and would you need
to get.
But we need to get that done
this year.
Mr chair and representative
there's almost no way we'll be
able to get those done this year
by the time we would get any
appropriation for the staff that
I'm talking about
it would take us roughly thirty
to sixty days to hire them so
we're talking July one and so I
assume the you mean this
calendar year
which I'm assuming that based on
the model your comment so would
be really almost impossible for
us to get that done this year
to the extent Mr chair and
representative that there is a
model rule that was adoptable we
would still have to work with
the Albuquerque Bernalillo air
quality board because we don't
regulate in that jurisdiction
and have been schedule a joint
hearing with the requisite
stakeholder engagement well I
think many stakeholders Mr
Chairman representative would be
supportive we can't assume in
either direction that we're
hearing from everyone until we
hear from everyone would be
disingenuous about the public
process we pride ourselves on
so would be very difficult to
get it done this calendar year
to be quite honest and much to
my dismay.
Mr chairman I think state budget
thank you for all you do and
your dedication and your staff
for all the hard work they put
in a pretty amazing so thank you
thank you Mr chairman I I one
more thing that's relevant here
please Mr second I'll be quick
Mr Chairman representative to
your to your point your specific
point and then it's taking a
step back and this was what I
was going to say device you're
Dixon I heard us this question
EMNRD I thought was a great a
great question and I just want
to set the stage as to what were
watching here at the Environment
Department of the legislation
that's in play right now as of
today there is according to our
fiscal analysis we would be
incurring if everything passed
and signed into law thirty six
point three million dollars of
unfunded mandates hitting us
just just as of today.
If you add the four percent
raise to that.
Which because remote we're very
limited general fund agency we
also take a two and a half
million dollar cut in our
services so between the the
what's in play today and the
raise to our employees we'd be
down eight point eight million
which is concerns me that we're
regressing further back as
adjusted for inflation to the
twenty eleven levels and not so
that that's in my mind when I
answer your question Mr chair
representative.
Thank you very much
representative Sarinana next
we're gonna go to representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Secretary sorry had to step out
for a few minutes I don't have
any questions I just want to say
thank you for the state of New
Mexico you have a great staff
I've had the honor of of working
with your group right position
right behind you there
you know the responses for the
knees my community have been
great.
You know and we have a lot of
issues in that part of the state
with water issues septic tank
will waste water and I really
really appreciate the response
time and and the attention of
been put into the people to have
that have needs Mr chairman got
a lot of people have knees and
they don't know quite how to
address them with the means of
the funds to do what would you
guys have been responsive I
really appreciate thank you
thank you thank you very much
progress in next regular rooms
thank you Mr chairman thank you
for your presentation just a
quick
explanation of the reversion.
Money if you will please.
Mr chairman and representative
thank you for that for the
question.
Have it here and I forgot to
mention it so Mister chair
representative the we reverted
just in percentage we reserve re
we reverted point five percent
of our total budget.
If you will search it just to
keep the scale together because
the one point three million
sounds like a lot about sixty
fifty eight to sixty percent of
that was money that was
allocated to us for the rest
COVID response.
And you know good news.
Very good news for for all of us
in the state we didn't need to
use that because we had we were
able to sunset are COVID
response the remaining balance
there some of it was for capital
outlay that came to us with the
appropriation language that was
not.
Functional for us to implement
that capital outlay and then as
a percentage of general fund was
reverted much to my dismay thank
you I Mr chairman thank you
Secretary for that and I hope
that my meat inspection built
not on your list.
Of then.
Because I promise you I just
want to tell you I promise you
that this is the first step of
many to get that passed and when
you need FTEs for that I will be
the first one beating the drum
for that thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you thank you very much
separate making members
the Secretary great see it just
a couple of quick questions
first Mr secretary
The.
yeah we did the the legislature
led by the house last year thank
you as close to a fifteen
percent increase for New Mexico
Environment Department correct
Mr chairman I believe that's
that's up yeah that's about
right okay the and thank you Mr
secretary and this year
this is sort of probably more
due to this sort of the timing
of the budget process but in
fact for the numbers that we
have we the the the LFC this
committee's recommendation is
above the executive
recommendation as it sort of
comes through to us even as he
pointed out some of the other
opportunities Mr Chairman you're
correct that in certain P. codes
as as our great analyst both
described there is an increase
and Mr chairman those increases
will will will be at the
jeopardy of whether or not we
have a functioning program
support.
To to administer those Mr
Chairman in the water protection
division three hundred thousand
dollars for contracts is awesome
but you know ensuring that we
have contracts staff to execute
those contracts is also key.
Thank you very much Mr Secretary
and Mr secretary for the sort of
the the responsiveness right now
it seems like there's a lot of
opportunity within the special
appropriate appropriations
that's where for last year non
recurring money great
opportunity tied to existing
sort of whether it's at the
federal or at the state level
existing opportunities you you
is that fair to say Mr chairman
I would one hundred percent
agree with you great thank you
for that I think we we have some
additional opportunity there and
this committee is going to
continue to be to work
especially on the special side
because the the work with
industry stakeholders the the
sort of the the public private
partnerships that this
department in particular is part
of I think a lot of we see as
very important to our state
moving forward in areas of water
in areas of energy and in and
protecting our environment with
that they got a turn a little
I'll turn to Representative how
to me what we're going to ask
for the LFC recommendation and
they'll be continued work
especially within the special
appropriations Mr chair I move
that we accept the LFC
recommendation.
Great it's been moved by
Representative how to me a
second by Representative Lujan
is their opposition to adopting
the LFC recommendation please
show Representative monthly.
will adopt that Mr secretary
thank you will look for to
continue to work together and Mr
Representative Montoya please
the secretary just.
Are you I'm doing my part to
kill bills and energy so you
won't have those unfunded
mandates.
We're gonna we're gonna that
thank you.
thank you Mr secretary.
Going to and now ask our.
Both to.
What.
We're gonna ask.
Invite up secretary probes.
Mr secretary it's great to see
you
great seeing this it's been.
And will ask Miss it's been two
as thank you forget everything
will course we have mismas CS
great to see you from the
department of finance
administration.
Whenever you're ready Mrs thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee again my name's
Jessica hits then LFC analyst
this is for HSD three four one
of the department of finance
administration.
we you all have a LFC packet
here in the first page is an
agency high level this provides
an high level overview of the
agency's general fund
differences in the two
recommendations you're welcome
to follow along on that as well
but will be mainly working off
of the diff sheets in the P.
code level and so we'll go ahead
and get started on pages two and
three of that document Mr chair
I will go ahead and start with
the roll up and if you all would
like to follow along in your
volumes those numbers are also
listed on page two of pages
sixty I'm sorry seventy six
through eighty six in volume two
and then there is a supplemental
chart in our volume three on
page forty six and this is to
provide information on the civil
legal service contracts.
so I'm going to get started with
the differences in the role of
Mr chair on the executive
recommendation exceed the
legislative recommendation by
thirty six point one million
dollars in general fund revenue
and this is primarily due to
differences in the agency's
request for of food expansions
the executive also includes two
point five million dollars in
federal revenues for the
agencies federal grants
management bureau where's the
legislative recommendation
provides four hundred thousand
for this effort but with general
fund revenues lastly the
recommendations different uses
of fund balances with the
executive recommending twenty
two point two million dollars
above LFC from the tobacco
settlement program fund and this
Mr chair Representative of
result in a net difference
between the two recommendations
of just under sixty one million
dollars.
In terms of basic Senators the
executive recommendation exceeds
LFC by five hundred forty seven
point four thousand in person
because the executive funds more
the agencies vacancies and
decreases the budgeted vacancy
rate.
Offer contracts the executive
exceeds LESC by four hundred
forty four point six thousand
dollars this is because the
executive provides more funding
for contract audit support and
IT and other costs the executive
also sees LFC by a hundred and
eighty nine point one thousand
dollars this accounts for
differences and recommendations
for grants to local governments
audit fees information
technology and training across
the different programs all the
differences in the agencies
other financing uses between the
two recommendations are
accounted for for that
difference in tobacco settlement
program fund revenue.
in terms of language Mr chair we
will go over these in the
associated P. codes but this is
a high level the executive
recommendation included language
authorizing DFA to transfer five
million dollars to the board of
finance emergency fund any here
the LFC and set a five million
recommends two point five
million.
for other transfer revenue again
the executive provides an
additional twenty four point
five million from the tobacco
settlement program fund and five
point three million again from
the fund for Medicaid services
but both recommendations to
support language recommending
fifty one point eight million
from county supported Medicaid
fund we have noted of the
analysts have come to consensus
on all performance measures and
targets and that is across the
programs Mr chair additional
information about performance
measures can be found on page
seventeen in terms of expansions
again we'll go over these at the
P. code level but just to give
you all high level the executive
fully funds the request for
eight hundred fifty thousand
dollars for for term FTE and
this is the funding agencies
infrastructure task force on LFC
provides three hundred thousand
for three FTE.
in terms of the agencies federal
infrastructure office again the
executive report recommended the
request of two point five
million dollars using American
rescue plan Act funds over LFC
provides four hundred thousand
for three F. T. E. instead of
six and again the LFC
recommendation uses general fund
revenues
and then lastly the executive
also had a food expansion Mr
chair the executive includes
thirty four point seven million
dollars in recurring general
fund revenues for this food
initiative and this exceeds
agencies initial request by
twenty one point one million
dollars LFC include seven
hundred thousand dollars in the
operating budget in the base for
admins and operations of that
program but did not provide
additional food programs in the
operating budget and said LFC
took the approach of funding
these appropriations in
nonrecurring special so you'll
see those as well on the order
of information but will break it
down in the Pecos Mister chair
and all handed over to Nicole
must yes thank you just have
members of the committee I will
now start on P. five four one
which is on page four of your
packet you can see here within
the base the executive
recommendation exceeds the
legislature LFC recommendation
by a hundred and sixty nine
point nine thousand dollars in
general fund
the executive exceeds LFC by
thirty four point five in
general fund revenues related to
the statewide food initiative as
she previously mentioned and
then two point five in federal
revenues within the expansion of
for the agencies federal grants
management expansion with our
for funding.
The executive within the base
the executive fully funds the
agency could request for person
to fill vacancies the LFC
recommends funding for personal
flat with FY twenty three which
is the love the executive five
hundred thousand and a base the
executive recommendation also
fully funds the agency requests
for other costs exceeding the
LFC recommendation by six sixty
nine point nine thousand dollars
for information technology and
training both recommendations
support the agency requests for
contractual services in the face
there were no FTE increases for
the base as well I do have one
technical correction for the
language within section for the
executive actually recommended
ten million dollars for the
board of finance emergency
funding where is the legislative
actually recommended two point
five million their work
consensus for targets for
performance measures for this
key code and then I will kind of
expand a little bit more on
these two expansions within P.
five four one the first is for
the federal grants management
division the executive did you
use of federal funding the LFC
uses general fund at the for the
second expansion the executive
also includes thirty four point
seven million dollars in
recurring general fund for the
statewide food initiative.
Which exceeds our and the
agency's initial requests of
twenty one point one the LFC
just to reiterate what Jessica
had previously mentioned include
seven hundred thousand for the
administration of the program
within the agency's budget
request but does not provide
additional food programs within
the agency a majority of those
costs for the statewide food
initiative includes funding for
of the you know virtual school
meals program and our secretary
secretary will kind of our
excuse me miss candles have as
well kind of talk about that a
little bit more in the
presentation that concludes my
comments for P. five four one
I'll turn it over to Jessica for
any additional comments of no
additional comments Mr chair on
this piece of I'm so we're going
to move to the next P. code P.
five four two this is programs
support this is a one pager
pretty quick you can see the
differences here are four
hundred point seven thousand
dollars in general fund revenue
that the look LFC reckons bill
is lower than the executive by
that much on the agency doesn't
receive other sources of revenue
for this purpose that's pretty
straightforward in terms of uses
as you can see executive
provided a little more funding
for personnel about two hundred
ninety thousand over LFC however
the LFC recommendation
I apologize the executive
recommendation also exceed LFC
by a hundred thousand in
contracts this is because the
executive fully funds the
request for contract audit
services which LESC did not
include and then they also
exceed LESC by ten point seven
thousand and other costs and
this is related to increased
audit fees so the LFC provides
fifty thousand over FY twenty
three where as the executive
provide sixty point seven
thousand over FY twenty three
and again consensus on
performance and for Nicole for
any additional comments thank
you Jessica Mr chair members of
the committee I will now go to
page seven of your packet I
don't have any additional
comments for P. five four two
eight four P. five four three
which is your community
development local government
assistance and fiscal oversight
program that includes local
government division II nine one
one R. D. W. Y. program budget
and finance bureau community
development throughout special
services bureau and the real
friends here I mentioned within
this
this program code P. five four
three the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation for general
revenues by one point one
million providing more than
twenty four percent increase
over FY twenty three whereas the
LFC provides a seven point five
percent increase both
recommendations support equal
revenues from all other sources
within the base the executive
recommendation exceeds the LESC
five hundred and twelve point
three thousand in the base which
fully funds all positions within
P. five four three the LFC
recommendation provide enough
funding to fill fifteen bacon
Act do in the program in
contractual services the
executive find three hundred and
forty four point six thousand
over the legislative
recommendation but I
recommendations reflected
increase overall for the
category to reflect decrease on
in from.
And with them I'll do do
appropriations how do you do is
local government division
The executive recommendation
provides ninety six thousand
less than the executive for
other costs this is primarily
due to differences in
recommending for of funding for
grants to local governments and
then within this unit this
program unit we also have civil
legal services the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
by three hundred and forty six.
Forty seven point six thousand
dollars in general fund however
both recommendations provide one
point one in other revenues from
the fund the executive
recommended a partial swap of
revenues reducing the amount of
from the social services fund
five five hundred thousand and
replacing it with about three
hundred and fifty thousand in
general fund revenues the LFC
did not support the swap because
they supported the reduction in
fund balance balance uses in
alignment with the request that
kept the general fund revenue
recommendations flat with FY
twenty three as far as section
four language the legislative
recommendation includes language
providing eighty thousand to the
town of Bernalillo for recurring
financial support services which
the executive did not include
due to this being a legislative
act.
Recommendations included
language authorizing use of
twelve point four million from
the enhanced the nine one one
Fund.
A twenty two point three million
from the local D. W. Y. grant
Fund and one point one million
from the civil legal services
fund of analysts have come to
consensus on all performance
measure targets and then I will
touch on the expansion
for this program code which is
for the agencies infrastructure
task force the executive
recommendation fully funds the
request for for FTE for this
task force the LFC provides
three hundred thousand or five
hundred and fifty less than the
executive for three FTE provided
recommendations provides funding
and expand it expenditure
categories professional to the
request but with the lower
recommended funding amount I
will now turn over to Jessica
for any additional comments for
this purpose thank you to call
thank you Mr chair just a couple
quick comments on this P. code
of you will have an additional
supplementary document on page
fourteen of your handouts for
civil legal services this is
showing that again the executive
provided a slight increase in
general fund revenues but that
was intended to partially offset
the decrease in in other
revenues from the fund but you
can see the LFC also supported
the decreased revenue from the
fund because they're running out
of fund balance but we held
general fund flat with FY twenty
three so it is resulting in an
overall net decrease for the
program but again general fund
was held flat in the LFC
recommendation I do just want to
know also Mr chair that in your
volume two is unfortunately
there was a a an error in there
that is authorizing it mentions
the use of one point six million
dollars from the fund rather
than one point one that is
actually in the recommendations
so there's no need I don't think
to develop any at a and it's or
anything like that is just for
the committees are notification
so and then we believe that I do
want to also.
Just note for civil legal
services there are also some one
time appropriations to that fund
in the specials list and I will
go over that and a little bit
but I did just want to know
Executive provides a one point
four million dollar infusion
into the fund where as the LFC
find six hundred thousand which
is the amount of the shortfall
prior year so just so you're
aware Mr chair without I'll go
on to the next P. code P. five
four four this is the program of
fiscal management and oversight
I'll be pretty brief but you can
see that the main differences
here are in fund balance
revenues and that again from the
tobacco settlement program fund
difference that I mentioned
earlier on the LFC
recommendation provides revenues
from that fund flat with FY
twenty three the executive
recommendation also exceed LFC
by five fifty seven point six
thousand in general fund
Executive provides a five
percent increase over FY twenty
three where is LFC provides a
four point one percent increase
in terms of the basic spend
insurers again executive fully
funds requests for personnel
providing a three percent
increase over FY twenty three of
course the executive provides
sorry for for contract yes I
apologize Mister chair of the
LFC provides forty five point
one thousand less than the
executive but does provide
adequate funding for an
additional funded FTE and you
can see that in your PS calc.
in terms of the agencies other
uses Executive provides twelve
point five thousand above LFC
for additional comprehensive
annual financial report and
audit training or kaffir propel
full and the executive provides
a hundred seventy two point five
thousand increase over FY twenty
three well as we're as LFC
provides a hundred sixty
thousand.
in terms of language again just
noting differences in language
for tobacco settlement program
fund and consensus on
performance measures and targets
are handed over to Nicole for
the next P. coat thank you
Jessica Mr chair members of the
committee if you'll turn to page
eleven and twelve for membership
dues and membership this is a
couple of the special
appropriations that flow through
the department of finance and
administration the executive
exceeds the LFC recommendation
for general fund revenues five
hundred and one point four
thousand dollars there are no
differences in recommended
amounts for the non general
funded items including statewide
teen court and the law
enforcement protection fund
within the base the executive
provides an additional hundred
and eleven point four thousand
over the LFC for the land grant
council the LFC provides funding
for the land grant council of
flat with FY twenty three and
the Legisla- LFC recommendation
exceeds the executive
recommendation by ten thousand
for the leasehold community
assistance program to allow for
races providing an increase of
sixty thousand over FY twenty
three
as far as performance measures
of Alice's come to consensus for
these performance measures and
there were no mentions of
language I'll turn it now over
back to Jessica for any
additional comments adjustment
Mister chair if it's a it helps
you will to serve you these
differences page thirteen
provides the US slightly nicer
looking different she put for
those non operating expenditures
and as you can see Nicole
summarized the differences just
a small of it sorry LFC provides
just a little bit more for
leasehold community assistance
and the executive provides a
little more for the late great
council so those are the main
differences in that Picotte of
that is The presentation we
can't speak just briefly to the
agencies of special.
Request if Mister chair if you
would like for me to do so
before the agency presentation
absolutely thank you Mr Mr chair
so in terms of the agency
special appropriations on page
fifteen and sixteen you can see
a high level different sheet
just highlight so because this
is a kind of complicated chart
here but there are some
differences in the in the
recommendations for
infrastructure offices and
matching funds on these are
related to items to four seven
ten and sixteen on your sheet on
these are just basically the L.
of the executive provides one
big appropriation for matching
assistance for local governments
where is the LFC at as you all
may know has a sponsored bill
attempting to create an
infrastructure office and so
we've made recommendations in
alignment with that of bill and
so you can see there are items
related to matching funds local
government assistance and also
standing up that office in terms
of housing Mister chair I don't
wanna throw too many numbers at
you but there are several items
on here for housing items one
nine fifteen twenty and twenty
one again there's providing
additional funds for things like
regency rental assistance of
course we provide funds for us
things like the mortgage finance
authority programs you can see
some differences there in terms
of the recreation difference
this is on line number eight the
executive did not include this
just wasn't LFC ad in this is
forty million dollars to
continue the existing recreation
grant program that we felt was
administered pretty successfully
last year finally there's also
two more is the civil legal
services and fusion that I
mentioned earlier which is line
seventeen again executive
provides one point four million
LFC find six hundred thousand
and finally the food initiative
this is on line number three and
I do just want to call the
committee's attention to this so
in addition to the recurring
funding that Nicole laid out the
third I believe it's thirty four
million dollars in recurring the
executive also includes twenty
one.
One million dollars in
nonrecurring funding for food
initiatives on the LFC
recommendation on the other hand
find all nonrecurring funding we
currently provide seven point
five million for DFA for various
initiatives I'm as I'm sure
Kendall mention on the
consolidated different requests
from different agencies but LFC
give seven and a half million
dollars for that initiative and
then an additional seven and a
half million Mr chair for the
public education department for
things like meal quality
improvements and food waste
reduction initiatives so that is
not on the sheet but if you just
want to note that in addition to
the seven point five you see
online three LFC also has
another seven point five for PED
so those are my comments on the
specials Mr chair and if Nicole
has no other comments we can
hand it to secretary
Thank you Jessica Mr chair
members of the committee I just
want to kind of point out a
couple of items that Jessica did
not provide any highlights to
and that is just one is just
three hundred for the
information technology
infrastructure upgrades for the
specials and then you know that
the gap of the difference for
the statewide food initiative
for the
for the the department of
finance and administration.
And that concludes my comments
at this point thank you
secretary famous it's been
playing this with the S. Mr
secretary it's great to see you
and please feel free to
introduce members you to thank
you Mr chairman and committee my
name is Andrew props on the
cabinet secretary for the New
Mexico department of finance and
administration it's a pleasure
to be here with you today I'm
gonna try to be brief Mr
chairman I know you have a
couple of easy simple agencies
coming up next so you probably
want to make a little bit of
time and I'll I'll try to help
with that I do want to start off
by thanking our analyst Mr
chairman for the work they do
not only during the session and
on the agency's budget
throughout the year we couldn't
do what we do without the LFC
and without Tesco or the
analysts but after the our
agency as well so I do want to
recognize and thank them for
their their work on behalf of
the agency we do have a number
of very talented colleagues with
me today Mister chairman I'm not
gonna go through all of them and
introduce them I do hope this
chairman you will give me a
little bit of a pass this time
around I am still new to the
agency there's a lot I don't
know about even our own budget
let alone the budgets of other
agencies so I may have to rely
on them a little bit more for
help and hopefully I'll have to
next year if I'm still here next
year
I do want to cover four areas Mr
chairman you do have a
presentation I'm not gonna go
through each of the slides but
as I said I would like to cover
four areas you'll see that
there's a summary of the General
Fund recommendations between the
executive and the LFC both
analysts have done excellent job
of of covering what those
differences are the overall
difference of course looks big
but really once you get down to
the to the program by program
analysis the the differences
aren't that large especially
when you take out the food
initiatives
I do think Mr chairman that
there.
Is if I have one asked to make
of this committee understanding
that you'll take you'll see
recommendation at the end of of
our presentation today other
perhaps we continue to have some
discussion in terms of getting a
little bit closer on the
personal services employee
benefits categories for all of
all of the programs it is
imperative Mr chairman that we
fill the positions that we have
been budgeted I have a strong
commitment to doing so to making
sure that if you
are allocate FTEs to the
agencies that we do everything
we can not only to keep the good
employees that we have a to fill
the positions as a come open but
overall Mr chairman I do want to
say that the recommendations are
not that far apart I do think a
few extra hundred thousand
dollars but in the personal
services employee benefits
category would make a
significant difference to the
agency so that's that is one
thing I wanted to the
government's chairman.
Going to the board of finance
emergency funding the analyst
covered this I I know in the and
we have some language the
executive is recommended ten
million dollars for emergency
funding it and the LFC is
recommended approximately two
point five percent Mr chairman
and members of the committee
again if we could close that gap
a little bit maybe to five
million dollars I know I don't
have to tell the committee what
talented staff we have at the
board of finance the great job
that actually in her for staff
to on behalf of the board of
finance simply Mr chairman of
the needs are are far
outstripping the amount of money
that we have to provide
emergency funding throughout the
year and so was chairman I would
respectfully ask Miss perhaps as
the process continues if we
could continue to look at that
happen and maybe get a closer to
five million or or meet
somewhere in the middle I would
appreciate your consideration of
that Mr chairman with your
permission in the committee
committees of permission I would
like to ask the candle from the
governor's office come up at
this time and talk a little bit
about the the food initiatives
and and the difference is that.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak today again
I'm Kendall Chavez and the food
hundred visor in the office of
the governor Michelle Lujan
Grisham I will keep my comments
pretty brief today I wanna
direct you to slide seven I
believe which is titled food
initiative
I think the main point I want to
get across is want to first
thank you for your trust in
partnership in this consolidated
budget approach we know that it
was a bit wonky and confusing
for folks last year but we
really truly think that this is
the system for addressing our
food systems challenges both on
the hunger side and on the
agriculture side we have dozens
of programs stretched across
multiple agencies that we track
across state government so with
with the finish of specifically
we have about twenty programs
across nine state agencies so
when you see that number well
I'll tell your attention to FY
twenty four recommendations
under the executive of executive
recommendation of fifty five
million that is stretched across
ninety agencies again with the
bulk of the increase I want to
make a comment that the net
increase from the agency
recommendation to the executive
is actual only one million
dollars what we ended up doing
as after conversations and
districts our local partners we
subject we shifted nonrecurring
funding for health universal
school meals which is a thirty
million dollar budget package
and Senate bill for over to
recurring based on what we heard
from superintendents
administrators and food service
directors and so that is the the
increase that you will see in
the budget and also enjoy your
attention as a political and
Jessica have mentioned LFC did
recommend seven point five to
DFA in one time funding we're
thankful for that and are
excited to you know work with
that number the seven point five
that is requests are are for
pead we actually don't think is
necessary you'll see what I get
to the next budget slide we have
a two million dollar one time
funding line item for Ted the
additional five point five
million the LFC is recommending
is not necessary and so we're
recommending that that seven
point five for PED's the moved
over to DFA for again the
consolidated budget approach.
we have four high level program
buckets that I want to quickly
speak to again I'll keep my
comments brief one is kids
kitchens the second is looking
specifically at senior an elder
hunger the third emergency food
assistance and innovation in our
emergency food programs and a
focus on farm ranch and food
business support L. use right
click rating member Armstrong's
course as you said the other day
we are you know we are also
focused on New Mexicans feeding
New Mexicans and is really the
spirit and the heart of this
initiative and so Joe you to
slide fourteen to food
initiative FY twenty four budget
request and again I'll just jot
a few highlights for you I am
sorry that these lines are
number next and we'll make sure
that that happens but if you
look down at Penn at the very
bottom.
New Mexico grown for school
meals healthy universal school
meals.
I think it's on I see the
supplied fourteen very back of
our hand of.
Last time without this annual
LESC committee members are
pretty upset with me so I I
apologize but I think.
The glass the.
I think I can find yes I have my
glasses on so I can get happy to
send this to you by email also
later a digital copy and I was
going to briefly touch on to the
pandemic bucket of funding again
is for a concept or a budget
passed a budget priority the
recalling kids kitchens that
includes thirty million dollars
again captured in Senate bill
four for healthy universal
school meals which we are
recommending needs to be
recurring a two million dollar
line item for New Mexico grown
for schools as a ten year old
program plus and we the HSD is
already reporting that twenty
three funds have been almost
completely expended because of
the addition of New Mexico needs
Lamberton be fixed cetera as
well as staff on the F. T. in
contractual support side for
PED's to really build out an arm
of the of the agency that will
just to scratch cooking healthy
meals and I have to it's
important for me to say that
this entire piece of the budget
is really focused on improving
our quality and health of school
mills here in the state of New
Mexico and doing that through a
lens of local agriculture and so
we're very excited about the
priority we have some farmers
and ranchers and food service
directors here in the room with
us today
the second large bucket is our
support for farm and far Farman
agriculturalist so you'll see
four line items for NMDA double
up food Bucks the healthy soil
program farm and ranch
development which will act as
almost a block grant program for
nonprofits in cities tribes to
operate internship and
apprenticeship programs we heard
loud and clear that this was the
need in our community as well as
a handful of other market
development development programs
for farms like and grown for
senior centers New Mexico grown
for preschools and other
programs are really prioritize
local food here in the state and
the last thing I'll draw your
attention to is investments in
emergency food infrastructure so
you'll see ten million dollars
under HSD for the community food
assistance program we're
recommending that those funds
also be available to again
tribes Indian tribal
organizations and local food
pantries who want to apply for
the fund.
And to do this work on the local
level.
And the last comment that'll
make it is you know many of
these items you'll see between
twenty three and twenty four are
very modest increases we didn't
make any increases that we can't
justify completely and they're
all pretty conservative other
than the thirty million dollar
increase for universal school
meals which we believe in the
executive I know from talking to
many of you and our our
stakeholders out large that
people want to see screen built
improve in the state of New
Mexico so we're excited about
that priority and then in
closing I would just say the
prospect of Secretary
we're talking about this budget
again to fifty five million and
change in terms of expansion
across nine agencies such as
hundreds of thousands of of
individuals all across the state
of New Mexico in every single
county so again a dollar figure
may look large but this is again
hitting every can calls every
community in the state we have
data to back that up and a
stress across nine different
agencies and so with that I'll
pass it back to the secretary
thank you Mr chairman I just
sort of recover for errors
should add one I do want to note
local government division I know
this is probably the division at
at DFA that's nearest and
dearest to your heart and
achievement work most closely
with and I just want to noted Mr
chairman good work at the local
decisions does and that this is
perhaps in areas this process
continues that we can get a
little bit closer between the
LFC and exec recommendations and
finally Mr Chairman our
financial control division
Mr Chairman if there's one area
DFA that keeps me up at night
it's probably this division is
not because we don't have
fantastic staff there we do have
fantastic staff there we have
great leadership there Mr
Chairman in my opinion the
cabinet secretary of DFA is
probably the least important
position the HSD if I didn't
show up to work for a couple
weeks people probably wouldn't
even notice especially since I
tend to be quiet anyway
but if the folks at in our
financial control division don't
show up each and every.
Day.
If we have retirements that
we're not prepared to fill with
succession planning if we have
employees poached by other
agencies because because it is a
very competitive market out
there for state employees could
state employees
we could be in a situation where
we would all be concerned we
have to meet payroll we have to
make sure we're providing part
of support all of the work that
our financial control division
does it's extremely important
it's not the the work that gets
the most notice but behind the
scenes a critically important to
mentioning of of state
government and the department so
as chairman I just want to flag
that is another area where while
the overall differences between
the executive and LESC are not
large perhaps we could continue
not just this year but into next
year as well talking about how
we can make sure that that
division has the resources it
needs to do its important work
on behalf of the state with that
Mr Chairman we're happy to
answer any questions thank you
very much Mr Secretary this
child as we're gonna go straight
to questions will go to first
Representative Herndon and then
ranking member Armstrong
suffered.
Thank you Mr chair
members of the panel thank you
for your presentation today I
want to focus into specific
areas that are of great concern
to me Mr chair first I I'm
looking at the different C. and
I'm looking at expansions and
I'm looking under the section
that refers to federal grants
management and so Mister chair
my my biggest concern there's
we've heard over and over many
times doing these presentations
about how there needs to be
matching of requests both with
to get federal money and that
the state agencies have to have
federal grants but they don't
often have the ability nor the
expertise to write those
requests and Mr chairman
understanding and I'm going to
ask for an explanation of
whether that the DFA now has an
entire division focused on
helping to write federal grants
and it really concerns me that
we're seeing this reduction of
two thousand two million one
hundred twenty three thousand
dollars that so Mister chair
members of the panel and I would
like for you to please explain
why that's happened and miss
Smith you thank you very much
for percent furnace it's me if
you have anything and then to
the secretary for I yes Mr chair
so so as mentioned excuse me so
the request came in as a request
to use them American rescue plan
Act funds of federal funds the
LFC and essentially views is it
they're booked in the
appropriation contingency funds
we've utilised essentially as
general fund revenue so that's
speaking to the difference in
the uses of the funds in terms
of the recommended amounts we
provided four hundred thousand
in the recurring operating
budgets primarily to support FTP
and Administration of those
programs but we do as mentioned
LFC hasn't us sponsored bill
this year that is attempting to
create an independent
infrastructure.
Of and and so if I can also put
your attention to the pages
fifteen and sixteen and I can
show you a couple of differences
in the nonrecurring funding
and so if you look at line
number two you can see that the
LFC recommendation includes two
million dollars for capacity
building grants to councils of
government and this is primarily
for technical assistance for
local governments who is
speaking to to your concern in
terms of capacity we provided
two million dollars for that
initiative specifically there's
also whites on here online for
eight million dollars for cost
overruns so projects that are
experiencing capital outlay over
runs that need additional gap
financing and then there's five
million dollars in line number
ten for state matching funds so
this would be local match
assistance for local governments
Mr chair thank you for
Representative this reduction
that's an increase the estate
the DFA the LCS all.
Reduction.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
that clarification on that item
and Mr chair I do have another a
major concern and is looking at
something that the that the DFA
secretary focus on that was in
local government community
services and specifically
looking at the civil legal
services frontier area and and
Mr chair I think it's really
important to point out that that
this legislature twenty two
years ago actually created the
little legals civil legal
services infrastructure to help
low income individuals and and
today Mr chair and and panel I I
I do want to remind you that
there are twelve organizations
that are providing the services
to the people in thirty three
counties who often don't have a
voice in the in civil legal
services are and I just and our
justice system and so to look at
that the the cut in these in
this
the amount of funding for them
is just disheartening because
who else is going to speak up
for them we look at right now Mr
chair and members of the panel
that right now today sixty seven
percent of the population in
this state is on Medicaid which
means that they are low income
and so we're looking at at the
civil legal services
find that in the civil legal
services organizations that
helps provide family safety we
look at domestic violence we
look at all sorts of things that
are that are affecting low
income individuals unfair debt
collection and it pains me Mr
chair to see such a great cut in
the civil legal services
division so Mister chair members
of the panel please explain why
you want to hurt so many people.
So that thank you very much for
Sanford and I think Miss it's we
can go back current the the LFC
recommendation is to keep the
general fund contribution flat
but that does result in a
reduction since the fund balance
is the fund is depleting so
they're slightly less than both
the executive and the LFC or
budgeting so sensually reduced a
shared reduction
Representative Herndon in the
fund transfer is
and the executive offsets that
with a slightly higher general
fund from FY twenty three.
Three hundred forty seven
thousand dollars higher.
Current LFC recommendation does
not include that but your yours
your emphasis on the importance
of this thank you for noting
that for sure.
Mr chair thank you very much
have I guess I was also
concerned that I want to bring
out that I heard in the early
part of the presentation at the
civil legal services from was
the reserve fund was completely
depleted and then that combined
with what I'm seeing on the on
the paper was another area that
I just wanted to bring to the
attention thank you Mr chair
thank thank thank you very much
Representative Hernandez next
we're gonna go to break member
Armstrong thank you Mr chairman
thank you for your presentation
I was curious about how the
county detention of prisoners
fund works and if it is if they
have to apply or the apply for
reimbursement or how does that
work Mr Chairman.
I'm not sure I can speak to that
briefly and that the agency has
additional comments it's my
understanding that this is the
transfer to I believe it's a New
Mexico's sentencing commission
and department of public safety
and so they go through a process
of so we're the local law
enforcement agencies will submit
data to the sentencing
commission to the counties
believes association of counties
helps to kind of coordinate all
of that and so this is providing
the funding for that but the
mechanism through which the
counties get the funding is
again the the local law
enforcement agencies will submit
data to the county association
and the sentencing commission on
the number of prisoners that are
housed on the number of
prisoners awaiting transport
there are certain qualifications
that are eligible for
reimbursement and so they would
submit those that that data the
sentencing commission then go
through a process of validating
that data I believe with some
assistance with DFA and then
those disbursements are are made
for those eligible costs and so
on that's my understanding of
that process okay thank thank
you Mr chairman and thank you
for that
accounting of that and then I
the yeah the other question I
have Mister chairman is if there
are these food initiatives
across nine different agencies
why are we doing it through DFA
and not directly to the agency.
Mr chair regained member
Armstrong so last year we came
with this page again to practice
this thing and is the
consolidated budget consolidate
we're almost operating as an
agency and making sure that each
one of these programs for the
service seniors preschoolers K.
twelve farmers X. that are
linked in a way that they would
be if they were in an actual
agency together you know DFA is
acting as the budget oversight
mechanism so we can make sure
that every cent of this is spent
we could be fully transparent on
performance measures and we can
track spending in real time much
quicker than if it was buried
within agencies budgets big deal
H. HSD pedig cetera and so that
was the original intent and here
we are seven eight months later
we have a full blown dashboard
that tracks every cent that
comes into this program trucks
several funds junior monies
because we can or acting almost
as as a proxy agency that makes
sense okay thank you Mr chairman
thank you thank you thank you
very much for making member
Armstrong next we're gonna go to
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair secretary I
want to express the same
concerns as Representative
Herndon and I I don't think I
could express it any clearer
than she did so I wanted to
share that with you about the
civil legal fund thank you thank
you very much Representative how
to meal.
May we have a chance to respond
Mr chair please visit if you'd
like to Mr property and
secretary Schardin are members
communities and to the point
Representative turned and
Representative apartment or.
We hear you we strongly support
this is well that's why the
executive agencies I as I
understand it funds
are still just as request so I
think just want to be clear this
from do a face up position we've
funded what are see less request
so just want to put it out there
thank you Secretary misstatement
thank you Mr chair again you
know just noting page fourteen
on this this information on page
fourteen does not take into
account the special
appropriations that I mentioned
earlier I'm again the executive
does provide a slightly higher
amount one point four million
but the LFC recommendation
provide six hundred thousand
with the intent to kind of meet
that gap in fund balance so
that's part of the reasoning
there and then I will just point
you also for your own on the
information again our volume
three on page forty six this is
our spiral bound document this
provides an overview of the
civil legal services spending
across other agencies and so DFA
on this is not the only
mechanism through which those
entities get funding there's
also funding that is provided
through CYFD for these agencies
aging and long term services
Department and crime victims
reparations commission for an
additional total of about I'd
just quick numbers a little
under two million dollars that
is also provided to these
organizations through these
other agencies so I did just
want to provide you that
information thank you very much
miss it's been thank you
Representative how to me next
we're gonna go to Representative
Lujan then Representative
Garrett than Representative
Brown.
Representative Lujan Sir thank
you I'm just going to go back Mr
chair to the.
The request here for FY twenty
three twenty four
recommendations to the executive
regarding the food initiative
and the LESC and I just it's a
basic question I know there's a
there's a big difference that
we're looking at here executive
says fifty five.
Twenty eight and we're and we
are from the LFC recommending
this seven point five are there
any bills that are.
There after there could be
contingent on affecting this
this budget line at all if you
can talk to us about that
subject.
Thank you Representative Lujan
Mr Chavez and then the message
if you want to offer any Mr
chair Representative Lujan thank
you for the question so there
are eyes on the soft memory I
think five or six appropriation
bills that directly relate to
our budget the executive budget
requests simply wrong senior
hunger and snap there's also a
healthy food and I don't have
the numbers excuse me the
healthy food financing
initiative on the Senate side
also is recommended in our
budget as well as Senate bill
four which holds that thirty
million dollars for universal
free meals so the universal free
no Senate bill four does
directly interact with this
budget and is contingent on a
passing.
Mr chair if I may I just wasn't
want also remind you of the
seven point five million dollars
that is in the LFC
recommendation for public
education department but at you
know as Kendall mentioned of the
Senate before is the biggest one
that has that thirty million
dollars in that appropriation
bill and so it's you know that
would essentially duplicate what
DFA has in the recurring budget
if both were to pass.
That's all I have thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Lujan next we're
gonna go to Representative
Garrett and representative press
thank you Mr chair I have two
questions and one requested a
service request if when you put
contingent on legislation
passing if we could include the
legislative bill sometimes we
can have down sometimes we get
my first question is on the
specials
but the line seven the operating
costs of infrastructure planning
development office that's
contingent I guess on Senate
bill one ninety seven so my
correct in understanding we're
taking position for the
governor's office that were
filled but not the legislative
department and now we're asking
for a actual office of
infrastructure planning my
understanding that correctly Mr
chair.
Mr chair I I believe that that's
correct and and we're moving so
I believe the DFA proposal is to
take those employees from the
governor's office and move them
into DFA where is the LFC
perspective is to create its own
separate office that would house
those those employees those same
initiatives.
Okay so Mister chair the
location will depend on the bill
passing will we do this anyway
regardless of the bill.
Mr chair I think that would
depend on the of the action that
is taken in these committees at
this time and so if there was
say you all take the LFC
recommendation and again we're
not taking action on the
specials at this time right now
either but see the LFC
recommendation was taken that
obviously would be contingent on
the bill but if if not then of
we would have the four hundred
thousand that's in the DFA
record the LFC recommendation
for DFA and those three FTE and
so that would LFC provides some
level funding at DFA already for
for things like staff
administration but the bulk of
the funds yes would be
contingent on that bill passing
thank you Mr chairman second
question is page sixteen line
twenty one
there is thirty million
allocated to the public private
partnership fund of the New
Mexico finance authority
eccentric cetera and it says it
is also contingent on enactment
of legislation of myself
Representative Brown are
actually co sponsoring a three
P. Neville we're wondering can
that go there or is this
specific bills that it's related
to.
Mr chair if I could have
director of you speak to that.
Thank you chair of.
See the.
I can tell you it's a matter to
discussion your.
About how to adjust that
recommendation to work closely
insure the.
Federal reserve rate for
so both whether it's legislation
or regulations for permission
sure sure
has the progress to sort that
out.
Okay thank you very much that's
it.
The very much Representative
Garrett thank you director Abbey
next we're gonna go to
representative from.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
secretary so I do have some
questions or concerns about the
civil legal legal services
funding so I'm looking at page
fourteen there's a chart there.
could you tell us what is
included in the category other
revenues and this is for revenue
sources.
There's a deduct there's a
reduction of a half a million
dollars it looks like from
twenty the twenty three are but
a budget to the twenty four.
Mr chair Representative Brown
so that other revenues portion
mainly comes from HSD filing
fees and so there has been a
pandemic impact to these fees
and so that's why you can see
the reduction of the those
revenue sources.
Mr chairman sectarian and ma'am
so things are.
Back up and running now so would
we not expect to see an increase
in filing fees noted reductions
for.
Mr chair Representative Brown we
do anticipate you know the
revenues you know we we have a
projection
it's been going down I mean we
can depending on the budget
availability project language
that language can you know
increase if we do see an
an increase in revenues but at
this point because what is
projected for this revenue
source.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr chair
of like to go to page sixteen in
the packet this is the
Page about supplementals and
special appropriations and just
want to double check these
numbers with you as well Mr
chair Senators online.
H. sixteen one seventeen
this is to the civil legal
services fund.
General the executive is
recommending one point seven
million the LFC is suggesting
six hundred thousand the
differences a hundred ten
thousand there's a note off to
the side that tells us that LFC
is.
Making its recommendation in
part because the program receive
four hundred and thirty.
Thousand dollars into your bill
funding and given to the base
operating budget in FY twenty
three.
And Mr chairman Mr I I think
that's helpful information but
there's no guarantee that junior
monies will be your marks for
this fund we we don't know what
to expect I think the request to
do today or maybe it's Friday
for the final but
don't know.
How much of the variable this
will be if you could address
that please Mr chairman Mr chair
Representative so I just wanna
let you know so in terms of the
junior bill appropriations so
this the four hundred thirty
thousand that I noted here this
is something that was
appropriated in the junior bill
last year but was scored by DFA
eyes recurring and so that was
adopted into the base budget for
that program and so the three
million of the three million
eight hundred thousand that you
saw on the other page that you
were just noting the general
fund amounts that is taking into
account the fact that they have
four hundred thirty thousand
dollars built into the operating
budget from the prior so that
will continue as long as it's
not removed by some other means
now the other thing I do want to
know is that we have us you know
heard the members concerns and
we are you know looking at
addressing the special in future
iterations of of the
recommendations I do just want
to provide some assurance there
as well.
Mr chair if I may ask for some
clarification so I've heard that
there's your that your money
will be considered not recurring
is that correct also Mr chair I
can't speak to whether or not
all of the money will be
recurring or nonrecurring my
Abbey director LFC speak to that
but but that would be right if
the agency received additional
appropriations from junior bill
if those funds were in fact
scored as non recurring then
you're correct that would be a
one time increase for that
program for that particular
fiscal year that would not then
roll into the next year and so
it just so happened that the
increases we saw last year were
scored by DFA as recurring and
so but I I don't know in terms
of the the total of the amount
how much is going to be
available for recurring versus
nonrecurring so so if there were
opportunities for more recurring
we could see the same the same
thing happened appropriating and
then that money getting rolled
into the off but for the next
year thank you that's helpful
information thank you Mr chair
thank you very much
Representative Brown next we're
gonna go to vice chair Dixon and
then Representative setting and.
Mr chair.
and.
Thank you Secretary I apologize
for.
Missing part of the presentation
I have a couple of questions
specifically around the grants
Division zero into the matching
grant funds I notice in the
specials and supplementals that
DFA requested a hundred million
for matching grants for
Local communities
last year the legislature
appropriated a million dollars
for matching grants to set up a
matching grant fund but to my
knowledge we have not seen the
legislature has not seen the
application or the process by
which subdivisions will apply
for those funds.
Mr chairman and members the
committee and
Meister Dixon since I was around
last year and then look behind
whoever wants to stand up and
give an update on where we are
with a.
Thank you.
It just please introduce
yourself thank you so much
after.
I get afternoon Mister chairman
industry that going goes and I'm
the assistant bureau associate
deputy director for acting
deputy director for local
government division so I I do
want to let you know the one
million dollars has been fully
allocated and those applications
were received those are
radically would have been issued
and we are currently waiting for
pay request on them but they
have been fully issued and
executed.
thank you Mr chair secretary and
Mr agbo
I would really like it though if
this the legislature could be
looped in on this I'm since it
is a specific program that we
had set you know provided the
funding for and asked to be
establish so
I do believe that there is
funding in the special.
Sorry it seems really loud
That the LFC has put in for a
much smaller amount to believe a
five million is that correct
assessment of Mr chair let me
just double check that.
And this would be for the match
she said yes yes so this would
be for apologies this would be
like number ten and yes five
million dollars and again this
is to help support of both the
infrastructure office but as
well as you know providing
additional capacity building for
requests for governments thank
you and so I think what I would
ask is that you know I think the
LFC recommendation as far more
reasonable given that you know
we haven't had an opportunity to
provide oversight of the
distribution of those funds to
ensure that it's it's being done
with the intent of the
legislature and that you know
it's sort of going where it was
intended so I think five million
is it is a great starting point
because I think we all
understand the need of our local
communities to be able to access
those matching funds so thank
you very much I'm really pleased
to hear that the funds have been
allocated but it would be great
if we could get some follow up
on that so that we know how
that's working and Mr chair
secretary along those same lines
it would be great if we could
get an update maybe a report
somehow on how the federal
grants bureau is progressing in
terms of
what agencies or potentially
local subdivisions it has been
able to help I know that there
are performance metrics that are
going to be used in the future
but it would be great as we're
making decisions about
increasing the funds up from
four hundred thousand to two
point five million
Mr chair and Mr secretary do you
by chance know if DFA has
registered as the single point
of contact for the federal
government for federal grants
yes as of last year we had not.
Mr chairman and vice chair Dixon
I don't.
Yes Mr Chairman representative
Dixon yes we have excellent.
Thank you very much
Last sort of area of questions
Mr chair secretary of the law
enforcement recruitment funds
that were authorized last year
of approximately fifty million
dollars
that were.
I believe sent to department of
public security by way of DFA
for the application process
there were a couple of hiccups
in the application process and
distribution of those funds and
so I would really appreciate if
it's possible to get an update
on that to from I don't know if
that's possible today or
potentially and writing
on whether we have.
sort of revised some of those
figures
and we're if we have a formal
application process now Mr
members the committee and vice
chair of Dixon first of all on
all three of your request would
be happy to provide you with
additional information we can
provide you with our report on
how the one million dollars was
allocated
and we can provide you with
additional information on why
the executive is recommending a
hundred million dollars for
those of local matching grants
we do think it's very important
we clearly here probably not as
loudly as you do but we all we
do hear from their communities
about their capacity to access
these requests a lack of grant
writers six hundred we want to
we want help we want to be a
real resource to you in your
community so we'll follow up
with you on that as well in
terms of the law enforcement
retention Fund I know a little
bit about that what I do know is
that there were some hiccups as
you accurately noted in terms of
the roll out on out some
confusion in terms of what that
money was intended to be used
for available for a year
communities are we apologize for
our part in causing any of that
confusion I think we have a much
clearer idea now of what the
intent was and how to execute
that intent and be happy to
follow up with you as well in
terms of what we're doing on
the.
Mr chair of ms please thank you
so much Mr chair representative
of vice chair Dixon I this
committee may have already
received this update on from
fall hearings but yeah we reach
out to to to DFA to get some
more updates on how those awards
were distributed is our
understanding that up for
instance there was a error that
was in Los crucis where they
listed their total force number
as their vacancy number I it's
more understanding I don't
believe that that's been
corrected but I know that the
agencies reaching out to DPS for
more information and it's my
understanding that DFA has
initiated a follow up either
survey or application or
something like that four
agencies who did not receive
funding in the first round on to
help address a few of those
concerns but again it's it's our
understanding that some of those
errors from the first round have
we're not corrected in advance
of the awards being distributed
and so we just wanted to let you
know that as well.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Mr mannerisms and I think the
work that time DFA does is
tremendous and very helpful for
all of our local communities
moving forward you know I hope
that we can make sure that the
money is spent as intended and
perhaps find ways of regularly
providing into that information
back to legislators on how those
things are being implemented
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much vice chair
Dixon excellent questions and
thanks to you and to me on the
committee with the the
specifically with the local
government grants division that
that we were there was a
conversation about the work that
went in there
Mr secretary I think you've
noted some of so and I apologize
Representative things first
chairman I I think.
HM I just have a six a believe
it's legal services question
why should other sources of
funding be taken into
consideration
for COS when the state is saving
hundreds of thousands of dollars
by not having to hire in house
lawyers to pay their budget.
That makes sense Mr chairman and
members of the committee and
Representative Representative it
does make sense I don't have a
probably just satisfactory
answer to I think it's it's
that's the way it has been done
I know that there are other
areas of government for example
harkening back to my read more
recent history with public
employees retirement association
the judicial magistrate court.
Retirement plans are funded
partially through.
Ortiz as well so I I don't know
the history of why why it is
that that other revenue sources
been used to fund this but.
That so there's probably some of
those industries maybe Mr
Abbott.
Thank thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman okay let's
try this one
there's a bill out there that
eliminates all filing filing
fees which would eliminate the
quarter which so let's start
with there's a bill to eliminate
all filing fees which would
eliminate a quarter of the CLS
budget do you have any way to
recuperate that if if that bill
this past any ideas.
Mr chair can I can just from the
LESC perspective I get I I think
that we are looking at
addressing shortfalls in the
special appropriation so again
looking at the six hundred
thousand trying to determine
what additional need there would
be on it and especially in the
case of that bill if it were to
pass and eliminate those filing
fees you know that would be
something that we would consider
in those discussions so.
Decisions have.
Thank you ladies act thank you
very much Mr Abbey and thank you
Frank Representative sunny and
Representative.
Great thank thank you very much.
Okay thank thank you Mr
secretary briefly Mr secretary
if you could just follow up with
this on a few of these we see
very low funded vacant rates
except for in the community
development in the local
government division in that Mr
Secretary were shown a twenty
nine point two percent.
Funded vacant right.
But but I want to echo your
point Mr Secretary and know sort
of the I think the request to
move closer to the executive
personal services employee
benefits and that is reflected
in all but that one in that one
Picotte secondly miss this are
we with the unified approach and
your success in moving funds are
allocated last year out I think
is positive.
Have you sort of take in account
or other ways to account for the
snap benefits and the other sort
of nutrition supports that we
that the state of New Mexico
receives and then administers as
part of as you can sort of noted
it New Mexicans feeding New
Mexicans Mr chair members of the
committee that's a very good
question so on this dashboard
that we developed it does track
all the federal funds coming in
as you likely now Mr chair snap
is more I don't a very large
percentage of the of the value
of money coming into the state
for food
as you know Mister chair and
other committees likely know a
lot all of the federal budget
are waiting R. F. they haven't
already been rolled back and so
yes in the last two years over
the pandemic we have seen a
massive amount of revenue coming
into the state or snap
specifically but those benefits
are are ending you know as we
speak so thank you very much
present and we've we've heard
that an RHS The presentation
another sort of the the the
decent of benefits that The New
Mexicans we see in there
it briefly I I just know that
for secretary as
where food is really the largest
sort of disk the the the food
supports of the largest
discrepancy
there's been additional
including in some of the
supplemental appropriation
approaches I think there are
significant amounts out there
including that'll be there for
the executive were I would think
we would just urge that all of
those be put on the table in
order to meet this need and to
acknowledge I think the success
that Mr Chavez and her team of
had when they receive funds to
move those out there we have
more tools than just and and
through that the GAA to address
that is that.
Yeah and just to note that and
if you want to add in order to
determine I appreciate.
Thank you very much Mr secretary
thank will now go to vice chair
Dixon we're gonna ask to keep it
simple we're going to ask for
the LFC recommendation the
members we want to know based
upon a lot of the feedback one
within the civil legal services
area the need to look at ever
upward revision there to
secretary Mr secretary to your
point to look at the board of
finance authority the language
in to look at that and three
right now to look at the coming
closer on the personal services
employee benefits
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
the LFC recommendation with
those directives to staff.
Great there's a motion and a
second is there any opposition
to that motion preshow
Representative Montoya in
opposition Mr secretary in your
team thank you all very much Mr.
I want it briefly we we deeply
appreciate folks our state and
we will have an opportunity for
public comment as we after the
the final two agencies today.
And.
We really appreciate folks there
and with.
Thank.
Education.
I think I think.
The current.
The.
If.
Do you know
you're done after this.
Thank you yeah.
This.
Madam secretary it's great to
see you.
we're gonna ask Kelly from the
LFC to Curtis off.
And then.
This these are and what we ask
everybody to get settled quickly
so we can kind of continue on.
Kelly if you could start a south
of course this is our agency
code six eleven early childhood
education and care thank you Mr
chairman Kelly client
legislative finance committee as
the chair just stated running
the code six eleven early
childhood education and care
department which I will see
ECECD for the rest of it because
it's already malformed.
with me today is secretary
Groginsky and my DFA counterpart
MaryBeth Densmore.
Now before we go to the
different sheets because there
are such large differences we
just want to set the stage and
so I think it actually have
everybody turned to their volume
one which is your Senator non
spiral documents so that are non
file and turn to page twenty
four.
So just for you know historical
information early childhood
recurring revenues have really
continue to go up at for many
years now since FY twelve when
it was about a hundred and
twenty million we've grown all
the way almost a six hundred
million dollars in the current
fiscal year so you've seen
immense grossness programs
across the years through many
years of solvency in which much
of state government with
shrinking or cut and early
childhood education and care
programs like home visiting
childcare and pre kindergarten
continue to see growth because
it's been a priority of the
legislature and this executive
as well.
And so I just want to show that
this is been a a continued
increase over years and this is
included the recent amendment
which was passed which is an
increase hundred forty million
most of this doesn't increase
that large early childhood trust
fund and so those are revenues
are going to go into these
programs on top of the if a
significant
investments that the state has
already put into this program
you'll notice on page twenty six
and twenty seven there's some
helpful charts on you because
we're gonna be talking about the
federal poverty level and what
that looks like income wise for
family size and I will know that
this is twenty two numbers and
they're slightly higher with FY
twenty three but it gives you a
good baseline of how much that
is a family income level it
shows you how much we've been
paying on average per child in
the child care assistance New
York notice that we every single
year but increasing the amount
that we've been paying per child
for child care providers for
children every single month and
then on page twenty seven you'll
see what the average enrollment
has been in child care
assistance since fiscal year
thirteen and so you're gonna see
that on average we're around
twenty twenty three thousand
every single month enrollment
program and then you saw a dip
in COVID which obviously we had
kids outside of the center
because for safety reasons as
the dip is really COVID death
and now you're going to see the
spike words up on that page
twenty seven which shows that
increase eligibility and
enrollment that we've seen in
families in the last year.
And then right below that is a
chart on New Mexico births why
is this important because we're
trying to build the right size
system we're trying to build a
system so that when you know we
we have four year olds and we
want to do universal pre K. we
have it for the amount of four
year olds we have today not the
amount of four year olds we had
you know five or six years ago
which may have been twenty seven
thousand and now we have twenty
one thousand because you want to
put your revenues and you're
spending right category don't
want to over fund one system and
under find another so we have to
constantly be balancing these
programs to make sure that we're
putting monies in the right
places so that families have
choices so just for context why
because we're gonna be talking
about these programs funding
wise we wanted to set kind of
just a stage of what kind of
that enrollment and population
has look like in spending for
history.
I'm gonna apologize here I had
to have another handout printed
out because something did it
print out on your original copy
so I'm mostly before we start
the different sheets gonna be
working off of the hand that you
just received in front of you
which is a high level.
Six and generally when you see
these this is the general fund
high level however as we've
talked about there's other
really significant revenue
sources that are state revenues
coming into this department in
particular and so this chart is
broken out into three different
tables the first table is the
general fund high level which
you're used to seeing.
The second table is the early
childhood care and education
trust fund.
And then the third table is that
distribution from the land grant
permanent fund which was
recently passed by voters and
just so you know land grant
permanent fund it is categorized
as general fund and so when you
see on those tables line seventy
one through seventy seven you'll
also see a little note on the
right hand side that says land
grant permanent fund and so that
those to correlate so how we're
spending land grant permanent
fund is general fund and
highlighted by those little tabs
on the right so you can see how
it's being Spence programmatic
Lee through those three tables.
And so as we go through the
different sheets it's going to
sound a lot it's got some really
complicated.
it's I'm gonna try and make it
less complicated through the
spreadsheet and we will go
through the different sheets as
normal but this is probably
gonna be easier for us to look
at it first so there's really
only three major key differences
there big differences but
there's three so the first is
how the executive for the LFC
Spence early childhood trust
fund dollars now the trust fund
at the time that the both
recommendations were put out
back in December and January was
projected to put out forty six
million dollars and so that's
what the executive
recommendation does if it does
forty six million dollars from
the early childhood Trust Fund
the LFC recommendation however
has eight hundred million
dollars coming out Trust Fund
depending on a different bill
passing to increase the
distribution why did we do that
well because the trust fund has
a very large corpus three point
four billion dollars at the end
of last fiscal year now the way
that the trust fund supposed to
be spent with an average of
three fiscal years right however
the trust fund has not existed
for three years it's existed for
two and so we thought it was
gonna be an average of those two
years of the corpus putting out
the distribution the state
investment council actually made
a decision that that first year
was gonna be counted as a zero
so mathematically if you put a
zero in there it's going to drag
down your average of that
distribution the trust fund has
enough funding to have a hundred
million dollar distribution it
probably would have been over a
hundred million dollar
distribution have that first
you're not been zero so the LFC
increases that with the bill it
is fine it would not hurt the
corpus at all and so the
difference in the trust fund is
the executive has a forty six
million which is the original
distribution the LFC has a
hundred million spending which
is required your bill
legislation.
And how that's broken out is
also slightly different you'll
see how the executive spends it
with included to home visiting
which the LFC also did but not
in this revenue source and then
pretty similar all the way down
for a lot of what the executive
the HSD had originally asked for
so we try to meet a lot of the
agency's request.
And then.
The LFC recommendation actually
has forty two million in it and
there's a wrong number here
apologize that's actually forty
two million online sixty seven.
For child care assistance.
And then some other pieces now
the second large piece in this
is your land grant permanent
fund which was passed that's
estimated at a hundred and forty
million going into the next
fiscal year so a hundred forty
million this is also a little
bit difference on how the LFC
and exec took an approach on
this the LFC built into the base
budget recurring into the
agencies operating budget and
every time you see one of those
little tabs on the right that
we're bringing in that land
grant permanent fund is general
fund you can see the bill C.
recommendation mostly focuses
that revenue on expanding pre
kindergarten in several is
expanding slots for three and
four year olds we're spending
the right to pay for four year
olds and we're also expanding
the number of hours in a day
we're providing pre K. services
and the number of days in a year
we want this to be a full
coverage programs so that
families often as a care program
you don't want families opting
out because they can't go to
work or school around pre K. you
want them to choose to come into
it why do we want that because
it shows the outcomes of the
state is trying to receive so
through LFC research we've seen
that the combination of pre
kindergarten and K. five plus
almost reduces the educational
difference between high income
and low income kids I I can't
tell you how impressive that is
because you don't see that
coming out of any real other
program so when we think about
it the LFC recognition really
focused on educational outcomes
and care because pre K. is both
and as it comes the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit which
prekindergarten was considered
in that lawsuit as the main
coverage the LFC recommendation
focuses the land grant permanent
fund an expansion of pre K. and
expansion of home visiting which
also has educational outcomes in
the long run.
Now the executive recommendation
built this revenue not into the
recurring base but into your non
recurring revenue which you guys
signed specials on Saturday but
you also the packet on that and
so what that does is fund
smattering of small program
Representative requests by the
agency and then puts a hundred
and twelve million dollars into
childcare assistance in that
nonrecurring back of the bill.
So because every yes so.
And I'm gonna go over that so
I'm I'm just trying to say like
there's a lot of differences but
it really comes down to these
three main point okay how we
built the land grant permanent
fund in the differences in the
child care assistance in pre
kindergarten and then the
spending levels of the early
care and education trust fund
that's going to be pulled out in
the different sheets but it's
because the revenue sources are
very similar coming in and out
it wouldn't have made sense to
go through the different cheeses
we normally did I think this is
kind of a a good overview.
So with that will go to your
normally scheduled presentation.
And and.
And so on page two you'll see
the differences on the specials
and supplementals which I just
talked those are different very
different because we see the
differences in how we pocketed
the revenues and recurring and
non recurring and slightly
different pathways of of
program.
All over the overview and then
I'll pass it over to MaryBeth to
go over the first program.
So a majority of the revenue
differences results from LFC
including that land grant
permanent fund to early
childhood trust fund revenue the
executive recommendation
included that revenue from land
grant permanent fund and
specials and supplementals in
the base a majority of the
recurring differences as a
result of the LFC included
expansions for prekindergarten
childcare assistance and home
visiting and we have reconciled
performance measures for the
entire agency so with that I'll
turn it over to MaryBeth for
program support okay thanks
Kelly.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee on
MaryBeth and for the executive
for ECECD
Kelly did an amazing job
breaking down the differences in
in the two recommendations this
year so so thank you for the
actually I'm just going to take
you through the first program
it's program support P. six to
one.
and in this programming second
of general fund revenues were
just a little bit higher than
LESC six point seven thousand
however the LFC other transfers
from the early childhood
education and care trust fund
which again is one of the
funding sources that we we kind
of have some differences on why
is thirteen million above the
executive in the base both
recommendations increase person
for administrative oversight and
I. T..
I and this is where the
executive is just a tiny bit
higher than LFC not just about
six thousand six point six
thousand.
thank.
Okay
also the executive
recommendation included three
million dollars for local early
childhood coalition from the
other category and I just want
to put out there that this is a
high priority for the executive
it's one of the things it's not
funded in LESC but it is a high
priority at the LFC
recommendation included sixteen
million dollars any other
financing uses category which
sends to other agencies and this
is the transfer twelve million
to the Human Services department
for child behavioral and
physical health three million
dollars for school based health
centers that would go to the
department of health and then
one million for intensive child
abuse prevention home visiting
unit at children youth and
families department
the LFC recommendation for
language does include language
around these on transfers any
other financing uses category
BLS came to consensus on all
performance measures and also
note regarding the expansions in
this program the both
recommendations funded the
expansions for these
administrative oversight and I.
T. positions the executive
included the funding and
expansions the LFC rolled into
the base and I just want to make
a note the executive and the
LFC both fully funded the
expansion request for the agency
to truly the only difference is
that approach it doesn't really
make a big difference in the
agency's operations but if
you're looking at your print out
you will see differences there
but it is the same amount in
expansions that was funded
with that I'll turn it over to
thank you ma'am especially for
handling that because I know
that can be confusing to see all
those.
Not it's in the base different
approach to what is that the
definition of an expansion bill
C. but says that that's those
are services that already exist
so it's not expansion so they're
all fully funded is actually
same sorry for how that looks
technically.
So with that we'll go to the
support intervention program
excuse me.
so in the support intervention
program the LFC general fund
revenue recommendation was
nearly thirteen million of of
the executive for that land
grant permanent fund revenue
that we discussed earlier the
executive increased early
childhood trust runs in other
transfers by thirteen point
seven above the L. C. resulting
in a difference of six hundred
and ninety nine thousand the
executive recommendation for
personal support of the
department's request will bill
C. was slightly closer to actual
expenditures resulting in that
all the six hundred ninety that
ninety nine thousand difference
this is a at a true difference
between the two recommendations
is intended transfers now and it
talks about this yet so
temporary assistance for needy
families which is a fund that
comes from the federal
government to the Human Services
Department for many years we've
been travel we've been
transferring pieces of the
tennis of.
It's not really the recurring
budget we've been using
nonrecurring balances left over
to early childhood for at least
the last ten years and so the
LFC recommendation actually
recommends to reduce some of
those ten of transfers and
replaces that with some trust
fund money and what that does is
allows HSD to keep that ten of
dollars so that they can
prioritize other programs like
family income benefits and so
that's a difference in that so
the executive recommendation
continues those transfers the
LFC brings those down slightly
replace of the revenue to hole
the agency harmless to allow HSD
that revenue to do other things
with their income support so
that's a true difference in the
two recommendations.
The with that'll turn it over to
MaryBeth for education and care
okay thanks Kelly Mr chair I'll
take you to P. six to three it's
Kelly said it's the education
and care program so this program
the executive general fund
recommendation is about seven
point three million over the LFC
and then the LFC other transfers
recommendation was forty nine
point three million over the
executive and that's mostly from
the early childhood education
and care trust fund Kelly
mentioned at the beginning which
is one of the funding sources
use for the child care expansion
that LFC had put in their
recommendation in the base both
recommendations increased
funding for personnel the
executive included one hundred
and eighty point nine thousand
above the LFC for expansion FTE.
The LFC recommendation was forty
two point two million above the
executive any other cost
category and that's for child
care assistance.
There is a difference in
language the LFC recommendation
does include language thank you
you are welcome to read
specifying the use of the child
care assistance appropriation
and performance measures again
were come to consensus and once
again there's one eighty point
nine thousand and expansions on
on the executive side and with
that I'll turn it to Kelly for
the next program Mr chair could
I just add one thing to that
program if that's okay could
potentially have the committee
user spiral bound notebook and
turn to page eighty eight you'll
see it are stacking chart that
looks like this.
I'll give you a minute.
I know the LFC black spiral
bound page eighty eight.
Volume three.
What this chart shows.
Good eighty eight eighty eight
I.
Thank you we're it's getting
late in the evening the evening
commute can you have helpless
follow exactly where you are and
and referencing pages and so yes
that thank you Representative
Lujan in our web page eighty
eight crore and then when you
get to the other our other but
yes we're on page five thank you
five of ten.
K..
So what this chart shows a child
care assistance goes from a few
weeks of birth up to the age of
thirteen and what this shows is
the average percentage of the
children enrolled every month
their age range in the program
and so you can see that over the
last several years childcare
assistance has ranged from about
thirty to forty percent of the
dollars going out far to school
aged kids so kids are older
because that could be
participate in K. five plus
after school care kids that
could be participating in
extended learning and so and
you'll notice that only fourteen
at the highest point several
years ago in sixteen it was at
twenty seven percent but on
average thirteen fourteen
percent our our youngest
children which are children two
years or less in this program.
And so what the LFC does with
that actually which is why I
bring this up the extra language
the LFC included prioritizes
childcare assistance funding for
the agency to try and do
something about increasing
capacity for the youngest
children still see has languages
says use five million dollars
please help us find more
capacity and care for infants
and toddlers especially because
we know that the hardest range
for families to provide care to
provide care for infants and
toddlers it's the highest risk
factor for abuse and neglect
because of children cannot speak
up for themselves and be
monitored and so they'll see is
trying to do something to kind
of move this forward so we can
provide those opportunities to
fund older children in those
other programs at at public
education other things and move
those revenues of to the younger
children so I that's why I bring
your attention to this chart.
with that we will turn to page
seven of the packet page seven.
Which is the policy research and
quality initiatives and I just
want to make shot up this
program they give me lots of
data and they're very helpful
and so thank you to the program
in two fifty for this
there's not much of a difference
one hundred dollars
General Fund so obviously DFA
fills the very much the same as
it is about the reserve quality
initiatives not that we love the
whole agency and.
so really no real difference
there
and with that I'll turn it back
to MaryBeth for it's called
public pre kindergarten but it's
really just prekindergarten.
Thanks again Kelly Mr chair.
yes I bit of a rounding error I
think we had
For P. eight oh five which Kelly
said it does a public
prekindergarten it is just the
both of the programs public and
private prekindergarten or in
this so in this program the LFC
general fund recommendation what
one hundred and twenty seven
million dollars higher than the
executive
excuse me and that is for the
land grant permanent fund
revenue which is one of the
differences the gotten that with
highlighted a few minutes ago
for you the executive other
transfers recommendation from
tennis was seventeen point six
million about the LFC and again
it's Kelly mentioned a moment
ago this is a continuation of
the tentative map that has been
going on for several years in
New Mexico seventeen point six
million supports child care from
tennis currently in the base the
LFC recommendation in
contractual services and other
financing uses was a hundred and
nine point four million above
the executive and this is for
the expansion of the pre car
prekindergarten and early
prekindergarten services Kelly
mentioned a moment ago which
includes more slots expansion of
ours to provide full day care
and increase the number of days
by twenty five the LFC
recommendation also provides a
rate increase worked into the
budget of eleven percent for the
four year old pre kindergarten
or pre kindergarten providers
thank you just want to put in
here quickly that there is
twenty million dollars on the
executive side for rate
increases for pre K. providers
but again as was discussed hello
many go that was a one of the
fundamental differences in the
two racks was the nonrecurring
versus the recurring funding but
the executive does have funding
in their similar increases.
I'm again with language and the
LFC does have on some additional
language for the department to
coordinate with PED on to part
prioritize the words of
prekindergarten programs at
school districts I believe this
line which is currently in there
their budget so this is nothing
new but it is recommended by the
LFC and again performance
measures were come to consensus
so with that unless Kelly has
anything else I can turn it over
to secretary Groginsky force one
last comment Mr chair just the
fact your packet to see you for
reference we don't need to go
over it and you'll need your
spectacles for this wealth page
nineteen is a wrap up of
spending of early childhood
programs from fiscal year twelve
to the current recommendation by
program and by revenue source so
you'll see for instance
childcare assistance starts
online three and and online a
Levin and it shows you every
revenue source that goes into
the child care assistance
program across a majority not
all of the early childhood
programs in the state in Mexico
for total of the LFC
recommendation of seven hundred
and twenty four million dollars
for the coming year which is
that large increases of the past
fiscal year which is a five
hundred and eighty two million
so we are talking about large
dollars here.
With that I will turn it over to
the secretary and I think you so
much for being with me.
Secretary thank you madam chair
madam chair sorry.
We for instance.
Members of the committee I just
want to start by thanking all of
you for your leadership your
commitment
It'll motional.
And this really the commitment
that you've made too early
childhood it's truly tremendous.
I also want to thank director
Abbey.
Charles Kelly all the great
staff LESC who over the last
three years have partnered with
us to really put ECECD on solid
footing not just for now but
into the future.
I'm really thanks to the wisdom
and the leadership of the New
Mexico legislature and governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham we're
leading the nation people are
looking to us how are you taking
such bold steps to care for and
educate young children support
families and make sure that the
people care for educate them are
also well taken care of.
It is truly a pleasure to work
in a state where we have a
shared goal of improving
outcomes for babies toddlers
preschoolers and their families
and again the people who care
for and educate them by
improving those outcomes through
high quality early care and
education system that system
includes home visiting it
includes childcare includes
early intervention and it
includes pre K..
I also want to thank and
recognize the incredible
families early childhood
educators advocates who are with
us here today for their
determination.
In seventy percent as a result
of their actions and you all of
you seventy percent of New
Mexico voters said yes to more
funding for early childhood they
said yes to making early care
and education a constitutional
right it's incredible as you may
recall during the pandemic
childcare programs in New Mexico
remained open.
Schools had to close but
childcare program stood there
ready to serve ready to educate
children six weeks to six great.
They are thinking these
individuals as you all and as
the governor in our
administration care so deeply
about New Mexico's future and
not just our future for next
year or the year after but for
fifty years for a hundred years
the investments that we make
together during this time of
enormous prosperity is going to
make a difference it's going to
make a difference for
generations to come and we know
that we take this role very
seriously and the executive
budget reflects that vision I am
so appreciative of the
conversations we've been having
with the LFC around this is
Kelly again did so brilliantly
thank you these are probably the
most challenging to.
Executive and legislative
recommendations that you may
grapple with
but we took when we built our
budget we have a five year
strategic plan so in your packet
I will go to the little budget
flights because Kelly in there
about justice for you very well
but I will point out the first
slide and I do want to talk
about that because this shows
you we're we're new start up for
you thank you you made us that
you created ECECD in two
thousand nineteen and we came
alive in two thousand twenty and
I just want to show you that our
growth has been very even you'll
see federal funds of course the
federal relief money came in we
were charged with spending those
dollars to help stand up or
child care industry make sure
families were not financially
burdened during a time of
incredible stress and crisis and
so you see the big influx of
federal revenue in two thousand
and you see that the twenty one
of the twenty two actuals but
overall growth has been very
modest we're looking and we do
have these new revenue streams
which is very exciting for the
people of New Mexico but our
operating budget is move from
forty percent of general fund in
twenty two three three the forty
five percent general fund in
twenty four so we do know and
the overall increase of seven
point two million here between
twenty three and twenty four our
vacancy rate if we had to be
fully honest is nineteen percent
but of those fifty eight
vacancies eighteen have offers
or waiting to start seventeen
are being interviewed right now.
Thirteen or actively posted and
we do have ten that are on hold
so we call our true vacancy rate
about thirteen thirteen percent
we have three hundred and three
point five FTEs and again very
grateful to the LFC for that
support with building the
department and making sure that
we are fully aligned and able to
serve the people of New Mexico
in the most efficient and
effective way I'm not going to
go over this but I just wanted
to show you that we developed a
document to show which goals are
six goals we have six goals in
our strategic plan what what
activities and objectives does
our is our budget going to
support and the thing that
MaryBeth mentioned with the
early childhood coalitions we
feel is just essential that's
under our goals family community
engagement when we see these
differences of how much for
child care how much for pre K.
or how do we get more home
visiting we need local buy in we
need local coalitions meeting
with us talking with us helping
design those systems it's going
to look different in Reno so
than it does in Los Lunas or
does in Farmington and I've had
some great conversations with
Representative Montoya just
about the importance of a strong
mixed delivery system where
families can choose do I want to
send my child to a preschool in
a community based setting as
head start really what's best
for me or is it more that I want
to go to the public school
because that's where I orient or
in some communities that's the
only option I have so ECECD
takes very seriously the roll of
us making sure that are mixed
delivery system stay strong we
don't push out head start
dollars that we make sure that
are school based programs in our
community based programs are
equally strong I think that's
where we have some concern about
a rapid increase I think the
most in the last ten or fifteen
years we've ever increase year
over year is ten million in in
pre K. maybe it's larger Kelly
will correct me but from going
from you know twenty million
dollar asked two hundred and.
Nine million dollar ask we have
concerns about our capacity as
an agency and about the capacity
in communities to do that to to
take up that opportunity we also
know that we have a lot of very
low income and poor infants and
toddlers Kelly talked about how
it works with your pre K. do
have K. five plus an incredible
outcomes but if we work together
to study what it means when a
child has home visiting
prenatally and then enrolled in
a high quality child care
program received early
intervention and then goes to
pre K. what will those benefits
look like that's the kind of
system that we're building some
families need all of those
things some families need some
of those things and some need
some for a while and then not
again so it's the system
approach I guess that I want to
just impressed that the
executive recommendation is
focused on continuing we're only
going into our fourth year we
know we have four years to set
some strong roots and
foundations of that this agency
will serve the people of New
Mexico for decades and decades
to come with that I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you so much madam
secretary thank you to our
analysts and we see the
incredible quality and capacity
of our analysts and of course
secretary with your team go
straight to questions organised
first start with Representative
Sweetser than Representative
monthly.
Thank you Mr chair madam
secretary
I would like to see
you're getting fully funded a do
you have the capacity to
Use all this funding that you're
looking out from both
recommendations or you got and
if not what's the sweet spot for
that then that you would like to
see.
You Mr chair Representative
Sweetser thank you for that
question again the conversations
we've been having a great we do
not think that it's feasible to
roll out the hundred and nine
million.
In pre K. we do know that the
hundred and twelve point six
million that we've asked for
child care will absolutely
support the continuation of
increasing rates high quality
care and being able to continue
our expanded eligibility but we
do think that there is room for
expansion with pre K. beyond
even what the executive has
asked for so I think those are
some of the discussions that
we're having of those resources
thank you Mr thank you very much
Representative Sweetser next
Representative month but.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
secretary thank you for taking
all of the time that you have
with me on this says no there's
a lot of folks here in the room
that are.
Wanting to make sure they have
options and so my concern I did
express this to
public at home they presented
was that
in a rush to roll out everything
that we're trying to do we want
to make sure we don't her
private providers that we don't
hurt community organizations
that may have
something that is a specific
specific
for their community.
And so I appreciate you taking
the time and I and once again I
just want to continue to
just express for fortunately in
Farmington as we've talked our
our private providers and are
Public schools are working
together to make sure that the
expansion public school pre K.
doesn't harm after hours care
Steinborn care we can care I
mean obviously they're folks who
who need.
Child care and we don't want we
don't want to harm childcare in
our pre K. rollout we don't want
a hard we want to put businesses
out of business so I appreciate
you taking the time and
hi and I also you Mr chairman
madam secretary also appreciate
someone who comes there and says
is throwing a lot of money and
then I cannot spend it all.
that's music to my ears.
so I I just appreciate your
efforts and and once again I
think it's very very important
that.
We don't lose options in our
communities so thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much of
Madam to it next we have
Representative Chatfield the
number Representative Lujan then
ranking member Armstrong
Sanchez.
Thank you Mr Mr chair of.
Representative secretary of
colleges that I was out of the
room and I may have just missed
this probably did this and that
I've been trying to be in two
places all the moment I haven't
got it done yet.
Try to
there is a huge difference
between the executive.
Recommendation and probably has
already been told why of I need
to hear.
For it there's there's three
main differences I know it
sounds massive and and there's a
lot of more doubling the details
but overall the differences is
that the executive
recommendation increased early
childhood trust fund dollars by
forty six million well the LFC
increased it by a hundred
million.
The LFC recommendation built the
land grant permanent fund which
is approved by voters as
recurring into the base budget.
The executive built it into
section five of the back of the
bill.
Nonrecurring.
and then the secondary means the
third main differences how we
spend those monies the LFC both
regulations increase child care
assistance the executive did
more well the LFC did far more
pre K. for the return on
investment and Yazzie Martinez
and educational gains reasons I
I do want to know the people's
tend to forget that pre K. is
delivered in childcare centers
okay so it's not like they're
different networks there half of
the money goes for pre K. when
it goes to the private providers
are childcare centers are not
like separate it's like a
separate body right and so when
we think about delivering these
dollars of the LFC
recommendation I just want to
note that the way we broke up
that new money seventy three
million of that went to the
private provider network and
thirty seven million went to the
public schools network and so I
just want to lay any type of
thought that we're trying to
push out the private provider
network there was actually a a
bigger emphasis on making sure
that we build out those provide
make sure we support those
providers and that those are the
same providers.
So we just just a clarifying
point.
the funding available to private
providers with.
For pre K..
Thank you thank you very much
Representative Chatfield next
Representative Lujan then
regained them Armstrong.
Thank you thank you Mr chair up
thank you Kelly did a wonderful
job explaining everything and I
was just is really quickly done
but thank you and thank you
secretary be here as well so I'm
going to look at I guess good
going into this a just looking
at page nineteen the tools will
get killed
Early childhood is systems
appropriations.
And just seeing.
In their.
I think there is some of us and
there's some confusion about the
town if it were to be spent
we're speaking out we allocate
can you give it give you some
clarification as we're looking
at the schedule yeah there's two
lines you're gonna look at the
first line is online fifteen.
Exactly the this period of
fifteen.
And then the second line well
it's gonna be several lines in
the pre kindergarten program so
lines thirty three lines twenty
six and lines forty seven so
what is the difference.
Bottom line
the exact the both LFC executive
transfer the same amount of
tenet for child care assistance
we continue that transfer that's
the same.
The LFC replace that TNF
transfer for home visiting pre
Caillaux and put in trust fund
dollars to replace that so their
health harmless while the
executive put that ten of
transfer continuing we did this
because it allows you just need
to keep that tab and use it for
other high priorities for low
income families so that's the
difference.
Thank thank you Mr at the that's
good I've been looking at the
numbers and everything and that
that's it's really good to
clarify so creates a district
more clarification so it creates
the more flexibility for HSD
programs Mr chair.
Mr Chairman it doesn't.
It stops the transfer of those
monies that they have it for
other priorities for families so
instead of spending on early
childhood we can spend it on I'm
not really sure what the agency
reckons for it but I think some
of it is income support related
thank you I think the answer is
yes to your point thank you yes
for other programs for
flexibility there's does it do
anything I mean does that
because of the this is the
negative effect for what was
originally being used for for
the child for early childhood.
Mr chair and Representative know
the program's real promises an
increase this program air
increase even if the data
transfer is they still have
growth it's my understanding
thank you that's great
clarification thank you things
are moving around because we
have so much work with you know
the so my next question this is
with these programs that we're
looking at and I've talked with
the secretary about this there
is a gap with our child care our
programs for our working
families and that is with our
pre pre K. programs kids get out
at this I think three o'clock or
two o'clock some mostly and so
then there's a gap of childcare
need their so can you talk to
talk about that a little bit
Mr chair madam secretary Mr
chair Representative Lujan thank
you yes I think with the the
executive also wants to look at
increasing our hours so that LFC
recommended eight hours of pre
K. E. and then twenty five extra
days which would add five
hundred hours to pre K. but even
with that that still doesn't
help a working family who has
needs ten hours ten and a half
hours sometimes for care so we
would still have a percentage of
those children who would need
before and after care and the
three year old expansion is
great it's going to get us the
what thirty five percent so
there'd still be in a lot of
three year olds who would need
access and working families who
need access to high quality
child care for their pre school
age children who don't have the
and wouldn't have access so just
so you know that we agree with
extending hours for young
children in pre K. but we think
that even with the eight hours
of the twenty five days to again
start that in August thinking of
some of your smaller districts
micro districts
that is a lot to implement in a
very short time and again when
we go back to having those local
coalitions being such critical
resources to us on the ground to
help.
You know it here in Santa Fe
County and they work together
all of the providers Farmington
they're all coordinating and
talking to each other cross
school community head start but
in some communities more
supports needed so that's a long
answer to your question that is
but I understand I'm services
that we're making the effort Mr
chair to to get this resolved
but then my question to go to
socially being
Representative here for our
state agencies are we providing
flexibility right now for our
parents are working families
with the with the work with
those folks will just pick up
their children and I have them
in childcare or go home and work
from home to put to cover those
hours researching.
Mr chair representative Lujan
not in state government but I
don't know whether employers do
that.
Mr chair
it madam secretary I think this
is a very important concept
since we're focusing we created
such a high profile this type of
funding that we actually look at
that look at our families you'd
have these needs thank you Mr
thank you very much
Representative I could just say
the child care that we supported
in state buildings is open from
seven thirty AM to five thirty
PM so that supports our working
families in state thank you Mr
I'd like to see those expanded
because they are not covering
the need thank you Mr thank you
Representative Lujan networking
member I'm so thank you Mr
chairman thank you all I'm sorry
I missed the beginning of the
presentation I too with the
Representative Chatfield is been
trying to be in two or three
places all day one of my
questions is
merry is that correct okay
MaryBeth I was curious Mr
chairman
Are you is your are you
prioritizing did you say to DFA
was prioritizing pre K..
with PED
okay Mister chair just to
clarify about Representative I
believe you're referring to the
language that I had just
mentioned in the prekindergarten
program and what it is is
current language that the agency
has if you were to look in you
know house bill two it's it's
already in there and LFC is just
recommending continuing that
okay thank you Mr chairman thank
you
so one of the issues that we
have in in rural New Mexico as
most of the time we have a
waiting list for our pre K. in
our schools and my granddaughter
was one of these children that
got booted out because she
turned five at a certain time
and so she wasn't quite ready
for for school and so for
kindergarten and so I'd really
like to ask if we're really here
to serve children.
Why would we not fund our
schools and of course private
I'm all about growing
opportunities in New Mexico for
anyone and everyone that wants
to grow have a business.
But why would we not
automatically just funds schools
because they don't they can't
claim that child on their report
because she's aged out but she's
not ready for kindergarten the
school let her go anyway and
just eight that and so I really
would like to see if we could
find a way to fund the schools
that really want to serve
children in the state of New
Mexico and that not happen to
our kids thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much remember
Armstrong next we're going to go
to Representative Trujillo than
representative Allison.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for the presentation.
That's a lot of money.
Where that you're talking about
I am I'm so glad that this
program is moving forward Mr
chair.
But because there's so much
money.
What are pre K. workers actually
making in that classroom because
it concerns me that
it's from what I've read and
what I've heard additional not
making a living wage.
Mr chair Representative Trujillo
I will get that information our
annual outcomes report had some
data on teacher salaries of
course our schoolbased teachers
are making the same salary as
their K. twelve counterparts and
with this administration did
created the legislature
supported a pre K. parity for
community based programs where
their teachers have the same
credentials and they get paid
the same scale but with many of
our pre K. teachers don't yet
have their bachelor's degree and
so that's what we're focused on
is getting them tortures
bachelor's degrees so they can
then be paid at the K. twelve
pre K. twelve salary scale and
and Mr chair in the meantime so
we don't know is there is a big
difference in a pre K. work
you're in Carlsbad what they
make verses one in Albuquerque
is there a big difference.
Mr chair Representative Trujillo
we can get that we just released
in November the competitive pay
for professionals we're we gave
everybody working in childcare
programs across the state if
they opted in a three dollar an
hour raise part of that
application they had to tell us
what they were earning that data
is also in the annual outcomes
report that should be in your
mailboxes today that you will
have but they were making about
twelve to thirteen dollars an
hour no these are teachers who
are in child care programs they
may also be in a pre K.
classroom making those those
salaries so but we can get that
to you and if there isn't a lot
of
Mr chair so so.
The twelve to thirteen dollars
is for a non credentialed for
well even credit I mean Mr chair
representative even we saw
teachers there if they were had
a bachelor's degree or master's
some times they were making
sixteen or seventeen dollars an
hour working in a child care
program.
Okay let me pick my job.
Okay that's standing
Representative Mr chairman I
thank you madam secretary great
question Kelly if you want to
add anything on that question as
far as wages yeah I guess Mr
chair thank you I just want to
clarify that but putting money
into the pre K. program but this
way we both increase the rate
but we also increase the number
of hours pre K. is more
inclusive because you don't have
to have an income level it's
free you don't ever have to pay
compared on childcare and at the
new rate that this would produce
it would actually be a higher
rate than child care assistance
pays for those children in
childcare and so it would allow
for higher wages hopefully if
those providers were able to
Bring that but that is like a
horrible but you know
allow that money to get to the
teachers now I I will say that
about four five years ago the
last time we gave a large freaky
right the agency wrote into that
that room increase for it had to
go to teacher salaries and so I
would recommend that this body
and executive look at that if
that's we move forward on this
to make sure that that goes
teachers pockets thank you thank
you Representative thank you of.
Chairman some of the other issue
is then so we're we're we're
talking about the day care
providers were talking about
public day care providers were
talking about.
The private day care providers
it does there's no difference
right we're working with all of
them.
Yes Mister chairman Senator
Hemphill they're all considered
private summer nonprofit summer
faith based and some are for
profit but they're all
considered you know private
private businesses that we work
with every day we have
So thousands of them thank you
so we just heard in house
education.
That there is a group of private
providers are asking for for us
to drop the G. R. T. on the for
them what makes them different
in the public providers Mister
chair Mister chair
representative Trujillo yes so
it would be the for profit
providers who were required to
pay the gross receipts tax and
so nonprofits don't pay the tax
schools don't pay that tax and
so those of private for profit
providers who are required to
pay that tax our concern from an
equity standpoint that the
revenues they're receiving are
less the G. R. T. they have to
pay back while the community
based on the schoolbased don't
have to pay taxes that makes
sense it I know what you're
saying Mr chair.
But to me and your explanation
makes sense but the request
doesn't make sense and I didn't
vote for it the committee
because how do you get parity.
With those public providers of
those private providers and some
of those private providers are
big corporations and it really
really concerns me that they're
asking for special support from
the state Mr chair within the
The the the information to I
know they don't pay their their
employees well it's it's all
about the profit and I'm very
very concerned Mr chair so maybe
you can get that information to
us and hopefully Mr chair we can
work on trying to figure out
when it comes to parity that
isn't just about the gross
receipts tax it's about pay
inequity.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
thank you Representative
Trujillo next we're going to
to representative Allison than
representative Garcia
Representative Allison please
thank you Mr Ferris and madam
secretary.
I appreciate everything that
you're doing for our students
and our schools
my question relates to your hand
up with your goal of.
Goal number three it says to
expand and deepen government to
government relationship and
agreements and that is one of
the goals that you did not ask
for special appropriations all
the others you just for special
appropriations in addition to
the regular budget I'm hoping
you're gonna tell me that your
relationship is going so well
that you don't need extra money
and
I'm just wondering how much of
an impact the Yazzie Martinez
hat of because that there was
some very high demands and if
you address each one of them so
well that you do not need any of
special appropriation thank you
madam secretary thank.
Mr chair thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative Allison
that question so last year in
this budget here we have one
point four almost one point five
million in our tribal investment
strategy so we asked to add
another seven hundred fifty
thousand to that takes us to to
point it out and then we also
secured private sector funding
from the Hilton Conrad Hilton
foundation for five hundred
thousand annually and so these
dollars are specifically for
ongoing consultation with tribal
leaders.
Tribal communities also or what
they apply for our pre K.
programs they can get funding
for head start programs but
these dollars are specifically
around working with tribal
leaders through ongoing
consultation and tribal
education directors around now
we have funding what what's your
priority within funding speech
language we're finding the in
indigenous Montessori institute
a variety of things that are
coming out of the priorities of
those tribal councils and
governors and presidents okay at
the same time you're Mr chair at
the same time you're satisfying
all the demands from the
Martinez in working with.
Mr chair representative Allison
we continue to work very closely
with all of our communities
around expanding pre K. as Kelly
mentioned making sure it's high
quality that reflects the
culture and the language of the
children being served.
Thank you madam secretary of the
two I just wanted to Mr chair
representative Ralph and just
really quickly I just wanted to
know for you the reason that
wasn't mentioned at the outset
that seven hundred and fifty
thousand is because it involved
recommendations so there's no
difference both recommendation
supported that expansion thank
you madam secretary.
Thank you very much
Representative Allison next
we're gonna go representative
Garcia thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you again madam secretary.
The knowledge does to the person
has.
What are we doing to do outreach
for these communities like my my
district is probably sixty five
percent native American and you
all in my district out there in
the chapter houses.
What what we do to help these
people out there no no rural New
Mexico.
And then Irvin got a lot you
know the big communities but
these other places the chapter
house up to they don't have much
of anything so what are you
hoping for.
Mr Chairman is it okay if I
bring up or Assistant Secretary
cotillion Smitty made of
American early education and
care.
I'm here.
The chair representative Garcia
sorry I started I started my
term.
there was already a very weakly
tribal way weekly communication
call inviting all tribal
communities to attend it
includes ECECD updates
opportunities resources
presentations
the last meeting we had we had
fifty five these which is up
from thirty back in December so
the word is getting out to the
tribal communities I've also
reached out to any.
Resources in the community any
border towns that serve
indigenous children and families
are invited into this meeting
I introduce myself hi talked
about the tribal this we should
do what it can be used for I
expanded the invitation to meet
I extend the invitation for me
for them to invite me out to the
community I am from the Navajo
Nation hi I have served twenty
four years indigenous
communities I know.
The need is great for resources
I know that time specially
services are needed for families
and children so I have reached
out to every
entity in New Mexico for in line
with my introduction what the
office one of my office there is
no weekly basis and the services
that are provided but also the
opportunities that are there for
them we also have started in
early childhood tribal advisory
coalition which meets this
coming Friday it is comprised of
a representative from each of
the twenty three tries published
in nations in the state of New
Mexico and so these are
appointed by tribal leadership
they were nominated and
appointed and said this is our
person that's going to come to
these meetings until every other
month and at those meetings
there's an agenda based on
priorities that the tribal
leadership have given and shared
with us we we did have several
changes in terms of leadership
as of the beginning of this year
but introductions were already
made with the tribal leadership
we I have reach out to them
and also extend my invite for
them to buy me out to their
communities so we were reaching
for.
I know all the back roads I know
all the fat how rural roads I
know all those rooms but the
secretary line and some of the
staff are going to be making
Richard they don't think they
think they have it in for them
this coming March and April but
we're going to go visit the
chapter houses and I would like
for them to see
that they're really not places
to really compromise of chapter
houses and head start that's it
so.
Thank you for that Mr chairman
of and.
In a local Mike my chapter
houses.
Just glancing of about three
hundred miles apart from.
In one of these that people Mr
chairman of the chapter houses
have asked me about.
With available from and then you
know.
Maybe.
The nomination has the
interagency meeting the going to
have one in March and a hundred
thirty five chapters in that one
time you know just a suggestion
Mr Chairman you might wanna make
it a point to be there and tell
these people what available to
all thank you like I want to use
the the valley you know I
visited my and all the Google
drive I hold in their.
And you know the people have a
lot of needs of the kids that a
lot of regional and and they
just need to
a little bit more outreach I
think to make sure that they're
not left out in all hi hat with
comments after we Americans
Mastin why because we never get
help.
And you know what a hard thing
to swallow Sentinel because in
my in my district is a more from
here than rule.
And we really need to reach out
to these people up there thank
you for that Mr chair I got
another question for
It will be for a secretary.
Madam secretary you know you've
talked talked about early
childhood care enough to we do
not mention one time above the
kids with the abilities or
special needs.
we additional
Mr chair and representative
Garcia thank you so much for
saying that I I referred to the
term early intervention which is
for infants and toddlers with
developmental delays and
disabilities if you look at your
special appropriations that is
one area and I think we have
agreement to work through is
that a request for eight hundred
thousand dollars to increase the
rates for our early intervention
program called family infant
toddler we just got news we're
number one in the nation in
finding it and serving and
getting young infants and
toddlers who have delays into
our programs so we want to.
Match that with some resounding
support for better rates because
we want to have a strong system
because we know when we get
early we get them ready and then
there you know on track.
Thank you thank you Jerry Mr
Chairman east of teacher or
providers that are providing
services for people but you know
handicapped people or.
People with disabilities total
disability they get paid extra
money for the.
Four of them seem skills all of
regular teacher.
To provide I'm sorry and Mr
chair representative Garcia our
early intervention program for
infants and toddlers are grant
funded programs Representative
part of me can of probably share
with that so they're not on the
public school salary scale but
in preschool and preschool
special ed.
Mr chair members the committee
so in public schools which is
totally separate funding system
if you have a developmental
delay you can go into a public
school classroom early and
that's in the public school
funding formula and they do get
increase rate for that
so that so that is great the
secretaries comment on the
family of a toddler program
that's not a care option list
those providers don't provide
care throughout the day like a
school classroom how that works
is you'll have a a provider go
into a family's home or child
care for their pre K. classrooms
and help that child individually
with and the teacher with that
child specific needs so it's on
top of what the provider is
getting for the care that makes
sense and and Mr chair
representative Garcia we just
finished a cost study on our
family infant toddler program
great participation from our
thirty three plus family infant
toddler providers around the
state and that's why we're
asking for this rate increase
because they are.
They're doing a lot and to as
Kelly said they go in and they
support really the educator or
the parents in being able to
help that child in all their
daily routines develop the skill
the skills that they're focused
on.
thank you madam secretary Mr
chairman one last question we're
not a question of the COVID.
At the end of the day if not how
much we.
We put into it is the quality
yeah at the end of the day
that's what we need to work on.
The dollar amount matters but
the quality of work on the
dollar for members thank you
thank you Mr thank you very much
representative Garcia next
representative.
So to clarify it's just a
clarification statement so
children in New Mexico three
years old to twenty one there's
public law that says that the
public schools provide that that
service no matter what that
services OTP T. speech and
special education so in private
preschools the schools can make
a visit and come into the
preschool and provide those
services but no matter where
that child is those services
must be provided by the public
schools early intervention is
zero to three public schools
picks up three years to twenty
one years.
Thank you very much
Representative you madam
secretary thanks the I I
Representative Garrett.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
everything you all do and Kelly
for me being chart.
We being those sources together
on madam chair one of my
constituents asked me to ask you
this and her concern is as so
much she money comes in for pre
K. that's almost impossible to
spend at all.
how do you deal with that in
light of child care deserts
still having poverty wages paid
to many of our child care relief
workers she just like to have a
comment from you on how that all
fits together thank you Mr chair
Representative Garrett that's
exactly what's in the executive
request is a hundred and twelve
point six million is so that we
can increase that what we're
paying our child care providers
to serve our youngest children
and so that would bring the base
up to fifteen the teacher would
be making twenty and that would
be in our one to three star
Centers but at the higher level
so that's where quality happens
if that how will we compensate
and the credentials of our
educators I have so many
testimonials from early
childhood professionals who
receive this three dollar raise
it is change their life they are
now feeling valued they don't
have a second job they're able
to pay for the medication for
their families I mean this is
incredible and we need to invest
in them we need we've seen
wonderful investments in our K.
twelve educators and we applaud
all of that and we eighty
percent of the brain develops
before the age of three
whoever's caring for those
children they need to be well
compensated and they need to be
well credentialed and that is
where we're going to get the
bang for a Buck so.
Okay.
A Representative Garrett the
next we're gonna go to vice
chair Dixon and then I'll have
some questions.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
madam secretary and Kelly and
MaryBeth for the presentation
I will try to keep this very
brief and actually instead of
asking a question make a comment
first early childhood system
coalitions I'm very interested
in that and I think that it's a
wonderful opportunity to help
with our home visiting concerns
so I look forward to learning
more about that and hope that
that's a another tool in our
tool belt for that the other
item that I wanted to flag is I
have been a huge fan of using
data to make decisions and the
family success led to something
I've spoken about the past I
noticed that the executive
budget has four hundred thousand
getting transferred to D. O. H.
LFC is lower and so I just want
to flag that is something on
that I'd like to understand a
little bit more about that later
on thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative by projects thank
you madam secretary
so I I think there we've laid
out the hearing there's a few
questions we want to follow up
on and few points to circle back
first Kelly you describe sort of
the break down can you describe
again actually the breakdown
private and public when it comes
to the pre K. funding the LFC is
recommending yes Mr chairman so
the I could have the committee
turn to page.
that she paid nine.
So on you'll see basically the
contractual services category
and see other financing uses
cattery were all the spending is
so the contractual services
categories the money for pre K.
for private providers and the
other financing uses is for
public school pre K. get sent
over to Pat and so you'll notice
that
the LFC recommendation is a
hundred fifteen point five
million in contractual services
and eighty four and other
financing uses the difference of
the current operating budget is
an eight X. over the current
operating budget for contractual
services is seventy three
million.
And then for the other financing
uses at thirty seven million no
I will note that this is a
technicality okay because we
give the HSD bar forty to
transfer between these because
it really depends on who applies
in jewel and July or before that
right if you have more public
private medical I appreciate
school providers apply the paste
is got to go to the RFP process
and we give them the flexibility
to move it around but for the
most part the larger portion of
the funding increase goes to the
private provider network.
Okay thank you very much Kelly
and and to the question of
uptake which I think is a very
fair and sort of the core
question.
Some it depends upon application
what does this sort of the the
window that we describe and and
we're looking at thank you for
the suggestion for provider rate
increases that are that that
would be for the practitioner
those New Mexicans who are
educators
You've described it we we can
work on J. lo the budget
language to specifically get
rate increases their do you have
sort of a
scenarios for up take that this
depends upon.
So Mister chair what I would.
look if you can look at your
picture your high level most of
the dollars are actually going
to kids and providers who are
already in the system is going
to longer hours says kids are
already in care whether there is
so say that pre K. days six
hours they're getting childcare
wraparound hours for those
outside hours this would extend
that pre K. day there in care
anyways that's a majority of the
dollars we do have expansion of
fourteen hundred slots for four
year olds and thirteen hundred
slots but that's not a majority
of the money it's for kids who
aren't exist for providers who
are listening and they're just
going to be using this funding
source instead of childcare
which frees up childcare money
for those hours that we're no
longer spending for that to go
to other children or other ages
does that make sense it does
thank thank you very much Kelly
so that's helpful and as we
continue sort of working and
madam secretary I know I have a
number.
We want to want to dive in on on
the department as well and I
want to be respectful of the
committee's time but
You the this recommendation and
it would be great as a follow up
and move we're gonna have some
follow up to go forward on.
To see what Here is going to
those existing existing New
Mexico families in kiddos and
educators private and public
one the expansion slots and I
think we've heard a discussion
today that there are
There are New Mexican families
who are would like to have their
kiddo in pre K. but that
services available I know that's
the case down where I come from
I hear you we know that's the
case in other we heard about it
from other committee members so
those are slots if we have
families that want to do that
right now it seems like this is
a incredibly opportune time to
to fill those slots we've got to
funding we've got providers
let's fill those slots
So but we want to we know that
there's a balance and and there
is a a great deal of interplay
between these age groups there's
an emphasis so.
More work to come there thank
you madam secretary it would
please any follow up on that and
I'll have a few other.
We have real concerns about the
and the expansion at a hundred
and nine million we do not pre
K. has high quality standards
that are some aligned more
towards the five star childcare
that the places where children
are across our state are not
necessarily all in those places
where you're saying there's
three yearolds and four year
olds and so we need time to get
there our proposal is yes let's
expand it more than the
executive recommended but do it
in a way that allows us in
twenty five to go with this big
because then we can prepare the
community we can prepare the
agency and we can make sure that
we're supporting a high quality
universal birth to five system
and not you know there's some
communities with that the
schools will be the ones to
serve the threes and four year
olds because there are no
community based programs how do
we prepare the schools to serve
three and four year olds there
are places where there are a lot
of there are childcare programs
serving three year olds but most
of the staff have forty five our
certificates that have bachelors
level degrees so we just want
some ramp up we totally agree
with the LFC that expansion of
pre K. a priority of this
administration we're currently
serving two thousand four
hundred and fifty to three
year olds through New Mexico pre
K. in community based sites and
four thousand four hundred and
thirty one four year olds.
We're serving seven thousand
five hundred seventeen four year
olds and school based programs
so this is this is a big ramp up
and we want to get work with
communities with the LFC and
really think strategically about
the best way to do this so that
we don't overwhelm the HSD and
we don't revert a bunch of
funding back and not meet the
needs of the community so we
definitely agree but I want to
say the bachelor facilities talk
all the time in communities some
places don't have the facilities
to expand but they need the care
so we want to be thoughtful
along with the LFC and with you
Mr chairman so thank you for
that thank thank you very much
ma'am secretary I think is very
important guidance and the
expertise that the department
and that you bring what what
will probably look for then is
to meld the scenarios more
closely look at the demand and.
Understanding that that.
That that perhaps we won't fully
take either approach in full
leaving the other approach out
our our the the balance will
sort of sort of shipped but I
think what will want to see when
we come back those New Mexico
municipalities where they want
those pre K. slots but can't get
them now we've got a if we have
got to find a way to fight for
those slots this year and in
subsequent years madam secretary
briefly
Kelly referred to some of the in
terms of the child care
assistance which is been a
hallmark of this administration
has been incredibly important
and I know providers from from
my region across the region
deeply appreciate the do you
have a break down of sort of the
age groups I know yes if and you
can provide that to us and
follow up I think the focus
here.
Would be emphasizing the
assistance go to those youngest
kiddos the the the families that
that during those times again
where we've heard sort of from
the LFC I know you share the
view that there are the most
challenges and I don't know I
think we have language that the
guys are investment they're it
would be great madam secretary
to work on that.
finally and this is for all of
us frankly in the room
We are home visiting along with
pre K. A. one of our best tools
and with our our child care
improvements home visiting right
now is not serving New Mexicans
in the way that it should.
And and I say that settlement so
and because it if you have the
numbers available that would be
great so that we can sort of
have that on the record but is a
minority of families numbers
wise who are eligible for home
visiting for home home visiting
there's been so much work and
work to support investment do we
know the share of those kiddos
and families who are utilizing
those services right now.
Our estimates are around Mr
chair around ten percent and we
we I want to put on the table
and I meant to say this in my
opening remarks we know that we
are not meeting the mark with
the Medicaid funded home
visiting so that is funding that
we know we we will and we are
taking very concrete steps with
HSD to rectify the situation so
those are families who will be
receiving evidence based home
visiting this request both the
LFC and exec include eight
million for expansion to reach
twenty five hundred more
families but one thing in our
special appropriation requests
when I was talking with
Representative Baca it kind of
struck me as our family resource
centers having these family
resource centers in our high
need communities this may be a
place where families could come
and get their home visiting we
do hear a lot of times and he
was sharing families don't want
people maybe to come to their
home I think the thriving
families prevention plan with
expansion of home visiting
created the family resource
centers where they're in
community and then of course the
other efforts around safe sleep
but we have to do better so
we're creating a manual for
providers about how to do
The Medicaid visiting we were
building Medicaid claiming into
our home visiting system and
we're meeting weekly with HSD
and the Medicaid managed care
care coordinators looking at the
data and asking them some tough
questions about where the
referrals and why are there
programs with those referrals.
Right thank thank you madam
secretary
we we have a very long way to go
we finally have resources and
clearly a broad commitment to do
what we need to do in that area
okay with that Mentzer we
knowledge that there is
significant work that needs to
continue I think the committee
acknowledges the.
Incredible importance of private
providers whether on the pre
care in the child care space
frankly we've heard here today
that oftentimes they're one in
the same
so we we want to that will guide
the work we're gonna ask for the
LFC recommendation we're gonna
have a few members who we're
going to ask that work a little
bit more closely but we know
these numbers will change madam
secretary and we're deeply
appreciative of your work and
the department so with that
we'll go to the but then a vice
chair.
Thank you Mr chair would move
the LFC recommendation.
Okay there's a motion for the
LFC recommendation the second by
Representative election is there
any opposition to that motion.
Seeing none that motion is
adopted and we're gonna have to
ask raking member Armstrong
Representative how to meal and
Representative Lujan to look a
little bit more closely also
just note there are a number of
members who will be close to
this as we go through the rest
of the session and into the
interim because as we've heard
today this is an ex extending
commitment it's not just a one
budget.
Thank you madam secretary thank
you Mr chair members of the
committee.
Thank.
In.
Our
farmers between the eyes and.
So if you're gonna.
Thank you all for being here
west folks and please feel free
we will have public comment
after we conclude thank you all
so much for being here.
I'm sorry we have to go through
this agency.
Yeah.
Secretary Trujillo secretary
Vigil madam secretary it's great
to see.
Hey.
And and we do have to ask
everybody if it please we don't
need again what we're going to
have public comment we do want
to continue we have one more
agency to hear so if you want to
stay please stay if you need to
head out that's okay a you can
come back but we do need to move
to the next.
Hi Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Eric should
be a of the LFC analyst for the
children youth and families
department that's under let's uh
agency six ninety and your
books.
sitting next to me is secretary
Barbara B. hill and sitting next
to her is our executive analyst
resistance more.
M. before right before I jump
into the differences here I just
wanted to mention.
this agency is alleges that
agency.
I I think maybe you've heard a
little bit about Legisla- in
this in this committee but if
you haven't it's a
Newer type of hearing they were
doing where in LFC and where we
do deeper dives into a specific
policy area.
In the case of CYFD we've been
diving into.
repeat maltreatment.
and that's one of the main areas
where CYFD kind of has control
as far as
children being maltreated within
the system that maltreatment
measure.
so I think some of the outcomes
from some of those meetings was.
one of the biggest things that
we need to work on is improving
our evidence based programming
within the department but that
also improving a staffing and
recruitment and retention that's
that's kind of our our two big
areas and so as we're going
through this budget request
budget recommendations.
You'll see that there's actually
quite a few areas and there
where we've
tried to boost up some of those
evidence based programs and have
also worked on things related to
improving the work force for
CYFD those those social workers
and others.
With that Mr chair I'm going to
start off on the high level in
your packets there.
so starting off I just wanted to
point out a couple things here
so it you'll see eight the high
level there it's
numbered each line is numbered
so you'll see line six there
the executive included two point
seven or two six nine nine
million.
In order to send to HSD for
behavioral health services.
LFC also included
funding for that but we're
actually setting instead of
sending the money directly to.
it it is instead of sending the
money to CYFD and then having it
go to HSD later
we send the money directly to
HSD and that's for twelve
million dollars so in total the
exacts with the federal match
would be about seven point three
million and that federal match
on the LESC side would be about
forty two million and that's
you'll you would see that in the
in the the HSD recommendation.
Another line I wanted to point
out for you is on line twenty
one.
and this is just
I just want to mention that
we've got money in there for
evidence based real supported
evidence based programming as we
talked about and the Legisla-.
We've also got another one
million dollars for it early
childhood to it early childhood
home visiting program
and that money is coming from
the early childhood education
and care department so you
wouldn't see that rolled up in
the in the general fund amount
there.
And then line thirty I wanted to
point out that LFC includes and
you heard a little bit about
this earlier with the last
agency removing been kind of
moving around some of the
different funding sources anyway
in this agency we included
sixteen million or about fifteen
point nine million in
temporary assistance for needy
families revenue in this budget.
So in total
Both agencies for both
recommendations are are are
pretty close as far as the
revenue goes with that pass it
over to Mary Beth to miss dance
more to go over the roll up in
the different states thank you
so much Mr chair hello again
committee it's nice to be here
I'll just take you through all
the roll up its your two cents
so again this is business unit
six ninety
estimate for revenue the LFC
recommended three point one
percent over FY twenty three the
executive recommended eleven
point seven percent over FY
twenty three in general fund.
LFC recommended increasing
transfers from tennis as you
just heard other states have
done this and this would be to
support the state's child
welfare system.
In total for all revenues LFC
recommended in eight point seven
percent increase in the
executive recommended a nine
point five percent increase so
again it overall they're not
that far off
We will get to the differences
in the base in person both
recommendations supported
appropriate placements salary
adjustments for frontline
staffing and for adding new
person the LFC recommended a six
point two percent increase in
the executive recommended eighty
six point four percent increase
I did want to know here's isn't
on here but when you do look at
the specials there's a couple of
specials that are related to
this one of them is supported by
the executive one of them was
put forth by LFC but both of
them are intended to assist with
this salary issues that CYFD
this is basically.
So in contractual services LFC
recommended a little bit more
primarily to expand the child
maltreatment prevention
programming in protective
services in other financing uses
in behavioral health services as
you just heard the executive
recommended transferring that
two point seven million in
general fund revenue to HSD now
is this to establish eight
children in care managed care
organization well LFC
recommended again a total of
twelve million finance to
improve services for children
but that again allocation was
included on the LFC Human
Services Department budget so
again you once you got here
again let's see language will we
can discuss that by program is
needed we came to consensus of
analysts on on targets and again
expansions will be discussed by
program so with that roll up for
you I will turn it back over to
the station for our program
support for it Mr chair to go
over programs support not
attended differences here LFC
and executive recommended
similar amounts for general fund
revenue
the executive recommended more
for federal funds revenue.
in the base the executive
recommended increasing personnel
costs spending six percent well
LFC recommended increasing
personnel costs spending by
about three point one percent
The executive recommended an
expansion fifty while LFC
recommended increasing person in
the base budget and then I'll
pass it back to agency does more
for JJ facilities thank you Mr
chair this one is very simple
there were no differences at all
in this program so I'll turn it
back to Mr xi a for protective
services where there are some
differences.
All right Mr chairman and
members of the committee I in
protective services.
LFC recommended about five point
two percent increase and
executive recommended a twenty
point nine percent increase in
general fund revenue.
LFC recommended a fifteen point
nine million in available
federal can't temporary
assistance for needy families
revenue
while the executive
recommendation for ten if was
flat with the prior operating
budget so this is this is kind
of one area where there's
there's a bit of a difference
the executive put money and from
general fund revenue LFC put
money and from town if they're
very similar amounts so LFC also
included one million from the
early childhood education and
care fund.
And LFC supported agencies
request for a federal revenues
well the executive recommended
less federal revenue.
LFC is recommended total
spending increase is fourteen
percent and the executive
recommendation is a thirteen
point five percent increase.
LFC recommended a twelve point
three percent increase and
executive recommended thirteen
point three percent in personnel
costs spending.
Both increases are in support of
the department's appropriate
placement salary adjustment.
and also to add more FTE.
LFC recommended a thirty six
percent increase in the exact
recommended a twenty six percent
increase in contractual services
for other spending
the LFC increase was three point
two percent and executives with
six point five.
For language the executives
language was similar to the
prior year's language for the
temporary assistance for needy
families block grant revenue.
while LFC is language included
that increase and then some
stipulations on top of that.
I LFC also has some language for
that one million dollars is
being transferred from the early
childhood fund.
In the expansions area of the
executive recommended a five
point one million expansion was
sixty New protective services
FTE.
LFC did not recommend expansion
but included funding to fill
some of the two hundred and
fifty eight currently vacant
fifteen the kind of base.
with that Mr chair of go ahead
and pass it back to miss dance
more to go over the behavioral
health services program.
Okay thank you again Mr chair
this is the last program at CYFD
its P. eight zero zero
behavioral health services so in
this program the LFC recommended
an increase of three point three
percent from the general fund
the executive recommended ten
point six percent over FY twenty
three from the general fund for
personnel costs in the base LFC
recommended the appropriate
placements salary adjustment for
frontline person and supported
the three community behavioral
health clinician teams that the
executive funded through an
expansion.
In contractual services the
executive recommendation
included funding to continue
initiatives that were previously
funded with federal funds.
The executive recommendation
also again includes that two
point seven million dollar
transfer from general fund
revenue from CYFD to Human
Services Department again it's
said to create that managed care
organization for Children
coffee.
I believe and instead of
appropriating general fund
revenue to CYFD to later
transferred HSD the LFC
recommendation includes that
twelve million directly to HSD
doesn't stop through CYFD and
this is to expand services for
children and it is about four
point two five million for
children in custody six point
six million for maternal and
child health and about one point
one million for youth treatment
applied behavioral analysis.
And lastly in expansions
executive recommended an
expansion for ten F. T. E. for
behavioral health clinician
teams and LFC recommended an
increase in the base for the
same purpose so again just
slightly different funding
mechanisms but the same intents
and with that I'll turn it over
to secretary hello no I'm sorry
I won't I will turn it back to
promote.
You madam chair just to go over
a on page eleven there I just
want to mention the nonrecurring
recommendation we have online to
there is nonrecurring revenue
and therefore increasing
salaries
from the executive side the man
on the line for you'll see three
million dollars in there that's
actually for helping to
implement the department's
workforce development plan you
know the state the department
put a lot of work into you know
there workforce development plan
over the summer and this is the
kind of help get that off the
ground and get it moving up
pretty quick and with that madam
chair pass it over to the
secretary thank you members of
the committee madam chair
members of the committee I know
it's late in the day and you've
been here all day or all
afternoon and so I I acknowledge
that and don't want to delay
your your time come in and
considering that budget
proposals I will say that for
those of you that don't know in
general what we do is a lot at
children youth and families
department we are divided into
four main areas we we have
protective services division
which serves children in custody
of the children who are abused
and neglected we do a lot of
prevention work through that
division we also serve our
juvenile justice you kids who
are accused or adjudicated as
having committed delinquent
offenses we also have the
behavioral health services for
all children in New Mexico not
just children in our care so
it's a huge agency we have a
program support that covers not
only the administrative role of
the functions of the agency.
But also I have to say is our
office of children's rights that
we're expanding as well as our
Office of tribal affairs so a
lot happens at CYFD and it's
really our vision and our
mission is to ensure that all
children youth and their
families in New Mexico are
healthy are safe are thriving
and are strengthened by their
culture and their communities
we do this by nurturing them by
assisting them and you have to
understand that the families
that we serve are those who for
the most part are in crisis or
at risk of of entering into a
crisis situation
I just wanted to acknowledge the
secretary Groginsky in the work
she's doing with ECECD because
our work at CYFD is directly
impacted upon the way New Mexico
treats and Services families
both in terms of economic
development and service in
education and what ECECD's doing
is so paramount to the system of
care and those families that
touch our sphere of care and she
in my opinion is doing and her
team on it an extraordinary job
of bringing services to our
children and families before
they enter or in hopes that they
do not answer our system of care
a children youth and families
department.
Also if I may just remind the
committee and and all lawmakers
for that for that matter that
our system of care is impacted
by our social vulnerability
factors in the state we're we're
impacted by poverty
by the ability of families to
have the resources they need to
care for their families by
housing by transportation and I
you can see in my presentation
to you on page three that those
social bought Boller ability of
factors affect the work that we
do a children youth and families
and the children we serve the
families that we serve so let me
Also as mentioned for your
purposes how important
prevention is in New Mr shin
shin may mention that investment
in prevention services in New
Mexico is so critical because it
will decrease the likelihood
that children are abused and
neglected and having the the HSD
having to intervene and so we've
worked collaboratively with our
sister agencies with ECECD in
submitting our threat I'm
thriving families prevention
plan and our families first
prevention plan working hand in
hand with them in serving these
children I was listening to your
comments earlier
regarding home visiting and so
on and so forth working very
closely with our sister agencies
around how do we serve our
children not only at the time
they're born but even before
they're born.
Just moving on very quickly I'll
mention the two critical areas
that I believe need attention
with respect to the different
recommendations and that is this
and our protective services
division we asked for funding
for sixty new positions and that
was not that was not made that
was not in the recommendation
that you that you have from from
that from your from your staff
and I have to say that the
funding for sixty new positions
is critical to our ongoing
workforce development efforts
and as Mr Sinead mentioned are
workforce development plan is
very very important because if
we don't have the workers at the
front end dealing with the
families in crisis and paying
them a fair wage a fair
compensation we cannot serve the
families that we need to serve
and so we did ask for sixty
additional
positions we believe that that's
necessary to continue to build
out our system of care the other
difference that I think there's
some attention and perhaps
miss Densmore miss Mr shin they
will speak to this is the use of
ten if money for what we had
asked be paid for through
general funds and the reason
that's of concern at least a
portion of that is of concern is
because we lose the federal
match when we invest in certain
Services in general fund so
we're able to to match that
through through federal dollars
through the title forty
matching mechanism and we're
we're concerned.
About the ability to match of
the for a sixteen million that
that that yes the bottom line is
the same but were were unable to
match
the use of those resources with
federal funds if they are paid
for by Canada
I can I can go on we we are we
are working very very hard and
we are
Really taking very seriously
building the system of care from
the ground up not from the
ground up from the foundation up
and I like to use the analogy of
a home house that starts to
creak in the windows don't shut
in the there's a leaky faucet
and you know things are.
Right right underneath
underneath the foundation and
the foundation I have to say
that children youth and families
department for many years
In opening up the basement
seeing what's going on
underneath the house ladies and
gentleman that's what we are
doing and you may not see it on
the front end with the with the
with results yes but the
investment that we are taking in
looking into that foundation and
what's needed to invest in our
system of care from the ground
up from underneath the ground
and making those changes is
what's happening I can assure
you that when that investment is
made and those changes are in
place that you will see over
time of the results that that
you desire and that the families
and the children that we serve
will be better off for having
made that investment so I like
to look at that House analogies
like getting that help to look
at what's happening underground
rather than just the shining
window or the door the paint job
I think this agency needs that
kind of investment that kind of
work from from the from the
foundation up
so with that I can proudly say
we're doing a lot around
children's rights we have an
office in of children's rights
that is advocating for kids who
have issues with the department
and also investigating
complaints we are building out
our investigatory Services
within the agency
working really hard with our
juvenile justice kids in fact
earlier this evening that was
the group from la Placita in
Albuquerque who are here to
support children youth and
families in our budget request
they had to go back to
Albuquerque is getting late in
the day but I have to say our
juvenile justice division is
working extremely well serving
kids in on probation or under
super.
Revision and as well as the two
facilities that we operate in
New Mexico for kids who are
committed in fact recently we
opened a and the Albuquerque
facility we after many years of
planning were able to have the
new athletic field that opened
up there and seeing the young
boys really participate in that
so what's going on in juvenile
justice behavioral health we've
expanded getting a lot of the of
behavioral health of support
that we need to serve our
families and children that you
can see it in the in the
recommendations made we are we
appreciate the the investment
that you've made in that
division so with that I'll stand
for questions I'm sure you have
plenty thank you madam Mr chair
and madam chair members of the
committee thank you then to just
thank you madam secretary
apologize for being now
thank you to by projects and
we're gonna go to representative
of how to me first and then by
ranking members.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
secretary.
It's really good to see you and
I can tell that you've put a lot
of thought and work into into
this that this department you
had said that you are requesting
sixty new social workers and
that that really is a necessity
can you tell me what your
caseload is for social workers
right now before the sixteen new
workers.
There it's higher than the
national average on the average
I let me check with my
assistant.
Changes.
Thank you for actually I can Mr
chair I can actually answer that
on page seventeen in your
packets there there's actually a
table there gives you the
national case load versus this
verses the
Our caseload in this in this
state sixty seven versus a
hundred and twenty four.
Mr chair can I ask for
clarification did you say that
social workers have a caseload
of a hundred and sixty four
hundred met Mr chairman and
Representative a hundred and
twenty four.
Still right thank you Mr chair I
have a couple more questions you
Mr chair madam secretary.
You are in charge of behavioral
health care services and I know
that that is a hard program to
find providers in how many
providers do you have and how
many providers do you need.
Let me go back and clarify the
caseload I don't believe that
the numbers presented by Mister
chair actually corrected it
depends upon whether it's an
investigation caseload of
permanency caseload
and emplacement caseload
according to our latest
dashboard we have
in the agency eighteen cases of
per investigation excuse me per
up placement
we have
For plate for a permanent see we
have a number of fifteen and for
investigations we have nine.
so I just wanted to clarify that
I'm not sure we're creating
we're on the same page.
so how many providers do we have
we actually administer through
either following colors or
through our own contract
management system approximately
four hundred plus contracts of
service providers around New
Mexico and
we work with the behavioral
health collaborative to identify
areas where services are needed
and so off and so on and that
that the collaborative
is is really working on
developing that access to
services particularly in our
frontier areas so it's very
broad it depends upon the
services that are being order
that are needed obviously and
this is this is so apparent
across New Mexico that the
fennel epidemic is horrendous
and we need services throughout
New Mexico in in and perhaps
even more so in the
In the front here in rural areas
to deal with that epidemic.
Thank you Mr chairman and
secretary just one more question
in committees there has it has
been of the building where it
was proposed and also some
concerns about having policies
and procedures transparent and
available to people I know that
we talked and and I hope that
you can share with the committee
what you guys are doing to
ensure that that happens thank
you Matt up Miss Mister chair
madam chair and Representative
Lujan a meal I am proud to say
that today we just unveiled our
new websocket which I'm so happy
about because I think being
accessible to the public
building folks being able to
access the information from CYFD
is so critical we will be
posting all of our policies and
procedures on that website I
imagine that would be
forthcoming very very shortly so
we are indeed
Operating in it let me just say
share with you that I I I I will
leave this agency under three
principles and every decision I
make is based on that number one
is being
accountable to the people of New
Mexico to being accountable to
the families that we serve
number two being transparent
making sure that the information
we can share is shared with the
public and finally being
collaborative we can't run an
agency like this in silo and
that's why we work closely with
our sister agencies with our
treatment providers and I hope
with our other branches of
government as well in serving
the children in New Mexico so
those three principles I think
as far as I'm concerned must
ensure to resonate throughout
the agency so being transparent
with our policies and procedures
that is happening will happen
very soon with our new website
that just and fail today thank
you so much thank you Mr chair
thank you I remember Armstrong
thank you Mr chairman thank you
for your presentation
US secretary Ben like can you
hear kind
I just wanted to ask you Mr
Shinya doctor doctor Mr Shinya
if Eric what is the situation
with the tab for the federal
funds that they're speaking
about and and is that.
Have you all looked at that to
see if that's going to be an
issue.
I'm Mr chairman and
Representative Armstrong yes
we've looked into the actually
quite a bit there's a lot of
funds a lot of general fund.
revenues in CYFD one example and
there's a lot of different
examples but one good example is
in within foster care within
protective services they've got
about a.
Let me see here about
About thirty one percent.
Of the funding for foster care
comes from the federal
government and about sixty nine
seventy percent.
Comes from general fund and so
the department has the
flexibility if they bring in
that ten if revenue they can use
that ten if revenue to replace
general fund these general fund
elsewhere
And so that's that's not really
too much of an issue they've
also got some other programs
over the last few years we've
been kind of popping up a lot of
these
evidence based prevention
programs within the department
and that's all been general fund
amounts to so they can always
use that ten if revenue for that
there's also
Yet oh yeah that's right and
also I just want to mention that
there's a lot of other states
out there
and I would actually I would
actually say that probably most
states use TANF dollars for
their child welfare systems
and.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you for that
I know madam secretary that that
you are taking the collaborative
safety report very seriously and
can you tell me what
improvements you've made that
will that could demonstrate that
thank you.
Mr chair and madam chair vice
chair and Representative
Armstrong yes last year
as a result of to trough the
Televisa's that occurred shortly
after I became cabinet secretary
I ate a retained of the national
firm of collaborative safety to
come in and to assess our system
of care and to provide
recommendations about what we
should do better in this is in
the system to minimize the risk
of that happening in the future
they came up with I believe six
of recommendations and we have
embrace those recommendations
and begun making changes in our
system and let me highlight a
few of those changes number one
we are providing more
specific training to our
frontline workers around safety
and around risk we are retooling
our safety and risk pool and
working with the provider around
that safety and risk pool when
they go into the home and they
do and and an analysis of what's
happening in that home one of
the things that we learned is
that this the investigators were
just using that term pool as
being the end all be all too on
a decision and assessment and
that that's not correct we don't
wanted to substitute their good
judgment we wanted to be a tool
in assessing risk and safety so
we have started that training
and it's been under way we've
had hundreds of specialized
training around that around the
specific role that our workers
are doing we have also joined
the national partnership of
child safety it's a national a
collaborative of States thirty.
One jurisdictions are part of
this collaborative and they
shared data and best practices.
With the states around child
fatalities or serious harmful
events regarding children we
developed a team to to work with
the national partnership
And I know there's more.
We've we've re constituted are
critical safety review process
what we found is when there was
When there was an incident and
we have to create a team come
together and then that analyze
what happened there wasn't
follow through after that
initial assessment of the event
and so we have started creating
that follow through was that was
the worker
had did they have a high case
loads was did they not have time
to really check on the safety of
that family and risk so on and
so forth so we have we formed
and organized that critical
safety internal critical safety
review process so.
And let me just.
Correct my prior testimony
because I always want to be
truthful I learned as a jazz and
Justice you have to be truthful
I have my team here to say that
the average caseloads for
December of twenty twenty two
are as follows fourteen new per
month for investigations
permanency at seventeen and
placement at twenty seven thank
you yes I wanted to correct my
friend thank you Secretary yes
Mister chair I could on that
also on that point too is that
was the annual caseload those
are actually the numbers that
the department
reports to the to the
administration for children and
families each year so that's
it's apples to it's apples to
oranges but that's what that was
I don't want you to think they
have we're carrying a hundred
twenty four cases thank you I
think we're on the same page I
mean the data is the data and we
reported to the fence thank you
so much and so one of the about
my last question Mr chairman is
there there's a bill floating
out there a caseload workforce
standards bill and I'm curious
madam right right so hard to
know what to call you.
It kind of indicates that there
may be an additional sixty four
people that might have to be
hired in in the the the over you
know the burn out with a burn
out Mr chairman and and
Secretary how and the kind of
the culture of fear type
situation how do you suppose you
will fill those that need and
how would you keep them thank
you Mr chair madam vice chair
and representative Armstrong we
in the in the cabin as a
litigation settlement are
required to
Have a workforce development
plan and we are in the process
of finalizing that getting that
approved by the COVID controls
in that litigation.
That said as that process moves
forward we are implementing a
comprehensive workforce
development plan anyway and it's
really about ensuring that we
have the right people in the
right positions across New
Mexico just so you know we have
approximately eighteen hundred
employees in in the state of New
Mexico so sixty is not a whole
not a lot of positions however
we need a process whereby we are
advertising we're training
recruiting we're training them
we're supporting them and making
sure we have enough work forced
to carry the case load at a
reasonable level and to meet
those national standards I have
to say just and I think it would
would be inappropriate to
mention that we are working on
the methodology of the hiring
across New Mexico we have
different regions and different
Of factors that weigh in on our
ability to to hire staff
depending upon whether you're
rural urban and so on as well as
the caseload standards that we
are required to adopt and do
adopt and how do we make those
two efforts.
Merge and we're working on that
methodology as we speak and
submitting it to the code your
trolls and that's that I I trust
within the next several months
that we will have a workforce
development plan that will be
approved and will will be
executing upon so that to that's
a long answer to that question
thank you thank you so much Mr
chairman thank you madam
secretary appreciate the answers
thank you Representative
Armstrong listening
Representative Lujan the by
rejecting.
Thank you Mr chair again thank
you justice thank you Secretary.
So thank you thank you member
our struggle you were years
striking on some of the topics
that I was as an
concerns or questions about so
it's going to go into the
workforce bill that we have
floating out there and having
worked for as as an HR for the
state of New Mexico
This this pandemic to developing
one section I know that it's
come to my attention from
constituents is how you're
you're looking at the parity
that we have for our
Our social workers and trying to
develop the of pay great.
For them it's the it's it's set
to entice them to for
recruitment my question is are
you working with the state
personal office on this bill and
if so does this create parity
where we have we have other
social workers and other
agencies that would need to be
part of that same rate schedule
Mr Chairman.
the answer to your question
about Mr chair madam vice chair
and Representative Lujan.
Yes the answer is we are working
closely with the state personnel
office but perhaps even more
importantly we're taking action
independently as an agency in
areas that we want to see to
improve we implemented a pay
differential of ten percent for
frontline workers and it's tied
to the position that they hold
we've also done the appropriate
placement adjustments across the
agency making a big difference
we're making looking at our pay
bands we haven't actually don't
have a plan yet around that but
looking under pay bands and
seeing if we can raise the
social worker pay band within
the state personnel system and
also in our workforce
development plan that as soon as
it gets approved by the
committee chose I'd love to
share with everyone it's really
working closely with the schools
of higher education across New
Mexico and and and fulfilling be
your intention around the fifty
million endowment of funding for
the announcement that you of
funded last year we're working
with secretary ridge Rigas and
the schools of higher education
to recruit the students come
into the social work field and
finally I'm proud to say we've
had seven job fairs and three
rapid hires
in the last three months and
we've got nine job fairs into
rapid hires are planned through
March so we're doing all of that
together workforce thank you so
much Mr chair thank you
Secretary really appreciate the
answer and how that is being
developed I just would like to
maybe talk a little bit offline
how that affects other agencies
and creating I don't want to
create a parity or
such a big difference that
that I am the it's being
addressed in being brought to
me.
Hi attention I'd have to say
thank you madam chair Mr chair
and secretary thank you thank
you very much Representative
Lujan next.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
madam secretary it's nice to see
you
I want to start with the
Item of the sixty new CPS
positions that it requested Mr
chair madam secretary Mary Beth
what is the dollar value of
that.
Mr chair representative Dixon
it's about two point nine
million the general fund with a
total of about five point one
million I believe including the
federal match.
sorry Mr chair made up for the
US sixty positions correct so
the total is.
Eight something million Mr chair
Representative the total with
Federal is I believe it's five
point one is that.
That's with the federal I
believe it's the the general
fund questions two point nine
million in the federal questions
two point three so about five
point two.
Thank you Mr chair Eric so thing
to add on that particular just
on this point here if you go to
page seven
under protective services and
and the hand out there.
This is this is where you'd see
the sixty FTE you'll see the
sixty FTE at the very bottom
there.
And but one thing I wanted to
mention as far as that goes is
if you look at the personal
services employee benefits line.
There's a difference there
between the executive and the
LESC of about seven hundred
grand seven hundred a hundred
grand.
and that's out of a total of
about eighty eight million
dollars and so that a hundred
grand you know it's very small
it it it's a very small
percentage wise and so anyway
the reason why offseason
recognize recommend increasing
the sixty FTE is because there's
About right now about two
hundred and sixty vacant
positions within.
Protective services.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Eric and secretary so the funded
vacancy we frequently talk about
how it's a snapshot in time
and
Eric when is our snapshot taken.
The representative vacancy rates
I.
Mr chair and representative in
New.
July.
Around the time that the it I'm
sorry August around the time
that the agencies making their
budget request.
Thank you Mr chair thank you so
Mary Beth Orton madam secretary
what is the current vacancy in
the what's the current vacancy
number now and the current
funded vacancy is it the same.
Then as a matter of by chairman
Mr chair and members of the
committee as of Friday January
twenty seventh in protective
services our vacancy rate was
twenty four percent which is.
Improving.
Thank you of you madam chair and
secretary and so twenty four
percent what is the Monday
number we're what is the number
of positions that that is a
quick stop.
No I don't have the support.
The two six it would be two
hundred and sixty six positions
madam vice chair okay.
Thank you and this is just
protective services division
which is our we have up more
positions in the other divisions
but we're really focused on the
sixty positions going to protect
services absolutely thank you Mr
chairman and secretary and the
reason that.
You know I have found value in
looking at the funded vacancy
rate looking back at what it was
in July or August at where it is
now is because when we talk
about adding additional
positions into the budget that
is money that is being set aside
and taken out.
of its ability to be used in
other ways and so for me in sort
of an oversight capacity Mr
chair
Madam secretary I struggle to
add sixty additional positions
that would require additional
funding when we have two hundred
plus positions that are
currently funded are vacant and
we have that time to be able to
maneuver
and fill those positions and
particularly in a tight labor
market and when we know that we
don't have the behavioral health
care workforce it seems unlikely
to me that we would be able to.
Bill what we currently have
bacon and fill an additional
sixty positions on top of that
Mr chair Mary Beth you wanted to
ask thank you Mr chair thanks
Representative Dixon I'm I just
wanted to point out that the two
hundred and sixty six positions
it's identified those are not
all funded.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
MaryBeth and so and so my
question really was about the
funded vacancies because in July
the funded vacancies for
protective services according to
our information was seventy nine
which would be lower than what
it is right now so in we know
that in January the rates and
increased of funded vacancies so
it regardless are regardless
you know in most concerned still
stands Mr chair and madam
secretary
The other.
Questions that I have an and
maybe just one question is what
legislation has been introduced
this session that is a result of
the steering committee meetings
that we had
over the summer and into the
fall and you know I very much
appreciated those meetings but I
think one of the complaints that
we hear often times is that
steering committees and advisory
committees and working groups
and task forces me and come up
with wonderful recommendations
none of which are ever
implemented and so I'd like to
know exactly how many bills have
been dropped this legislative
session that address the issues
that were
Product Matt madam vice chair
and Mr chair members of the
committee first let me say the
enhancing Services steering
committee was a very valuable
process for me to analyze what
changes and improvements can be
made to the agency I don't
believe that all the
recommendations that they made
should result in legislation and
I have to say that the deadline
for.
I mean bills is not yet.
Reach so I I hope that we can
certainly consider filing some
legislation to address some of
those recommendations before the
deadline thank you Mr chair
thank you madam secretary faces
that mean that at this point in
time no bills have been
introduced that in time now
we've only introduced to bills
that directly our agency bills
one is to expand the eligibility
for fostering connections and
the second is to a line are our
system with the interstate
compact on the placement of
children so the answer to your
question is in your very good
cross examiner.
Is that we have not filed in
bills.
Thank you madam secretary and Mr
chair
I would
Late to if there is a the
subcommittee
that works on resolving any
differences I would respectfully
request to be part of that thank
you Mr chair
thank you vice chair Dixon I
don't see any other questions
you madam madam secretary thank
you very much for your for your
work for your departments work
thank will we'll ask for the LFC
recommendation we do know some
differences in some of the
personal services categories and
sort of that balances by sharing
a number of other members were
referring to let's go ahead will
we'll ask vice chair Dixon and
Representative Trujillo to take
just a little bit of a closer
look we may ask another member
to sort of dive in
but with that will go ahead and
just for the LFC wreck.
Thank you Mr chairman of the LFC
recommendation.
Graders a motion for the LFC
recommendation the second is
there any opposition seeing them
we've done that members we.
we're very appreciative for
everybody to get in this is our
last full day of committee
hearings so it's sort of a a
long Davis said they.
and what we do we are going to
transition quickly in the public
comment
we've been working to limit the
first members for any there will
be some individuals in the
public we're going to speak in
Spanish I understand that we
have translation devices that
can be handed out individually
to us as members I'll.
I'll be taken one of those.
Let's.
For translation.
What
what tax.
Yeah and then you.
If you'll look forward.
And.
Okay once we got those.
Where we're gonna ask if you can
try to limit your comments to as
close to a minute as possible
we're deeply appreciative that
folks have dug in and state this
scene and if it needs to go over
and finish your thought please
don't hesitate to do so but
we're going to target a minute
will start a timer.
And if we can.
Great.
Okay
please.
We'll start here thank you
Mr chairman and representative
there's no way you could sit
through this process without a
deep personal love of New Mexico
and can personal commitment to
the improvement of our
communities I am economic cells
are keen I'm one of the
directors of the New Mexico
immigrant law center and I'm
here in my role as the director
of the New Mexico immigrant law
center but also on behalf of the
twelve civil little legal
service providers in the state
we are here you guys have a
tremendous opportunity to help
us as we are in crisis the past
three years our reserves have
been completely depleted because
of the decrease in filing fees
and we are desperately need your
help we are asking that you
please accept the executive
budget recommendations for one
time special and supplemental of
one point seven million dollars
in the DFA and increase our
recurring budget by two million
dollars the investment in these
services flow are essential and
flow into every others single
type of funding that you all
fund and Representative Sarinana
is professionals can be more
apropos for the crisis that we
are and we are facing a bill
which we are in support of of
eliminating are filing fees
please continue but that affects
our current fiscal budget fiscal
budgets which have been cut by
over ten percent in addition to
the risk of the filing fees
being depreciated so please
please on the services thank you
thank you very much.
Thank you chairman and members
of comedian and thank you for
you'll following us to share
this story yes my name is Selvi
to my lord and I'm I'm just
starting organized and someone's
got to and then this that indeed
here and I was member fourteen
years and I'm even and I love
New Mexico and I'm on I am grant
money and I don't so that
promoted gift a gift for my
grand.
Total of an hour I'm reading and
I sent my community and come
back to to insure that
constitution amending up
one we'll plus we made ourselves
here and demanded more funding
now now.
That we have the cabin I went to
see that money will go back into
in my community and there are
not many Shiite healthcare
centres in my community.
And these are to find a place
that will give you my
granddaughter so that I can work
I want to see more support for
women's who wants to start a new
shelter sentiment communicating
that this is such a unique
aware more child centered the
circle Michael come nope should
leaving my granddaughter in New
Mexico City provide anything
sometimes you sacrifice my job
to be able to they get off of
here more so you'll get an
invocation sent their pool he'll
are working community saying
that and I want to say thank you
to meditate the exemptions for
these I guess she's I'm I'm I'm
I'm I don't know but thank you
so much to have us to talk thank
you to let the community talk
about left is values and I would
come.
Much thank you.
I think thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee my
name is are down on a two I'm an
early childhood educator for
eighteen years and a member of
all the I want to thank the
community members for their work
to ensure that I I for the past.
The fight our fight to pass
constitutional amendment one has
produced a department budget
that has grown over two hundred
million dollars thank you vice
chair Meredith XO for listening
to concerns about H. B. one nine
one and proposing a bill that
allows the trust fund to
continue growing with on the
long term funding for early
childhood educational programs
for many years my colleagues and
I have fought vigorously to
professional wages in our
careers that we love along with
the years of experience we have
adopted various levels of higher
education to provide quality
care and to teach our youngest
learners at the most critical
time of development we are
grateful for the community's
support committees some work to
continue funding for the dollar
is but we need to build on that
to ensure that the funding is
accounted for and that allocated
to the tri care industry for its
purpose not only would this
benefit the work force but he
will also be beneficial to all
New Mexico families with
affordable child care thank you
thank you very much.
What amount to generate the
members of the committee that
the number then the moment those
so it members almost axiom this
thank you for the best value for
any reason I mean don't photo
try new so yeah well a week
without I mean the at the.
We are a in the new them late
most arrival which is how we do
that would be our last I think I
mean that.
Think it goes us.
He came Hey this when we go.
The company that we've been a
on the news and Cisco money that
isn't going through we cannot
suppress immune from so mostly
others yeah you I'm so glad I
lost many of them with a company
that get over it up for you but
I'm Office como yo but active
but I'm seeing you see everyone
video so you are almost but not
more than miss new that we land
also see our the last test but
if which are most of the the
money that.
Thank you Mr chairman Robert
Romero on behalf of NGL energy
partners in the state that we
support the NMED budget request
includes an appropriation to
implement water reuse
strategies.
Thank you very much.
Hello Representative thank you
for having me my name is Melissa
Martinez I am a parent and I
come strongly to see that I was
the domestic violence abuse
victims I had to leave at six
months when my daughter was six
months of my son was twelve
months in utero there was no
options in Rio Arriba county for
zero to three and I really wish
the representative Joseph
Sanchez was here to hear that
because we need the support how
did not been for representative
for the money passed during this
last legislation for the COVID
of payments being paid in the
subsidies I would not be a
professional today I have served
one year school and I am proud
to say that I am a public
service and choose to continue
being a public servant these are
only two blessings then they are
looking at me today because this
is what they need to do they
need to know that they're going
to be leader some day they need
to know their work they need to
know that their community is
looking out for them and so we
might this is what we need to do
we need to pay for wages to the
teachers because I was once a
teacher and I left because I
can't live like that you can't
live off a twenty thousand
dollar margin I'm trying my best
and I hope you guys understand
that thank you so much thank you
very much.
A good good evening Mister chair
and other members of the
committee at least gonna with
the Serra club you're gonna
chapter just want to comment
real quick a couple things for
sisters strategic water reserves
the Interstate Stream Commission
these are funds that can help to
directly address New Mexico's
current water crisis first
allowing I just need to purchase
water rights to meet our compact
requirements also by protecting
endangered species the LFC
budget has one point five
million executive wreck it is
ten million Senator Stefanics
Bill would appropriate twenty
five million don't let I S. C.
forego a purchase of water right
because of lack of funds
secondly and I'll try to be
quick I'd also like to urge full
funding
and beyond for NMED LOC budget
is not enough that we recognize
increases the year by year the
governor's budget is not enough
but with revenues pouring into
the state we should first
funding oversight the keeps our
water air kids and communities
safe first of fully this means
the Klan member of can't take a
basic emitter of greenhouse gas
emissions this means that
contrary to the requirements of
federal law the department can't
afford small rules putting a
permit communities for example
at risk of being found out of
federal compliance this means as
the secretary said that clean
cars and truck rules that are
literally a copy paste of rules
from other states can't be done
in time to apply in a meaningful
amount of time the climate
crisis is not so far of constant
a constant it is fires it is
draft is asking it is exposure
to toxic chemicals and so we're
asking will fund the in this
agency to the level required to
keep New Mexico family safe
thank you thank you very much.
Hello again Mr chair and members
committee I don't see any County
Plamen Energy advocate with
conservation voters Mexico and
my colleague Luis Carrero
covered made the point that I
was going to talk about but I
will just reiterate a few points
that the secretary secretary can
he wanted me to touch on he
talked about things that we are
putting at stake if we don't
fully funded this department and
if we continue to fall under
from this apartment we are
risking our state's incredible
potential to lead the nation and
renewable energy and that's an
industry that will diversify our
economy promote job growth and
help us tackle the climate
crisis the executive budget
recommendations outlined in
Secretary Kenny's hand out is
what the department needs on to
properly implement effective
renewable in climate policy and
we have a once in a lifetime
budget surplus so there's no
reason that one of the most
important state agencies should
have to operate without these
resources thank you thank you
very much.
Good evening my name is Rosalie
Chavez on the.
Interim executive director New
Mexico legal aid we are a
statewide legal aid programs
that serve the entire state
as you know we rank third and in
the nation in terms of poverty.
When the pandemic hit the
poverty of the low income people
were hit the hardest.
Things
changed drastically for the
worse many people became
homeless people couldn't pay
their rent could buy food
couldn't pay make car payments
and domestic violence increased
most severely most recently I
have I had to urge our domestic
violence attorneys to more
strictly reduce their priorities
because we had so much request
for services and domestic
violence and we couldn't serve
all of that last year we had
over twelve thousand requests
for services we only opened five
thousand about five thousand
cases out of those five thousand
cases we were able to help
of sixteen thousand of
individuals nine thousand of
whom were children.
I ask that the
Committee except the executive
budget.
Of of including the special and
also full metal
Recommendation of one point
seven million forty if a civil
legal services
three forty one an increase of
find a recurring increase of two
million dollars for civil legal
services thank you thank you.
Much is senior president the
members of the committee
nominations sent to someone I'm
not so with member of the
central we've been going up for
you are allowed to vet bills
that is centers that we've got a
funding yet cost part of the
constant input and output that's
an adult game need track input
on posted on mama thank god on
is to see that people need to
know this is Janet Alonzo so you
have to have a we that just as
he hopes will win that is good
typical back you see in Thailand
is is he data you that I need to
we've done the muse need those
will minerals that is basically
a lesson then I recognize that
we are going on you got any
notice of affect that.
Do that the last election is to
come with me is it with us
hope is that they lied very
apple daily Vincent Gallo you
for my most at the money that's
what in me end up because the
constitution and the middle one.
The mid looking look at it
look at what you state this mean
database is a chemist need those
things can make what is about to
me that just get dollars have
you done this in a tackle this
bill is that'll going on C. N.
N. B. A. U. that's what Basel
what what does he need for that
today's all dress up at the the
political sin since then was
we are a company that.
Again you madam aggressive.
Again I this is a dental policy
and look able to off I will.
New Mexico both in C. alleged
does very little question them
but on but I think she's the one
is a little much of that is
that.
Pandemic then last time with
seaport activate those which of
that ISIS.
Thank you.
When I started this thing over
thank you members of the
committee.
And it's not just the on some of
you don't it almost values
initial report to to get on
again at the end user base here
less enrollment a whole new
companion then this internal
okay and then they get this to
what if any but I think this
question school but this year.
We know but I just.
You'll see in line this.
Clemente little visibility one
million additions so we moderate
in the economic thank the how
the lettuce in Seattle E. mais
drive the disgusting thing but
on.
It is when you put them they get
a phone those as the Seattle is
it'll cost you on them but I'm
not you're not totaling is in
rural New Mexico announced
additional Yankee in apple
you'll the latch of the of those
miss more you'll you'll send
this in my district discussion
on them but I'm not even I see
open that gate if you're still
meet but office the on the list
but I'm they get the less
wasteful.
At the.
Not.
I hope it'll sound ideas then it
access so I'll Neilson before
this program must but I school
we made our you funds you last
four million loan he got next
single jungle in going to an
office that are both economic
growth get a whole lot funding
in if they are new submit
digital photos of the Navajo he
is thought in fact I will send
it on May Day lot economia then
your last is borders okay yet
that I just need to talk with
others to see if you can IBM we
have a I.
Let's be they'll be able to see
a laptop with that project they
those getting most of those
emails will may he Connell state
indexes so a little costume
thing but I'm not you get lost
my is yes he's got this I just
dress thank god that access so
our own satellite you'll do not
even have to think on the board
in the in the polls the metals
Ninos focus on as we total The
we will make you go to this
device guess broadly give them
money and that is the instant
battles on justice system grant.
Good evening Mr chair and vice
chair members of the committee
my name is Barry K. route I'm a
registered lobbyist for your New
Mexico association of food banks
and we stand in very strong
support of the executive
recommendation.
the reason is your food banks
have worked hard to meet the
needs of hungry New Mexicans and
continue to be a strong partner
to try to end hunger.
Those needs continue to grow I I
know a lot of this field that
with the worst of the pandemic
over maybe this hunger needs are
going down the thought of simply
not the case therefore the money
in the executive recommendation
is necessary to help us with our
efforts to continue to try to
end hunger thank you thank you
very much.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Joseph
Hernandez I am a registered
lobbyist for animated vote.
We cannot afford to for for
policy for policy and and
projects that will increase
methane emissions we need to
continue
to to protect our public health
as you know methane emissions is
is is methane is a powerful
greenhouse gas nearby community
of Shiprock there is a high
concentration of orphan well so
as soon as our to Gallup in the
summer of twenty twenty one
secretary Kenny secretary
propped brought together a
working group to integrate
equity priorities in their
climate work seven principles
were created and approved by the
cabinet secretaries in the
governor as guiding principles
to ensure that equity is
meaningful it integrated in the
state's climate Planning fully
funding the New Mexico
environment department ensures
that we engage overly burdened
communities respects tribal
sovereignty assures
collaboration and consultation
it helps maintain accountability
transparency fully funding New
Mexico Environment Department
ensures that we incorporate
traditional knowledge from the
from the original students of
this land advances equity
economic transition fully funded
New Mexico environment
department will make sure
rulemaking happens for climate
policy that this body passed a
previously fully funding the New
Mexico department reduces the
health and environmental impacts
in my community.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
representative my name is
Michael about I want to start
with on and off remembering and
thanking the committee members
on the hard work to ensure that
our fight to pass constitutional
amendment for any child to
education I want of the case
managers a New Mexico Asian
families I come from the Afghan
community my life is surrounded
by refugees from Afghanistan on
my job as an as a community
leader who's been involved in
their lives I'm very close to do
to Fiji's I get to help them get
started in this country
Michelangelo after education the
knowledge did experiences funded
homes in Afghanistan they had
that kind of their children and
this is skip on came here to be
safe on the start from fresh
from zero I see how my single
mom Gwen is is struggling to
work on one more day with young
children she does not have
access to free trade care for
infants and she cannot afford to
pay for a day can I see that
there are great programs for
families with young children but
because because of language lack
of language access they cannot
utilize these programs I would
like to ask you to support the
funding for it only charge what
Education and Care Department
thank you all for your help and
support we love to see
improvement in practicing in
programs for at least try to
education thank you very much.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee and thank you
for allowing us to share our
stories my name is Nettie
content as and I am from Gallup
New Mexico father my daughter is
eleven months old in Gallup
there are many options for early
childcare.
We are in we are a child care
desert I have to be able to have
someone care for my daughter so
that I can work and provide for
her sometimes I can rely on my
mom to help me but she's also a
full time.
She job there are not many child
care centers and in my community
and it is hard to find a place
that will care for my daughter
so that I can work.
I want to see more support for
women who want to start new
shelters centers in my community
Gallup that is a child care
desert if there were more
childcare centres I could have
the option of leaving my
daughter to be cared for well I
work says there isn't sometimes
I have to sacrifice my job to be
able to take care of her
More childcare centres would
help are working communities in
Gallup New Mexico thank thank
you.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is lance on a
policy director for the center
for civic policy thank you for
allowing public comment the
choice should be between three
agencies HSD ECECD and see what
I FTE fighting over the ten of
federal block grant the state
should use this historic
opportunity to fully fund all
three agencies as a reminder
children on the ten intent of
households in New Mexico
currently live at twenty three
percent of the federal poverty
guidelines that's only four
hundred and forty seven dollars
a month for a family of three
let's put our families first
thank you for your support thank
you very much.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm that any separated
no full time internet New Mexico
St online poverty we urge you to
adopt the executive special
appropriation request one
hundred twelve point six million
for child care assistance in
section five of HB to so that
ECECD can continue to store
expansions the childcare
assistance that is help
thousands of children and
families and provides near
universal child care to New
Mexicans that they can work go
to school and find a job the
special appropriation will help
New Mexico's youngest children
receive high quality child care
which helps brain development
and reduces government costs
later in life it will allow
parents to continue to work
which benefits our economy so
please we are due to adopt the
executive recommendation thank
you thank you very much okay
members act includes public
comment I know today is very
long this is our final full
