OK, we have a great. Thank you
so much. Uh, we will go straight
to uh the governor's office, uh,
which is agency code 356. So
members, we can open up our the
white binders here.
Um
Behind have 3, we'll get to 356.
Um
We'll start off with the LFC and
the DFA.
Uh, and then for the executive,
good to see you, uh, Mr. Ron,
please feel free to introduce
members of the executive who are
here today and I'll go for the
other agencies once we get to
the executive presentation and
then we'll go from there.
Uh, big things, uh, budget
director writing in that up on
the screen for us.
If it takes a bit, we can just
go straight to our paper copies
here.
OK.
I think we're ready to go.
So, please.
Good afternoon, chair, members
of the committee. I am Emily
Hilla, the LSD analyst for the
office of the governor. Again as
chair Small said, we are in
business unit 356. I would also
like to point you to page 111 in
our volume 2.
today is Cindy Montoya, the
chief financial officer for the
office of the governor, as well
as Doctor Andrew Minor, the
state budget division director
of the Department of Finance and
Administration, talking about
the executive, the executive
budget recommendation.
To talk about the differences
between the recommendations to
members of the committee.
That's
like 111 in volume 2.
Yeah
It's the right time.
And very much appreciate the
members calling up the volume 2.
Appreciate allte being and
listen.
OK, please take it.
Uh, moving forward with the
differences between the budget
recommendations, the executive
recommendation.
It sounds like we're having some
feedback. OK. Should I bring it
closer? Is this better?
Is this mic over here too,
I like the culprit.
OK, let's go and we'll go a
little bit, yeah.
That's overseeing how the
feedback is and then we'll
adjust from there.
Let me know if there's still
feedback. I'll try to go.
Slower as we try to fix this
over here. Sorry about that,
chair, members of the committee,
uh.
To go over the differences in
the budget recommendations, the
executive is 4.1% higher than
the AC recommendation in general
fund revenue.
LFC recommendation that supports
a budget commensurate with FY 25
due to previous spending levels,
whereas the executive
recommendation fully fulfills
the agency's request and to get
into specifics for you all, the
executive recommendation is 3.4%
above the LFC and personal
services and employee benefits
due to increases in insurance
premium costs and these rates
are decided by the general
services department.
The executive recommendation
exceeds the Ay recommendation by
26.8% in contractual services to
allow for more legal research at
the office.
Additionally, the executive
recommendation is 3.6 higher
than the committee in other
costs due to the increase in the
Department of Information
Technology rates.
Uh, there were no differences in
performance measures here,
members of the committee, and
then just moving through the
packet, you can see uh the
performance measures for both
recommendations and we have our
personnel calculator that I'm
happy to answer any questions
that you may have. Uh, but with
that chair, members of the
committee, that is all I have
regarding the LFC
recommendation. I'll turn it
over to Doctor Minor to talk
about the executive
recommendation.
Like
Thank you, Emily. Good
afternoon, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, uh, real quick,
just to reiterate the
differences, the executive
funded the agencies's request,
4.1% or about 271,000 higher,
most of that in personnel, and
other to fund the rate needs of
the agency. And with that, I
will leave it to uh Ms. Montoya.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, I'd
like to introduce our cheaper
staff, deputy chief of staff
Diego Arcon, who is here with us
today and our director of
operations, Ms. Vanessa Kennedy.
In front of you, you have the
office of the Governor
presentation. I'd like to
briefly go through it. Page one
is just a very quick overview of
the office of the governor.
If you'll slip to page 2, it
talks a little bit about our
constituent services and the
services that we provide to the
state of New Mexico.
And how we assist each in each
each of the constituents in New
Mexico in any
Questions or concerns that they
would have with the agencies or
outside, outside of state
agencies. If you flip to page 3,
it is a breakdown of our FY 26
appropriation request by
category.
And on the next page, it gives a
detail.
As it was stated by both the
executive and the LXD analysts
are requests consist of 4.1%
higher or more than the FY 25
budget recommendation. This
request is mostly due to an
increase in the GST and do it
rates, 202 was in the personnel
and employees benefits category
and then an additional 18.6 in
the other category.
The request for the agency is
50,000 higher in the contractual
services to assist the agency
with additional contractual
obligations that they may need
during the FY 26 budget.
I will stand for questions.
Great. Thank, thank you very
much, uh, to you. Thank you, Ms.
Montoya. Um, or and, and, uh,
chief financial officer and I I
appreciate you will go the
questions from the members.
Uh, great we'll start with you.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Just tell me what's the IT rates
for.
It's kind of a lot. What is it,
Mr. Chairman and and
representative, the IT rates in
the other category would be our
HCM, which is human service like
our share rates per employees.
Those have increased over the
years for do it. I think the
biggest increase that you're
looking at, uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative is in the
personnel services and employee
benefits category and that is
for our liabilities.
GST liabilities are, are risk
rates.
All right. Thank you,
Representative.
Are there additional questions.
I've got a couple of questions,
so, uh, maybe Matilda.
We increased the executive
budget, uh, several times during
my tenure, perhaps, uh, you can
tell us a little bit about those
and then we can ask the
executive to sort of.
detail out some of the um
Uh, additional services that are
connected to those increases.
Yes, uh, chair, great question.
So as you can see on page 111 of
Volume 2 and 24, the governor's
office received an increase of
$809,000 a 17.8% increase to
fill vacancies. Um, however, the
office reverted 5 110.6,000 or
9% in personnel funding and by
24 in addition to borrowing out
145,000 in personnel costs to
purchase cubicles, furniture,
and technology equipment for the
staff, and so the LSC
recommendation due to these
different reasons in previous
spending patterns.
due to the increases previously,
as you mentioned here, uh, keeps
the uh agencies' budget
commensurate with FY 25.
And I'll turn it over to um this
one.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee. So at
the time of our request and, and
that is correct. We did revert
about $510,000 in the personnel
services and employee benefits
category. We were holding the
office of the governor was
holding about 6 vacancies. We
have now filled those vacancies
in the in that category, we have
two vacancies, um, that we will
be recruiting for and hiring
for.
Should the LFC recommendation be
taken and our staffing level
stays the same. We would be
Overspent in the in in the
personnel services and benefits
category of absorbing that
202,000 liability that we have
to the general services
department.
Got it. Thank you very much. Um,
and members, if we can turn to
page 4 here in our different
sheets and we'll see on the
back.
Um
Sort of a reflection of that
reduction in funded vacant rate
on the vacancy rate.
You look at tab.
Uh, it's at 3% with a funded
vacancy sort of.
One position is what we're told
back from September, which
reflects broadly with you
reading Mila that the agency is
um found a way to bring on folks
in order and kept them for the
duration.
Yes, chair, um, this PSA has not
really changed since, uh, when
we were going over the agency
requests, however, as you can
see, in column and still the
estimated fun on the estimated
to funded vacancy in dollars is
$173.9,000 if we keep personal
costs commensurate with FY 25,
so that you can see what it have
to absorb the total $22.4,000
request that they are seeking to
increase they could additionally
do.
Bar to cover the increased rates
with um the current budget
recommendation the LFC has. OK.
OK, thank you.
Um
And uh this Mooya, do you want a
detail or and from the exact any
additional detail, and I'll, let
me break this before I ask this
question. It's been the practice
of this committee since I've
served on the committee that
generally make the executive
budget request. It's, it's sort
of, uh, one of the few in a very
unique circumstance within the
practice of the committee. Um,
I'm asking questions that are
sort of going a little bit
deeper.
Um
And one of the questions is, so
with the, the funding that's
broken out here.
Is it mainly around sort of the
contracts.
And some of the work that the
executive is intending to do.
Separate from the
uh different.
Department of Information
Technology rates separate from
some of those, which maybe we'll
expect to see with the number of
agencies.
Um
Yeah, if there's any additional
sort of color to add around the
contracts and they importance
for the work because we
recognize
The importance of the work of
the executive and the need to,
to work closely.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee, um,
To state that we could do bar to
cover into the personnel
services and employee benefits
category is risky. Last fiscal
year, a reversion out of the
category in the 300s, which was
contractual was $3000 and in the
other category was $5000. So.
I'm not sure that we would be
able to cover that cost or the
or absorb that cost with moving
out of the other categories, um.
The additional $50,000 in the
contractual category request is
for additional contracts. It's
$50,000 for legal services,
legal review, legal policy if,
if the agency should need it,
yes. Got it. So thank you, uh,
Ms. Fonuyen, that's sort of
looking ahead and obviously uh
public safety is a big part of
our conversation. It's also a
bit of a contingency sort of
looking ahead.
OK.
Thank you.
OK, I don't know that there's
any other questions from the
committee. Uh, I'll go ahead and
ask the vice chair to move the
executive recommendation. Uh, I
appreciate the conversation that
we've been able to have just
you.
I would move the committee adopt
the executive recommendation.
it.
OK. It's been moved in 2. let's
go ahead, we'll take a, uh, just
a roll call vote on this, um.
Representative Baca.
No.
Representative Duncan. Yes.
Yes.
No.
Again.
Right. Thank, thank you very
much. Thank you committee
members. Uh, well, uh, that's
the analyst to have a close
reign on what the additional
contracts are and that that uh
work be coordinated closely with
the LFC.
Great.
Thank you all very much. OK, uh,
we're gonna go on to agency code
308.
Mr. Roitor, it's great to see
you. Thank you for being here
today. Uh, we're, as we'll start
off with Mr. Ortega.
And working to get our uh
Technical pieces, right?
And think very big things to
Rome and the.
And Mr. Chair, with that, I'm
gonna go ahead and get started.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Antonio Ortega, and I am
the LFC analyst for the Office
of the State Auditor. All the
way to my left is the DFA
analyst SJ and the New Mexico
State Auditor Joseph Maestas.
Mr. Chair, members in getting
started, please reference
relevant budget details in the
LFC budget document Volume 2 on
pages 64 and 65.
And you may also refer to tab 3
agency code 308 in your binders.
Mr. Chair, beginning with the
base budget differences, the LFC
recommendation proposes a 0.7%
increase over the FY 25
operating budget, including a
0.9% increase in general fund
revenue.
Here, Mr. Chair, that includes
the LFC recommendation funding
196.1,000 over the or excuse me,
under the executive
recommendation for personal
services and employee benefits
as the LFC and Department of
Finance and Administration are
conducting an ongoing review of
compensation and uh
categorization in the state that
could reduce the need for
targeted.
Compensation in the future.
Next, Mr. Chair, the executive
recommendation funds 14.7,000
below the LFC recommendation to
support expenses in the other
category.
Here the executive
recommendation proposes a 4.5%
increase over the FY 25
operating budget, while the LFC
recommendation proposes a 7.1%
increase ultimately matching the
agency's request within the 400
category.
And finally, Mr. Chair, I just
wanted to point out members, if
you take a look behind your
personal services and employee
benefits calculation worksheet.
There is a list of special
appropriations and their
corresponding uh LFC and
executive recommendations. Uh, I
would like to remind everyone
that the special appropriations
will not be voted on during this
hearing, but SJ and myself are
available to answer any
questions you may have regarding
the recommendations.
And Mr. Chair, with that, I'll
pass the presentation over to
SJ.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, um, just to
reiterate, the executive
recommendation in uh provides
for a 4.5% increase, which is
196.104 appropriate placement,
um, in conversation with the
LFC, um.
We learned that there is a study
going on to identify the real
cost of these targeted
placements, um, but we can
confirm that the need is there
um for appropriate placement,
um, especially for CPAs within
the department. Um, the
executive recommendation is
equal in the 300s and then as uh
Antonio mentioned, we provide
for a 4.5%. We, the executive
recommendation funds.
A 4.5% increase for CPA training
and certification.
Which is slightly less than the
LFC recommendation.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, uh, Mr.
Roditor, thank you for being
here. Please feel free to
introduce anybody from your team
who's also here.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, um, members of the
committee, I want to
congratulate some of the new
committee appointees, um, today
I have my, um, deputy state
auditor, Mr. Ricky Bejarano
right behind me. Uh, we also
have my policy director, Mr.
David Pena, I think he's in the
back here.
And for insurance, I brought my
administrative services
director, Ms. Cheryl James.
Right back here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. May I
proceed just with my brief
presentation, um, thank you
members of the committee. Um,
you know, I've made this
presentation before about the
state of the industry.
And I can assure you it's a
national problem that's come
home to roost right here in New
Mexico.
Um, you can see by that graph on
the left, we've experienced
almost a 40% reduction in
accounting firms that we
authorize every year to fan out
and contract with public
entities for their annual
financial compliance audits.
So my office doesn't do the
audits in-house, we rely on
accounting firms to do that.
Um
The, the graph on the right kind
of shows we did a salary
comparison cause it's so much
easier to do benchmarking with
public salaries, New Mexico is
that oops, that column on the,
on the right, we are lagging
behind every single state
auditor office, uh, in the
region, uh, and surrounding New
Mexico in terms of salaries.
Uh, there's just a, a
diminishing uh interest in
pursuing accounting, the, the
rules to sit for the CPA are
getting too onerous.
And so, and the public
accounting standards are
proliferating quite a bit. I
think Gatsby is over.
Uh, 100 and so profit margins
are going down, interest is
going down. We live in a free
market economy without
accountants, uh, we're in a
world of hurt.
So what are we experiencing here
in New Mexico?
We're having problems recruiting
our office and the
qualifications for auditors are
unique and like no other state
agency. Uh, we're already seeing
this problem manifest itself in
terms of late audits between 22
and 23, we've seen a 20%
increase.
And once we're done reviewing
all the 24 audits, uh, you're
gonna be shocked at how many
more are late.
Um
I mentioned the reduction in
license CPAs here, even here in
New Mexico over the last 5
years, we've seen about a 30%
decrease in the number of
licensed, uh, CPAs. Another
problem is a lot of these rural
public entities.
Can't hire another auditor. And
so they're asking us, Mr.
Auditor, please waive the
eight-year auditor rotation
rule, any public entity can only
contract with an accounting firm
for 8 consecutive years, and
they can get that waiver, but
we're seeing an increase in
those waivers.
Why is that a problem? Because
we're vulnerable by state law,
if these public entities can't
find an auditor, we're on the
hook. We have to do it and give
unlimited resources,
We're going to tell them, you
know, we'll do it, but
It's gonna take a while.
And the other thing too is, you
know, we've asked the governor
to consider increasing the
higher education endowment fund,
um, some of the higher ed
institutions and their
accounting departments have been
seeking these higher ed
endowments under the category of
workforce.
Uh, initiatives, and I can tell
you that this is a workforce,
uh, crisis.
Um
Another issue, um, back in 2021,
this office was mandated through
HB 236 to review all
conservatorship reports.
But it was an unfunded mandate.
We weren't made whole, so it
required us to take resources
from our mission critical.
Uh, financial audit division to
staff this conservatorship
review team.
And so what we do is we work
with the courts. They send us
these annual conservatorship
reports. We have full discretion
to determine whether or not we
want to audit them.
But if you look at the kind of
that second bullet.
Uh, under impacts, um, and one
of the senior analysts asked us,
so what is the financial impact?
Of, of this function of this
conservatorship review function.
It's about $600,000 and that
excludes overhead and other
costs, so
Um
We'd like to see this function
transferred back out, either to
administrative office of the
courts or to the attorney
General's office.
So our general fund category in
the 200s, I think the analysts
already explained it. Um, we did
ask for a 15.8% increase, most.
The lion's share of our budgets
in the 200s. Uh, we have
Really worked hard to stabilize
the office, I inherited an
office with a 40% vacancy rate.
It's hovering around between 24
and 25%.
Uh, we've modernized it, but we
know that we're still lagging in
terms of wages.
We were gonna request uh a
special appropriation to do our
own compensation and
classification study.
The one that was commissioned by
Spo basically excluded auditors.
It excluded the auditing
positions in my office, so we
intend to ask for an
appropriation to conduct our own
compensation and classification
system and benchmark against the
public sector and the private
sector.
This just shows the graph of our
current budget, our request
relative to the two
recommendations, um,
You know, I've often said that
if my office is underfunded,
then it really diminishes our,
our ability to weed out fraud,
waste and abuse, and I know all
of you are very concerned about
that, and I'd like you to think
about that when making decisions
regarding my agency's budget.
I want to get into the special
appropriations, Mr. Chair. The
first one is a request for a
million dollars. Uh, this was
kind of a collaboration between
my office and the LFC to
capitalize our audit audit fund
to be able to respond to agency
referrals like we recently did
an audit of local economic
Development Act on a program
level basis and then we picked
several mature leader projects.
Uh, we didn't find any
wrongdoing, but here's an
example of
my office being able to
objectively respond to your
referrals. And so by adding this
appropriation to the audit fund,
uh, we can be in a better
position to respond to any
referrals from the legislative
branch.
And one thing about the otter
fund is you all use.
The balance of our audit fund to
partially defray our operating
budget, and that's not
sustainable. Uh, it's very
difficult for us to meet the
performance metric to bring in a
certain level of revenues
through fees that we charge
because we do conduct a handful
of audits.
But, um, uh, like Male's
Community College, uh, there was
an appropriation behind that for
us to do the 22 and 23 audit,
we're on pace to begin the 24
audit, however, were conducting
a special audit on the prior
leadership at Mesaenss. So
there's an example where we
Had a public entity that was on
the brink of insolvency, we
stepped in, reconciled all their
transactions, um.
The community college is
stabilized.
And so we feel this
appropriation could really help
us. It's non-recurring, and it
could help us be a little more
nimble in responding to
legislative uh referrals.
The next one is $500,000 to
implement a singular audit of
state agencies. What's a
singular audit? It's a
consolidated audit of all state
agency audits. Uh, we just
contracted with UNM's Bureau of
Business and Economic Research.
They conducted a study of how to
reform.
A financial compliance with
state agencies.
And as an initial step, they're
recommending that, that we
institute a statewide federal
single audit. This is an audit
that consolidates all the
federal portions of the annual
financial compliance audits of
every state agency.
And we would join 45 states,
like, let's join the rest of the
United States in reforming
financial compliance for state
agencies, but we'd like to see
this.
Um, ultimately,
come to a singular audit and so
this, this appropriation would
would study the transition, uh,
as a state to go from status quo
to uh a statewide federal single
audit and eventually to a
singular audit, there are some
other issues that were uncovered
in this study, for example, uh,
share is not integrated with
universities and other component
units.
And I want to link the concerns
of the industry in this, in
that.
There are certain states that
have a hybrid where they don't
consolidate the audits of the
large complex agencies where the
risk is highest. And so we can
still continue to audit state
agencies, but on a less frequent
basis with this consolidated
singular audit.
And so you guys know I'm, I'm,
I'm doing my best to try and
reform this industry, and I, I
hope the industry is willing to
work with me on that.
Uh, the next appropriation is 2
of them, uh, they're both
500,000. 1 is to provide audit
prep services to the small local
public bodies, as you know, uh,
my office has received two
appropriations totaling 1.5
million to help these small
local public bodies come into a
compliance because as you know,
many of them have capital outlay
that's being held up because
they're not in compliance with
executive order 2013006. So
these are some of the metrics
that we've uh
achieved, we've had uh 267
entities brought into
compliance, we've released $5.2
million in withheld capital
outlay for small local public
bodies.
Our, our accounting firms and we
are actually doing some
in-house, uh, agreed upon
procedures to help these local
public bodies, but we have
delivered 772 financial uh
certifications right now. We
have 3 statewide contracts to
cover the entire state with the
priority to continue helping
small local public bodies.
But we want to add a new element
of services, and that is to help
them prepare for the audit,
we're dispatching an audit, and
they go to the small local
public body and they're not
prepared for the audit. So this
is a new element to our funding
and then that second one is just
to help continue, uh, helping
small local public bodies, um,
be in compliance.
You can see on the very bottom
there, we still have challenges.
We have 271 local public bodies
that are still noncompliant, uh,
we're in arrears about 1700
financial certifications, but we
keep adding local public bodies.
They're hearing about this
assistance program that you all
have made available through the
appropriations. And so, uh,
we're really testing the market
on this one. We're gonna see if
they can rise up.
Uh, to this challenge and help
all these local public bodies.
This is the last slide. It just
gives a summary of, of some of
the accomplishments that we've
made, uh, here in the office.
You can go ahead and read that,
but Mr. Chair, um,
You know, I, um, I know the
budget recommendations have not
been favorable relative to our
increase of 15.8%, uh, but
We feel at this point that um
the highest consideration be
given to our appropriations
request because that may ease
the burden on our operating
budget. So with that, Mr. Chair,
we stand for questions. Ricky,
do you want to come on up?
Great. And thank you very much.
Uh, we're gonna go first to
represent Duncan and then from
there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, my
questions are, since I am new to
this committee, my questions are
to kind of get some education
under my belt.
Can you talk about um some of
the smaller assass and those
that are non-compliant right
now, um, I know there's
different levels of audits that
you have to perform. Can you,
can you talk a little bit about
that? And is there any, um, is
there any, uh, uh thought
process about doing if you're uh
say you that gets $12,000. Um,
is there any thought to say, you
guys don't need an auditor or is
it a one hour telephone audit or
something like that just to
Help them out. Thank you, Mr.
Sure, um, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Duncan, the Audit
Act, uh, apply it, the section
of the Audit Act applies to, uh,
public entities that have
revenues under a half a million.
And those are considered small
local public bodies.
But
It the there's different tiers
that apply to to local public
bodies, and it depends on the
revenue levels and the progress
made in obligating their capital
of the.
Now, if there's an entity, I
believe that that has under
50,000 in revenue. They're not
subject to any kind of audit.
It's basically a
self-certification, but tiers 2
through 6, they have different
levels of financial uh
compliance.
And we are working on reforming
those tiers. Uh, it's been a
while since they were developed.
I think that the revenue
thresholds that determine each
tier, uh, needs to be updated
and so we do intend to sponsor
legislation to reform those
tiers.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm, I'm
glad to hear that if there's any
way that we can help the smaller
entities that I'm, I'm all for
that.
Um, next question would be, Mr.
Chair, would this single federal
audit program.
Would that use the bigger firms.
The New Mexico probably doesn't
have a whole lot of them in. So
then what would, and if so, then
what would that do to the local
firms within the state of New
Mexico, the homegrown boys.
Well, there's about 133 state
agencies and share, um, not all
of them require a single audit,
uh, but if we consolidated all
their annual financial
compliance audits, there would
be 133 fewer, but this would be
a lot bigger, more complex, uh,
audit. And so, yes, it would
probably require a bigger
auditing firm as an example,
University of New Mexico,
there's only really two audit
firms that can audit them. I
think their, their budget's
about 3 billion.
dollars, so, uh, this would have
an impact on the industry, but
again, it wouldn't totally
eliminate the frequency in
auditing those state agency. We
might go to maybe every 3 years
instead of every year. And by
the way, we're one of the few
states that audits every single
public entity every year. We're
talking almost 1200.
And about 650 of those are
subject to a full financial
audit.
Thank you Mr. Have you, um, you
said it would impact the the
smaller mom and pop shops, um,
have you looked into that
further to find out how much it
would impact them.
How many of them would be out of
business as a result of this, or
would there, would it go to
that, uh, level.
Um, it's hard to say what the
impact would be right now, the
industry, in my opinion, is
already under strain because of
the difficulties we had in
hiring accounting firms to help
us early on in our program to
assist small local public
bodies. So our procurement
process evolved such that the
only interest we can get from
medium and large firms was to go
a statewide procurements as
opposed to procurements on a
county by county basis.
I'm, Mr. Chair, thank you. I'm,
I'm, I mean, as a small business
owner myself, I absolutely do
not like to hear that. Um, I
understand on one side of the
coin, um, that I may not be big
enough to do that, but.
I mean, I, I would recommend we
do anything and everything we
can to protect our homegrown,
uh, small mom and pop shops.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much for
that.
Uh, next we have Representative
Mohan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you, Mr. Arger for
being here, um.
Are you, um, asking for the.
What is the, I'm trying to find
the additional amount that
you're asking to help, uh, to
the, the small rural areas to
prepare for their audits.
Is there additional amount in
the budget for that? That's half
a million and, and we didn't
just get that.
Uh, out of the sky, Mr.
Chairman, uh, Representative
Luhan. We did an early
assessment of the small local
public body program. We actually
hired one of the larger
accounting firms.
And that was one of the
recommendations that we need to
add a new element of services,
uh, to help them prepare for the
audit, and we think this is
gonna help.
Cause I know there were many
questions like, OK, if you get
him to to be compliant, how do
they stay compliant? Well.
Audit preparation services will
really address that, that need.
Thank you so much. I appreciate
that. I think this is, you know,
I remember being very supportive
of the first million dollars
that we gave so that you could
help the the small small local,
um.
Government, uh
Governments and is there
additional funding that you need
also for that to continue what
you're already doing, Mister
Chair, that the million dollars?
Yeah, totally, yeah, that's what
I thought, OK, well.
I think that what I feedback
I've gotten is it's really
working, it's, it's getting out
there, that's been and you've
been utilizing. I see that
you're using the money for that
and what you found is that you
need the you need a back step
and do the prep work with them
as well. And I know that in a
lot of our small rural areas
that this is very helpful and
very necessary. So I just wanted
to say thank you for for really
doing that this type of work.
Um
And as far as like the
The audits that aren't, you said
there was 772 or is that
certifications?
Are there
Can
clarify like how many audits you
said there's an increase though,
those are annual certifications
that the smaller entities
require and we've helped to
develop those through the small
local public body, yeah, that's
trying to clarify, but you also
said that we're gonna see an
increase of defaults and audits
by 20%. Is that correct as well,
Mr. Chair? Well, you know, the
early data is coming in, we're
not quite done with all the
reviews of the 2024 audit
reports, but we're seeing
a dramatic increase in late
audits, uh, more than 20%.
Mr. Chair, is that because the
where are you seeing that come
from? Is that from our small
local government or where where
is the majority of that, you
know, the industry is
contracting in the form of fewer
independent public accounting
firms in New Mexico, so the
client loads the same, but
there's fewer firms. In fact, we
just saw Mr. Chair
Representative Lujan, about 2
months ago we we witnessed a
medium firm acquired by a larger
firm, so we're experiencing the
the contraction of the industry
real time.
Thank you so much. I know you're
really looking into how we can
um.
Expand what our auditors do and
and do it in a holistic way, so
thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much.
Next, we're gonna go to ranking
member Chatfield, then
Representative Silva.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Sorry you
caught me by surprise, uh.
Thank you for being here, Mr.
Auditor. Uh,
you know, referred a couple of
small entities to you to, for
helping, they hadn't really made
the cut, and I, I appreciate
what you're, what you're doing
and what you're trying to do.
Uh, something that I wanted to
just call your attention. I
think I, I may have mentioned it
before, but, but, um,
Severance tax bonds have a
Have
When they are given out, they do
not allow for the payment of
fiscal agent fee.
So some of these small local
entities can have a very large
project.
But they don't have a fiscal
agent fee, they're unable to
collect the fiscal agent fee and
they, in order to hire an
auditor.
Now in the case of the salt and
water conservation districts.
We've been trying to bring some
bills that brought some external
funding in there so they can
start to pay for that audit, but
I, I can tell you that probably
won't solve it for, won't solve
that problem for all of the
small agencies, uh.
Uh, the different, uh,
Subdivision of government, if
they, they can have a quite
large project, project.
But still, no money.
To to hire an auditor if they
are funded with severance tax
bond. Are you aware of that?
I, I wasn't aware of that, um,
but I think the committee is
aware that if there is an entity
that's non-compliant for
executive Order 2013006, they
can find a fiscal agent, but as
you said, uh, Mr. Chairman
Representative Chatfield, there
is kind of a uh administrative
fee that is assessed by the
fiscal agent to administer the
capital outlay for that
noncompliant public entity. Uh,
if they can't use severance
stacks, they'll have to find,
you know, other means.
To pay for that administrative
fee, but I wasn't aware of the
restriction on STB funding.
Uh,
Mr. Chairman.
If they, unless they have a
federal contract.
Or some other type, you know,
partner in there.
There is no fiscal agency fee on
severance tax bonds. You just
It don't matter how big the
project is. There's no
severance, uh, there is no
fiscal agent fee allowed on
severance tax bonds, so anyway,
there they sit and uh I know
your agency has been reluctant
to uh provide an audit for, for
the larger contracts.
Um, like I say with with salt
and water conservation
districts, we're trying to do,
do a work around, get them where
they're up and running, but
there's a lot of other projects.
Sas uh.
You know, just to um withhora of
other types of projects go to
probably face that very same.
Same problem. So if you're, if
you're looking at projects that
a good sized project, why aren't
they hiring their own auditor
was uh just a, just a little bit
of a
Something that from inside the
industry that, so you would help
you to know. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you very much,
thank the member, uh, Chatfield
next representative Silva.
And then and and Mr. Chair, I do
want to state we did issue a a
report on the program. We
documented how we actually spent
the initial half million
appropriation and our
expenditure plan for the million
dollars. So I believe we
provided it to every single
member, if not, we'll make sure
and get it to you.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you so
much for your presentation as a
new member, it was just really
insightful and um illuminative
illuminative for me. I had a
question about um
The conservatorship function,
um, how many FTEs does that take
in the office. I see it says 50%
of the general counsel, but is
there additional staff added to
that?
Right now, um, Mr. Chairman
Representative Silva, uh, we
have 5 total FTEs, but two
vacancies.
So we, and we did elevate that
group, uh, as a direct report to
the deputy auditor.
But it's, again, it's, it's an
issue because
Prior to 2021, which is when the
mandate of the law was passed,
this office only dealt with
public financial information.
Now we're faced with uh dealing
with private financial
information, and I could tell
you if we select a
conservatorship for audit, these
private financial institutions,
many of them which are out of
state, are reluctant to provide
that information, which forces
us to exercise our subpoena
authority. And so,
It's very labor intensive.
We weren't made whole, and it
took vital resources from our
financial audit division. That
is the main division that
reviews all those audit reports.
Thank you. And um,
What, where did it live? Where
did this function live before
2021?
That was before my time, was
that in uh administrative
officer of the courts, is that
AOC?
I'll let my deputy respond.
Come on, deputy dog.
Mr. Chairman Representative
Silva. The function wasn't being
performed before.
This was a start, um, so there's
nothing to measure against in
the past. But I think the big
takeaway is that these are not
public funds. It's outside our
mission. It's outside our scope.
Um, one could argue, and this is
a personal
Opinion, it had no business
being transferred or begun in
the auditor's office.
Thank you. And that would
require a legislative action to,
to change. OK, Mr. Chairman
representsilva, that is correct.
OK. Thank you. Thank you, chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 2
questions.
reminds us, uh, you mentioned
the workforce initiatives, HED
endowment. Can you just
elaborate a little bit what you
would like to see in
relationship to producing
auditors.
Well, I'd first like a, like a
firm and formal recognition that
this shortage of accountants is
a workforce crisis here in New
Mexico.
First and foremost, it needs to
be treated like we treated
nursing shortages and, you know,
level 4 operators of water and
wastewater systems, we are there
right now. And so some of these
uh flagship university
accounting departments have
pursued these higher education,
uh, endowments, and the governor
actually sets the priorities.
And so there's a number of
priorities for this endowment
fund, and one of them, and it's
not very explicit, it's
workforce initiatives and
We need to elevate this issue
and formalize this funding and
maybe be more explicit in the
designation of future priorities
for this endowment. My second
question is, I didn't realize
that you're a member of the New
Mexico Border Authority. Do you
have any unique role in that
capacity.
I wasn't aware of that. I, I
really, uh, there's a problem in
the legislation has been passed
historically that designates me
as a statutory voting member in
these bodies that are affiliated
with entities that we audit. And
so, wow, if I am a statutory
member of the border authority,
I shouldn't be there and if any
of you want to sponsor
legislation to just cut me out.
It, it would be more than
welcomed.
Thank you, because Mr. Chair, I
think they would benefit for
your presence. Thank you. Thank
you. Thank you very much. Next
we have, uh, Representative Dowd
and Representative Buck.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Mr. Auditor. Um, so what I
wanna back up Representative
Chatfield on his concern about
the 47 swimwater Conservation
districts.
If they have a meal levy, a
local mill levy, they're able to
hire an auditor. If they do not
have a local mill levy, which
most don't, then they are
relying on
Whatever we're able to provide
for them, which fluctuates
greatly. Um,
But yet they are responsible for
doing the mitigation, water and
land vegetation management,
thinning and all that stuff on
all state, federal, and private
land. They're the only ones who
can do work on private land to
mitigate fire risk and those
sorts of things. When you have
267 entities that you helped.
Do you have a breakdown of
whether there's a rule or metro
if their water districts, if
they're swim water districts, do
you have broken down? Can I get
a list of who those entities
were and just off the top of
your head, are they mostly rural
and small?
They're mostly rural and small
and Mr. just a reminder to go
back through the chair,
you're fine you're fine.
No, no, no, me,
Mr. Chair representative Doo,
they're mostly rural in nature
and if you were to look at all
those small local public bodies,
uh, there are way more aseass
and mutual domestics. But, um,
and we have a list, we can get
you a list.
And I want to let everyone know
we developed an application
process, so any small local
public body that wants these
services and apply.
Uh, we have the 3 contracts
statewide. Uh, we've also
awarded a 4th contract to
develop a tool kit for small
local public bodies.
To help them help themselves.
Um, so,
And we're, we're focusing on the
small local public bodies that
have capital outlay withheld.
Um, the old way of helping them
was this office would set aside
about $20,000 and they would
have to apply and hire an
attorney at about $2000 a pop
for one fiscal year.
And so many of them are behind
more than 10 fiscal years. And
so we've really accelerated this
direct assistance to get them
all into financial compliance
and remember it's not just about
accessing capital outlay. It's
about applying for new funding
like New Mexico Finance
Authority Water fund, Aseia
Infrastructure Fund. So this is
really, really important.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Auditor, I, I do
not disagree with you. The other
thing that made me think that
this was probably rural
communities, is that when you
talk about 267 entities divided
by $5 million released, it's
less than $20,000. Yeah, we're
talking about these people are
already dealing with scraps. I
know they're dealing with scraps
because I'm likely to get less
than $3 million to try to figure
out how to fund 300,000, 300
million in requests. And these
people have got to pass their
audit.
Because there were we're trying
to resolve issues around soil
health, water health, uh, for
our um for our environment, and
those who say, you know, that we
need to address these sort of
mitigations to be very concerned
about what you're doing. Uh, is
there when you go in, it's
totally there to help them
become compliant. They're not
gonna have um like feel that
you're, you're coming in to to
come with a heavy hand and point
out the wrong. You're there to
help them become
compliant. Absolutely, Mr.
Chair, Representative Doo, yeah,
it's an application process.
They apply of their own
volition, and I want to tell you
I grew up in rural northern New
Mexico, Mansea water rights
owner. I'm a land grant heir,
and so I think these rural local
public bodies have been
neglected for too long. We all
understand if you grew up in
rural New Mexico, you have to
understand and appreciate the
services that they provide for
their own communities. So we're
here to, we're from the
government, we're here to help.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Auditor. And
then, um, I'm really curious
about you're saying that you're
making sure that the opal, the
opiate settlement funds were
being used for the proper
purpose. I, I, it's probably not
your in your preview, but if you
could tell me what those
purposes are because I've been a
little curious about how folks
are coming up with their
interventions, cause some of
them seem very impactful and
evidence-based and others seem
like, how did they pick that?
Yeah, Mr. Chairman,
Representative Doo, uh, my
office has a formal role in the
administration of the opioid
settlement funds. Now the
allowable uses are laid out in
the agreement itself, but what
we do is we do an audit and we
just change the audit rule to
direct all the auditing firms
that I've authorized to audit to
do testing to ensure that all
the recipients of the opioid
settlement funds that they're
applying those uses consistent
with the allocation of.
It.
If we find that they didn't,
they have to give the money
back, and they can't receive any
funds until they're back in
compliance. And the other thing
is that they can't commingle,
uh, those opioid allocation
funds with any other funds. So.
It's quite formal. So, Mr.
Chair, so if, if they were, I
know that we're just looking at
your budget, but if, if they
were trying to strengthen the
existing program that had
evidence-based results, they
couldn't. Well, if it was
consistent with the, with the
agreement itself, they could.
OK, OK, thank you. Um, and then,
um, Mr. Chair, Mr. Auditor, my
last question is just, I see
that you've mentioned Western
New Mexico University. Are you
going to look and see if this is
a trend. If this is an outlier,
what's happened at Western
Mexico University or if it's a
trend at all universities, I
know.
Some universities have jets and
fly legislators back and forth
to events, I mean, like, are you
just focused on Western and how
do we get, how do we see if this
is an outlier or if it's
typical. Mr. Chair
Representative Doo, um, in terms
of Western right now, we're
conducting us another special
examination into the $1.9
million dollar payout.
Um, we've also are working with
the universities I designated
them for a special audit, um,
we've approved the scope and
we're gonna accelerate the time
frame of that audit. So instead
of a November completion under
their own self-designated audit,
which I canceled that contract.
This new audit, we're gonna
accelerate it and have it
complete by June and hopefully
it could inform the Attorney
General's investigation as well.
In terms of universities, we're
gonna do a statewide review of
all universities.
foundations
Foundations are component units.
Of the universities, and we have
a lot of foundations that uh are
are convinced that they're not a
component unit.
And so, uh, and
In terms of Mesa lands, the
foundation was under was not
cooperative with my office, and
it led to a disclaimed audit.
Masa lands, so we want to make
sure that foundations are
operating above board that they
accept the fact that their
component units and subject to
being audited along with the
primary, the main university,
uh, plus we audit all higher ed
institutions, and so, uh, we're
gonna be looking at this, any
potential trends in excessive
travel or uh improper
procurement. Uh, so, yes, it's
on our radar screen and we've
already uh identified.
ified university foundations for
a kind of a special statewide
audit.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Uh, next we're gonna
go to Representative Baca, then
Representative Herrera.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and thank
you for your presentation.
Just two simple questions. Um,
Mr. Chairman and uh Mr. Otter,
what were your reversions last
year? Cause there's a little bit
of a discrepancy depending upon
Where you look.
Uh, in the initial half a
million for the small local
public body program we had to
think about a $80,000 reversion
on that appropriation.
On the budget side,
what was our
Did we have a reversion in the
budget? No.
We did have one in the special
appropriations, a half mil.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
the, uh, Mr. Chairman and Mr.
Rotter, I'm looking actually at
uh volume 2, page 64.
Um
Under the, the budget as far as
it's titled under the budget
issues and
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Rotter, I,
I believe that.
We're looking for a general fund
increase of 17.7%, is that?
Is that correct? Am I reading
that, uh, Mr. Chairman, and Mr.
Roder.
Mr. Chair represented Baca. I
thought it was 15.8%.
I have uh so I have the request
of uh
General fund increase of 17.7%.
A and also recruits a request of
691,000 or 15.8% in personnel
costs.
I, I just want to be clear as
far as
What, what the requests are as
we look at them in comparison to
LFC, this is true.
Uh, anyone as far as um volume
2. What, what is the request?
What is the percentage of
Increase
Uh, the agency request that's.
And it's a great question from
Baca. I think sort of detailing
the full request, the majority
of that, which is in the
personnel services and employee
benefits. Additional parts of
the request, I think is also
part of the question, which is a
great question to sort of make
up the entirety of the increase,
which does equal, as we're told,
17, over 17.5.
And if the LCN was wants to go
into more detail, great, if we
want to ask Doctor Courtney to
come here or direct your soli to
go unless you want to sort of
detail it out, Mr. Auditor.
With regard to the percentage, I
think we had calculated 15.8%,
but regardless.
The increase is necessary in
order for us to be able to hire.
Uh, qualified auditors.
We cannot currently hire CPAs,
for example, unlike other state
agencies in order to promote to
audit managers.
It requires for our auto
managers to be CPAs under AICPA
standards under generally
accepted auditing standards and
statements of auditing
standards.
That gets very expensive because
we're also competing with the
private industry or competing
with the very IPAs.
That conduct audits on our
behalf.
The other thing I want to
mention is that these, the
higher level, the higher the
level of auditor, the more we
rely on them to review the
audits that the independent
public accountants do.
They don't just do them and, and
the audits are then issued. They
come through our office and they
go through two separate levels
of review, and then a final
review on my behalf.
So that's it if you're
requesting.
The need for this, that's the
need, uh, the percentage will
work with LFC get nailed down,
but there's not that big a
difference between the 15.8 and
17, really.
OK.
think that's true.
Thank you very much for Barca.
Uh, next we have represented.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
just, um, thank you, Mr.
Auditor. Is that your name, Mr.
Roger? I don't know. Anyhow, um,
I always said that.
I always paid really good money
to auditors to drive me crazy. I
just want you to know that, um,
good hard money went out the
door for people to, but having
said that in 17 years, I only
had 3.
I thought pretty small findings,
anyhow. Uh, I'm very curious
about this tier, these tiers,
it's 50,000 where you is that
operating or is that assets and
operating for, for a small, um,
you know, local se here or
whatever. I don't believe
itsets. I think it's revenues.
Just revenues operating
revenues, yeah, and I, I don't
think that we count federal
funds, uh, towards that, that
revenue level that determines
their tier.
OK, so it's only state.
It's only their own revenues I
mean local revenues, OK. Um, can
you talk a little bit more, Mr.
Chair, and um Joseph, can you
talk a little bit more about the
tier legislation that you're
considering, uh, what those
levels are and um and also let
me know, are you gonna drop the
bill this session, I guess
that's what we wanna know, Mr.
Chair, Representative Herrera,
um, we are looking at changing
the amounts that determine the
thresholds for sure.
You know, certain tears are
dependent on progress in
spending capital outlay,
however, I don't believe we have
a very accurate robust capital
outlay tracking system here in
the state. So we're, we're
contemplating not including
progress in capital outlay
expenditures to determine tier
status. So we'll probably raise
the revenue levels, we may
consolidate certain tiers.
Um, from my understanding, most
of the ears are kind of your
lower level tiers 1 through 3,
rarely do we see a tier 6, which
is between 250,000 and a half a
million in revenue. So, uh, and
we do intend to drop a bill in
this session and it would
require an amendment of the
Audit Act.
OK. Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for that answer,
because I
Uh
You know, you know how many ase
and mutual domestics. I, I'm
just saying.
Ah, I am very few that would
have an operating at 500,000.
Uh, most of them have less than
100 participants and a lot of
them are less than 50. Uh
there's a lot of small mutual
domestics and um seki
Associations and and their
capital outreach requests keep
getting larger and larger. So
what you could use to do, I,
what you used to be able to do
for 200, I'm getting 1.5 and a
capital million in a capital
outlet.
requests now. So, um,
Well, I, I'm, I'm glad to see
that you're gonna do those tis
differently, they uh it's much
too low, I think, and uh looking
forward to the legislation.
And uh I, I guess I have one
more question. I remember being
terrified that we were gonna
come under the single audit. We
weren't at the Lanel Foundation,
so can you explain to me again
the difference between a single
on it and um just kind of a
regular audit that you'd have.
Yeah, right now we, we do, we
bifurcate the audit, uh, you
have the overall Mr. Chairman
and Representative Herera, we
have a overall annual financial
compliance audit, but there's a
distinct component.
And if that public entity
receives more than 750,000 in
federal funds, they have to do a
federal single audit, and so
there's a subelement to the
overall financial audit, and I
think that threshold has been
raised to a million now, so any
anyone that receives a million
dollars, over a million dollars
in federal funds has to do a
single audit, and when it's
done, it, it gets sent to a
federal clearing house, so that
is a distinct component right
now. What we're proposing.
Is that we consolidate all those
federal single audits prior to
going to a
A singular audit, which is a
consolidated audit of all the
state agencies and the feds
would prefer that, you know,
we're, I don't know, maybe
number one per capita, uh, as a
state in receiving federal funds
and so I think we ought to join
the rest of the United States
and start moving in that
direction.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, and
thank you for, for the answer to
that program. I, uh, to that
question, I appreciate it. Um,
that's it.
Thank you very much for observe
that, uh, OK, uh, I have a few
questions, Mr. Roder then we're
gonna go to Chatfield just to uh
share sort of uh some good news,
uh, and, um.
Then we'll go to the motion. So,
uh,
Oh
Uh, we didn't have you on the
list, but if you want to ask
questions, Hernandez, please go
ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Auditor. Good to
see you and, and your team here.
Um,
Uh, uh, my question is, what are
the challenges and barriers that
your agency sees, uh, with the
audits for tribes, pebbles and
nations.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Hernandez, we don't oversee the
the audit of any sovereign
nations and no tribes, uh, these
are all pretty much.
Subdivisions of the state. I, I
apologize. Uh, and, and I'm, I'm
just trying to reference like
some of the uh state money that
goes
To, to them and so I guess I'll
just, uh, where, where I'm
getting to is, is I know that
there's um uh some areas of, of
need in, in these communities.
And I'm trying to understand how
we can be um good neighbors in
that. And, and I really love
this initiative, the Workforce
initiative, and, and, uh,
talking to my chapter houses,
that's, you know, something that
I'm saying is, is that
compliance and, and I'm just
trying to, and, and, uh, and I
apologize if this is the wrong
agency that, uh, some of these
local governments in my, in my
district filed their, their
compliance with and I'm just
trying to uh figure a a creative
solution to help.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Hernandez, I think one of the
solutions is to codify executive
Order 2013006, our governor is
about to leave in a couple of
years. Uh, it's only executive
policy and you know, my office
supported a bill last year to
make it law because that is
really the only incentive for
public entities to be
financially compliant because
they're capital will be held
back.
If they're not financially
compliant for that executive
order. And so we're going to be
supporting legislation to that
effect. I think that's one thing
that can be done to make
permanent that incentive to
ensure that public entities
remain compliant.
One last question, um, I had met
with San Juan College, and one
of the areas that, you know,
they had brought up to me, uh,
was just the, uh, the, the pool
that, that, that we have for the
state, uh, that they have to go
through and so I'm, I'm just
trying to understand more about
the, the pool that, uh, how how
many, um, members are in that
pool and would there be
any opportunity to, uh, since
this is a capa it sounds like a
capacity issue to help, you
know, these small colleges maybe
utilize um some of these
independent auditors that could
be at the level that we're
talking about, um, yeah, uh, Mr.
Chairman Representative
Hernandez, um, we, we audit all,
all higher education
institutions. Uh, there is no
special funding, you know, for
them, but I think as I
previously mentioned, we are
going to be looking
at university foundations, we're
going to be looking at other
issues that have come to light,
um, for, you know, during recent
examinations that we've
conducted. So, uh, higher end is
certainly going to be a focus of
ours.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you, Representative
A Hernandez. Thank you, Mr.
Auditor. Um, OK, uh, a couple of
things. One, just to give
credit, uh, it was former
Governor Martinez who instituted
uh the executive order, which I
think is stood the test of time,
so something to call out,
appreciate and appreciate the
suggestion, Mr. Auditor to, um.
Uh, institutionalize that.
Second, can you and your team
send the LEA report that you
mentioned during your
presentation.
To the committee members, I'm
sure if you could re up that for
the committee, he'd be very
appreciated, um, that's all
right.
Number 3, I guess 2,
we're told that there's roughly
10 vacant positions in the in
your office. Again, this is a
backward looking calculation in
September, there were 10 vacant
positions of those vacant
positions, how many are of the
our our statutorily required to
be auditors.
Or, or CPAs, excuse me.
You want to take that?
Mr. Chairman
representatives. Currently, it's
3.
But it needs expansion. We'd
like to convert some of those
positions as we find qualified
people that are willing to come
to work.
At our office that are qualified
that are actually CPAs and we
expand that and convert those
positions to audit managers. We
need, we desperately need CPAs.
There's no getting around it for
our office, and that's the major
difference between us and the,
the other agencies and where
In essence, the Deloitte report
is flawed.
It compared our auditors to
auditors throughout the state
that don't have the same
requirements and qualifications
required.
Got it. OK. Um.
Thank you for that. I'll come
back to that, uh, just to follow
up on Hernandez's question. So
for, for things like
Maybe the intersection of like a
tribal infrastructure fund, you
know, TIF funding that, you
know, if there are nexuses with
sovereign tribal nations, and
it's an interest of the
committee to understand that and
and to be supportive, uh,
overall.
Um
I wanna ask if Doctor Courtney
can come up briefly, um,
And this is just a sort of
summarize the LFC pay plan as it
is right now since the majority
of the difference we're seeing
here is in the general fund on
the pay side, focused on the 3
CPA positions, even though as
you've explained, Mr. Auditor,
there's an interest in uh as
many sounds like as many CPAs as
you could get would be
beneficial. If Doctor Courtney
can summarize for the members
sort of the current
FC play
plan, uh, that'll give us a.
Good step forward.
Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um, so, hi everybody, John
Courtney, deputy director over
at LFC, um, a part of the LFC
recommendation includes 4%
average pay increase for all
state employees and educators.
Um, you'll see that in, in some
of the summary documents we
provided earlier in the week.
Wow, that was.
Now that was last week.
Last week, um, where for the
executive and higher ed, that
amounts to about $100 million.
That amount is tucked into the
uh the public schools wreck from
uh our analyst Sonny Lou. There
is also a $17 million
piece of that recommendation in
Section 8, which would be for
targeted comp, um.
A lot of you might remember that
when we did our orientation, we
talked about um some agencies
requesting targeted comp and you
all, um,
Uh, commissioned a big study
that uh Deloitte is is basically
finishing up now, um, to see
where those gaps in pay are, and
that's um we're still pretty
comfortable with that estimate
that that's where that 17
million will plug in if, if you
look at the amount, you know,
what would the state auditor
get, for example, from the 4%
from the targeted pay comp. It
would be, um, the difference
would more than make up the
difference between LFC and DFA
for the general fund rec right
now, which I think is
57, it would, it would be uh a
bit more than that.
Got it. OK. Thank you very much,
Doctor Courtney. Um, OK, uh.
think those summarize my
questions, uh, want to go to
representative that ranking
member Chatfield, and then we'll
go back to the vice chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, for giving
me a second bite. I just wanted
to take a minute to thank you
for what you did at Mesa Lands.
We have a wonderful college
delivering wonderful CTE skills
to our students and and other uh
types of classes, it's a major
part of our community. We had
one bad actor that almost
Uh, took that away from us, and
I appreciate you all coming in
in getting everything
straightened out. I understand
that the college itself is up
and running, doing well. The
support uh organization is
Which will be on its way is what
I hear. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, thank you, Represent
Chatville. Thank you. I just
want to just let you know that
we're not gonna go away. We,
we're committed to auditing with
our staff, Maalands Community
College for a number of years to
come. So I just wanted to
As assure you of that. Thanks.
Thank you actually want to go to
Representative uh Sanchez for a
similar thing as well. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I want to thank
the state auditor for his work
helping our Aseass get up to
date with their uh their
audience. I know that's been a
huge help.
Uh, I also want to welcome uh
Fernandori chef, award winner
and Ralph there Martinez, their
community organizers that uh
they're helping prisoners when
they get out, rehabilitate them,
so.
Want to welcome you guys too.
Thank you. Great. Thank you very
much Representative Sanchez.
Welcome. And I think the, uh,
that speaks volumes, Mr.
Auditor, for your approach. OK,
we're gonna go to the vice chair
and then go from there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
would, uh, move that the
committee adopt the LFC
recommendation, of course,
understanding that some of the
issues, uh, with other state
funds and questions will be uh
potentially discussed in working
groups.
OK, it's been moved by vice
chair Dixon, seconded by ranking
member Chatfield. Is there any
opposition to that motion?
OK, seeing none, thank you very
much and we will be meeting in
working groups as we go through
this. Thank you.
Oh
OK. Uh, now, we'll, uh, invite
up the Secretary of State just a
quick note, um, our Secretary of
State, uh, wasn't able to be
here today, is under the weather
and, but uh after sort of seeing
if we need to reschedule
ultimately, they, the request
was to continue forward with the
hearing.
OK, we're on agency code 370,
um.
And the cello, take it away.
Yes, uh, good afternoon again,
chair members of the committee.
Again, I'm Emily Hilla. I'm also
the LFC analyst for the
Secretary of State. With us
today is Sharon Pino, the chief
of staff for the Secretary of
State, as well as Justin O'Shea,
the chief financial officer for
the Secretary of State. Again,
we do have SJ Jessop from DFA
talking about the executive
budget recommendation, um,
peaches that I would like to
point you to, uh, starting on
page 127 of volume 2 for
additional information for you
all, and while you're are all
getting there.
Um, I just wouldn't like to give
you all a little bit of context
about what went into the LFC
side of budgeting for the
Secretary of State cause a lot
has happened since this time
last year, so if you look at
your high level,
should look like this, um.
On lines 1314 and 15, you'll see
something that says reduction of
election costs, as well as SB
108 adjusted output election
cost removal.
So last session, Senate Bill 108
passed chapter is now lost 2024,
chapter 24, which creates the
new
Uh, distribution from the tax
suspension administration funds
to the Secretary of State's
election funds. Now the
Secretary of State has a lot of
statutory obligations to cover
election costs and previously
this was funded from their
recurring budget, however,
Senate Bill 108 takes election
costs out of the Secretary of
State's operating budget to give
it a more stable, consistent
year over year.
Uh, perspective of what's going
on actually in the budget. So
with that, if you look on your
high level lines 1314, and 15,
the LFC recommendation when
considering and creating the uh
FY 25 or sorry the FY 26
recommendation, we adjusted the
9.3 million that you all
allocated for the cost of the
elections for FY 25, so that
gets us to 2.6 as the elections
program-based operating costs,
so that's what it costs. The
operation day to day to run its
daily.
needs outside of uh
administering the election. And
so if we do look at this
adjusted operating costs with
elections out of the budget. The
LFC recommendation supports a
17.2% general fund increase in
this specific program for an
overall 12.3% general fund
increase to the Secretary of
State. Now, what you're seeing
in your volume tunes at first
glance, it does look like a
budget decrease because we are
removing budgets out of the
Operating budget, however, we
are actually increasing 12.3% of
the operating costs is how the
LFC views this specific budget.
So with that SJ and I will get
into the differences between
both recommendations. I'm gonna
move on to page 3 for you all
for a general overview.
The executive recommended 12.5%
more in general fund revenue
than the LFC. Those
recommendations support the same
use of federal revenues and
other revenues.
For our beast costs, the
executive recommended 5.9% in
personal services and employee
benefits, then what isn't the
committee recommendation, and as
you all just heard Deputy John
Courtney talking about our
compensation package and the
logic behind that.
The LFC recommendation is 0.2%
more in contractual services and
in the other costs category, the
executive recommendation is
44.4% more than the committee
recommendation.
Chair, members of the committee,
there were no differences in
performance measures in neither
recommendation supports the
office's requested expansion,
uh, with that, I will turn it
over to Ashley to talk about um
the administrative and
administration and operations
program.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, Emily
members of the committee. The
executive recommendation is
higher than the LFC
recommendation by 20% in
revenues in the administrations
and operations program. Um, this
is mostly due to the office's
new business filing system,
which they aim to own rather
than contract, um, so the
increased cost in this P code,
which are
Let's see.
4.6% in personal services, 23.9%
in contractual services and
99.6% in the others category,
um, the large increase in the
other categories due to the cost
of ownership hosting maintenance
support, um, and additional
infrastructure to own the system
rather than to continue to
contract it out.
Um, the LFC recommendation is
commensurate with FY 25, whereas
the executive recommendation
increases personnel costs to
cover new insurance premium
rates from GST the LFC
recommendation supports a
$500,000 increase or 236% uh in
contractual services to cover
the costs of the new business
filing system and the executive
recommendation fully supports
the agency's requests in the
300s and 400s due to these.
anticipated costs.
And with that, I'll turn it back
over to the LFC analysts, uh,
Miss Hilla for, um, the
elections pea code.
Um, to members, thank you. I
would also like to correct
myself, um, Sharon Pino is the
deputy secretary. He's the chief
of staff, so I just wanted to
make that distinction for you
all, um, and moving on to page 5
or page 7 for the elections
program.
The LFC recommendation is 1.5%
above the executive and general
fund revenue. Both
recommendations support the same
use of federal revenue, the
committee recommendation is 6.8%
below the executive
recommendation and personal
services and employee benefits.
The executive recommendation
allows for the office to fill
vacancies and covers new
insurance premium rates. The LFC
recommendation is 15.6% above
the executive recommendation and
contractual services to cover
various increases in
Uh, contracts, um,
Including um new IT maintenance
and contracts for voter mapping
and collaboration with the
University of New Mexico, um, in
the narrative, it says that this
contract was a million dollars,
however, it is not the total
cost for that exact contract,
um, it was supposed to be a
million dollars increase in
contractual services altogether,
so I just wanted to clear up
that distinction of what you're
seeing in the narrative.
However, what it says in the
narrative, it's not reflective
of what you're seeing in the how
LFC created its budget
recommendation with the specific
increase in contractual.
So the narrative might say that
the GIS mapping services is a
million dollars, which is
untrue. However, the LFC
recommendation did not build the
recommendation based off of
this, um, distinction in the
narrative that you're seeing.
Um, again, uh, to cover over the
expansions, neither
recommendation supports the
expansion of positions. This is
because the office submitted
this later than what was um the
statutory deadline to submit the
budget requests, and so the LFC
didn't have the time to properly
review the expansion position,
Um, and moving over on to page
8, you will see our personnel
calculator. Please let me know
if you have any questions about
that. It does say that there are
60 fields FTE positions. I
believe as of this morning that
might be 5.
Um, according to the data that
the LFC has, um, and moving on
to pages 9 and 10, uh, we have
our
Special appropriation
recommendations. Again, we're
not voting on specials. However,
if you have any questions,
please feel free to ask EJ and
I, um, the X's indicate where
there are differences in the
recommendation, whereas the
check indicates where there is
consensus in both
recommendations. The LFC and
executive support various
efforts to fill in um
supplementals that were from the
uh primary election that are
currently in the FY 24 FY 25
operating budget, um, as well as
to make sure.
That the uh office can fully pay
out the costs that it needs to
for the general election, um,
with that chair, I will hand it
over to SJ for final comments
for the executive recommendation
and then we'll turn over to the
Secretary of State staff.
Thank you. Uh, I have no further
comments at this time if you'd
like to greet us. Thank you to
our analysts, uh, deputy
secretary, uh, please go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, um, we appreciate
you all hearing us this
afternoon and again my extreme
apologies from the secretary.
She would absolutely be here if
she wasn't very ill, so I would
like to introduce some of our
other staff were here and also
here to answer any questions
that you have. Uh, we have
Justin O'Shea, our chief
financial officer. We also have
several of our directors here,
uh, Lindsay Bachmann, our
director of executive and
legislative affairs, uh,
Christina Chavez.
our director of Business
Services. We have our chief
information officer, Greg
Rockstroke, and also our cheap
insert information security
officer, uh, uh, Brad Purdy here
with us. Um, again, um, as I, I
know you all have our
presentation before you. I'm not
gonna go through it side by
slide, uh, obviously, uh,
recognize that you all
appreciate brevity, and I know
if you have any questions,
please ask us, but I do want to
hit some highlights.
Um, as Emily mentioned, um,
there was a, um, really dramatic
change in how we're funding
elections, thanks uh to the
legislation that was passed last
year and pulling, and I wanna
clarify, it's not all election
costs because we do have annual
election costs that are not
direct election costs. So the
fund is intended to pay for
direct election costs, so that's
reimbursing, um, expenses that
come from the counties. There
are election costs that are in
annual basis that we try to
build into our regular budget,
um, that unfortunately we did
not see funded. I think there's
some difference, uh, in opinion
in terms of um whether or not we
did receive an increase in
funding because from our
perspective, again, based on our
budget request, um, there was a
significant decrease that I
think puts us in a disadvantage.
Um, in FY 26 to be able to pay
our limited staff, um, which are
very valuable, um, we, unlike
other agencies, um, attempts to
uh fund all of our staff because
we need, we have one run a staff
of 65, and we're always actively
trying to fill all of those
positions. Um, I do want to
highlight some of the work, um,
again that we have done, um, and
the secretary has spearheaded,
um.
carefully work on how we budget
and spend taxpayer dollars, um,
again, we've come up with a
process of uh creating MOUs uh
with the counties, um, and, and
an admin rule which really
structures what are direct
election costs. What can you be
reimbursed for by the state. We
have a lot of nice to haves when
it comes to elections. We want
to make sure the the state is
funding.
He must haves and in the success
that we have seen in doing that,
um, is again, um, our state was
ranked number one in the nation
in 2024, um, by MIT for the way
we run elections and we're very
proud of that. We're at the
bottom of a lot of lists. This
is not one of them. And this is
not one we ever want to get to
the bottom of. We want to make
sure that we are fully funding
elections.
Um
Unfortunately, again, this year,
uh, following the path of
previous years, um, since, uh,
the secretary has been Secretary
of State, um, we have, uh,
again, uh, seeing some
recommendations that are
severely underfund our office,
so we'd like to highlight some
of those during this
presentation.
OK.
So some of the highlights again
for um the uh FY 25, uh, we, we
were a very successful in
running uh both a primary, um,
and, uh, uh, a general election,
uh, we managed the replacement.
We're very proud of this. Um,
our new agency business filing
System which went live on
December 9, 2024, again, as
Emily mentioned, I think that
that was one of the
discrepancies mentioned.
in the narrative, we are not
asking for a million dollars to
continue to fund a system that
we just lost, that we just
launched.
Um, we're also, uh, managing
ongoing enhancements to our
campaign finance information
system. I know a lot of you have
experienced frustrations with
that system and our staff have
had to help you through one of
the recommendations in this in
um our C2 request is partially
funded to replace that system.
So we're looking forward to
that.
Um, let's see.
What we want to do, um, for the
FY 26 initiatives, um, again,
um, with the launch of our new
business filing system expanding
the uh accessibility for
businesses in our state
streamlining the election
administration voter uh
registration and reporting and
implement new efficiencies for
local election administrators.
Uh, let's see.
Some of our other goals, um,
again, that we're gonna talk
about throughout this
presentation, um.
You know, uh, it's been
forecasted, um, our state are at
least our office has relied
heavily on hoba funds, which
help American vote act Grant
funds that come and have come
consistently from the federal
government. Um, it's been
forecasted that that's, those
are not funds that in the future
that we can rely on to fill some
of our gaps, and it covers a lot
of security initiatives for our
state.
Which is another reason why
we're asking that our budget
requests be fully funded. Um, as
we know, again, threats faced by
election administrators
throughout um uh we, we utilize
that funding and some of our
initiatives to mitigate, um,
also existing uh projects and
programs, um, we remain
concerned that um this funding
will not be available in the
future for our state.
We already talked about the
direct election costs being
removed, so I'm going to turn to
Justin, who is going to
highlight a little bit of the
budget overview that uh we are
discussing today. Uh thank you,
Sharon, um, Mr. Chair, members,
um, I'm gonna briefly just
discuss a little bit, um,
quickly, uh, about our just
general FY 26 budget request,
um, as you can see, um, in the
slides above you, um.
Our base uh general fund request
is 12.9 million. Um, we have one
FTE expansion requests, and it's
simply a stern to perm change, a
temporary uh federal funded
position that we want to
transition to a uh general fund,
uh, funded position, um, and we
had 7 total one-time
appropriation requests that um
we'll discuss later in the
presentation.
Um, the next slide is our
overview of the request. Um, you
have that in front of you. I
won't go too much in detail of
this. What I really want to
highlight is the um comparison,
um, and if you look at the
screen above you and this is
what I really want to highlight,
um, based on the LFC and the
executive uh comparison, um, if
you look at the general fund
highlighted in the very first um
line item here in yellow, um,
you, you'll see that there's a
32% decrease.
And at 23% decrease
respectfully, respectively from
the LLC uh recommendation and
the executive recommendation.
Um, basically, when we
formulated this budget, we
started from scratch. Uh, I call
it a zero-based plus. Um, we
started from scratch, meaning
that we took out all of our um
costs that were associated with
the direct election costs, and
we really try to identify
everything that uh we're
associated with our um
administrative and cost of
business. Um, and
And we literally tied it to our
prior actuals. Um, so when, uh,
again, the LFC mentions that
there are uh recommendations is
commensurate with uh actuals. I
would really push back and say
that it is not, um, because
again, these recommendations
were formulated based on
actuals. Um, and I would also
recommend that um the uh
committee look at the personnel,
uh, category, which is, um, a
14% decrease from our
Um, our recommendation because
we really do, uh, fully fund
our, um, personnel category, and
we really would like to see that
uh fully funded because we don't
want to come next year, um, and
request a deficiency, um, in
that category.
Um,
And going to the next slide, um,
Yeah, so this slide just
basically uh overviews the, what
I just mentioned. So, um,
basically 14% is what we really
want to highlight is the number
that uh decreases the request
that we, uh, submitted uh in
personnel and as our deputy
secretary mentioned, um, we 100%
staff our office. Uh, we only
have 69 FTE, um, and we fully
staff all of those FTE as of
last year, we had a full staff,
all all 69 were.
fully staffed. We don't have any
vacancies, um, and we strive to
not have any vacancies, uh, you
know, as opposed to other
agencies. Um, so I definitely,
um, would
Urge the committee to consider
that when you make this uh um
this boats, uh, you know, to
consider that this 14% is a
really big hindrance for our
office. Um,
And then go to others, um, you
know, the increases to the
contract categories, um, that
was prior mentioned, um, we've
really did strive to incorporate
enhancements to service, and the
SEPA systems, um, which you guys
have uh probably uh uh you know,
experienced in your um, you
know, filings, um, we really do
strive every year to um
incorporate enhancements to the
systems that are public facing,
um, and we don't want to come
with one-time specials every
year.
Um, to this committee, uh, and
we really want to do incorporate
that uh to our annual budget,
um, as opposed to a direct
election cost, um, as it was
prior. Um, I do want to point
out, uh, the federal funding,
um, notes in your narrative in
front of you, um, and it was
briefly mentioned by our deputy
secretary, um, that the Help
America Vote Act is not, is not
a guarantee going forward. Um,
we are almost fully depleted of
that grant. Um, it was about a
9.
5 million grants, uh, since
2019, and that is almost fully
expanded. Um, we rely on that
grants for a lot of our base
operations and if we don't see
in this current new federal
administration, um, a
continuation of these, uh, you
know, revenues that we see
annually, which is about a
million dollars every year. Um,
we're in serious trouble, um,
because we do rely on that, um,
for, you know, our base
operations.
Um, so that you know that that
is something to consider when
um, you know, we submit our
budget to you.
Um, and the last is, uh, that,
you know, I would urge that, you
know, based on our current
projections that um the LLC
recommendation does not
commensurate with actuals. Uh,
we can provide uh documentation
that, you know, our current
payroll is actually, uh, you
know, projecting a a, a
deficiency. Um, and I know we
have a bar hearing tomorrow
about things that, you know,
agencies that are borrowing too
much and um we're gonna be one
of those agencies that'll be
here tomorrow. And uh, you know,
We don't want to be, you know,
borrowing in the future. Um, so
that, that's um what I'll say
about, um,
You know, that those uh
highlights and I'll turn it over
to the deputy secretary.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, one thing I did want
to mention, um, as our CFO, um,
highlighted, uh, the use of hova
funds in our office right now,
the Hava funds, um, the help
American Vote Act is funding um
our elections outreach
coordinator, and that is the uh
position we have asked, um, that
the per uh the term position we
have asked to make permanent.
Um, and again, it's a critical
position in our office and
certainly if we can't rely on
future federal funds that will
be a position that,
unfortunately, we will not be
able to maintain in our office.
Um, so just wanted to highlight
that.
OK.
And we have a number of members
with questions, so in additional
components from.
Uh, the only other thing that I
would add, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee is, um, again,
I know that there has been uh a
lot of talk about increased
election costs. Um, I would like
to highlight um that we have
seen a lot of legislation um in
the last several years, um, that
certainly has been mandates upon
our office, um, and has
attributed somewhat to the cost
of elections, but also I would
add has
contributed to the success of
the way we run elections and the
fact that we are being mentioned
and named as number one in the
country. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, Deputy
Secretary. Mila, is there
anything you wanted to add, uh,
and then we'll go to questions.
Uh yes, sir, thank you. Um, I
just wanted to clarify the LFC
recommendation does not at all
cut personnel, the Secretary of
State says that is a 14%
decrease. However, this is
untrue. I don't see anywhere in
the different sheet where the
personnel recommendation is
different from what you all
appropriated for FY 25. The
Secretary of State's office at
the end of FY 24 did increase
their personal.
now by $555,000 and that
included up to a.
38% raise when you all
authorized a 6% raise in FY 24.
So the, let me just uh and
members, I think this is on page
2 that you're sort of walking us
through.
Yes, uh, page 2, there are no
differences in the uh FY 25
operating versus the
recommendation, so the operating
budget right now for FY 25 and
personnel is 6.3 million. What
is included in the LFC
recommendation is $6.3 million
the Secretary of State did
increase their personnel budget,
however, the LFC only.
recommends personnel budget of
what you all appropriated and
the amount of compensation that
you all appropriate and not what
they increased through a budget
adjustment. OK, thank you very
much. Uh, I know we've got a
member questions and we'll work
through them and appreciate, uh,
you know, this is why we do
these hearings is to be able to
look at these, um, the budgets
from different perspectives,
compare things and then sort of
go forward, which is, which is
what we need to do. OK, we're
gonna start with Representative
Silva, then go to representative
Hernandez.
Representative Duncan, uh, and
then uh go from there. Uh.
And vice ranking member
Chatfield. So going first to
represent Silva.
Thank you, chair. I thank you,
Deputy and presenters. I
appreciate the presentation.
Um, I am, my questions, I have 2
questions and I'll be brief. Um,
They are around the migration to
the do it environment. I'm on
page 11 of your presentation.
Um, there's a request for
400,000. And I know it's a
specials and supplementals, but
I wanna make sure that I'm
understanding this. So it's
400,000 and then on page 13, you
talk about additional security
protection.
Um, are these the same
considerations?
Mr. Chair and Representative,
yes, they are the same. We
wanted to highlight that, um,
you know, the critical nature of
that request was to migrate
those um on-prem solutions to
the new environment. So it was
uh expanding upon that, um, you
know, uh, recommendation, um,
and, you know, LFC is not lack
of recommendation on that uh
special. OK, thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, uh, and
presenters on page 12, the
ethics e file, um, for 5
million.
Can you explain that too? Is
that different or part of the
same?
question
Mr. Chair, uh, and
Representative, I can answer
that as well. Um, so, uh, we
clarified that, uh, since the
recommendation with LLC that
this is actually a phased
recommendation. Um, so the
ethics e-file campaign system,
so that's our uh campaign uh
finance system will be replaced
at some point, uh, but in the
phased approach, um, this is the
initial phase, so it's phase
one. It's 50% or about 50%
recommended, um, but it will be,
uh, you know, recommended for
consideration in, in the future
once we uh get to that point.
Thank you. And finally, Mr.
Chair and presenters, is it
reasonable that any new system
would consider all statutory
requirements, including any new
proposed legislation.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Silva, could you repeat that
question? I'm sorry. Yeah, is it
reasonable that any new system
that um that is budgeted and
approved would consider all
statutory requirements,
including any new proposed
legislation. Yes, um, and, uh,
Mr. Chair and Representative
Silva, that has come up um in
several questions related to our
campaign finance system, um,
there are several bills out
there, um, suggesting changes to
that and obviously if we were.
implementing a new system, uh,
any new requirements would be
built into that system.
Excellent. Thank you, Deputy.
Thank you, chair. Thank you. Uh,
next we have representative
Hernandez and represent Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
Madam Deputy Secretary and staff
for being here. I, my question
in regards to the, I think we're
year 2 of the implementation of
the Voting Rights Act.
Um
My question relates to the um.
Uh, what, what,
the component that I, I feel is
really meaningful. I, I mean,
the, the, there's just a lot of
good things to talk about that,
but the question I, I, I'm, I'm
asking is more about the uh
local governments on the Navajo
Nation, um, are they, are they
utilizing uh like as a voting uh
location or are there any uh
issues of
Local governments uh like what
is that process like for them to
be, uh, an official polling
location.
And Mr. Chair Representative
Hernandez, I'd like to defer to
our director of legislative.
An executive affairs for this
one.
Good afternoon, chair, members
of the committee. I think these
are really great and timely
questions. Certainly last year,
we did not see a lot of
participation in terms of
notices or solicitations under
Navra, the Native American
Voting Rights Act.
Um, the dates for the different
requests can be kind of tricky
and we think that that's
probably why, um, folks are
still trying to figure out
when's the appropriate time to
make those requests. Um,
generally they fall in March and
April of each year, although
they are different whether or
not it's the odd or even
numbered based on election day
versus early voting, polling
locations. Additionally, we did
some rulemaking in 2023 to
address how um
tribes, pueblos, and Indian
nation can go about requesting
um ballot dropboxes and so that
process is promulgated in rule
now, um, and then also mimics
the same timelines that kind of
fall under the Navarre. So we
tried to kind of bring it all
together so that it was easier
for people to track and
certainly the secretary myself
in the state elections director
have been talking through some
ways we could do more formalized
outreach to help make sure.
Sure there's consensus on how
that policy functions. Um, we're
doing some formal letters to
new, to new, um, heads of
government, etc. and so, um, if
you have any ideas, please reach
out to me. I'll leave my card,
um, and then in the interim, if
there are any other additional
questions, I'm happy to answer
those.
Great. Thank you very much, uh,
thank you, Representative
Hernandez. Representative
Duncan, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm just a little confused and
um I'm on page 127, blind or
line 3 and it says the fiscal
year 26 budget request
represents an overall general
fund increase of 5 or 668.
8 % increase.
You know, there's, I can't tell
you how many people in the state
of New Mexico are just trying to
budget and maybe do a 1%
increase in their budget.
And for an agency to come in and
I realized 2 million of that is
for uh new software, um.
And contracts for geospatial
information.
But how can you even come and
say 40%.
is where you need.
I mean, I, I just find that
really, really difficult that an
agency would come and ask for a
66.8%.
Thank you
Deputy Secretary, uh, if you all
want to answer that's great. If
not, that's OK too. Great
question. Yes, chairs
representative, again, that is
the and I think it's, it's a
great question. Sorry to
interrupt myself, but I think
it's a question for the
Secretary of State's office.
They're the ones who are making
the request. So it's appropriate
for them to address or not to
address, but just to remind you
about too, this is after we
adjusted the base operating
costs from, so we took elections
out, so that's where that.
increase is coming from. I don't
think that's the way that the
secretaries of state seize the
request though as they've said
throughout their budget.
Uh, yeah.
And Mr. Cha and Representative
and thank you, uh, Emily for
that clarification. Um, yes, so
there is a lot of transition
here, um, and context, um, sent
108, which is now chapter 24 and
laws of 24 section 2, which uh
basically eliminated election
costs from our base operating
budget. It's literally gutted a
lot of our base budget out of
our request. Um, so any base
request that took that out.
would have been a large
increase. Um, but going forward,
you won't see any increases from
here. So in FY 26, um, you won't
see any variation from here. If
this is like a one time, um,
kind of, uh, readjustments of
our budget to eliminate our
election costs and readjust to
having our operating budget to
come in front of you with just
our administrative costs.
Um, so these large percentages
that you see and I did highlight
in my uh slides here as well,
these large percentage
variations are because of that.
Um, so there's not actually that
variation in our request. We're
not requesting that much of an
increase in our funding. It's
that our base budget is that
much re reduced, um, and we're
requesting that from our base,
um, to increase it from there. I
don't know if that makes sense
or if that clarifies it, but I
can definitely, um,
you know, reach out to you uh
with more detail um after this
hearing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
It's, it's about as clear as
mud.
Um
I still find it extremely hard.
So we take $12 million is it 12
million off for the elections
take out 9.3 million from the
election's program. Everything
else remains the same, so the
total adjusted operating budget
that we were looking at is 7.8
million. OK, so then, Mr. um, so
in fiscal year 27, you're going
to guarantee me you're not gonna
ask for any more than 14 million
if that's, if that's what you're
asking for today. Is that
correct?
Mr. Chen representative, that is
correct. There shouldn't be any
variation between our annual
costs, provided there isn't any
legislative change or something
that we need to do as an office
to, you know, mitigate or, you
know, implement something, there
shouldn't be any change in our
administrative costs from there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm a
whole lot more com comfortable
with the LFC's recommendation,
just.
That's 32, 40% increase even.
So, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you very much Representative
Duncan. Uh, next, we're gonna go
to
Representha please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Yeah, the, um, and
understanding.
For, uh, Mr. Chairman, uh Rep
Duncan, yeah, it's, it's all
over the place because of the,
the way that we have to pay for
things and things have been
done. Um.
My question, as I'm looking at
at the budget information is,
um, I'm looking at her volume.
Um, 3.
And
This is the um.
Cash balance report.
I'm on page 147, so I'm looking
at our cash balances, and I'm
showing this
the Secretary of State has a lot
of cash balances, except there's
a, there's a um minus amount if
you will, for 6.7.
Million dollars plus for the
statewide election fund. The up
the shortfall that we had this
for this last election cycle,
Mr. Cha.
Mr. Cham Representative Wuhan,
uh, yes, that is exactly what
we're remedying, um, and, uh, if
you, if you may, um, I can uh
direct you to this slide here.
There are two critical specials
that will remedy that exact
cash. So right now, technically
with DFA's blessing, uh, we are
operating in a negative cash
standing in order to pay our
obligations for the 2024 general
election. Um, the first is, uh,
the 2.1 million section.
6, which even covers our primary
election, uh, shortfalls, OK?
Um, the second is the 5.5
million, uh, Section 5 request
that um mitigates the the very
uh shortfall that you just
highlighted. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
So you will still be short.
funding if we were to give you
the 5.5, which our
recommendation is a 2 point. 1,
so how are you?
Going to try to remedy, no, I'm
head shake. Can you explain that
to me? Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Luhan, it's not
quite so we are, uh, with Cenbo
108 and the mechanism in place
there, um, we are going to be
due a reimbursement from the
Department of Finance
Administration, the actuals um
from the 2024 general election,
which are due on February 3rd.
So, uh, the Secretary of State's
office are due uh report the
DFA, um, all of the actuals from
the general, um, and then we are
to do a reimbursement.
within 30 days of our actual, so
we are gonna be doing a large
sum of, uh, you know, infusions
of the fund, so we won't be in a
negative standing after that
point.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and for
the previous years uh
legislation was supposed to
remedy.
Um, those shortfalls, why do we
have such a huge increase
because I believe it's a 52%
increase in election costs. Can
you explain that, Mr. Chair?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Lu Han, um, I'm not an elections
expert, uh, but there have been
a series of uh legislative
changes since 2023, um, that
have really increased um our
elections costs, and we did
highlight at a high level, um,
in this last slide, um, we have
a series of implementation costs
that uh went into effect last
year, that total of about 1.4
million um our cost per election
increases a total of about 2.3
million and then our annual cost
increases total of
about about 50 days, actually
that's about 75 million now, or
75,000 now, um, excuse me, um,
you know, since this uh time of
the slide. So, um, there have
been a series of uh statutory
changes that um have increased
election costs since 2022, um,
that the legislature has passed,
um, that we as an office have
had to implement um that have
increased inevitably the cost of
elections. Thank you,
thank you for the
The
You know, admirable way of
implementation and for us to be
looking and forward thinking in
our election process. I do know
that 1 in 10 of, um, our newly
registered voters or same day
registration, we had 1 in 10,
uh, individuals show up in Santa
Fe County, Mr. Chair, and we had
about, we needed about, uh, I
don't know, uh.
More than 10 additional workers
to just process these things, so
that's the cost if anybody's
wondering. I was just wondering
if the Secretary of State had
more detail other counties, um,
but I won't get into further
discussion with that, um.
We are
Yeah, I have these, the concerns
of this, um.
While these increases in this
being one of the biggest, you
know, increases that we're
seeing in our budget, um.
Uh, I wanted to go into, um,
page 12, uh, your section 7
requests. The 1.96 project.
funny, what is, what is an
election people property and
process management system pro uh
project. Mr. Chair, is that more
steepest you can answer very
quickly. Is that part of the CPA
or new implementation for new
technology,
Mr. Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Lujan, it is not.
This is a different system. A
lot of our processes, uh, in
handling, um, our, our general
um election system or manual,
and this is
intended to really modernize and
get away from using spreadsheets
and everything else on a daily
basis. It will, um, increase the
efficiency of not only the staff
in our office, but county clerks
throughout the state, um, so
that we are again being more
efficient in what we do and the
end goal is to be spending less
money. Thank you, Mr. Chair. um.
Again, I'm looking, I'm going to
go back to your cash balances
too, and you talked about the
help America vote out. You have
$1.8 million in cash balances
there. What are your plans for
that and as you mentioned, there
could be some federal, um,
Non uh recurring dollars, if you
will. Can you explain that a
little bit, Mr. Chair.
Because
You have an operational FT that
you want to fund and you've been
using that funding for that. And
was this the first year that we
had an elections outreach
officer, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chen, Representative Lu Han,
yes, so that is the first full
fiscal year that we've had this
fully funded, um, uh, this uh
legislature last year passed,
um, that uh physician last year,
we were, uh, very grateful for
that. Um, but this position has
been very critical for this
office, and we'd like to move it
to the general fund. Um, but
moving to the Java, uh, and your
question, uh, representative,
um,
The Harva fund is uh mostly
budgeted this fiscal year. Um,
we have done a series of
sub-grants to all counties for
uh security uh efforts, um, we
wanted to do an initiative for
all counties in the state to
bolster their uh uh security
efforts, um, whether it's
cybersecurity or uh physical
security, um, and that is
significantly drained that 1.8
that you mentioned. Um, the
remainder of it is for our
office to bolster our
costs. Um, like I said, uh, and
previously, uh, we used that uh
a lot for our IT costs various
software, um, and just, you
know, miscellaneous, um, you
know, maintenance and and annual
costs. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, um, and, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative, if I, if I could
just add to that briefly, um,
what we talk about in terms of
costs. We're talking about
security related costs. The
attention of the Help America
Vote Act is really too.
enhance security initiatives,
um, the election outreach
coordinator has been a huge part
of that in terms of uh combating
missing disinformation in
elections, uh, getting out
information to the public, so
that is part of that effort, but
they are security efforts, and
if we don't keep up those
security efforts if that if
those federal funds dry up and
it leaves a gap. It really
leaves it to the state or it
leaves us vulnerable to those,
um, security.
concerns. I appreciate it. Thank
you. Uh, we're trying to
decipher here is that we have a
fully funded operational budget.
And you're asking for this
additional um position which
granted and and I I appreciate
your explanation for this. We're
trying to
To make, you know, to figure
this, this portion out, Mr.
Chair, if you will, um, 11 thing
that I would like to know more
about is like the training
efforts and what it what I know
that we heard earlier this year
from the Secretary of State
about that. And I, I, I'm just
not seeing that where that is in
the budget, and the explanation
for, is it under the specials or
is it under your
your other budget requests.
Mr. Chair.
And Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Lujan, um, are
there specific security cause
we, I, I mean, I'm training
efforts in our office because we
have them in several different
areas.
That's what I'm trying to
understand, but maybe we'll talk
about offline. I just have a, a
question about that and how
that's
Um, being addressed with our
local governments, our local
county clerk's offices and and
where, you know.
If it's needed, Mr. Chair, if
you will, and I didn't see that
explained out were read through.
All
information, but
um I appreciate you, you going
over some of these things with
me. I just, I just feel like
we're we're gonna have to, I
mean, I'm looking at your, your
cash balances and other things,
and I feel like we've made
changes already, um, and
mandates already for this
office, so.
Trying to figure out where those
those balances come and you and
you're asking for more, and I
understand why, though. Thank
you, Mr. Chen. Thank you. Uh,
next we have ranking member
Chatfield and then vice chair
Dickson.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Right at
the end of your presentation, I
just caught the blurb security
for migration of information. I
hope I'm not duplicating her
question, but I don't think I
am. I think she was talking
about another kind of security.
So tell me exactly what you're
talking about at the end.
The just the last little
paragraph there.
And Mr. Chair Representative, if
I could defer um to our director
or or cheap information security
officer, I believe that he can
answer that.
Mr. Chair, uh, representatives.
So basically, um,
What we're working on is Active
Director. Active Directory has
been a system that's been out
for about 25 years. It's a great
system operating systems keep
going up, but it's, um,
It's not great to be able to
protect systems.
Um, do it as made a transition.
For a lot of their systems over
to Microsoft um intra.
Um, most organizations around
the country have made the same
thing. So basically what we're
proposing is to help us make
that transition too.
As long as we keep using
They tried and true system?
That if it ain't broke, don't
fix it. That actors will take
advantage of that.
Um, so what we're proposing is
To not try to piecemeal, but try
to actually move into a system
that's got a very robust.
Version of security so that
whenever we try to add something
like privilege access
management, which is admin
control and all those other
pieces that we're working with a
very robust system and we're
working in alignment with what
the rest of the state's also
trying to do.
So, Mr. Chair, that, I thought I
got onto that and I thought
that's what you're talking
about. And how do we know this
new system is safer. I mean, you
said, you said the words tried
and true, and I understand tried
and true means other people have
had an opportunity to learn how
to, to hack it.
How do we know the new system is
safer?
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative.
It's basically where Microsoft
has been spending their billions
of dollars.
So Microsoft has, instead of
focusing a lot on their systems
been around for a long time,
which they keep upgrading.
They followed the standards that
coming out of national
institutions, standards and
technology. They follow the
recommendation of CISA, which is
the federal government's
security association and they
apply those kind of those
capabilities to that system.
There are others out there.
Oracle has it and others, and
what they're trying to do is
each year, each, they try to
focus on what, what do we
perceive? What's the
recommendation? What's the
standards, what do we need to
focus on? And that's where
Microsoft has been focusing up
their efforts.
The last
At least 5 years, but the 2
years were like pushing down. So
as there's things that are
happening like with the federal
government.
If the federal government's
getting a hacked and they get
hacked every single year. The
rest of us behooves us to try to
at least do the best we can with
the uh good systems.
And it's not spending the most
money. It's not being bleeding
edge.
It's something that they know
that there's a framework that we
can actually rely on.
We can continue to, we can
continue to use that tried and
true system and we can continue
to upgrade and use what's called
mitigation, which is protect
what we can based on our funding
availability.
But it's asking for a world of
hurt somewhere down the line.
Um
But what we'll do is we'll
continue to do whatever we can
do with the funding that's
available. Uh, this is a
recommendation from our agency,
and this is a recommendation
from the feds and others, which
is basically, you gotta keep up
or you're gonna pay the price.
So let's share, what is the cost
of the new system?
We don't know the cost of the
new system, but we do know the
cost of being a valuation of our
system. So the problem is the
longer you don't upgrade
something like that, the more it
costs every year.
So what happens is we need to
take the initial funding,
evaluate where we're at.
Figure out what that transition
is and what those costs are
going to happen. So this initial
funding is, what is it going to
cost for us to make that, use
whatever we can to move as much
as possible into that new
framework.
And then figuring out the 2nd
year come back and say, is there
any gaps?
That continues forever.
There's always going to be gaps.
Because everything that we do to
protect ourselves this year.
Will require enhancements and
more next year because bad
actors will take advantage of
it.
What we're asking for is funds
in order to make that first
step. Um, next year.
Expect to see the same request
if it's not funded.
Expect to see it'll cost a
little bit more.
Cause we'll be a little bit more
behind the curve. We'll be in
years 26 instead of 2 and just
is it sorry to interrupt, I
apologize for member Chatfield.
Just a quick reminder for, for
all committee member or uh
presenters to go through the
chair. Only reason we do it is
just to sort of keep an orderly
dialogue as we sort through
complex, challenging issues. Go
back to you rank your member
chapter. uh, yes, sir, you know,
We have like a certain amount of
marbles here and we, we're
moving them around if we put one
in in over here in your corner,
we have to pull it out of
somebody else's corner unless we
get that request early on, you
know, where we can get it in the
budget when we're making the
budget and there's some of us
here, we work on the budget all
year long.
And uh
So I, I think it's a, it's a
worthy cause, it's a worthy
thought, uh, I could probably
help you.
Getting next year's budget
easier than, than this year's.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Uh, next we have Vice Chair
Dixon.
Oh.
Mr. Chair, thank you. I just
want to ask a quick follow up on
the question that was just
asked, because I think it's
really important. This year, the
Secretary of State was involved
in litigation that required a
lot of some changes, and so I'm
not sure that that the funding
for the litigation and what
resulted was included in the
budget. So my question, Mr.
Chair, and, and, um, and to the
uh to the panel, then how do we
accommodate them for that. It
would not have been foreseen.
At the time that it occurred.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Representative
Herndon, um, so I'm, I'm not
sure which, uh, litigation that
you're referring to, um, if is
it uh the vote ref case, um,
there has not been a ruling on
the amount of uh fees related.
It's still ongoing, um, so I'm,
I'm assuming if, if we are
assessed, um, fees, Mr. Chair
and Representative, we would
come back to the legislature to
address that at that time.
And Mr. Chair, just one more
follow up on that. The Secretary
of State's office was required
to put that uh platform online.
So was there a cost in
connection with that that wasn't
anticipated before and then how
do we cover it?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, it
was actually the plaintiffs who
was who were putting all of the
information online. It's it's
made available. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, for that. Thank you,
Representative Feron. Uh, next
we're gonna vice chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you for the presentation. Uh, I
have 3 questions. Um, the first,
um,
Mr. Chair, and um I think uh
deputy secretary probably. Um,
how long does it take, uh, to
process an application uh to set
up a corporation. What's the
time frame right now?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Dixon, and we have our director
of business services, uh,
Christina Chavez here and and so
I would defer to her, but I, I
can't assure you since our new
system, we, we are feeling great
about the timing.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair
Representative Dixon, uh,
currently we're at 3 to 5
business days, um, typically
we're at 3 business days due to
the weekend, of course, um,
they're able to file on the
weekend now, so that kind of
affects our numbers there, um,
but on any given day by the end
of the uh business week we're
usually at 1 to 2 business days
now in comparison to over 30
business days. So it's been
significantly improved, improved
the business services filing
system for sure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
so much. Um, and with the new
system, um, can everything be
done online?
Um, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Dixon, yes,
everything is done online,
including filing reports,
amendments, formations, and um
everything that was previously
done on paper is now online.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, and,
uh, sorry, this is a an added
question. Um,
Do you coordinate closely with
uh the economic development
department, um, and they're
newly formed Office of
Entrepreneurship, which, uh, the
goal of that is to help
streamline the process for
people starting new businesses.
Um, uh, uh, Mr. Chair
Representative Dixon, uh, yes,
we do. Um, we do, I do, uh, meet
with them on a regular basis.
Um, of course, I'm always
available for any questions, um,
any, anything that they have
going on as far as any, any um
outreach to the public were
always available to them as
well.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, and back to sort of the
question about elections. Um,
the first question I have is why
What was the, what are the
drivers for the dramatic
increase in the cost of the 2024
elections over the 2022
elections. I mean, it's $10
million.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Dixon, there were actually
several drivers of that. One of
the key ones that I would
mention is um the legislation
that passed that increased um
the payment for uh poll workers,
um, so their salary increases,
uh, we also had precinct
changes, redistricting, um, so a
lot of new, um, the, the need
for increased um valid on.
demand systems, um, some of the
other ones that I can mention is
uh let's see.
Um, I, I'm gonna defer, uh
Lindsey, uh, if, if you're aware
of any other significant
increases.
For the funding.
So I think um chair members of
the committee, um, the deputy
secretary did well to to
highlight some that were
specific to each election. There
are some training requirements
now for challengers and
watchers, and we took on the
implementation of those systems,
um, at the state level to kind
of provide a uniform, uh, set of
rules by which everybody
operates. Um, we also saw in
something that um chair um
representative that we're going
to look to address in the
legislation this year, um, is,
is we had an exorbitant amount
of recounts, um, related to the
2023, um, regular local
election, um, that was due to a
legislative change in the margin
that triggered those recounts
and as we all know in local
elections, although they are
consolidated and more uniform,
better for voters, etc. They
still um results in a lower
turnout. So when you, when the
margin
is still at 1%, you see quite a
few. We went from like 11 to 36,
um, and so the state incurs
those costs, um, as it relates
to that election.
Um, we also, um, are
responsible, um, chair, members
of the committee for sending a,
a, a notice of election prior to
each election. That's, that's
costly. It goes to every
eligible voter, um, prior to,
prior to an election, um, and so
I think that, I think that
pretty much encompasses it.
There were some all other
systems that were stood up,
electronic signatures for
nominating petitions. I'm sure
people on this committee
utilized that, um, we also did
things like
uh permanent absentee list, um,
all of this was, was in the
passage of both SB 180 and HB4
in 2023. So there were some
larger systemic things that were
not direct election costs, um,
but I think we've hit the
highlights on the direct
election costs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that, uh, those details.
That's um very helpful, um, and
I think leads to sort of the the
final thought that I have, um,
which is whether or not we need
to
Reconsider, um, the amounts that
we had previously estimated for
um elections, um, and, you know,
it was my impression. I, I
understood that when we passed
SB 180, uh, that the Secretary
of State was in support.
Is that, oh, sorry, 108.
Sorry.
Chair, um, uh, representative,
yes, and one item to clarify the
reimbursement structure that was
included in SB 108, um, is, does
have a cap, so you are, we are
reimbursed for each election um
through that mechanism, direct
election costs we submit all the
receipts, um, and then it's up
to 15 million. So if there was
ever a moment in which there was
an overage, we would come back
to the legislative body.
and have that conversation. Um,
so I just wanted to highlight
that as a, as a point that's
kind of been missed in
conversation today.
Yeah
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much for the clarifying
answers. I appreciate it.
Uh, great. Thank you, Vice Chair
Dixon. Uh, thanks everybody.
It's very informative hearing.
Uh, please give our best to the
secretary, um,
The
Uh, a couple of quick questions.
One, in FY 24, I believe there
was a reversion from the
Secretary of State's office.
Mr. Chair, yes, there was a
reversion, um, I believe is
under 3%.
OK. What was
OK. Um, do you know what that
was related to. Um, it was
mostly related to um about
109,000 in payroll and then the
rest was in non-reverting funds.
OK.
Got it. Um, thanks, uh,
secondly,
Um
Well, I'm gonna ask for the LFC
recommendation. The, I think
we're struggling and I
personally struggle remembering
back to last year that SB 108
was a very high priority for the
office, understandably so. It
remains my understanding that
it's sort of, it is a general
fund hit because it is an
automatic fill up to $15 million
for the elections fund, um,
that's after
for elections of average far
below that, although I think
it's fair that we sort of look
into a more challenging future
where with increased legislative
demands and perhaps other
things, things get more
expensive. We're paying
coworkers more, which is fair,
but that automatic fill up,
which is already a $15 million
potential debit to the general
fund. I it's a fair place where
we're sort of struggling
through, um, uh, I think we've
talked a great deal.
about it. I'm gonna ask for the
LFC recommendation, we will be
continuing to work through this,
and we do want to make sure uh
that obviously all parts of
state government are able to
function, uh, in one to
compliment you all, particularly
on the business, on the
decreased time that the vice
chair noted with regards to
business filings, which is very
positive. With that, we'll go to
the vice chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I would
move that the committee adopt
the LFC recommendation.
OK, it's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by
Representative Garrett. Is there
any opposition to that motion?
OK, I don't see any. Thank you
all for a very informative
hearing. Uh, thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and members of
the committee. Great. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. OK, we're gonna ask,
uh, the treasurer's office
agency code 394 to come on up.
We're good. Good to see you.
Madam Treasurer.
Oh, great, excellent. Uh, thank
you for being here. We'll go to
Miss Hilla. Please go ahead and
get us started. Yes, again, uh,
representatives. I'm Emily
Hiller. I'm also the LFC analyst
for the state treasurer. Today
we do have our state treasurer,
Laura Montoya, as well as SJ
Jessup representing the
executive recommendation. We do
have additional staff up here
from the state treasurer's
office, so, um.
Treasure Montoya will introduce
them when it is the treasurer's
turn to talk about their
presentation. However, chair
members, we are going to be on
business unit 394, and you can
refer to pages, 136 and 137 in
your volume 2s.
OK, chair members moving into
the differences between the
budget recommendations, the
executive recommendation is 3.5%
higher than the LFC
recommendation. The LFC
recommendation keeps general
fund revenues commensurate with
FY 25 due to higher utilization
of other revenue.
Both recommendations increase
the use of other revenues by 37%
or 148.5,000 from revenue the
office receives via investments
from the local government
investment pool.
Getting into the base, the LFC
recommendation is $600 more than
the executive recommendation and
personal services and employee
benefits due to an increase in
federal revenue, the executive
recommendation is 10.4% above
the committee recommendation in
contractual services, um,
And 12.8% and the other costs
category, the executive
recommendation increases general
fund revenue to increase other
costs to cover new IT costs that
the office is going to incur.
However, the committee
recommendation increases, um,
Other revenues to cover these uh
licensing increases rather than
uh
Supporting new general fund
revenue into the office's
operating budget. Um,
additionally, there were no
differences in performance
measures among both
recommendations. Um, again, we
have our personnel calculator on
page 3 that I'm happy to answer
any questions about. If not,
then I'll turn it over to
Treasure Montoya to talk about
her presentation.
Before we get started today, I
brought most of my executive and
our portfolio manager to
introduce to you, um, because as
you know, we've been building
our team, so there's a table of
contents of some of the
discussion items, but I think
you've had a long day, so I'm
gonna stick to the money, honey.
So, um, I'd like to first
introduce Janice Parela. Many of
you know her as former Senator
Varela's wife, but she is a
former deputy treasurer, a
former county treasurer where we
got to be friends and also one
of our other former colleagues,
Treasure Duncan.
Uh, now representative and um
and then the accounting manager
and assistant county manager. So
we're really happy to have her
with us, um, and keep us all
going. We have Kristen Dorlan,
who is the new chief financial
officer, if you knew her from Do
It, we stole her. We have Vicky
Hais who is our chief investment
officer and representing both
her and our investment team is
our portfolio manager, Ms. Anna
Murphy.
Right on the corner.
And then I have a couple of
additional team members that I
wanted to introduce to you. We
have our communications director
Bushra.
We have Christina Perrea, former
Reina de Santa Fe, our programs
and outreach director, Christina
Naya special projects director,
Victor Cornejo, our admin
assistant, and um I believe
that's everyone from our
executive accept the state cash
manager, which just retired last
Friday. So if you know someone
who has banking and CPI
compliance, um, send up my way,
you might know somebody.
So,
what I wanted to do
There we go. I just mentioned as
a reiteration of what the sto
core functions are where the
banker, of course, for all of
the state government agencies,
we manage cash flow and ensure
state obligations are met, funds
not immediately needed are
invested with of course the
priority of safety, liquidity,
and then yield. We have debt
service paying agent where the
manage we manage securities, we
purchased all the geo bonds in
the educational technology
notes. We administer programs
and outreach, and we serve, I
serve on 13 boards, councils,
and commissions and.
Some of my staff help serve on
some of those boards, councils,
and commissions and others by
statute only I can serve on.
What that looks like if you ever
need any questions or you need
to talk to someone on one of
those boards. I'm your friendly
face. I'm on SIC, which is now,
this is a little outdated, we're
about at 59 billion, um, the
state treasury's Investment
councils about 17 billion. The
two pension funds are about 17
billion retiree healthcare, MFA,
SBIC, Rita, the list goes on and
on. We put our organizational
chart in there for you, but I
think for us the fiscal
highlights that are important to
mention are that we manage about
7.
13 billion, that's as of end of
fiscal year 24, we had um about
1.95 at that same time, of
course we like to do things by
fiscal year, but we're already
over the 2 billion mark on LGIP,
which helps our local government
schools, um, special districts,
counties, cities, everyone that
needs liquidity and wants to
diversify their portfolio and
have the skill set of Vicky and
Anna, they utilize the LGIP, um,
includes tribal entities that
can participate.
Our total earnings for this last
fiscal year are 675 million.
It's the most earnings the state
treasurer's office has made.
This is the most money that the
treasurer's office has managed
just in 2019, they were about at
6 billion. Today we're at over
17 billion. If you look at $675
million you're talking about
$1.8 million earned every single
day for the last 365 for that
fiscal year, and all I'm asking
is for 2 hours more.
In my budget.
Uh, we now have 1100 bank
accounts and the trade volume is
30 billion, and of course, we
serve 140 state agencies. Those
pools are made up of general
fund core and general fund
liquidity bond proceeds both
taxable and tax-exempt,
severance tax bonds, the local
government, short term, and this
last year we were able to get a
local government investment po
medium term only uh the state
investment council participates
in this. This allows for them to
have the liquidity, they don't
have to pay any more costs than
5 basis points, and they've made
quite significant dollars and
it's a good collaboration
between SIC and Stick or State
Treasurer's office.
We do the overnight repo
technology notes, general
obligations. This helps a lot of
our rural communities. It's a
very limited cost for them to be
able to do these for, especially
our rural areas. And of course,
we do all the collateral
management.
So this little picture gives you
an idea of the increases that
we've seen from 2019 to current.
Obviously, there's been a
dramatic increase in work, and
for those of you that work in
banking or in small business,
that increase means you need to
have more staff.
To be able to assist. Some folks
might think that it's just
adding dollars or zeros at the
end, but it really has to do a
lot more with being able to have
enough staff to adequately
provide for the service. So I
think for us the biggest core
picture is what is up in front
of the screen right now.
There's not a big difference in
the 300 and 400 category as to
the executive and the
recommendation is because of a
lot of the services that we
needed to get in order to have
both cash management and
investments be able to tie
together and in our type of
softwares that we need.
The big difference is 3
full-time employees.
That's what we're talking about
today.
And I put on the bottom what
those employees really make up
and
Why? I really need them.
So I'm gonna zoom in.
And move it to exactly where we
need to be.
Cause I can't see very good.
So if you look at the positions
that need filling, you have a
human resources manager. The
biggest question I think you
would ask me is why did you
revert money and you're asking
for more money.
And I'll give you the answer
right away. The reversions in
the 300 and the 400 category is
because due to procurement, you
have to have the item in-house
before June 30th. Because of the
delay with what happened with
COVID, we were still feeling
that delay. We were not able to
get some of those systems that
included a security system and
the badge access for people. We
have an issue with a lot of
homelessness. People have broken
into our cars, and so we needed
to make sure we were able to get
that security system that tapped
into this current fiscal year
budget. I'll get to that point.
a little bit.
We lost an HR person last year.
It took me 3 months to get one
in. Then I had to keep them for
3 months to give them an
opportunity to try to do the
job. It didn't happen, so now
I'm 9 months in without an HR
person. I didn't realize that I
could ask for help from state
personnel. So we did a memo of
understanding and state
personnel has been so gracious
to help us out. Same thing
happened with our CFO. We didn't
have a CFO and DFA has been such
a great partner and has helped
us out with a memo of
understanding to borrow a CFO
until we got Kristen.
Having said that, now I have a
state cash manager who just
retired. That's a
constitutionally uh position
that is part of statute, um,
they manage everything in in
state cash management, um,
division.
Legal counsel, we need a
procurement person in the budget
and finance division. We just
lost that person about a month
or two ago, and then in cash
management, we are missing two
positions that need to help do
the audits on the 1100 accounts.
Just this year, we already have
done 10 analysis of 10 more
accounts that need to be
formulated. And so with one
account, you don't need a new
employee. When you have several
more accounts, you need a new
employee because we're not even
taking part in the
auditing aspect of what we need
to do, because we're reaping at
the seams.
Um, the nacho position that I
had told you that I needed last
year. It is a statutory
responsibility and we do need to
get a nacho position in here. So
those 7 positions, I have no
choice but to hire someone. Why
haven't I done it? Because I
haven't had the tools of having
the HR person to actually get it
done, but I still need to get it
done. I'm required to get it
done. So this year we have
exactly about 50% in our 200
category that will help us with
that. Hopefully we can get
someone in to help us, um, and
then just to give you
perspective
As far as HR is related, we just
this week had 12 applicants,
only 8 qualified. Then when we
called them to interview all 8,
only 4 said yes, and after 4,
only 1 made it, and then after
that one made it, we have to
pull the personnel file and they
ended up not being able to be
part of the office. So you have
to start from scratch all over
again. So that's the core of
what we're needing right now.
The difference in the 300 and
the 400 category, um,
Is the exact same in the
executive in the LFC, I'm not
exactly sure why it looks
different, um, I'm sure Miss
Emily can tell us or SJ, but we
really do need the contracts.
They are all things that are
part of the obligations of the
constitutional duties of the
office, I need to have my
Bluebird licenses. I need to
have my standard in tours in
order to do the job for the
investment team. We need to have
the new system of G Treasury and
Broadridge upgraded.
Because that helps with the cash
flow analysis to be cash flow
analysis to be automated, and
then it also helps with help
with what we're trying to move
towards, which is pre-trade
compliance instead of post-trade
compliance. That needs a
connectivity so that Vicky and
Anna can work live and at the
same time the compliance and
risk team can be able to see
what that trade is and make sure
that we're in compliance with
our investment policy.
Um, and then outside of that, I
will just say.
We're doing a lot outside of our
constitutional duties with
programs and outreach. We're
going to come before you to ask
for help to pass baby bonds,
which is gonna help bridge the
gap of inequity and allow a
$7000 per child, so we put a
little flyer in there for you
just to show the heart and love
of baby bonds and what that can
do for New Mexico.
When we look at being the 2nd
largest permanent fund in the
country, but yet a disconnect in
where we're at in poverty and
where we're at in crime. We need
to do something different as
leaders, and I think part of
that is what you guys do today
in helping the issues of today,
but we also need to look at how
we're going to invest in our
future and how we're going to
keep New Mexicans here for our
workforce and our communities
and our families to stay vibrant
and coming from a rural
community, rural communities
matter and it's important that
we're able to invest in them by
being able to invest in their.
children and their families, so
that's that one, New Mexico
stable, you all helped us last
year to get that bill aligned
with the federal government,
we've been able to increase the
amount of people we're helping
with disabilities.
To be 2nd in the nation, and I'm
really proud of that fact. And
then financial literacy, this
body helped get financial
literacy as a local option. So
far happy to tell you all that
we were able to get 30.
Out of 89 school districts, um,
have used their local credits to
make financial literacy a high
school graduation requirement,
and these districts reach 38% of
New Mexico's students. Let me
minimize this so you guys can
see it.
And so that's all I have for
you, Mr. Chairman. I thought
it'd be quick and easy. Thank
you very much, Madam Treasurer.
We'll go to questions, uh, I
don't know if there's any
questions.
Oh, Duncan, yes, please. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I mean,
obviously, I couldn't let you go
by with questions. Um.
To
your, your personnel woes.
I think the entire state of New
Mexico is under the same
problem.
Um, and, and I believe that uh
paid family medical leave is
only going to make that worse
for physicians that you have to
have that are specific with
specific requirements.
So I, I, I, I feel for you.
The, the other question that I
had was the 10 new programs that
you're talking about. Could you
elaborate on those a little bit
more that you required more
employees to take.
Big church or to, to um operate
the.
And thank you, Emily.
Um, if you look at the
organizational chart on the
spreadsheet. Hm.
What age?
Um, peach 6.
Thank you.
So you'll see under cash
management.
So we have a total of 35
employees that the treasurer's
office has, but only 27 were
funded, 8 of them were unfunded,
and right now there are 23
filled.
So, the
Physicians have been there,
we're not trying to add new
positions, we made sure to
switch them off. So for example,
where you see Dominic Chavez,
Dominic Chavez is the general
manager under cash management,
who's in charge of all the bank
accounts for the state agencies.
Arsenio Gardinho, who's in
charge of risk and collateral,
uh, management doesn't need that
vacant to account auditors, so
we moved that vacant account
auditor under Dominic. So it's
the same positions, but we just
hadn't had the funny.
for all of the positions for
some time. In 2019, I looked at
the report with only $6 billion
in assets, they still had 35
fully funded positions. Now
we're 3 times more, and yet we
only have um 27 that are fully
funded. So there's a disconnect
of where we're at today versus
where we were at yesterday. Now
we're doing a really good job
and they say we're reaping at
the seams, but we have an
amazing group of staff members.
A lot of them were there when I
was the admin assistant.
Those people are gonna retire in
the next couple of years also,
and so we need to start building
up the team so that we don't
have a disconnect because we're
at 17 billion today in a couple
of years, that's going to be
significantly larger, and it's
not only the state that would be
impacted. It's all the local
governments that Vicky and Anna
invest for and on behalf of.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
uh my uh my treasure says you're
doing a wonderful job with
investments, so thank you very
much for that. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you very much,
Representative Dixon.
Or, uh, Duncan, and I, uh, let's
go to Representative Doo and
then vice chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you guys for the presentation.
Could you explain a little bit
more about the baby bond and
explain where the money, I, I
don't understand where the money
is coming from.
I love the question. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman and Representative.
So let me get you to that page.
And there's a flyer that
Christina um gave to staff to
put on your, on your uh desks.
So this idea of baby bonds,
since we have 58 billion in the
in our funds, and I don't want
to be specific exactly where
they're going to come from,
because I think that's still a
question one way or the other,
um.
And I don't want to upset
anybody with where I, I think
they should come from or not
come from. This is all up to you
guys, what you decide. But $7000
per child born after July 1st
would go into an SIC account
that would be placed there after
18 years, that child would
receive with a very conservative
7% rate of return, approximately
18 to $25,000 in their name.
Then the state agency would be
able to help them.
With their education with a
trade school with a small
business, and of course it has
to be New Mexico or um let's say
they want to buy a house or buy
a business building, they would
be able to use this funding, so
they wouldn't get the money
directly because we all know we
were 18 months, but they would
be able to get, for example, the
invoice from Northern College
and then we we would pay out
Northern College or if it's for
books or for the trade, and so,
but this would really do is it
would bridge that gap of
inequity. It would allow people
to have.
some funds that could utilize to
build wealth and in essence,
hopefully take away from the
numbers in an incarceration and
drug addiction and all the
things that we're paying for
anyways and instead put it
towards something positive so
that we can start having
self-sustainment and be able to
reflect the two, the 2nd largest
permanent fund to one of the
wealthier states in the Union.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you. So, so we would, I, I'm
sure there's gonna be a bill. We
don't know where the funds are
going to come from. It's going
to come from reserves, and then
we'll set aside or tag a name,
how long do they have to live in
New Mexico and it
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Doo, my proposal, which could be
different from others, would be
that the parent, one of the
parents has to have been in New
Mexico for at least 5 years, and
the baby has to be born in New
Mexico as part of the qualifier
so that we're really impacting
New Mexico families and New
Mexico babies. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, and, and then if they
lived here 5 years and then they
lived out of state, they would
still be a recipient, regardless
of income, regardless of where
they live, but all expenditures
have to take place in New Mexico
or just education. So actually,
Mr.
Chairman Representative Doo,
we've been convinced that
education can be anywhere
because their specialties that
they might need or they might
get a scholarship to a school
that has a specialization, but
then they'd have to come back to
New Mexico and work in that
workforce for at least 5 years
is what my proposal is. I don't
know what will come before you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you very much,
Representative. Uh, next, we're
gonna go to Representative
Lujan.
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, all your staff, um,
I'll
Continue on the line of
questioning on the baby bonds.
How does this compete with uh
the investment, uh.
We already have, is it the 509?
529 529. Thank you. 529. How
does that compete with that, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chairman
Representative, the 529 plan is
for individual parents or family
members or someone that wants to
put money towards that child,
and they're able to invest it.
This would be a government
funded trust account that would
be similar to holding funds
like, um, anything else that's
at the SIC it would be
segregated SIC would invest it
at the same type of yield that
they're investing, for example.
example, the permanent fun early
childhood tobacco, water, and
because it's 18 years out, they
could take a little bit more
risk without being concerned,
and then they would only need to
pull out for that specific year,
what would be needed? 22,000
people are born every year, 75
to 85% are on Medicaid, so New
Mexico is uniquely different,
where every child in New Mexico
could be impacted in a positive
way because a lot of the people
that are not on Medicaid are
right at the
that borderline, whereas other
states only allow for Medicaid
recipients because the idea is
to bridge the gap of inequity.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I
appreciate your efforts on
working on this. Wouldn't it be
more effective for us to just
reestab or read or do something
with a 5:29.
To fulfill the same efforts,
Mister Chair, Mr. Chairman, the
5 to 9 is specifically for
families to invest in their own
children. A government funded
trust account would have a lot
more regulation because it's by
statute, and it would allow for
every baby born, and you would
need to have state agencies that
would be able to partner with
each other to be able to get
that child's name, be able to
attach the money to that child
when they turn 18 or if they
don't want to use it when they
turn 18.
At the age of 35, it turns into
approximately $75,000 or they
can use it towards their
retirement when they're older.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Again, I,
I think that um.
There might be some
Some kind of redundancy there to
be quite honest with you, and
then just taking the risk and
the risk management and putting
that into statute as opposed to
maybe looking at the 5:29 and
we, you know, looking at what we
already have in place and
addressing, you know, having it
available to be used towards
housing or towards, you know,
not just towards education but
expanding the use of that, and I
think that that that develops,
um.
That develops a more, uh, I, I
don't know what to say more
stable because whenever we have
investments, we have risk. Um,
so I'd look, I, I'd like to know
what you know, that looks like a
risk persons what what is
stable, Mr. Chair, um, and I
think this is a great effort as
well, and I know that this
office has really been the
leadership and looking at where
those inequities are in our uh
for our our working families and
our work.
Yeah, and our children and, and
looking at that, and I am sorry
I came in a little bit late, um,
and are you?
Are you establishing any other
type of special program to your
office this year, Mr. Chair. So
Mr. Chairman, a representative
to to be clear, baby bonds is
not through my office. This is
something that we're pushing as
an initiative with several other
people. There's been a pilot
project that has already been
developed, um, to allow for
about 20 families to be
impacted. This is something that
several state legislators are
supporting, um, not just me, so
I don't want to take the credit
for that. This is money that
wouldn't even
be invested in my office because
I'm short term 0 to 3 years.
This is something that is long
term and that's why we suggested
the state investment council,
and I do really want to be clear
when we're talking about safety,
liquidity, and yield.
And we're talking about risk.
There's a difference between
risk and calculated risk. An SIC
are professionals at making sure
that the calculated risk allows
for the yield that we're
requesting. So 7% yield. What
baby in New Mexico that's on
Medicaid would be able to have
$7000 put in their name, and I
would say also that the
difference with the 5 to 9 plan,
I believe, and Natalie Carterval
will probably correct me, is
that that's only for schooling,
whereas this is for housing,
this is for building a business,
this is for.
potential retirement. These are
for all the things that help
grow your economy, build your
base, increase your job force,
increase the wages of your job
force, and it's a win-win.
OK, thank you. I think we can
have an offline conversation, I
just really feel like we're, we
start separating efforts, then
we start, you know, that band
starts stretching, so I'd like
to see what would be the more if
most efficient way of doing that
and maybe changing things in one
program that we already have in
place as opposed to another and
looking at all those those
numbers and calculated risk as
you, as you stated, nothing that
I'm against, I'm just trying to
be uh fundamentally.
about it. Thank you. Perfect.
Thank you. Uh, we're gonna go
next to represent Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh I
just wanted to follow up on the
140 million, so it's 140 million
and it's gonna be annual,
correct?
That's an annual reoccurring.
Till the till the kid was 18
years old.
Oh, Mr. Chairman, thank you for,
for explaining that for baby
bonds. It's 7000 in total, it's
about $1 billion that we'd be
requesting.
So if we have, if we have, um,
20,000 babies at 7000, it's 140
million.
So that 140 million would be
reoccurring every single time.
Mr. Chairman, that would be one
way to do it, but because we
have so much money, it would be
better if we just took the
billion dollars, set it aside,
and then put the 7% interest off
of the billion dollars, and it
would be fully funded until
2060.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, you
know, just an idea, so we have,
there's a foundation back home.
And uh in, in Lincoln County and
what they do is
When these kiddos, there's,
they're trying to run a little
pilot project, so some of the
kids get the money upfront.
And it's a very small percentage
that finish it, because they
front load them and they don't
finish their their education.
There's another, uh, benefactor
that loads them at the back.
And it gives them an incentive.
To
Finish school and when they
finish it.
And you know they're gonna be a
finisher.
prevent you offloading that
25,000 to get started in a
business or something like that.
Just wanted to throw that at
you. Um, is there other places
doing this baby bond? Yes, Mr.
Chairman Representative, the
state of Connecticut just did it
for um they're called the Husky
babies, which is their Medicaid
program. Connecticut's very
different from the makeup of New
Mexico. You have a lot of rich
and a lot of poor. New Mexico is
more front ended, um, you have a
foster kids in California that
are being funded as part of this
type of program.
program, Massachusetts has a
similar type of program with a
certain group of children, um,
and then there's philanthropy
work that's being done privately
to assist, for example, here in
New Mexico, um, where we have a
pilot project and they're
utilizing all of the data and
information that they're getting
from that to assist us to make
sure we have everything correct
on the legislative side as we go
through this 18-year course.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for that that answer. How
long is the program been in in
existence, Mr. Chairman, uh,
state of Connecticut just got it
passed last year, so their first
babies were July 1st of last
year. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and,
and out of those babies,
Do we look at the parents, um,
income or anything like that, or
is it just?
Mr. Chairman, in Connecticut,
it's only the husky Medicaid
program, so they have to be
already a recipient of Medicaid
in New Mexico, the proposal that
I would offer is that because
you have such a high percentage
of people on Medicaid and
everyone else is just right
above that for the most part,
that it be every baby in New
Mexico born. Now that would be
very different for any other
state. I wouldn't recommend that
because then you'd be defeating
the purpose, but for New Mexico,
it would make more sense to do
it that way.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
the last thing I had was
I hope I'm not repeating myself,
but so at the end of 18 years,
they go, they go get their
education, so did they they get
it at 18, so that front loads
them to go get their education
if they don't get their
education.
And the money is ever wasted.
How do we fix that?
Mr. Chairman, the money would be
invested through SIC. The only
time they would be able to tap
into the money is if they sent
in an invoice from the school or
the trade school or the business
or whatever entity that they're
trying to use it off of whatever
you all as legislators decide to
allow them to have the purpose
to utilize it for, um, so they
would never get the money
directly and they would only get
a portion based on whatever the
legislature decides on that
invoice, and if they choose not
to, for example, because now
you've made school for the most
part.
then they can use it towards a
later time in their life when
they have a family, they want to
get their first house, they want
to build their business or if
they're fortunate enough that
their family can help provide
that, then they can use it
towards a retirement.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much Representing
Vincent. OK, I don't see any
other questions, uh, Madam
Treasurer, uh, from my end real
quick, what we're seeing up here
is the original agency request.
Then
I, I assume and just to point
out, I think for committee
members, um, in terms of the LSC
and the executive uh
recommendations. Those are very,
very close. Uh, we're shown sort
of a, a very small difference
and um
We're actually higher on the LF
so the two wrecks that we can
choose today. uh, while the LFC
recommendation.
is a little bit lower in terms
of overall general fund. It's
actually higher when it comes to
personnel services and employee
benefits than the executive rec,
uh, albeit by $600 so but not
very much. Uh, this is a, um,
this, I believe, Madam Secretary
or Madam Treasurer, this would
have been the request that came
from the agency in September,
uh.
That goes to the executive,
correct, Mr. Chairman, the first
portion is our recommendation,
the second portion is LFC's
recommendation and then
executives is the 3rd. If, if we
had to pick between the two, I
would absolutely pick the
executive recommendation because
then I would be covered in my
300 and my 400 category and then
I'd have to bake for 3 employees
that I statutorily have to do in
order to fulfill our statutory
obligations. And I appreciate
that just uh
I guess 2 notes, the one, we
will have work groups that are,
you know, where we're looking
at, looking at things closely to
were shown, and again, this is
back in September, but that
there's a um
Uh, funded vacancy rate of
12.7%.
Abundant vacancy in dollars of
roughly $492,000. Again, this
was back in September, that may
have changed, but um, that's
what folks and that's what the
committee will be looking at to
make sure that we get it right
to support you, uh, and
appreciate very much, of course,
the conversation about
additional items, particularly
baby buns. With that, we'll go
to the vice chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would
move that the committee adopt
the LFC recommendation.
OK. It's been moved by by Cha
Dixon cited by Garret and
represented Duncan at the same
time. Is there any opposition to
adopting that motion?
OK, I don't see any, thank you.
Thank you very much, Madam
Treasurer, and thank you to your
team. Thank you. Have a good
session.
OK, uh, we'll invite up the
Attorney General.
Mr. Attorney General, thank you
for being here. We appreciate
you being here and uh
We are excited to hear the
budget.
Good afternoon. Good afternoon,
chair, members of the committee
or almost evening, I don't know.
Um, my name is Felix Chavez, and
I am the LFC analyst for the
Attorney General. With us is the
Attorney General Raul Torres, as
well as Marius Miglia, the uh
the TSA counterpart, my analyst,
my, my counterpart to me. We're
behind tab 3 in your binders,
it's agency 305. I think you'll
have to go back in the binder
because
We kind of put it out of order
here.
Give you guys a second.
OK, also, also for further
reference for budgetary things
and Volume 2, it's pages 60 to
63 again pages 60 to 63, but I
would like to point your
attention mostly to volume 3.
In volume 3, there's on page 44,
again, page 44, there is a
projection on the consumer
settlement fund.
That will provide you.
Page 44 on volume 3.
Again, this chart shows a
consumer settlement fund
projection should look like
this. This should give context
to the LFC's recommendation in a
more visual form. If you'd go to
line item 26, that is the, the
consumer settlement dollars at
the LFC is recommending for use,
and below it shows balances in
both restricted and unrestricted
monies in this fund.
But with that,
I would, um,
I would like, I will be
presenting to you all the
overall differences in the
Attorney general's budget, as
well as the differences in P
code 625 or legal services, my
counterpartist Miglia will
present on P code 626 or
Medicaid fraud, and after the
two of us speak, of course, it
will point it to the Attorney
general for you all.
But to move on from there,
beginning with the overall
differences. I'll start with the
revenue section, the LFC
recommendation exceeds the
executive recommendation by $2.9
million or 5.4% across all
funding sources. The biggest
driver of this difference is in
the legal services program where
the LFC recommends as requested
by the agency, the use of funds
from the consumer settlement
fund for operation.
use, while the executive
recommends utilizing general
fund and holding federal funds
as well as other transfers flat,
again, other transfer section is
the money is coming from the
consumer settlement fund. With
that, I'd like to pass it to
Mario if he has any further
comments.
Madam Chair, committee members,
thank you, Felix. My name is
Mario Semiglia. I'm the DFA
budget analyst for the
judiciary. You'll see me a lot
in the next couple of weeks, 35
more times, so get used to it.
Um, Felix has been uh really
good at kind of setting the
stage about the differences
between our recommendations, uh,
the DFA executive
recommendation.
gave $850,000 recommended for
$850 more than the LFC
recommendation. Uh, however, the
LFC exceeded us in the other
transfers and fund balance and
that's because the agency
requested to use a lot more of
the consumer settlement fund to
fund their priorities. So while
2.9 looks like a big difference.
It's a lot of caveats in there
that I'm sure we will dig into.
And with that, I will pass it
back to Felix to set up the.
Uh, 625.
Thank you, Mario. So to legal
services a little further on in
that packet. Um, I will admit
that there is a typo, and I'll,
I'm gonna read it and that's the
correct version of it. I
apologize, but um, correctly
stated in the revenue section,
the executive recommendation
exceeds the LFC recommendation
by 150,000, as Mario just
explained, are 5.4%. And again,
the, um, the LSC exceeds the
executive by 3 million overall
funding sources in this pe code
again because of the use of
consumer.
settlement fund dollars.
Um, with that, the, um, the,
again, the LFC recommendation
keeps General Fund flat with
FI25 while reducing federal
funds as requested by the
agency, this reduction, while
increasing other funds again and
the transfers again in the
consumer settlement fund.
The, again, I just want to keep
reiterating the fact that this
is an agency requested mode of
this is why this is in the
budget. Anyway, moving on to the
base section of this page, the
recommendation exceeds the
executive recommendation by
$694.6,000 or 2.7% in the
personnel category.
The difference again stems from
the executive recommending
funding salary,
GST liability insurance rate
increases, as well as funding
for retention initiatives, which
I'm only, I'm leading that off
for you guys. I'll let Mario
first explain that further, but
just so you guys have that
context. The LSC recommendation
funds 5 term positions related
to consumer and civil rights,
because that's the division that
relates most closely to the
consumer settlement fund.
And we'll let the agency
demonstrate that a transition to
an enterprise model as the
Attorney General would like to
do is feasible and fiscally
responsible.
Outside of this, the um LFC
recommendation also provides 2
full-time positions related to
the environment and special
prosecutions because of ongoing
environment and social media
litigation.
Um, again, moving forward to, to
the other cost category, the
other, the
Excuse me, the LFC recognition
exceeds the executive in the
other category because it funds
for additional capacity for
litigation expenses. Litigation
expenses have increased because
of the cost of expert witnesses
as well as transcription costs
have increased. The executive
recommendation in contracts
funds slightly more, just more
funding for contract for
contract attorneys. With that,
I'll pass it to Mr. Smiglia for
his further comment on legal
services and then for him to
present Medicaid fraud to you.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, committee members,
thank you, Felix. Uh, like Mr.
Chavez said the uh 850,000
difference in this P code is for
salary, GST liability rate
increases and retention
initiatives within the Office of
the Attorney General, uh, of the
Mexico Department of Justice,
sorry, and we have um
We, that is the main big
difference driver there is Felix
has said, uh, using the consumer
settlement fund versus general
fund as the agency requested. So
we're gonna move on to P 626,
the Medicaid fraud, uh, because
the second pick code that makes
up this agency, uh, they
executive and LLC
recommendations held general
revenue flat. However, the
executive exceeds the LFC
recommendation by 73.73.7,000
across all funding sources, and
this was the executive.
leaving the federal funding flat
from FY 25, where the agency
requested it a little bit lower,
um,
I was always taught not to mess
with federal funds and Medicaid
fraud, so I just didn't wanna.
Create a scenario where we might
be risking the federal match.
Um, so that's really the only
difference in 626, so.
I take it back to Felix.
Is
back and forth, back and forth,
but the only comment that I have
for this P code is that we did
not include the personnel
increase because the overall LFC
budget recommendation includes a
compensation package.
And just uh before I I bring it
to the Attorney General and the
rest of your packet, you have
the uh performance measures for
me and Mario came a consensus, a
personnel calculator as well as
um special appropriation
different sheets. With that,
I'll pass it to the Attorney
General with his comments and
any further presentation.
Um, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you very much, uh, uh,
recognizing its 4:40 in the
afternoon, you've been at it all
day. I'm gonna keep it
exceptionally brief, um, we've
provided to members of the
committee a comprehensive
overview and annual reports
summarizing what I consider to
be some of the most, uh,
substantial and impactful work
in New Mexico Department of
Justice has engaged in ever we
have initiated, uh, first in the
nation litigation against some
of the largest social media
companies in the
world we are actively engaged in
multiple civil rights
investigations, um,
Into the well-being of children.
Uh, we have returned, uh, money
to individuals who have been
impacted by um price gouging in
Lincoln County. And as I look
around the, the committee and,
and the membership that's
represented here today, I, I am
struggling to find any county or
corner of the state where we do
not do substantial work, um, and
I provided just a few of the
highlights of, of some of the
things that we've gotten into,
um, from, from hazing.
Legislation investigation and
prosecution. Uh, we're working
with individuals to bolster
victims' rights to try and bring
parity between victims and
criminal defendants, um, and
providing counsel both to
agencies, uh, and, and to
commissions under the direction
of the executive. Uh, but what I
would like to tell, what I would
like to point you immediately is
to something that I know is of
great concern to members of this
committee, um, and it is an
overview of the, of our FTEs,
uh, this is a projection.
based on, on where we are now of
19% vacancy rate, we've actually
broken it down by, by a category
attorneys, investigators, and
others. Um, I will admit and,
and wanna draw some, your
attention to something that's
incredibly important. We in the
first year and a half in this
agency had a very difficult time
recruiting individuals because
for reasons that preceded my
administration, uh, a court of
appeals placed this agency for
the first time in its history.
Under spoke, and because of
that, we were required to
operate under the caps that were
imposed by Spell, and to make a
long story short, those caps
were insufficient to recruit
qualified civil litigators. We
worked very hard with SO to
create a new classification to
raise the caps that we allow, we
were enable, we were able to
offer to folks, and you can see
for yourself the the impact that
that's had on, on retention and
recruitment. Um, the, the
analysts did a great job.
Uh, summarizing the, the, the
larger aspects of the
presentation. But this is the
one slide that I would like
members of the committee to, to
think about and consider when
you put or request in context.
In 3 fiscal years, the New
Mexico Department of Justice is
responsible for recovering over
$400 million.
$400 million. We asked this
committee not to expend any
additional money out of the
general fund, not one dime out
of the general fund we asked
instead to use a little over $6
million of the $400 million that
we recovered to fund the
operations of, of the consumer
agency itself, but also to fund
the operations for those aspects
of the agency that, that don't
generate revenue.
Whether it's, you know,
protecting kids from abuse and
neglect, prosecuting cases,
investigating child pornography
on and on and on. Um, our
analysis of the recommendations
that, that are, you're presented
with today is that um the
recommendation of the LFC would
allow us to spend 1.7% of the
total money that this agency
recovers on behalf of the state.
Um, and we appreciate that. We
really do. Um, and what it
would, what it would allow us to
do is hire significant, um, and
make significant increases in
the number of attorneys,
investigators and paralegals. If
you go with the low
recommendation, that's the DFA
recommendation.
That's $727,000.
$727,000 for all three
categories. What that means is
this.
Under our recommendation in our,
our budgetary request, we'd be
able to hire 8 new attorneys, 9
paralegals, 8 special agents.
Two investigators and 3
constituent services. If you go
with the low rec, I can hire one
attorney.
And one paralegal.
To an agency that returns.
to the state over $400 million
in 3 years' time.
Another way to put this is,
I could go away for 8 years and
pay for the agency myself with
the monies that we raise.
And not show up again in front
of this committee for 8 years.
All we are asking to do is for
permission to spend a slightly
larger percentage of the money
that we generate to build
additional capacity to recover
more money and better protect
people. Um, I think it's a
reasonable ask. I think it's a
sound use of of limited
resources and freeze this
committee to use general fund
resources where they are more
desperately needed.
My colleagues in the district
attorney's office, they do not
generate hundreds of millions of
dollars in general fund every
year. They have to come to you
and beg for general fund money.
I don't. I'm here asking for the
privilege to spend a small
percentage of the money that
this agency generates on behalf
of all our constituents and the
most vulnerable members of our
community. And with that, I'll
stand for questions.
Thank you very much, uh Mr.
Attorney General. First
Representative Dao and then
Representative Silva. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you,
Attorney General for the
presentation. Are the contract
employees paid at market rate?
Um,
that, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Dow, we have uh a
variety of different contract
employees, so we have certain um
contractors who are on a set
fixed rate. So for example, we
hire attorneys that represent
members of the judiciary to
represent and defend them in, in
actions in federal courts, some
of them have been actually sued
in federal court, and they've
asked for contract attorneys. We
have other attorneys that work
on behalf of the agency that
That are paid as in the form of
a contingency fee.
As I made clear to the committee
last year, we were formed
entirely what I believe to be an
excessive pay structure for
contingency fees, and we have a
strict cap on how those fees are
paid and so when we're happy to
provide that to, to the
committee, um, to give you more
depth and context on how they're
paid. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
you're saying when we, we
collect the money, it all goes
back to the state because
When the Medicaid, what if it's
part of its federal? Like how,
or it's all transferred to the
state, so it all goes back to
the state. We're we're talking
of, madam, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Doo, we're only
talking about the consumer fund,
not all of the moneys flow
directly back to the consumer
funds. Some of it we goes
directly to consumers. Some of
it is in the form of all, you
know, different forms, um, of
settlements, but the, the bulk
of the money recovered goes into
the consumer settlement fund.
And then thank you, Mr. Chair
and Attorney General, what are,
what, what will
If we vote for your proposed
budget, how much of that's going
to go for efforts at CYFD.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Doo, uh, we have
reserved.
Other than, I believe, 2
prosecution vacancies in two
criminal investigator vacancies
every other additional resource
has all been set aside for
impact litigation, which
includes the CYFD unit. Mr.
Chair, what other units, state
and federal, does it include?
The the Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Doo, it includes
uh the group, the same group
that is engaged in the metal
lawsuit, the SNAP lawsuit, um,
and various other consumer
protection activities, uh, that
relate to pharmaceuticals, for
example, uh, we're actively
looking into, uh, price fixing
and insulin, for example, the
availability of, of certain
types of inhalers for
Juveniles, my own children have
asthma. I have asthma. There are
a lot of kids in this state
that, for example, can't get
access to the asthma medication
that they need because of
pharmaceutical benefit managers
who restrict, um, the types of
asthma medications that come
back. Those are the types of
litigation initiatives that are
underway, but we also have two
pending uh civil rights
investigations involving
children. I can't get into the
details now in open session,
but, uh, rest assured, it does
include CYFD.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I'm, I
really struggle cause I also see
some suits, you know, I've
talked to you offline about some
that you filed, um, against
people that I think provide
really critical services to our
state.
Um, so how much of that goes to
sort of
Well, we've talked offline about
stuff. What percentage of it is
things like you and I have
discussed.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Dow.
The, the lion's share, if you
look at, if you look at this
graphic.
Um, the 8 attorneys, the 9
paralegals, special agents, the
investigators, those two
investigators are civil
investigators.
Uh, and they will be supporting
specifically civil
investigations of the types that
we have discussed impacting
children of the 8 attorneys, 6
of those are in the impact
litigation section, uh, I
believe 6 or 7 of those
paralegals are in that same
section and constituent
services, while not exclusively
designated for just that type of
uh inbound traffic, uh, what we
have seen is that, for example,
when we initiate
Litigation on solar
manufacturers or solar
installers who are taking
advantage of people whenever we
announce an initiative like
that, we see a spike in inbound
traffic.
From people who have been
impacted because they've been
taken advantage of by a solar
company. So in order to handle
the inbound traffic for the work
that we do, we've added those
constituent services, but
someone can also call and report
a crime. So it's, it's hard for
me to say this is a dedicated
constituent services and they
will only handle this kind of
call because they're trained to
handle every kind of call that
comes into the building. Thank
you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much for Doo.
Great questions. Next, we're
gonna go to Representative
Silva, then represent Hernandez.
Thank you, chair. Uh, thank you,
Attorney General for the
presentation. Um, I also want to
thank you. I'm from Las Cruces.
I want to thank you for the
diligence and hard work that you
and your office put in for the
Open Meetings Act decision on
the Las Cruces City Council and
investigating Memorial Medical
Center, um, as a private equity
institution that was, uh,
skirting its responsibility. So
thank you for that. Um, I'm
wondering if you see trends of
needing to litigate on behalf of
Public interest when you see
certain industries at the
federal level, uh, do you
regulate?
Um, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Silva, one of the
things that we are, um,
Bracing ourselves for is that
with the new, the incoming
federal administrations, I think
pretty clear signal to, to step
back from the consumer, uh,
protection work that's done by
the CFPB. We anticipate a
dramatic increase in the number
of calls that we will have for,
um, financial institutions who
have misled customers, uh, gifts
or or products sold in the open
market that are deficient in
some.
way, um, other types of consumer
transactions, not only in
Standard goods and services, but
also access to healthcare, for
example, we are, we are
concerned, um, as I said before,
that, um, pharmaceutical benefit
managers and those companies,
um, have
Assumed a really, um,
Impactful role in in determining
who gets access to healthcare,
who gets access to medication,
um, I can't tell you how many
times I am personally stopped or
we received um calls to our
constituent services line about
my doctor prescribed this
specific medication for our
child.
And the insurance company or the
PBM won't allow it.
And that those are the types of
things that we intend to get
into. I'm not going to prejudge
whether or not there's been a
violation in that space, but,
but healthcare access is a very
big concern for us.
Great. Thank you so much. I
appreciate it. Thank you, Chair.
Thank you, Representative Silva.
Next we have Representative
Hernandez and Represent Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, um,
Uh, Mr. Attorney General, uh,
you know, it, it's, uh, first
off,
I live on a Navajo nation.
My community is, is shipwreck in
New Mexico and um two questions.
Uh.
Does your office investigate
look at
price gouging that that's
happening, especially in
Northwestern New Mexico.
Whether it's retail,
Um, big box stores or even um uh
what, what my constituents are
telling me is these fuel prices
that we have in Northwestern New
Mexico. Uh, so that's the first
question.
Chairman Representative
Fernandez, I can confirm for you
that we have an open
investigation into price fixing,
as it as it relates to gasoline
in San Juan County. Um, I can
also tell you, as one of the
only attorneys general in the
country without an in-house
economist on staff.
I, you know, I got a question
earlier from Representative Doo
about how we pay contractors.
When you look at the other con
with that, that category of
contracts, one of the contracts
that we have to engage in is an
economist to look at the market
impact and see whether there is
any price fixing engaged in
that. We have other price fixing
initiatives, for example, for
representative Vincent, when we
had uh citizens who were fleeing
from the fires. They were going
into Chavis County, which where
my family's from.
And they were going to hotels,
they were having hotel
reservations canceled and
charged 3 or 4 times.
What they were being charged the
week before. Um, so we're
engaged at multiple levels on
price gouging separate apart
from this, we have a proposal to
up to amend the, the unfair
Practices Act to actually to
provide an enhanced penalty for
people that engage in price
gouging whenever there's a
declared a public emergency, um,
the penalties for UPA violation,
and unfair Practice Act
violation is $5000. It hasn't
budged in 40 years.
So our proposal would double the
baseline penalty to 10,000 and
raise the penalty for
individuals, for example, in
that scenario that I mentioned
in Chavis County, if you're
gonna charge somebody
Double or triple what you would
charge them for a hotel room
when they're running for their
lives and fleeing from a fire.
I'm gonna have a $25,000 penalty
to bring to bear on that
conduct. And I, and my sense is
that should change the type of
behavior that we have seen that
I think everybody agrees is not
acceptable.
My second question, uh,
Having, um, the support for our
indigenous community by making
sure that now that the Michigan
murdered, uh, and I'm sorry uh I
think it's a task it got
changed, right? and so this is,
this is important to me because
um my, my cousin brother's been
missing and uh we've been
looking for him, uh, for over 15
years now.
And so
Under, uh, what's, what's being
done differently than before.
And uh also, uh, do you guys
Is it under, under the
Constitution or to to look at
the digital footprint, and I'm,
I'm more specifically the social
media footprint of these uh
missing individuals.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Hernandez, we are statutorily,
uh uh mandated to organize and
we are currently running, uh,
missing and murdered indigenous
persons Task Force. Um, I will
also tell you that for the first
time in this agency's history,
we have two designated full-time
Indian Affairs attorneys, they
do nothing but work on native
issues. We have never had that
before. The way it was in the
past was that we would take um
incoming requests for support or
information from our tribal
partners.
Um, and tribal communities, and
we would filter it.
To the environmental lawyer or
the criminal lawyer or the civil
lawyer, and what that meant was
we were sending different people
to a tribal community over and
over, and they had no broader
sense of the overarching
challenges. Now we have two
people and all they do, and so
we reoriented the focal point
of, of the organization around
specifically supporting those
communities.
That concludes my question.
Great. Thank you, Representative
Hernandez, uh, Representative
Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, just, just one quick
question for you. Historically
what has your um
You're hiring them down. Um, can
you give me a percentage of that
with the addition of the new 8,
you're looking at hiring. Um, do
you think you'll have a problem
hiring those individuals.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Duncan, uh, I,
I'll be honest with you, one of
the things that I'm taking full
advantage of is the announcement
of the administration just
recently to cancel all incoming
hires or the Department of
Justice honors program. Uh, we,
we immediately reached out to
all of those law students who
were counting on going to the
Department of Justice where I
used to work, and uh we've had
pretty positive response from a
number of, of, of extraordinary
institutions we
Actually, um, are going to be
interviewing a young New Mexican
who went to Stanford Law School,
who thought she was going to the
Department of Justice, and I
said, well why, maybe you can
come back to Santa Fe and help
us right here. So we're, we're
making uh a real headway there.
The, the bottom line though, and
I think we're moving in the
right direction.
But I'm gonna say something that
probably every person that sits
in this chair that comes before
you is recruiting in this state
is difficult.
Because of some of the other
challenges that even private
industry has in recruiting
individuals, quality of
education, the public safety
issues that, that I've been
pretty vocal about, but also the
pay.
Um, you, if you want high
quality civil litigators.
You have to pay what high
quality civil litigators make.
You're never going to match the
private sector, but you can't
have a step down that is so
dramatic that you're asking
somebody, um, who's got a wealth
of experience to take a pay cut
of hundreds of thousands of
dollars. Our prosecutors are,
it's easier, right? I can bring,
I can lateral in a prosecutor
and bring them in, um, because
we don't traditionally make that
kind of money and it's easier to
press to keep pace, but civil
litigation.
Um,
the most of, most of the people
that we are trying to recruit,
if they were to take their skill
set on the open market, they're
usually in the neighborhood of
34 $500,000 a year.
And, um, I, I would never come
before this committee and ask
for that kind of cap space, but
we were, we needed to move from
the low 10s to the high 130s,
140s to, to be.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So your
vacant vacancy rates.
Can you tell me what those have
been Mr. Chairman,
Representative Duncan, I can
tell you that just over 3 months
ago it was almost 30%. But as
you can, as you can see it, it,
it's down to 19%. So, um, the,
the trends are moving in the
right direction. But, um, I
will, I can tell you now that
this is where why money matters.
Uh, I was contacted by an
18-year prosecutor, the criminal
chief of the US Attorney's
office in
Las Cruces.
Um, who I, if I had to guess,
was probably making $225,000
200,000 dollars a year.
And I am convince I am trying to
convince that person who could,
I could hand him a murder case
and he could go to your
community right now with no
training and get a conviction.
I'm trying to sell him on only
taking a 6000 or $70,000 pay
cut.
That's
That's what it looks like in my,
in my seat. So I, I, I, I do the
best that I can. We have
specifically made the decision
to push to the top end of the
band in order to get high
quality people, but it's a push
and pull because once we do
that, we know that we're gonna,
we're gonna have empty seats,
but we've made the strategic
decision to try and recruit.
Much higher quality of terms.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Duncan. Uh, next we have
Representative Herndon and then
Representative Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
thank you uh Mr. Attorney
General, just to clarification,
if you don't mind, regarding a
follow up on the question raised
by Representative Hernandez and
uh pertaining to Senate Bill 12
that was passed in 2022, and the
prosecution and the
investigation of missing and
murdered indigenous women and
families. So have there been any
prosecutions at all pursuant to
uh that position being put in
place since 2022.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Herndon, we do not have uh any
cases that have resulted in, in,
um, a formal criminal charge.
Um, Mr. Chair and Mr. Attorney
General, uh, why not we have had
many people missing, and why
aren't we having any
prosecutions, Mr. Chairman,
Representative Herndon, one of
the things that we um have found
in the course of engaging in
this work.
Is that number one, not every
person that is missing on that
list and in that universe is the
victim of a crime.
And one of the things that I
think is very difficult for us
to parse out is we are missing
far too many people from these
communities, but, um, not all of
them are, are the victims of a
crime, and for those that are
the victim of a crime, or at
least we believe we have
evidence of that. Oftentimes by
the time our agency is, is fully
engaged several years have gone
by. So you're talking about cold
cases that um do not result.
In
Timely information from
witnesses, timely the collection
of forensic information. The
other thing that I will tell you
that has been a source of
frustration for our
investigators is that we have
convened several meetings, uh,
at the FBI on our own, at our
office and in other places, and
have asked to enter into MOUs
with our tribal law enforcement
partners. We have buy-in from
our tribal law enforcement
partners from most of the major,
uh, metro area tribes, so it's
let a.
Dia, Laguna, and others that
have bigger law enforcement
agencies. We have other
agencies, for example, the
Navajo Nation, we have no MOU.
And we have very little, if any
representation from their
Department of Justice. So it's a
very difficult for our agents to
build a criminal case when we do
not have timely information from
our partners. Um, it's something
that we're committed to. We have
agents that are, that are
skilled in homicide
investigations, sexual assault
investigations, uh, complex
human trafficking
investigations. We put those
cases together all the time, but
we cannot build cases out of
Uh,
poorly constructed
investigations that we were
often 3 or 4 or 5 years late. My
hope is, is that by investing in
technology, we can't integrate
or phase two of the platform
that we had built to support
this initiative, would, would
actually, we're not gonna
require, we can't require of
tribal agencies because we have
to respect tribal sovereignty,
but we are asking for real-time
communications whenever someone.
able communities goes missing.
So that we instantly know that
that person has gone missing,
and that information is fed
directly to APD or directly to
the state police. We don't have
that right now.
So we have a communication
breakdown and a siloing problem,
we need both technical support
to build that out. We have the
money to build the technology,
but I can't make people execute
the MOUs and share timely
information to support criminal
investigations and prosecutions.
Thank you, Mr. Attorney General.
Mr. Chair, I have one other
question with respect to the
consumer fund that we were
talking about earlier is the
amount remaining in that fund
after the consumers have been
made whole for the way in which
they were hurt.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Herndon, um,
I can, I will get you the exact,
we can provide the exact
figures, but most of the monies
that we end up putting into that
fund, have to do a statutory
penalties. We always pay
consumers back whatever
demonstrated uh harm that they
have received, but usually that
is a small percentage of the
statutory penalties.
Um, so there's usually
substantial money left over
after that recovery has
happened.
And thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Mr. Attorney. Thank
you, Representative Herndon. Uh,
next we have Representative
Vincent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Attorney General for the
presentation. Uh, just had a
comment and then a question. I
do appreciate you taking care of
the price gougers that that uh.
prey on
Fire victims that are in state
and federal disasters, and I
hope you crack down on them
really good, but I did want to
make a comment that just a
couple of bag bad actors in
Chavis, they don't, they don't
make that big of an impact
because the rest of the
community was outstanding to our
fire victims and fed them and
put their their horses and stuff
up at the fair ground, so, uh,
big thank you to Travis County
too.
I had a constituent asked me,
when you buy.
Alcohol or tobacco.
And they scan your driver's
license. Who owns that data and
does anything happen with that
data? Can they sell it.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Vincent to, to be perfectly
honest with you, I, I do not
know who owns the data or where
it goes my my sense is that it
would end up with RLD um in a
database that is reported as
part of the normal reporting
process for information gathered
in connection with those
transactions, but that is a yes,
and so, but I will certainly
look into it and find that out.
I will tell you that separate
apart from the presentation I've
made here today, we are pushing
for
consumer data privacy bill. We
are one of the few states in the
country that does not have a
comprehensive consumer data
privacy bill that would allow
any individual who has given
over information to one of the
large platforms, Google, Meta,
Twitter, any, they would be, you
would have the right to delete
that information, to restrict
its transfer in, in my
perspective, and I know that,
that oftentimes that touches on
an ideological sort of dividing
line in legislative bodies.
This is something that I think
all Americans have a have a
concern about is what people are
doing with our data. And so our
hope is to be able to um get
strong protections against that.
Here's the sticking point. If on
the other side of this building
they passed that legislation,
just like they do with all the
other statutory references that
this is just a handful of the
statutory references that talk
about our office.
Most of the time when that last
sentence is tucked in and it
says, and the Attorney General
shall have the power to enforce.
No one sends a memo to this
committee that says we just
added 16 new things for the
Attorney General to enforce. And
so if I, if we don't get what we
need, then my responsibility is
to sit down there and look who's
in the building, and
We're gonna do one more thing,
but one more thing comes at the
expense of something else, and
that's just the nature of what
we do. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for the time. Thank
you, Representative Vincent. Uh,
next we have Representative
Little.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank
you, Attorney General Torres
and, and all that are here. Um,
I have a question in to follow
up on the MMIP and uh I one of
the issues that have come up as
we are talking about the budget.
Uh, and finances, I am curious,
uh.
To find out if there are funds
also within this budget that are
set aside for either prevention
activities for for communities,
um,
As we know, these families are
dealing with these tragedies.
But there is an opportunity. I,
we believe there's a number of
individuals who have talked
about this to.
It's hard to use some of the
funds to work on prevention
activities, and I've got one
more other follow up uh question
and uh perhaps uh to make this
quick, I'll just put this out
there real quickly, uh, Mr.
Chair, um, uh.
Unfortunately, I do have
experience with the uh being our
family being a victim of crime
and uh a criminal activity and
murder, we know what happened.
We are very aware it is
heartbreaking to think that
there are families. I mean, as
as injured as my family has
been, they have been able to
access support, uh, in terms of
victims assistance, uh, the fund
that's available and established
there and forgive me, but I
think I may not have a not
entirely sure where that fund is
set aside, it might be in the
EOC, but uh I am curious uh to
ask if uh victims
assistance funds would be
possible, um, because I do
understand that these cases have
not yet.
Be resolved as you just spoke
earlier, not every uh person
who's missing is a victim, but
it does not take away from the
families that grief that trauma
that is taking place and I'm,
I'm.
Wondering about that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative Little,
you, you make a very good point,
um, our agency doesn't control
the crime victim's reparations
fund that that fund is managed
by a gentleman by the name of
Frank Zubia, who has been an
extraordinary partner both when
we were at the DA's office and
now the the the Department of
Justice, and so we work very
hard to make sure that we, um,
connect victims with as many
resources as possible. Um, we
also work collaboratively with
our partners at the United
States Attorney's Office, who
has
primary criminal jurisdiction on
in in Indian country and federal
Indian lands. And so, if
depending on where the
jurisdiction lies, we will
assign um both investigators and
prosecutors, but it's also
victim advocates who are
available to talk about those,
um, resources counseling,
transportation, um, short term
housing, there are lots of
resources available.
Um, but I, I do want to make one
further point that um is also
gonna come up in a substantive
piece of legislation if uh a
sexual assault victim or child
abuse victim is um victimized in
Indian country, and they come
into the federal criminal
justice system where I was a
federal prosecutor.
There is no right. There is no
constitutional right whatsoever
for a defense attorney or a
defense investigator to go and
interrogate that sexual assault
survivor or that child victim,
and it is not a right guaranteed
under the Constitution, it is
something that is
From my perspective
a a feature of our criminal
justice system that needs to be
fixed. Thankfully, it is the one
aspect of, um, prosecuting cases
in Indian country where we
afford victims in those
communities much greater rights,
and I would hope that we would
extend that to victims all over,
all over the state.
Thank you for your response.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I know
that took us kind of in another
tangent, but I do appreciate
that.
Thank you very much for, uh,
thank you, Mr. Attorney General.
Um, we went, thanks to the
committee for great hearing just
as a sort of a reminder for all
of us, uh, our LFC
recommendation is a stronger
recommendation for the agency,
albeit, you know, a little bit
lower general fund and Mr.
Attorney General, it sounds like
um there's continued work,
particularly
we go through this budget year
and then into the interim as you
and your team propose sort of a
Evolving way of looking at how,
uh, how you all are able to do
your jobs on behalf of all New
Mexicans.
Uh, thank you very much. We'll
go to the vice chair for the.
For the uh
Recommendation?
Um, Mr. Chair, I would, uh, move
that the committee adopt the LFC
recommendation.
OK, it's been moved by Vice
Chair Dixon, seconded by
Representative Hernandez. Is
there any opposition to adopting
that motion.
Please show ranking member
Chatfield in opposition.
OK.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Attorney General.
Madam Commissioner, uh, thank
you for
Come on down, please.
So.
the.
I've never done
Come on. You said I was an
aggress. That's a I thought it
was, but other people did not.
I did a little.
color
All right, uh, we'll go, we'll
jump right into it, Ms. Gasan,
thank you so much. We have our
LFC analyst, uh, once we get to
you, Madam Commissioner, please
feel free to introduce the
members of your team who are
here, and with that, we'll go
ahead and uh kick it off with
Ms. Gaso.
Uh, good afternoon. I'm Helen
Gois. I'm the LFC analyst for
the state land office. Um, we
are going to be discussing the
um budget for the state land
office this afternoon, that is
agency 539 behind tab 5. you
will also find the um discussion
of their budget, our budget
recommendation on page 229 of
volume 2, and there are two
charts concerning um their
revenues and distribution to
beneficiaries in Volume 3.
On pages.
30 and 31.
Uh, with me today is the uh
state land commissioner,
Stephanie Garcia Richard. Her
chief deputy, is it Chief
Deputy? I have no idea. Deputy
of Deputy of operational
simulate Stewart and the DFA
analyst Monica Tapia. Um, if
you're ready to go, I'll start
with the uh
Money, uh, the LLC
recommendation increases total
revenue by 1.1 million over FY25
for an increase of 4.1%. This is
less than the 3.7 million
increase recommended by the
executive, which would have
increased spending by 14%. Um,
the, uh, our recommended the LFC
recommendation is uh was heavy
on personnel. There was, we kept
uh contracts and other flats for
A recommendation for an increase
for for personnel of 5.4%. The
executive recommendation was
17.2%.
17.2% for personnel and they
included a 2.8% for each of um
others costs and uh contracts.
Um, we both in continuing
language on um COVID methane
production and we included some
language having to do with
spending on a cybersecurity
position that made a contingent
on compliance with do it, uh,
standards, and with that, I will
turn it over to Monica who will
talk about performance.
Helen, good afternoon, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee, as
Helen mentioned, I am out of the
top of DSA analyst for the state
land Office.
executive and LFC have come to
consensus on performance
measures which reflect the
agency's request slightly to
slightly raise 7 targets and
lower 2.
Now I'll pass it over to.
It's.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um, and
since you invited me to
introduce my staff, uh, I, I
would love to do that, in fact,
so if I could have everyone's
hand, please.
We have our assistant
commissioner for mineralsrelo.
We got assistant commissioner of
administrative Services
Division, Selena Romero.
We have our director of records
Lee Mueller. We have our
director of HR.
Chanel Townsend.
We have our deputy of public
affairs here next. We have our
assistant commissioner for
Service Resources, Dana Baker.
We have our assistant
commissioner of commercial
resources might say.
We have our director of
accounting, Antonio Medina. We
have our assistant commissioner
for communications, Joey Keith.
We have our, uh, director of
service Resources Division,
April Elliott. We have our
director of facilities, Bobby
Gallegos. We have our general
counsel for the state Land
Office. Sorry if you're not.
We have our uh director of
loyalty Management Division
Eammonaka.
We have our director of
commercial Resources Division,
Jim Fortier. We have our
director of our IT division,
Toni Hoffman.
I'm gonna see you for 1 2nd. We
have our director, or I'm sorry,
our assistant commissioner of
Cultural Resources.
We have our director of cultural
resources, and why can't I think
of your last name? Curry, Anne
Curry.
The reason I ski from Misha is
because you all actually um gave
us this position last year in a
very, very happy to say that we
have hired into this position.
This is a classified tribalism,
which means after, yeah, right
after this administration leaves
in 24 months.
Manisha Trujillo will continue,
and she has already um done.
phenomenal reach out uh in terms
of tribal consultation, in terms
of uh MOU um negotiation between
tribal uh
And as well as uh organizing our
TIPO summit. So thank you to
Monisha.
We wanted her here just so you
all can put a name with a face.
Mr. Chairman, um, we were
pretty, uh,
Aggressive.
In our uh budget request in
front of the committee.
And uh.
There is a considerable
considerable difference between
DFA and the LFC recommendation.
So we have a proposed compromise
that I will talk about that's on
page 10. Before I get there
though,
First I have to brag on the.
Work that this phenomenal staff
behind me and their divisions
have done that is going to be on
slide 2.
Uh, advancing renewable energy,
helping communities meet their
affordable housing needs,
strengthening our tribal
partnerships and addressing
legacy oil and gas issues, as
well as our 2nd
National top workplace in USA
today.
Um
That we have ever earned.
And uh our record earnings on
page 3.
The thing that I really want you
to, to look at, um, even though
it looks fairly small. We have
the highest ever non-oil and gas
revenue that we've ever earned
at the state land office, $214
million.
That money is just we're on the
cusp.
Of continuing to earn at least
that or more in the non-oil and
gas revenue funds. So yes, I
know that you all appreciate the
billions that this office brings
in, but I did want to emphasize
that we have the another
historic high, which is our
largest non-oil and gas revenue
ever.
Page 4,
Talks about our, you know, you,
you have asked us to be
accountable for the money that
you appropriate to us and so we
try to check all of the boxes
of, you know, what I have
learned when I sat on this
committee.
Uh, low vacancy rates, um, uh,
no, uh, reversions, no barring
out of personnel into contracts,
um, you know, it's, it's kind of
the recurring theme that you all
will hear throughout throughout
all of your hearings and we try
to
Check all the boxes.
Um, on page 5, we did hear the
chairman last year, um, when he
asked for increased targets for
some of our performance
measures. And so not only have
we increased those, but uh
really strive to meet those as
well, so that's page 5.
Page 6 was our original request,
Mr. Chairman. Like I said,
pretty robust.
Um, and I will explain a little
bit about why we were so
aggressive in our initial
request, um, and it includes 3
new FTE and that is on page 7.
So our 3 FTE requests have to do
with, uh, ensuring that we are
covering our cybersecurity
mandate, so, you know, that we
often get asked, well, doesn't
do it help you with that. And in
fact do it does oversee and
regulate cybersecurity. But we
are responsible at our own
agency for
Uh
Putting forth our our
cybersecurity plan, ensuring
that we are meeting those uh
those requirements, and so we do
require an FTE to do that work.
Um, the other two brand new FTE
requests.
are due to the historic
workload, you all have historic
money in the budget.
That directly relates to
historic workload that we are
seeing this team behind me is
seeing at the state land office.
So historic royalty, um,
artists, historic.
Uh, approvals for oil and gas
development, historic, uh,
Field reports and field
inspections. All of the, all of
the work that they do.
is reflected directly in the
money that you are seeing into
the state coffers and so we need
help with those record
turnaround times, Mr. Chairman.
So, part of our request
initially back in September, um,
to the committee was that we
wanted to undergo um
Uh, uh,
Entire turnover, lift and shift,
um, of
are of our HR positions and the
way that they are classified in
state government. And we were
definitely taking uh
Some of the, the recommendations
from, uh, the Deloitte study,
but LFC was, was telling, you
know, agencies that they really
needed to be doing according to
best practices, but what you
have to understand about the the
uh positions at the state land
office is that if we, if they're
sort of set in amber.
And then we continue to have
those same positions, um, have
raises every year after year,
the lower.
classification will just remain.
We have to first do a lift and
shift of those classifications,
and then followed the Deloitte
instructions, and then follow
the LFC instructions. So we um
have already actually undertaken
and we're like 40% of the way.
With those reclasses for our
managers.
For our entire manager class. We
have gone to Spo.
Requesting reclasses, requesting
increases so that we are on par
with our sister agencies.
Remember, we are competing, yes,
with the private sector, but
really, we are competing with
the other natural resource
managers in the state and
federal government.
And right now,
For example, my, she's not here
right now, but my director of uh
oil and gas is not on par with
the person who does her job at
the OCD for example.
So we are, all we're trying to
do is ensure that our
classifications are on par with
our sister agencies and that,
that is a big part of what this
budget request was about.
We want to properly compensate.
The folks who who bring in the
billions of dollars that you all
enjoy into the state coffers.
Um, you know, it's kind of old
news now.
So I'm just kind of gonna skip
over page 9, but that's
I appreciate all of the work of
the analyst. I didn't even thank
them.
But they did yeoman's work.
So onto the crux of the matter,
which is page 10. This is our
proposed compromise. Essentially
what we're asking the committee
to consider today. It's taking
the LFC rec, which you need to
do because it's the lower wreck.
To make us whole, we are
proposing an additional
$661,000.
And, and that keeps contracts
and other flat.
As well as reducing the original
amount that we had asked for in
our bar language, reducing that,
I believe, by almost by more
than half, reducing that by more
than 50%. So we feel like it's
a, it's a little bit of a give
and take, you know, we're asking
for less than our bar language.
But, but the LFC reckless a
little bit more.
our proposal, Mr. Chairman.
I hope I said all the right
things.
You all are tired. I think I'm
kind of tired. Oh, the appendix
has a very low vacancy rates and
are a lot.
Me and Helen have a, you know,
we have a whole history.
It
Mr. Chairman, I stand for
questions. Thank you, Madam
Commissioner. Thanks, uh, great
to see you and your team here
today, uh, we're gonna go first
to represent Doo and go from
there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and hello,
how are you?
Um, so can you tell me what the
new revenue was from?
You said there was 12 million in
revenue 214. 214. OK, yeah, so,
uh, primarily that is um for
rights of way, commercial
development, and then, of
course, our renewable energy. So
we have these renewable energy
projects that we have been um
approving and and citing, and
they are just beginning on their
trajectory because those those
uh projects are set to last for
40 years. And so they're just
starting to, to make that
revenue.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Has the,
we heard a presentation from
Economic Development, and
they're asking for money for
like site prep to create
opportunities for, for new
industry to come in, is that
something that would be eligible
on your land or have they talked
to you about that? Do you know
what I'm talking about? So Mr.
Chairman and Representative, uh,
we are in close communication
with EDD. I hope that the
secretary would say that, um, I,
I believe we are. I take his
phone calls, he takes mine. I
think that's, that's the
measure.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, we can't use
money ourselves on site prep,
but should um should an
applicant come in that, you
know, it desires the site a lot
of times that package is kind of
put together with the assistance
of EDD and the local
governments, uh, sometimes with
um, uh, IRBs and, and things
like that. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. My last question is
just, um, when you talk about a
historic workload, what
percentage of the revenue that's
generated stays at your agency
versus going to permanent fund
or general fund.
That's a great question, Mr.
Chairman. I believe it's about
1%, yeah, so, so we are, um, Mr.
Chairman, we keep 1% for our own
operations. OK. So thank you,
Mr. Chair. So then, as the
workload goes up or the revenue
is coming in, that 1% is also
going up. Is that correct, Mr.
Chairman and Representative,
yes. Thank you. Thank you so
much. Thank you, Representative
Doo. Next, we're gonna go to a
regular member chat.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good afternoon.
Commissioner.
Um, you know, in, in eastern New
Mexico, we've got some federally
declared.
Uh, transformation corridors,
potential transmission corridors
and that, I'm not against
transmission corridors. I'm not
against, uh, wind energy. I'm
not against solar power, but I
am a little bit, uh, I
Hello
I'm wondering about why the
local folks weren't contacted
ahead of time about these, this
federal declaration, and I
wonder if the state land office
was uh contacted and are you
engaged with those guys and
what's happening there? So, Mr.
Chairman, we are also not
against solar, not against
transmission and not against
wind, uh, but we do have our own
concerns about those corridors
as well, so I will let the
deputy commissioner address
that, Mr. Chairman, um,
representative, uh, you know, we
just learned of that as well
when it rolled out and we
participated in the, the public
discussion that they had. It was
a brief overview. There's going
to be a public comment period in
February. Uh, we have concerns
about some of the uh sighting of
where they've proposed, um, you
know, we're trying to get
transmission in uh as it
pertains to state trust land,
but that's a very long way of
saying we were not, uh, you
know, included in the
the early stages of that
discussion, but we're engaged
now.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
that's a problem. Um, inclusion,
uh, get the word out there and
let's, let us know what's going
on. I got, I have a problem with
what's going on over there.
Uh
Very quickly as possible, and I
know it's not a quick thing, but
we have a bunch of new members
here, and I was asked today,
well, what's the state land
office do? and I said, get, get,
get it, get it, get it, get it,
get it. I, I told him a lot of
things that you did, but I've
probably left out a few of them,
you know, as far as gold and gas
leasing the surface leasing,
mining and minerals, and you,
you tell them, Mr. Chairman.
All right, my favorite question
in the world, um, so we are a
constitutionally created office,
constitutional and statutorily
created. We were deeded over
about 13 million acres of land,
um, actually before statehood,
um, and that was to draw revenue
for New Mexico's public
institutions at a time when New
Mexico's tax base was not great.
We were just starting out as a
state. Our tax base still, you
know, I mean, it's this, this.
Agency does a lot to fund New
Mexico's public schools,
universities, and hospitals. And
we, uh, the, the historic
revenue that we bring in this
last year, it was the 2nd
highest ever, uh, at 2.56
billion. It actually saves the
average taxpaying household in
New Mexico, $3000 off of their
tax bill.
Because we exist. We do all
kinds of things. If you name a
thing, we do it.
We have trade at the border. We
have a Walmart in Silver City.
We have affordable housing in
down in Las Cruces and in
Albuquerque.
Uh, we have the Netflix studio
up at Mesa del Sol is on State
Trust land. In addition to those
more traditional uses of state
trust land that you think of
raising, uh, we have 3500
grazing lessees, um, and oil and
gas development. We are trying
to diversify, um, our, our
revenue into things like
renewable energy, uh, wind and
solar development. We have
participated in the
legislature's community solar
act by uh approving now.
Does someone know this off the
top of their head? 1199.
9 community solar projects on
state land throughout the state,
um, and there was one more thing
I wanted to say.
Um
Yes
Oh, we exist to solve community
problems. We, we have taken it
upon ourselves to help help
communities who are
transitioning maybe away from
extractive industries, um,
especially the communities in
the northwest part of the state,
as they uh look for different
modalities, different
manufacturing, using state land
to, to generate uh that economic
development that's us in a
nutshell. Oh, we have a dual
mandate to make money, but not
at the long term expense.
Of the resource.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, that's
a good description. I think it
would be hard to name all the,
all the things you do, you do a
lot, uh, last question, what is
the conservation leasing
program.
All right. Um, the conservation
leasing program right now is a
pilot. It is designed to
incentivize certain practices we
would like to see on state land.
Some of those practices people
already do. Like I said before,
we have 3500 grazing lessees. So
some folks already participate
in things like rotational
grazing and things like uh uh
planting cover crop and things
like water conservation. We
would like to incentivize those.
Those types of activities on
state land and so we are
creating instruments, particular
to those activities we would
like to see on state land.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Ranking Member Chatfield. Next,
we're gonna go to Vice Chair
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Commissioner, for the, uh,
incredible work that you guys
are doing, and thank you to the
analysts. Um, I was wondering,
um, Madam Commissioner, first in
the um difference worksheets,
um, there is a reference to uh
retaining ongoing language
concerning certain cobed methane
production.
So I'm wondering if if I could
get a little more information.
You, it's your turn.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative,
uh, this comes up every year.
It's a very strange one. So
section 29 has to do with these,
um, tax credits that were
monetized back in the 90s, the
land office was an eligible for
tax credits, so uh there was a
deal struck with companies and
with royalties and it's not
around anymore. It, um, uh,
isn't something that we do
anymore, um, but we have to move
money over as part of these
agreements. And so the suspense
language there in section 29
relates to that. Um, we, we wish
we didn't have to deal with it,
but that's essentially what it
is.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, that actually uh made me
then wonder um if the state land
office has looked at, uh, carbon
credits, uh, and, you know,
carbon markets. Uh, absolutely,
Mr. Chairman. So as part of this
conservation leasing, uh, we
actually like, you know, we're
trying to monetize everything
that we would like to, you know,
value or, or incentivize on
state land and so we have uh
looked very personally, I would
say into carbon markets. We
don't necessarily.
uh, that there's a um a place
for them here in New Mexico, but
you know, if you would like to
have further conversation on
anything you know, I would love
to do that with you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, thank
you, Madam Commissioner. Um, you
know, sort of talking about
carbon markets and then leading
into, you know, we're sort of in
a whole new era for energy
production and, uh, you know,
the, let's say transition, um,
with the transition, it comes
two things that I'm curious
about, uh, what your office is
working on. Number one, mining,
uh, because I think we all know
that copper and lithium for, you
know, just to name two, are
critical.
minerals, uh, for the energy
transition and both um are here
in New Mexico. So the first
question is, uh, what is your
office doing to support uh
responsible mining in New Mexico
as both a revenue source, um,
and a way to contribute to uh
the transition, and then um what
uh is your office doing for some
of the newer technologies, um,
you know, do you guys, uh,
Uh, have agrivoltaics on land,
um, are you working on
geothermal, some of those other
opportunities. Thank you.
So, uh, Mr. Chairman and Madam
Vice Chair, uh, as, as it
relates to mining. We do have
some legacy minds that are
already existing on state land.
In terms of any prospective
minds going forward. We, um,
are, are just kind of looking
with this lens of not wanting to
create.
Anything that some future land
commissioner is going to be
responsible for cleaning up, so
we have pretty strict
requirements for how we would
like.
Business to be conducted on
state land. Um, I will give you
an example of something that did
catch our eye, and that was um
this uh
Applicant came in with a request
to mine something called
Pasilon. It's green concrete,
it's supposedly um lower uh
carbon footprint than your
typical concrete and so that is
something that was uh
Agreeable to us and and so we
did work through um some.
terms around that kind of a
lease in terms of things like
geothermal, uh, Mr. Chairman, we
have actually just finished the
draft on a rule change.
To ensure that our practices at
the state land office meet state
statute when it comes to
geothermal development on state
land. We would love to welcome
geothermal development onto
state land. So our first step in
doing that is to update our rule
so that we come into compliance
with state statute and some of
the work that you all have done
very recently around that
industry. Um, we, that, uh,
draft rule will go out to
interested parties,
stakeholders, uh, some companies
who have approached us.
on developing geothermal on
state land, um, and after that
we will undertake an
administrative rulemaking.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Commissioner. Um, I think that,
uh, the geothermal is wonderful,
um, I will say that I think
that, um, you know.
Your office could really be a
national leader, uh, in terms
of, uh, responsible mining, um,
and really working to
demonstrate that, um, mining and
socially and environmentally
responsible practices are not
mutually exclusive, um, and also
that, you know, it has to happen
somewhere, uh, if we're going to
support the energy transition
and, you know, it could be here
in New Mexico done. The
sustainable way, or it could be
done in um Indonesia or the
Congo, uh, with less friendly
practices. Um, so, uh, that's
just a comment on that. Um, and
I certainly hope that you guys
are also looking at some of the
other ways that you could
monetize,
you know, some of the other
technologies that have been
proven, um, and are going to be
required, uh, in this
decarbonization. So thank you
very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Vice Chair, uh,
Madam, thank you very much. A
couple of um quick questions.
One,
The, we all know and you know,
uh, for every barrel of oil
we're bringing up somewhere
between 3 to 5, maybe a little
bit more, uh, barrels of water.
Um, and
I would love for us, and I
think, uh, the innovation and
breadth of experience at the
state land office with you all
and at your sort of leadership,
we have a remarkable opportunity
to engage in how we, um, clean
and reuse water in safe places
in safe ways, displace the need
for new fresh water for, uh, and
leave that fresh water for
agriculture.
for our environment, obviously
for drinking for people. Uh, is
that something where there,
where you see opportunity in
this final 2 years to um
Uh, both economically and
environmentally, uh, make a lot
of progress. So I will say, Mr.
Chairman, that we, um, very much
support uh the use of recycled
produced water in oil and gas uh
processes, um, and, and you
know, we have done that at the
state land office by taking
fresh water off the table for,
for use in the oil field and,
and things like that. So that is
my use of produced water that,
that we support. Um, we're, I'll
just say that we are watching
with great interest.
interest
How this commodity of produced
water uh plays out and how the
state land office can can step
in to to be a player there. I
will say that when the original
produced water bill was passed,
I don't know, now, 3 years ago.
Uh 55 years ago we had, we made
an attempt to amend the state
land office into the bill so
that we could be uh one of the
players in the bill, and
unfortunately, that, that effort
uh was failed, but we, we were
interested in.
Um
You know
Really taking a look at.
What the technology was saying
about how clean the water could
get, what it's potential reuses
could be, um.
Thank you, Madam Commissioner,
and I, uh, as we go through this
session where there's obviously
a particular focus on water from
a number of different areas and
rightfully so. It's a bedrock of
importance to New Mexicans. Uh,
I'm excited to work with you in
your office to find the ways
because there's the sort of the
reward for cleaning and reusing
uh treated produced water in
areas in ways that are safe.
loop systems using less fresh
water for uh new economic
development and the unique role
that the state land Office can
play there, uh, I want to
support that, uh, in any way
possible. And it is a
remarkable, almost
responsibility because Madam
Commissioner,
It seems to me that right now,
even with us,
Very substantially increasing
the amount of uh treated
produced water that's used in
oil and gas operations. The end
result is still almost every uh
all of that is gonna be injected
in the deep water disposal well
either in New Mexico or in
Texas. That's sort of where we
are now, right?
Yeah, so, so we, uh, I think
that opportunity and this may be
sort of a, uh, an important
session on that. Uh, second
question, something, uh,
equally, well, it
really representing the breadth
of the work that you do, um,
whether we call them, however we
refer to them, uh, the horses
that are on state land SLO
parcels that are out in, in
different parts. If those are
managed, they can be a very
significant challenge for you as
a land manager, for uh the
grazing lessee for folks who are
out there hunting and there's
less forage. It seems like this
is another maybe challenge and
also opportunity. Would you
agree, uh, Mr. Chairman,
absolutely. So that is
definitely a challenge that we
face as a land manager, um, in
particular parts of the state,
um, and so we would love to work
with you on that. I know, yeah,
we,
stand in to to partner. That's
awesome. Uh, thank you for that.
I, I'm excited and this
committee really digs in as you
can see members are here after a
very long day, really focused.
Um, I would love as we sort of
move forward, I think you've
proposed a compromise. You've
also proposed a very aggressive
sort of entire shift following
investments at this committee in
the legislature has made over
the your tenure, uh, sort of a
big
perhaps final step. We're,
we'll, we'll move for the LFC
for right now. Uh, I think
you're proposed compromise seems
reasonable. It's probably
there'll be committee members
who want us to think about going
all the way to what the full
sort of request is, there's
gonna be a suite of things that
if we can sort of find that
sweet spot, uh, I think there's,
you know, the committee is, has,
has been and is seems again
ready to support the office.
So, um, and we'll be doing those
working groups in public, uh,
and really wanna say thank you,
uh, your employees who are here,
the workplace and environment
that you and your team have
created speak for itself and uh
really an optome opportunity
this session to make some more
big progress together.
So thank you very much and
thanks to the LSC and of course
to the DFA uh for your diligent
work.
OK.
Mr. Chair, I would move that the
committee adopt the LFC
recommendation with more work to
come.
Right. OK, it's been moved by
Vice Cha Dixon, seconded by
Representative Mohan. Any
opposition to that motion? I
don't see any, uh, thank you
very much.
OK, committee, thanks so much.
Uh, we'll be in subcommittees
tomorrow. We'll be meeting with
subcommittee leadership tomorrow
just to sort of talk through,
wanted to say thank you, great
questions, appreciate the
committee digging in spending
extra time, uh, in its, um, very
much just want to say thank you.
