What we're gonna do first,
before we go to member
introductions, I want to go to
Amanda Dick Petty Amanda is our
new house appropriations and
finance chair, Finance Chief
Chief of staff, she comes to us
from LFC also from Dona Ana
County, which is great, uh and
without further ado, we're gonna
turn it over to Amanda to
introduce herself.
Uh huh. And lead us through the
morning. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Good
morning, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. I am Amanda Dick
Petty. I am your new chief of
staff this year. I want to start
by saying thank you. Um, I say
this a lot. But I am grateful
and I am humbled to be in this
position as Mr Chair mentioned.
I do come from lfc. So I know
almost all of you from my time
at lfc.
Or my time before that working
in the house. Um, I also wanted
to say that I know I have some
big shoes to fill, and I will
show up every single day and I
know we have a very big job, but
it's a very exciting job, and I
know that I would not be here. I
would not be in this position
without the mentorship and the
guidance of people who came
before me, including Bill
Valdez, including David Abbey,
and including director Sally who
hired me at LFC about six years.
Ago. So thank you all.
I'm really excited. I would also
like to introduce the staff for
HFC this year. We have some
folks returning as well as some
new folks you'll see in your
budget binders. We have a staff
directory that looks like this
with everyone's pictures and
names and a sort of brief
overview of what they'll be
handling. Um so you can look at
this for guidance, and I will go
ahead and let Mike Mulligan our
lead analyst start off
introducing the analysts.
Audience. I'm Mike Mulligan.
This will be my fifth year with
house appropriations. And if you
need anything, we're here to
serve you guys. So thank you.
Good morning, Mr Chair, members
of the committee and
distinguished audience members.
Um I'm Scott Roy Ball. I've had
28.3 years of, uh,
State government experience,
including nine years at the
infamous Legislative Finance
Committee.
Good morning. My name is Eric
Soto. I just graduated
university. Um, my first session
here. I'm excited to work with
all of you. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr Chair members
of the committee. My name is Kim
Abate them Martinez and I'm a
retired from the state of New
Mexico. I was an analyst with
the executive side from my past
life.
Mhm.
German members of the committee.
My name's Tom Donnellan. I have
been a, um
Chief finance officer and budget
officer for a number of the pub
blows from the last 20 years and
a couple of municipalities as
well.
And I also like to introduce
Rick May or have Rick Hendrick
is himself and then pass it to
our committee. Analysts.
I'm Rick. May I worked before
the House Republican Leadership
office, working with all the
Republican members of the
committee.
Good morning, Mr Chair, Madam
Vice chair. Members of the
committee. Um, my name is
Shannon Baker. I'm sure you
remember from last year and I
will be your head committee
assistant this year. Do we need
to get somebody to fix this
microphone?
Okay, that
Good morning committee members
Marcello Rodriguez. This is my
fourth year with House
appropriations.
To be here.
Boy. Good morning. Members of
the commission chair Small
Chair Dixon. My name is Jackie
Garcia.
I've been here for one year. I'm
new and it's great to be here.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Mr Chair members.
If there's nothing else you'd
like to hear from staff, we can
go ahead and turn it over to our
first presenter of the morning
that thank you very much.
Amanda. We're gonna do some
member introductions for folks
who are here and just want to
say to all members of the staff.
Thank you very much. We're
incredibly grateful for your
work.
Were excited for what will be a
tough but very, very productive
and fast session as we all know
how we treat staff members of
staff for both, uh, the
Majority and minority is how we
treat each and every member. And
so we just want to say thank you
really appreciate your work
Excited for the session. Okay
with that. I'm going to look to
my right to ask our members to
introduce themselves.
Yeah, Mr Tear they have been
Good morning.
To the members and to the staff.
And first off. I want to wish
you all a very, very happy New
year.
I am Anthony Allison. I
represent District four.
You don't get no more
Northwestern than I do my
district. So good morning,
Looking forward to the 30 days.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr Chairman,
Members of the staff and
governors office and Secretary,
um
Glad to start the year off with
a bang and the snow came in. We
needed that folks downstream are
gonna be very happy that we're
getting that so we can we can
put up with a little bit of
this now. I know. Um, but
representative Montoya, I'm from
District one.
I've got
Most of the northern part of
farming tonight.
From La Plata Plata area to
Aztec, so glad to be here.
Good morning, Mr Chair and
everybody representative. Terror
Luhan. I represent house
district 48 here in the capital
city, and I'm just ready to get
down to business. Let's get it
done. Thank you.
Good morning, everyone. I'm Rep.
Joseph Sanchez from the
Beautiful Espanola Valley from
the big community of Alcalde
represent
Colfax, Morariu, Erebus and
Miguel and House Tomorrow County
and how best to see everyone
again.
Excellent. Thank you. Now we're
going to look to our left will
go to representative pedigree,
please.
Thank you chair and, uh
Hmm. Happy New Year, everyone.
I'm excited to be here back this
year. Looks like we have a lot
of work to do.
I want to thank God for the
moisture that we have been up,
Please. We need all we can get.
Thank you, Um Debbie ceremony
representing District 21 in
Bernalillo County, The Manzano
high school area. I'm looking
forward to a very welcome. Thank
you for being here. Thank you,
Mr Chair. I'm state. Rep. Choi
Garrett. I represent Northwest
Burn Leo County. The Petroglyph
National Monument is the heart
of my district.
And, um
It's just great to be here, and
I just want to remind everybody
that representative Alison's
first name is Anthony. Not
Good morning, Mr Chair, vice
chair and everyone present
today my pleasure to be here.
Snowy day Beautiful
Ah, I represent district 12 in
Albuquerque, Berlioz's county,
which is the heart of the South
Valley and really proud of that
I was born there literally.
Happy to be here, chair. Good
morning, everyone. Mr.
Jack Chatfield District. 67,
Colfax, Curry, Harding Quay, San
Miguel and Union counties.
Everything from rap down to
protect Ellis down the east side
of the state.
Happy to be here.
Really happy to see. Excellent.
Thank you very much. Now we'll
go to ranking member
Good morning, everyone. Gail
Armstrong from Magdalena, New
Mexico. Quite the drive this
morning pretty interesting only
until I got to Santa Fe. So, um,
And, uh, anyway, I represent
House District 49, which is the
largest house district in the
state. Caption Sikora, Valencia
and Sierra. Nice to be here.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Uh am
representative MEREDITH Dixon,
representing House District 20
in Southeast Albuquerque. Thank
you. Excellent. Thank you. All
my name is Nathan small. I'm
proud to represent House
District 36 to get the chair,
House Appropriations and Finance
Committee with just an
outstanding group of members as
we've seen with our outstanding
staff.
And really want to say a very
big thank you to everybody again
just to stress that this will be
a very challenging but very
productive session. Sort of like
the snow, which I didn't see
coming up from Las Cruces until
right around lava Hatta, But we
made it just fine last night.
Okay with that we'll turn it
back to Amanda. And if you'll
take us through our beginning
presentations
Sure. Thank you. Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair. Members of the committee.
First up, You have a review of
your general fund. Revenue
estimate. You all did hear this
in December, but it's a really
nice refresher to remind
ourselves where we are for
revenue and I can turn it over
to our presenter.
Protection.
Good morning, Mr Chair members
of the committee. I'm Stephanie
Chardon Clark, the secretary of
the Taxation and Revenue
Department and with me today as
secretary props with D, F A and
chief economist Leo Delgado from
D F A, as well as Lucinda Cedo,
the chief economist from Texas
and rev. And, um, I think I'll
be very brief going through the
macroeconomic slides to keep you
on track and as this is a review
of the December estimate that
was presented to lfc
Um so I believe we're
Okay, There we go. Okay, so I'll
start on.
Slide four and just quickly
remind you what was reported for
the December estimate about the
baseline forecast. Really? The
the punch line here is that not
a lot changed between the August
estimate in the December
estimate regarding the baseline
forecast from Moody's S and P
and Bieber, Um, both of the
national baseline forecasts are
not expecting a recession there.
just expecting slower positive
economic growth into the
forecast period.
Um, I think I can skip through
some of the next slides. They
just sort of reiterate what I
just said there hasn't been a
lot of change to the forecast
for the macro economy since the
August forecast that goes for
gross GDP. State GDP on slide
six Employment on slides seven
and eight.
Um, slide nine gives you a nice,
um, summary of changes in
employment in New Mexico by
sector and just a reminder that
New Mexico added 17,100 jobs
from October 22 to October 23
nice, strong job growth.
On, um, slide. 10 really can
just see that the New Mexico
unemployment rate is about the
same as the national
unemployment rate.
Slide 11
Um, A fairly important change to
the forecast is that the
forecast for the federal funds
rate has been, um, revise such
that the target fed funds rate
is now expected to remain higher
for a longer amount of time than
it was during the August
forecast.
On slight 13. We move over to
oil. Um the forecast for oil is
is a little nuanced. It was
increased by a few dollars per
barrel for FY, 24 and 25, but
then decreased by a few dollars
per barrel in the out years of
the forecast, So, um, higher in
the near term, lower oil price
and the long term
And then likewise on page 14.
You can see at the bottom of the
table that shows the the
estimate for oil volume
production and the production
volumes are forecast to be lower
than they were in the August
estimate. So overall, it's an
it's a negative, um, adjustment
to the oil forecast.
Um, I think I can skip over the
next slides on oil. They're very
technical, but really, just, um,
pointing out that we should
expect our oil production to
plateau. We've been on this
exponential rise in oil for a
couple of fiscal years, and now
we're expecting more of a
plateau and production to
eventually be coming down and
from that peak level
Um
Go to slide 20, which is
personal income tax, and, um,
for pit, basically, really, it's
on slide, 21. We're showing that
Uh, pit grew 21% in fy 22 it
grew by 9% in FY 23 despite some
legislative changes, and now
we're just we're looking at, um,
like I said about the baseline
forecast positive but slower
economic growth in the forecast
period, so that is shown here in
the pit forecast.
Um, and slide 24. I'm sorry, 25.
We have a similar chart, but for
G R T. Um and again G R T has
grown very steadily over the
last couple of fiscal years, and
now we're expecting slower
positive growth in the grt
revenue.
Um onto slide 27 and on. We talk
in detail about the severance
tax and rents and royalties,
revenues, energy related
revenues, and I think probably
the main takeaway here is that
although I said a minute ago
that the oil forecast is down,
um the general fund is is
basically shielded and insulated
from that downward revision to
oil because of the statutory
reserve structure that the
Legislature and the governor
have put in place in recent
years. Um, that downward
revision to oil is
Being absorbed by
Estimated transfers to the
severance tax Permanent fund,
the early childhood trust fund
in the Tax Stabilization
Reserve.
And with that, in record time
I'll turn over to Secretary
promised.
Good morning, Mr Chairman,
Members of Committee. My name is
Wayne Crops and Mr Secretary. If
you could pull, Yeah.
The Yeah. The microphone. Yes,
sir. Thank you.
Is that better? Good morning, Mr
Chairman, Members of Committee.
My name is Wayne props on the
secretary of the Department of
Finance and Administration.
Happy New Year.
I, too have been advised to be
brief and brief. I shall be
Starting on page 30. This
committee Mr Chairman and
executive.
Have been discussing quite a bit
that revenues have been are
starting to moderate.
The unprecedented
Level of revenue growth that we
saw in and you see this on slide
30.
In years Fight 2223 and 24.
Are now returning to what I
would call back to normal.
For FY, 25, 26, 27 and 28
revenue growth is supposed is
protected to be in the 2 to 3%
range. Um, I recall Mr Chairman
many years ago when I was in LSE
analysts at two and 3% revenue
growth would have been
considered.
Almost unprecedented at that
time, but now they are normal.
I think it's healthy that we
recognize that revenue growth.
Projections are moderating, but
also recognize that we still
expect to see revenue growth
into the next into the near
future. I was reading Mr
Chairman, before I came over
here this morning, an article
about the Arizona Legislature
which is convening today and
faces of $1 billion shortfall in
their budget.
So instead of what we will be
discussing over the next 30 some
days or so of additional
revenue, many states in the
country are not only returning
to normal but actually basic
facing budget shortfalls. We are
in a very unique position in New
Mexico. In fact, I'm not sure I
know of any other state in the
In a country that isn't in a
position that new Mexico is in
with continuing to see
increasing revenues. One slide
32
Mr Chairman, members of the
Committee for FY.
25, As you know, Recurring
revenue is forecasted to grow at
2.2.
Percent.
Grow by 2.2% over FY 24 levels
and new money projection for FY
25 is $3.48 billion.
Slide 33 I would note.
The one change in the forecast
from July and basically July is
that in FY 24 estimated reserves
transfers etcetera is projected
at 9 906 million. I believe in
July when we reported to the
Legislative Finance Committee
that was close to 600 million,
so that is the one number that
has changed slightly.
Mr Chairman, I won't go to in
any detail on slide 34 in terms
of risk to the forecast. You can
foretell the future as well as I
can miss Chairman on side 35 as
you know our economists and a
lot of time, um, between
themselves as well as with our
Outside control consultants,
ensuring that we do look
Both the upside and the downside
to the forecast, like 35
demonstrates the stress testing
that is done both on the upside
and the downside.
For the consensus revenue
forecast and then on slide. 36
Mr Chairman, the General fund
Revenue versus the tenure trend
is is covered in that slide.
And with that, Mr Chairman, I
will wrap up as well.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Good morning, Mr Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is the smile Tourist. I'm,
the chief economist for the
Legislative Finance Committee.
And thank you for having some
patients with me. I'm gonna try
to keep my place and drive at
the same time. This power point
which, actually, we need to make
the transition to a power point
here soon, but, uh, the
presentation that you heard is
more narratively described in
the lfc brief that looks like
this. Hopefully, it's in your
packets.
And I'm just going to highlight
go through the brief and
highlight a few things, uh, to
sort of reiterate, or bring your
attention to some of the issues
that the secretary has brought
up.
Um as as both secretary, Second
Clark and secretary props
mentioned this revenue estimate
has slight changes that make it
difficult to describe. But in
essence, we are still at a high
level of revenues but are out
year trajectory has downshifted.
so we've experienced almost 20%
growth for two years in a row.
We expect that to slow to 10% in
the current fiscal year, where
in
And and before we thought maybe
4% in the years after that,
we're seeing that closer to 2%
in the next year and then 3% in
the years following so high high
levels remains, but the outwards
trajectory has flattened out a
good amount.
Better.
Um, on this slide on Page two.
We try to illustrate for you all
the makeup of the revenue
change. You can see that in FY
20 for the red and purple bars
here represent oil and gas
related revenues. They still
make up a significant amount of
the growth in FY 24. And of
course, those levels are what
what we grow from in the out
years, so oil and gas still
providing, like I said, two
thirds of the revenue growth
here in the out years, though
it's interesting to note that
interest or investment earnings
on both the General fund and
from our
Permanent funds that distributed
the General fund.
Become the major driver of
general fund growth in the
future, which is what we as
economists really like to see,
because those are the most
stable sources in the General
fund, and now they are also the
fastest growing source is
moving on. Skip over most of
this on Page three. You can see
change in employment at the
bottom here. This just
illustrates a little bit more of
what the secretary was talking
about. In the point that we're
making about the economy is
slowing down or seeing that
economically and in our
revenues.
You can see the green bars 22
blue bars, 23 and 24 employment
growth. You can see how much
lower that growth is, especially
as we near that full employment,
so those leaps and bounds we
were seeing and personal income
taxes are slowing along with
that employment growth. Um,
speaking a little bit more to
oil here in the middle of Page
four.
We have recounts index to pre
pandemic levels, and for a while
there, they had exceeded our pre
pandemic levels. Since then,
we've actually dropped back down
closer to the around 100 mark,
and so that's contributing to
that slowdown in oil production,
and you can see the the oil
production growth rate here at
the bottom of Page four. We were
leaps and bounds. The the
Fastest growing oil producing
state in the country, since we
have come down pretty
dramatically to below 10% and
and getting closer and closer to
that 0% growth line there, um,
matching North Dakota and Texas
on on Page five here at the top,
This is a graph of our monthly
oil production in barrels per
day and
As the secretary mentioned,
We're seeing that rapid growth
turned into more of a plateau
Over the last six months, we've
actually seen declines in
average, uh, barrels per day
produced in New Mexico. It's
picked up a little bit in
September, and it's about flat
in October. I just looked at the
data yesterday, so we're still
seeing that plateau continue.
We're not seeing a resume a
resumption of the growth we had
been
Um, skipping over the grocery
seats tax. The growth is broad
Based. In previous years we had
seen actually mining driving our
grocery seats. Tax growth. It's
now construction and retail
trade and actually professional,
scientific and technical
services. So somewhat of a
reversal in what we're seeing in
gross receipts tax from that
mining to construction and
professional services.
Um, I do want to highlight on
Page seven. Here at the top.
This speaks a little bit to
what? Both the secretaries were
talking about Those changes in
tax in the tax code. In this
case, the reduction in gross
receipts. Tax rates are
contributing to our revenue
slowing down, so we had been
seeing gross receipts tax
exceeding the 10 year trend. The
blue line there representing the
10 year trend, the black line
representing our grocery seats,
tax collections.
We were growing so quickly that
we were seeing that 10 year 10
You all have enacted a quarter
rate reduction in the growth
receipts tax. We're seeing that
now come back down to the 10
year trend as those cuts take
effect.
I also really want to highlight
these two revenues here. This is
oil and gas, emergency school
tax and federal mineral leasing
payments, both related to oil
and gas production and and taxes
and revenues, and what you'll
notice is the total collections
are the combined bars and in FY
23. We actually had a peak year.
So if if you take the blue bars
represent the amount in the
General fund and the orange
bars, which represent the
amounts going to the early
childhood trust fund.
The combined total is what we
received in the year.
And that was our peak year and
in FY 24. We actually saw a
pretty pretty significant
decrease when you expect that to
continue in FY, 2526 and 27
before climbing a little bit in
28, and so what I really want to
highlight for you is the impact
of those distribution
mechanisms. You all have done an
excellent job insulating the
General fund from swings and oil
and gas.
And without those mechanisms
will actually would have seen a
decrease in general fund revenue
and we would have been having a
much different conversation.
This legislative session we
would have been talking about
what do we do now that our
revenues are declining, so just
speaks to the good work that has
been done on insulating the
General fund from that
volatility, um from oil and gas.
And and, of course, preparing
for the future as well.
This graph here on Page eight.
Is just an illustration of the
point I made earlier. The green
bars reflect investment earnings
in the General fund. You can see
they are the largest growth in
the General fund. And and as I
pointed out severance taxes
actually declining here, But
because of those insulating
mechanisms, the general fund is
actually well protected.
Uh, keep on moving here until
pit revenues. The same, uh,
conversation as I was having
with grocery seats, taxes, lots
of personal income tax
reductions or credits have been
enacted that have brought those
collections back towards the 10
year trend so again, passing on
a lot of that revenue strength
back to taxpayers.
And you can see their tax
expenditures growing in pit and
have
Resulted in that return to
trend.
Um, with that, Mr Chair, I'll
talk a little bit more about the
Stress test here. The blue line
representing our current
baseline expectations for the
General Fund as secretary props
mentioned those bars above and
below represent what we think
could happen in the General fund
In the event of certain
scenarios, the lowest scenario
is actually a low oil price
scenario, which, of course,
leads to lower production in
that event. Um, we actually
expect like a $2.5 billion loss
over two years.
Gets closer to 3.5 billion over
the three year period. But these
are not additive. So if you see
that there's actually a decline
from a potential moderate
recession if the moderate
recession coincided with the low
oil price scenario, you'd have
to add those two together to get
at that impact.
And then just highlighting these
trends as well. We saw that
gross receipts, tax and personal
income tax were above trend and
have since returned to the
trend. That's not the case with
severance taxes or rents and
royalties, they remain
significantly above trend and
that's really contributing to
the total General fund remaining
above trend as you can see.
Um, I want to highlight if the
stress test wasn't enough of an
indication of the risks that oil
and gas posed to the General
fund, this graph right here,
which shows are different
production trajectories, as
estimated by rice that energy
under different price scenarios
and the price scenarios really
very widely by source. It's very
difficult to predict and based
on where are prices end up? We
could have very significantly
different outcomes in terms of
oil production, and, of course,
that that also means for state
revenues.
So just keeping in mind that
prices is a now a very important
always has been, but continues
to be an important driver of the
state's revenues.
Um, Lastly, I'll just I'll
highlight
We have continued to talk about
over the interim, the impact of
oil and gas on the Capitol
Outlay program. Of course, the
general fund is very reliant.
But capital outlay is even more
so. It's almost 100% reliant on
oil and gas related revenues.
And so as that oil and gas
revenues climbs, So does our
debt capacity, and so does our
expected debt load. So this is
something that ratings agencies
are looking at that we've heard
heard directly from them.
Uh, our per capita debt is
expected to increase
dramatically. That's something
we're keeping an eye on but also
the longevity of our capital
program as we make many more
investments in the near term,
especially as our capacity
climbs being able to maintain
those assets even when oil and
gas declines in the future is a
challenge that we're currently
with that Mr Charles close with
something
For the audience here on the
last page, we have rolled out a
new dashboard interactive
dashboard and download
downloadable data set of our
revenue estimates on the LFC
website. You can find that at nm
legis dot gov slash lfc or on
this presentation. We have a
live link here for anyone who's
watching the line.
Thanks And it works. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you very much,
Mr Torres. Thank you. All
secretaries, chief economist.
We're going to go now to
questions. We're going to start
off with representative Wuhan
and go from there.
From behind, please. Thank you.
Thank you for the presentation
again. Um
There's just a lot to this. Um
what? We're really what I'm
really, really focused on are
the balances of the whole
balance of all of this,
including our taxes, including
our
Just everything you discussed as
an economist and really kind of
some of the general messages
that we're giving in the economy
slowing down, I guess.
But when we're saying things
were at the highest peak of
revenues that we've ever seen,
and we're seeing a plateau
I don't necessarily believe that
we are returning back to normal.
I think that we are in a new
face. Um and so if you can
expand, um what That means.
Um, because
We're plateau owing at a level
that we've never seen before. So
I don't want mismatch messages
to be given out. I want us to
really focus on what that means
for our state moving forward,
and I do see that it you know,
just just the way that you've
broken. This down is is
incredible. And for us to
capture a lot of this is, um,
still learning curve, and I'm
one of those that still
learning. I think all of us are
always learning so
If you can just capture that,
and what that means. We are
plateau at a level that we are
versus
You know, returning to normal
for New Mexico. Normal for me,
means that we are at these low
levels and this volatility
that's that's a constant where
we have put in a lot of
protections for our states. So
What does that mean? When we're
running these these risks and
the stress tests for our state
and including those components,
are we really at this high level
of risk? Are we in the future or
in a place where we can make
really incredible investments of
future investments, keeping our
tax code words apps or not? Were
those adjustments? Thank you, Mr
Chair.
Mr Chair and representative Han
Yes, a lot of a lot of parts to
that question, So, so I'll start
with the the new level. I think
I think Secretary props was
getting at the levels of growth
are more typical of the trend.
That's certainly true. But your
point is well taken that
Those levels of growth are at a
much higher level so we can
sustain the investments that you
all have made in a lot of public
services offered to new
Mexicans.
We don't We don't foresee any of
that needing to be pulled back.
But the new growth the new
budget growth, for example, um
will likely have to be a lot
slower than it has been in order
to, um
Daring to to continue that to
ensure ensure that that
continues to be the case and as
far as you know, risks to the
forecast. Excuse me on
On the stress test here Page 12.
I think a good example of this
is of the as you as you
mentioned the insulating
mechanisms that the investments
that you have made that have
helped to reduce the level of
risk If you look at this table
here
These are the details of the
stress test the amount that the
General fund declines by his
line five. So that's $281
million in one year in FY 24
$1.4 billion in FY 25 and so on.
But if you look at line 11, this
is the amount that
Is also being lost in revenue
that is not experienced by the
General Fund. 840 million in FY
24 1.7 billion in FY 25. So if
you all hadn't made those
investments
It would actually be
3 billion in one year in FY 25 1
billion in FY 24 we'd be talking
about, you know potential impact
of 7 $8 billion rather than $3.5
billion. So you know about 50%
of the impact has been born by
those mechanisms that you all
have created. Thank you. That's
that's really good, uh, piece of
information and I want, you know
as you're talking to the public
and everybody for us to really
capture that.
And what this really means for
this budget year and moving
forward. I thank you so much. I
can't stress how much we're how
lucky we are to have, Um all of
you here and you working for New
Mexico. Um, Secretary Did you
want to add anything with our
tax? Um
Any any kind of tax changes or
anything that would
As we're moving to what? I'm
These adjustments that we need
to put in or not growing as fast
as we'd like to.
Anything you'd like to add as
far as as
What? Our tax codes some
adjustments or anything like
that. That need to happen for
our state. Mr. Chair. Um so, Mr
Chair and representative Luhan.
Thank you for the question. And
I think the chief economist from
LF FC did a really great job
answering your question already,
Um and I I think I would only
add to it that
I think this is obvious to the
members of the committee. You
know the reason our new money
for the last couple of years has
been so large is that as
policymakers you and the
governor together have
recognized that our revenue
growth has been at an
unsustainable pace, and we need
to plan for the future not only
through higher reserves, but
also through, um, restraining
Unsustainable long term
recurring growth, and so each
year that you have intentionally
Uh, growing the recurring budget
at a level that is less than
that year's recurring revenue.
We've been adding two new money
so in the future, if if this
revenue estimate holds, and we
see this plateau growth, and
then someday we see oil and gas
revenues decline and interest
earnings go up.
Um, you know, we're we've been
trying here to build reserves
and build these trust funds and
other places that we've It's all
to build a bridge to, you know,
whatever Future scenario we have
That is post peak oil in New
Mexico. So that's all I would
add as far as our tax code and
our tax policy. Um
I think we've We've done a good
job in the last five years,
delivering a lot of very
meaningful recurring income tax
cuts, um in income tax cuts
through the working families,
tax credit and Lichter think a
lot of things we've done that
have made our tax base more
progressive. We've also expanded
the grocery seats, tax and level
the playing field through
Internet sales and things like
that. Um, I think we can
continue to do more in the
upcoming session to provide well
targeted.
Tax relief and also make sure
that our reserves remain high
and take care of a lot of non
recurring needs on both the
expenditure side and you know,
across state and local
government.
Perfect. That's what I have. I
just want to fuller scope for
everyone that's listening in for
us to myself to to to grasp and
you're just
Everything you're saying is what
I what I've been reading and
what I believe So Thank you so
much. Thank you very much
represented Johan. Next, we're
gonna go to represent dela Cruz
and we'll go to represent check.
Thank you. Mr Chairman, Can you
expand a little bit done on the
The forecast for capital, you
know, for most of our residents
are taxpayers.
Capital is where the rubber
meets the road for them.
And that's where they see
government at work the most. I
mean, short of schools. Can you
expand a little bit on that?
Here start
Um, Mr Chair and representative
accrues. Absolutely. Um so
You know?
The capital, a process
Is determined in part by a
forecast of oil and gas, which
which is already a difficult
thing to do. And so those oil
and gas revenues specifically
the severance tax
Goes into the severance tax
bonding fund. We
Do an estimate on how long we
expect those revenues to last.
and then we estimate our
capacity to issue debt supported
by those revenues.
And so you know, as as these
revenues climbed dramatically,
so does the capacity because our
ability to pay that debt grows
with the revenue in that fund,
So that's where we're seeing
that expected capacity climb
very quickly. But as Secretary
Chardon Clark mentioned, we know
or be included in our long term
estimates in July that we see a
time.
Maybe not clear yet when FY 28
fy 30 to win New Mexico may
reach its peak oil production.
And so the question becomes. How
do we continue to issue more
capital or even any capital? If
we've exhausted our capacity in
the future by committing to a
significant amount of debt now
that then has to be supported by
declining revenues in the
future, So that's something that
we've been thinking about a lot
at the LFC and and actually with
the Board of Finance and Faye.
Is. How can we address that? How
can we address both the rapid
build up in debt, both in the in
the event of a fallen oil, you
know, are we Are We sure that we
can continue to pay our debt? We
want to make sure that we can,
but also, how can we begin
transitioning to a new revenue
source potentially for capital
in the future, especially when
the
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Is there
gonna be any, uh
Legislation this year around
creating a legacy fund that
would address some of these
capital issues, particularly
around roads.
Mr Sharon and I thank you. I
think, uh, representative just
jump in. I think, um, um, they
Mr Torres can speak to lfc
sponsored legislation, but much
of the other legislative forum
sort of would be our like our
province. More so, But, yeah,
please continue. Thank you, Mr
Manalo. That that I think that
will work. Thank you, sir.
Thank you very much Represent
dela Cruz. Next we'll go to
represent Chatfield, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Last year. We were very
fortunate.
To be able to do our capital
outlay without selling our
Bonds.
And I also saying that even
though percent of of increases
leveled out when you're looking
at a percentage of this much
larger budget
It's more money than a
percentage of a small budget.
So is there this year? Any
chance that we could do the
same Mr Chairman, members of
committee and representative
after world if you're
If you're asking whether or not
the executives couple outlay,
um, recommendation will be
funded through General fund
again this year.
The answer is yes, there are. I
think two projects.
One for the executive office
building and another for the
rest. Historic restoration of
the baton building that we're
proposing to fund through
severance tax bonds, But the
rest of the executives
approximately $850 million
Capital outlay proposal this
year. Well, thank you, Mr
Chairman. That's good news.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Representative Chatfield. Next,
we're gonna go to representative
Allyson and Representative
Sanchez represent Allison,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
My question is on the oil
production.
The oil production on the Navajo
nation. Is that included in the
state. Uh, production records,
revenue and all that.
Hmm.
Yes.
Mr Chairman, representative,
representative Allyson. So, the
forecast estimates and includes
production for federal ends and
state lines. Okay, Thank you for
that, Mr Terror. The reason why
I ask is within the past couple
of weeks There was a pipeline
that was ruptured in my own
community of Shiprock.
And they estimated that they
lost 1500 barrels of oil, and it
has been leaking for a couple of
days before, uh, people with
authority finally came to do
something about it. So who
suffers the revenue? Is that the
Neverhood nation because they
own
The pipeline under the Navajo
nation, oil and gas or the
state, or do they both suffer
the revenue?
Mr Deer.
Mr Chair, representative.
Elephant. So, um, I would say
probably both. It would depend
on where that production
originated. Who? The producer
was where it was going, But I
think it'd be a safe assumption
to say both would suffer the
revenue loss.
Okay. Thank you for that. Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much personality
represents Sanchez, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Just a few
questions. Um
You know, we're gonna get
presented the the two budgets
here soon, and unfortunately, I
didn't get to go to too many
olive sea meetings, but
I know at some point forecasts
are showing that we're going to
plateau and, um
I guess. One of my concerns is a
just growing programs and
departments instead of, uh
Feeling existing needs. I know
there's a lot of this is
probably one time funding that
we should be spending a man
reoccurring things like
Have a lot of schools in my
district that are in horrible
condition.
I guess. At some point, I'd like
to see us investing more in
schools and roads,
Infrastructure. Um
Where I live. Everyone has
septic tanks. You can't drink
the water. Um
Things like that. At some point,
I would hope that this committee
and the
The different departments start
looking at improving our
infrastructure and using that
really one time money that's not
really recurring money into a
Improving the lives of people
that are here now and, uh,
I just wanna make that comment.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much. Representative
Sanchez. Next, we're going to go
to representatives on
Okay. Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
Thank you. Great presentation.
Um and I don't mind hearing it
over and over again because
something else sinks in. Um so
thank you, Um
First. I really appreciate the
emphasis on the debt load and
capital outlay discussion very
helpful for us to understand,
and I'm sure I'll have questions
moving along on that, Um
On page eight of the money
matters. Um, there is a chart
showing the corporate income tax
and the film tax credit.
And I just wanted to make sure
that I understood correctly.
Um, Mr Chair, and, um Izzy and
probably Secretary Chardon
Clark. So right now, um, so the
red is the film tax credit and
the Blue is the corporate income
tax and
It looks to me as though as we
move forward in fiscal year, 28
Will sort of be approaching not
quite half
Of the corporate income tax
being rebated.
To film tax credits and my
following that correctly.
Mr Chan, Representative Dixon?
Yes. The combined bars represent
total estimated corporate income
tax collections. The Red bar,
therefore, leaving the net
amount to the General fund in
Blue.
Um, Mr Chair? Um and Mr Torres,
so
And this is the corporate income
tax sort of assumes that we
don't have explosive growth. In
other
Industries. Is that correct? I
mean, sort of staying constant.
Mr Chair. Explosive growth is a
good way to put it. We don't
expect I don't remember in this
forecast any standout industry
in particular, it does expect
growth sort of in general across
industries.
Thank you, Mr Chair and Mr
Torres, and so that would just
sort of reiterate for me. The
need for us to expand. You know,
as we talk about economic
diversification, um and our
reliance on oil and gas, um you
know that. Perhaps we want to
make sure we're investing in
other
Industries that are also
providing revenue.
Because film and tech film does
provide a great source of
revenue, but we want to make
sure that we're increasing some
of those others.
And Mr Chair representatives,
And I also just caveat that a
lot of our businesses in New
Mexico are paying under the
personal income tax and may not
be showing up here in the
corporate income tax. So just
keep that in mind that
The corporate income tax is not
a full pick, Mr Chair and and
Vice chair, Dixon. I'll just add
it agree with that. Um, I'll
also just say that the corporate
income tax is one of the
toughest to forecast so in
general, in any forecast, you'll
probably see um, a guesstimate
of slow positive growth, but
also our corporate income tax in
New Mexico is heavily tied to
oil and natural gas.
So when you when we say that oil
and natural gas revenues are
sort of plateau, owing, so would
be the corporate income tax.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Cherry.
Thank you, Secretary and Izzy
and that actually leads to my
final question, Which is I
appreciate all of the mechanisms
that have been put in place to
insulate the General fund from
the volatility. I think it's
tremendous and really just a
testament to the hard work that
that you all have done in sort
of supporting the policy
decisions that have gotten us to
this point.
However, my question is
What would happen?
If we were to stop drilling oil
and gas
Tomorrow.
To our budgets and
representative Dixon.
So, uh, I think actually, the
executive presentation has a
great slide on this. Thank you.
Yeah. You read my mind. So this
is the production curve for oil
wells in in in New Mexico, But
this is not uncommon across the
country. And what you're seeing
here is that in those first few
months that are welcomes online.
Most of the oil is being
produced.
And so there's a rapid decline
in the oil produced as the well
ages and so you would expect if
new drilling work to stop that
are existing wells would decline
rapidly, and so would our total
oil production so you can see
right. There's maybe a fraction
of that Maybe a
Maybe 20% 10% of our oil and gas
production could remain in New
Mexico, so maybe a good good
equivalent would be to take 20%
of our revenues or or I guess
losses of 80%. I think that
would be a good off the top of
my head estimation.
Uh,
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Mr Torres. So a loss of 80% of
our revenues.
Oil and gas related to oil and
gas related revenues. Excellent.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr Chair. Thank you represented
Dixon. We're going to go to our
advice. Share Represent brown,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you all. So I represent the most
prolific oil and gas legislative
district in the nation. It's um
Eddie, and so so much of this
additional mystery
Um
The amounts of money that have
gone back to Eddie Lee County so
much given to the state for
revenue, which everybody gets to
enjoy.
Precious little comes back and
so, for example, with capital
outlay last year statewide
Capital outlay.
Lee County got $11 million, and
so other
Places in the state. We're
getting 60 mil over the board,
but
Point is
Eddie and Lee. It's well past
time that they receive
Back.
A greater portion of what they
sent to the state.
I believe there are only five or
sing more in terms of State
River, so the needs are great.
The infrastructure is stressed
oil and gas traffic in
particular is above pre pandemic
bubbles at this time.
And, um, we just can't
Keep waiting in, so we have
another. Basically this
Let's go around. Um
Again, Um
It's it's not reaching the
places where it is desperately
using all this good revenue.
And so I'd like to see something
in our budget that basically
rewards the hardworking people
of southeastern New Mexico.
We have some road projects that
we've been waiting on. The money
is not showing. Uh people are
dying. People are getting
injured. It's
It's most and I wish and that
this isn't a message. I hope the
executive will here.
Someone in her office I hope is
listening in. We have got to
take care of the people who were
taking care of the state and I
do have one other question. I
will question I guess.
I look at the
Projected plateau owing of
revenue, and I think that's
probably realistic.
But we are in a very volatile
time Geopolitically and I
believe things could fall apart
much faster.
Then we think they might
And so I know you do stress
testing and all that, but I'm
going to be a little bit on the
conservative side here and
suggest that we
Hold back on the spending.
And I believe if I read notes
things correctly here, the
governor wants to increase
spending by 10%.
In a period that's projected to
have lower revenue. And so it's
not sustainable that way. And so
we've got to
He's smart about this and be
realistic about what we have to
work with.
I know a number of us, Mr
Chairman or working on a
transportation trust fund Bill.
Um, trying to take some of this
surplus money and put it
In an account to trust fund for
to to gain some revenue. Over
time. I have a suggestion in my
bill to put in some additional
revenue sources to keep that
Clumped up.
Like the Education Trust fund
since it was started, so
I hope that the committee, the
Legislature executive
But honestly, I represent a lot
of attention.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much. For present Brown
Represent pedigree, please.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you all very much for the
presentation.
With respect, Mr Chairman and
vice chair with the question the
vice chair asked. What if we
stop drilling tomorrow?
I think we got to a point that
80% of the revenue.
And and so in in. I got one head
shaking, shaking no over there,
so I just want to be clear with
the lost revenue with the
reduction that goes almost 70%
of that. Whatever that value is,
comes from all the gas.
And I understand what you're
saying.
Your charts and what I actually
see in daily production. What I
see in what happens with out
there.
They don't see the tape Wells
that were predicting
And we can have a deeper
discussion.
My mom Mr Chair and represented
Brown's comments. Uh, agree
we're
We are the top.
And have been for some time. The
top producing Lee County Eddy
County Representatives statement
with 3 million
Take 11,000,007 0.5 million And
so there is
Lack of of what needs to be done
down there. We have specifically
one road truck traffic.
Is comparable. I have 40 between
lane traffic and in an accident
basis as well.
We've been dancing around that
with the D O. T. For
Five years now, 380, probably
just as well. Completion of 62.
The reworked that none needs to
happen on New Mexico 18 the
damage done to the road from the
windmills.
There's a significant amount of
work to be done on that. And I
hope
Our secretary of the D, O. T and
district to engineer comes back
with some significant answers on
how they intend to
P's part of the state, just
bringing in
Majority of the revenue. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you very
much represented pedal group.
Um, represent Montoya, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
Easy. I guess this question
prior for you.
Um
Looking at the chart that you
showed us, um and that is
accurate. The production at the
very beginning is the
Is where we're getting really
are funds.
Um so the a moratorium on
drilling it would do that as far
as direct
Oil and gas revenue.
Um, is he with those?
Um would that reflect all of the
service industry dollars would
that reflect
Uh, payroll with that that
That is taxable.
Um
I and I, and I'm sure it
doesn't and that's really hard
to mix together.
And that's really the point I'm
trying to make is
If 50% ish of the budget right
now.
Which I think is probably a
little low. Uh
Is attributed oil and gas. I
think that's low because of
What it doesn't represent. What
it doesn't represent is
Some of the service industry.
But beyond that,
Um, uh, I grew up in a in
What was the previous, uh,
natural gas boom.
In San Juan County.
And I feel your pain
representative Brown as far as
when when we were producing the
large share of the state budget.
I think at one point we're
getting 10 cents on the dollar
back so
The infrastructure is taking a
hit and because it happened to
us as well, So I feel your pain.
Um
But we owned a bakery.
I was one of one of the
businesses we own. But my my mom
and dad would joke when
everybody asks what business do
you have? They'd say, Well,
we're in the oil and gas
industry.
And the reason was that's where
all the customers
Came from
And I would suggest to follow up
on representative Dixon's
questioning.
Um, I think the hit we We
probably need to do a little bit
of
Dynamic scoring.
To figure out what would really
happen.
If we put a moratorium on
drilling and if, if if oil and
gas were to go away
Beyond just oil and gas revenue.
I would like to see
What we would some sort of
study. Take place to see what
would really happen because I
guarantee you those communities.
That have grocery stores and
restaurants and hardware stores
and contractors who are building
homes. Um
Uh,
That that would be a much bigger
hit.
And to be in one of those
communities where
San Juan County has been was
fortunate that we had coal mines
as well and power plants.
And Mr Chair. Those
Are are going out the door as
well, then, right along with the
Navajo middle class is leaving
with those jobs.
Um
But
We have benefited from being a
regional shopping center.
What has saved the community.
Has been people who are
traveling from 100 miles from
any direction to come and shop
in San Juan County. So the money
you're still coming in, But the
jobs are not the same. Their
service industry jobs so
People are not getting paid as
well.
But
As far as government goes,
they're surviving.
Other communities are not in the
same city down south, the
communities that they're not
regional shopping hubs. Matter
of fact, people knows
communities are traveling to
Albuquerque or El Paso or
Or Lubbock.
Midland.
To shop.
And
I would suggest that
If this if we were to
Really do away with oil and gas
drilling going forward.
Cities of Albuquerque would take
a big hit because people from my
community are not going to be
traveling there to go shopping.
You know people from from from
the Southeast or not going to be
traveling to Albuquerque for a
weekend.
To get their kids school
supplies.
So, Mr Chair, I I Maybe this is
an official request, but I'd
like to see us do
Especially since we're seeing
some bills. I think there's even
one that we're expecting for
this year, too.
To literally discussed doing
away with oil and gas
production.
Um, I'd like to. I'd like to put
our
Experts.
To work on.
Some dynamic scoring, see what
would really happen? Not just
not just the numbers, it's easy
to say.
80% of oil and gas revenue would
go away.
But I'd like to see what would
happen with all of the other
industries that are either that
are related and those that are
not related.
But it would be grt dollars tax
dollars. That would go away. It
would be, um, purchase of new
homes and those grt dollars that
would go away payroll that would
go away. So, um, I think we need
to do that. If we're gonna We're
gonna be making these decisions.
We really need to have this
information in our hands. So
thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
very much.
Welcome. Uh, I did not put extra
batteries in my microphone
Promise. Thank thank you very
much represented Montoya. They
don't see any other questions.
I'll have a few wanna say a big
thank you to the committee for
great questions. Briefly.
Panelists first Madam Secretary
on page 21 sort of within the
tax realm.
You've said it, but just so it's
very clear.
Over the past five years.
Overall, especially on the pit
side. How much have we reduced
our tax revenue through, um,
reduction.
Um, Mr Chair. Thank you for that
question, And I think there
might be a table in the lfc
brief that gives the fiscal
impact of each of the individual
pit reductions, but well is he
is navigating to that. I'll say
that we've made a couple of
different rounds of expansions
to the working families. Tax
credit. We've expanded the low
income comprehensive tax rebate.
Created the child care tax
credit and expanded it again
last session. Um and let's see,
I'll go to Izzy to present his
work on this table where they're
all laid out.
Thank you, Mr Chan. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. Personal income
tax specifically is the age line
in the middle on a recurring
basis over half a billion
dollar, you know, credits or
reductions, but on top of that,
um I think we're close to two or
3 billion in non recurring pit
rebates as well which we're
missing a few years of rebates
here, but
Another 700 million. And if
that's correct, OK, thank you.
And if you if you give us a
summary, we don't have to go
through it now on the G R T
side, um or if you have it off
the top of your head. That's
great, too. Mr. Chair on the GR
Teesside. We've now implemented
a one quarter percent cut. They
were implemented 1/8 and 1/8
over two fiscal years.
And I, the estimate has changed
a little bit, but roughly
speaking each 1 8% in Grt
probably reduces revenue by
about 232 120 million something
in that neighborhood. So we've
we've reduced the recurring G R
T by somewhere around 440, or
450 million so far.
Got it. Okay. Thank you, madam.
Madam Secretary. Thank you, Mr
Torres. And so we're not off
base when we say roughly a
billion dollars in, um, tax
cuts tax, uh, reductions over
the past five years. Sort of.
That's all being factored in
here. Correct? Uh, Secondly, um,
going to page
I think it's 33. We seem to go
through this recently. We've
seemed to go through it where we
end the session right around 30%
reserves. We come back into
sections sess session at 45,
plus percent reserves. Do what
we anticipate that happening
again in FY 26 Karen represent a
small
No.
Look forward to hearing what
secretary process to say. But I
think, uh, contributing factor
has been these reserve
transfers, which are built in a
little bit here. Um, but
appropriations that you all have
been making that are expected to
come out in one fiscal year.
Don't make it out in that fiscal
year, and that has been
resulting in large transfers to
the Tax Stabilization reserve,
which has more of a lockbox.
So as you all attempt to spend
down again in the next year,
that's not available there for
you, and that's kind of built
the tax stabilization reserve
higher and higher and higher. I
think that in my opinion,
certainly a contributing factor
getting those appropriations out
on time. Maybe a solution. Um,
also, uh, you know a fixed to
the There's a current waterfall
mechanism where it spills over.
Check. Making changes to that
could also be a fix.
Mr Chairman Members Committee. I
certainly agree with that. I
know this committee will see has
expressed concern years that has
been well aware Mr Chairman the
state and I dont growth in our
own rev flowing into the state
of many.
But I do. I do believe it was
appropriated for
Has been our colleagues to do
that. I do think the last point
Tax stabilization fund. I think
it's a brilliant mechanism. I
don't know who thought it up,
but somebody because we have a
significant
Um, but I don't think it was
designed the amount of revenues
to look at
How that how that how those
triggers are set up, Justin.
Great. Thank you. Thank you both
very much moving representative
Dela Cruz, I think brought up a
very important area on the
capital funding. Of course you
highlighted that Mr Torres.
Uh um.
I have just say we should be
considering legislation about
how to structure and this is
sort of coming from our
economists and financial side of
the the shop as it were. We need
to consider alternative revenue
sources because we can't
Count on General fund in 3456
years time, especially nor can
we necessarily really trust the
severance tax bonding system
that it currently relies on and
you know, I know it's a sort
short session. I would love to
see legislation at least brought
forward that begins to try to
fix that this year.
Um and I think I'll leave it at
that and let
Mr Chair will be happy to help
you with that.
Great. Thank you very much for
that, Um
The I guess a couple of other
things that have come up the
plateau, I think really
appreciate the visual. You know,
we continue to see production
increases were over 56 million
barrels a month. That was
according nation, but I think I
appreciate the graphic that sort
of shows.
The plateau. The revenue plateau
that that we we have, um the, uh
quick questions. Lightning round
Most of the growth has come from
federal lands over the past
several years. Is that correct?
And can you give us a rough
percentage of how much Mr Chair
I could do the math?
But the increase of production
has been or I guess another way
of saying it is, uh, the share
of production of New Mexico's
production has increased
dramatically on federal land, I
would say eight, maybe pushing
10% over the next couple of
years. So you know if if the
majority of the growth is for
sure coming from federal lands,
that was certainty, we can go
into those sort of the specifics
and Doctor Dolittle. I know you
have sort of have a lot to add.
I know where
Just a bit over time.
That's an important point
because it reflects obviously
the administration that's in
place.
Permits that came perhaps
another administrations. But I I
think it's an important point
for us as a committee to really
understand is that production
growth has come during the
current administration's both in
the state as well as at the
federal level. Um and then to a
couple of the points that were
raised. I think we'll continue
to have a lot of discussions
around those.
We can see what the county
reserve levels are right. We can
see what
Could you provide those for us,
along with sort of the
Uh, demographic, sort of who's
growing. Who's not that kind of
thing? I think that helps
because very well taken sort of
concerns. Um and this is it'll
be one way and there'll be a lot
of others that will have to go
into sort of understand the
fiscal picture all around. Yeah,
The different parts to that
picture. Okay. Thank you all
very much. We really appreciate
it. Thank you. Committee for
great round.
Let's go briefly to
introductions. Representative
Hernan if we can start with you,
and we'll go to represent Brown
and represent part of and then
we'll go to our second
presentation.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Uh, good
morning, everyone. I'm
representative Pamela Herndon,
representing House District 28
where we are energized and
excited about putting together a
coordinated behavioral health
plan. We with respect to the
state, the county and the
cities, so be on the lookout for
it.
Thank you, representative from
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I'm
representative Catherine Brown
as I mentioned a few minutes
ago. I represent Eddy and Lea
counties. My sign board isn't
quite up to date for some
reason, but I'm very proud to
represent the wonder people.
Wonderful people of District 55.
Thank you.
Thank you very much represented
had a meal, then we'll go to
represent Garcia.
Good morning. I'm representative
Terror had Romeo I represent
Dona Ana Sierra and Kowtow
County's district 38.
Great to see you.
Thank you so much Represent
Garcia, please. Good morning, Mr
Sure members of the committee
decision, gentlemen. My name is
Harry Garcia Ripston House
District 69 coverage Parcel
Someone. McInnis Ebola burn
unusual instance program unease.
Uh, this is my eighth here here,
and I've been in this committee
for eight years now.
And I look forward to doing good
this year. So thank you.
Everybody for being here. Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Excellent. Thank you very much
for Garcia. Okay? Great as well
Go now to our next presentation.
Director Sally will maybe ask,
uh, go to you, Um, great to see
you again. Secretary props and
when it comes time, please feel
free to introduce staff in
whatever order you gotta want to
present the executive and the
LFC budget recommendation.
Good morning, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee. My
name is Charles slowly and I sit
before you as the Legislative
Finance Committee new director,
So I'm I'm also humbled to take
on this responsibility and look
for
Had a great fall working with
the committee developing the
recommendation that you're going
to be considering this session,
and I'd also like to to take the
opportunity to acknowledge our
our staff that are here.
Um, our fiscal analyst done a
great job. We've got a number of
veteran fiscal analyst as well
as new ones. I'd like to
introduce Dr John Courtney is my
deputy that will be overseeing
our budget responsibilities. Um
Michaela Fischer will be our
deputy over our program
evaluation unit.
Um And you've been Mr Torres, as
you just heard is our chief
economist, and Ms Leger is our
assistant director that oversees
our business operations.
We did hand out a directory of
the rest of the staff looks
good. Just raise their hands
from LX. See?
They're here to serve. Um, HFC
as you do your work, as well as
Senate finance this session as
well as the full legislature on
anything, so you've got their
contact information. Feel free
to to reach out to them. I don't
know if that would be
appropriate for Mr Props to to
do the same and then we can get
into the details.
Happy to do that Mr German
member of the committee, um,
have a group of intrepid dfm
analysts, some of whom made it
from Albuquerque this morning.
Not all of them are here, but I
do appreciate the opportunity to
recognize them very proud of
them very proud of the work that
they've done in developing the
executive
Budget. As with director Sally,
This is my first real budget as
D F a secretary. Although I've
been in the position slightly
longer than Charles has
Uh, it's a lot of work and it's
not easy and I do very grateful
for them. I'll start off Mr
Chairman is somebody you
probably know as well as you
know me, and that's Dr Andrew
Minor.
I was the state budget division
director.
I believe Mary Beth Densmore,
who is the deputy director of
the state budget Division is
also here. Mary Beth has, uh,
take it pretty easy on her. We
give her the easy agencies she
has early childhood development,
Human Services Department and
Department of Health.
Uh, among others, Children,
youth and families as well. So
you'll be seeing a lot of Mary
Beth during the during the
session, Laurie Siaca, one of
our senior analysts, is here as
well. Believe Monica Think I saw
Monica Tapia as here? Um Simon
Miller, Our principal analyst is
here.
Simon also get some of the
easier agencies such as the
Public Education Department.
Public schools. Support is kind
of our go to for a number of
agencies. He's also filling in
for some as we feel some of our
vacancies, um at the at the FAA.
And we also have Mario Miglia
who is a senior analyst, D F A
handles all of the courts.
district attorneys and the
attorney general's office. And
did I mention I think I saw
Donna Donna Rivera is here as
well. Ah, and she handles a
number of agencies, including
regulations and licensing
department, which is the
department. I don't think I'll
ever fully understand their
budget.
Um, but also board a nursing
energy, minerals and natural
resources Department as well. So
I think those are the ones that
are here today. Out in the
interest of time, I'll say the
ones who weren't but you'll be
Excellent. Thank you very much.
Let's dive into our LFC and
executive budget
recommendations.
Great. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
So you've got a couple of
different documents in front of
you and
I want to go through them real
quick. I think we're going to
set up time to do a deeper dive
in some of the things that tools
that you'll have before you to
use as you build your HFC budget
going forward, But the first one
is what we call um
Volume One you'll often hear
referred to, um
And this is really focused on
policy and performance analysis.
It's got a brief overview of the
LFC, um, budget recommendation.
If you have questions about
Um
The specials and supplemental
spending. That's in this volume.
If this is a good one to take
home tonight and start going
through because it will
Homework assignment right? It
will. It will help provide
context to you, particularly
when you get into your larger
agencies about the research that
was going on this interim at LFC
and what and will help answer
why the committee was moving in
a certain direction or not, if
you've got questions about
agency performance, that's that
informed a lot of the
recommendations as well. How
well is
Child protective services doing
you'll be able to go in and see
a scorecard for each of the
major agency. The second volume.
Um are they actual detailed
appropriations recommendations.
This is more of a reference
document for you in this fast
moving session. This is
This will give you the deep dive
on why the recommendation for
the Medicaid program was the way
that it was what the agency
requested, um and provide some
other deeper dive context.
The third one is Volume three.
This is a good one, particularly
for your your staff. If you've
got a question about something
there might be the answer in
here.
Who Who's poor beneficiaries for
the land grant permanent funds.
you know, each beneficiary has
their own fund and has their own
assets. Just so happens like my
fun fact is the second largest
beneficiary happens to be
New Mexico Military Institute.
Why would they be the second
largest one? And not you and M
or New Mexico State? Just so
happens there. Trust lands, you
know, are very valuable and it
builds up over time. How much do
they get a year? That will be in
here? Um, you know what are all
the details behind this early
childhood budget? How much have
we grown for home Visiting
versus Brick? That kind of
information.
Will be in this document. How
much have agencies as the
secretary talked about reverted
or move money around within the
budget for bars. That kind of
information will be in that,
supplemental. Um, volume three.
So moving back to the quick
presentation to go over the LFC
recommendation. This first slide
this cartoonist slide is what we
don't want to have happen where
we go off the roller coaster. Um
and the the second slide is
really what we've experienced
and in terms of the roller
coaster of revenue growth
relative to appropriations
growth or decline.
I could run this second slide
back 40 years, and that's the
story of New Mexico General
Fund. Um, revenue roller coaster
and what's driving that and you
heard a lot of from the
economist that our reliance on
oil and gas heavy reliance on
oil and gas revenues is the
primary driver of that.
But there's something different
that's been occurring over the
past couple of years than what
we have experienced over the
previous 40.
So
For a long time. New Mexico
simply produced about 70 million
barrels a year.
Um and then with new drilling
techniques, and and, um you
know, fracking and horizontal
drilling, starting at around
2017 2018.
Production volume started to
soar and you signed the revenue
estimate that production
estimates for the next fiscal
year soar to over 700 million
That rollercoaster is hard to
even see on this graph. Um, you
know, from the great recession
and the oil bust just because
the revenue growth that we've
been experiencing over the past
couple of years has been so
extraordinary and you haven't
been spending all of it each
year on a recurring budget.
You've been cautious. You've
been using it to cash finance
capital outlay.
You have done large, um, special
appropriation budgets You've
done large multi year
appropriations. Um, and each
time you do that, out of the
recurring revenue, it kind of
compounds and builds on itself.
Um, and that gives you a really
big new money figure. But what
happens if we take this graph
out over time?
And next slide.
And this is just a couple of
different scenarios that I'll
show you that LFC has been
working on during the interim,
and it really
The main question is, how soon
do you want this surplus to run
out?
You know if the revenues are
starting to taper off 2.5 to 3%
a year at best in the out years?
Yes, that's a lot more money
than as a broad dollar figure
that maybe what we had a decade
ago. But nonetheless, you know,
revenue growth of 250 to $300
million a year.
Um, next year if that's what
you're new money figure was,
that would be a very different
position for building a budget.
And so
My point to the committee as
well as to you has been
The more you spend in recurring
today, whether that's through
the House Bill two or that's
through recurring tax cuts.
Think of
$100 million increments as a
percent of spending $100 million
in taxes. You're spending it
through the tax code.
Combining those numbers in this
particular scenario that's about
a 15%.
Growth.
And you see that the day for
where you will start either
cutting budgets or putting
together $300 million budget
increases will come sooner than
later. Next slide.
This represents close to the LFC
recommendation, which allows for
surpluses over the midterm.
Uh, probably allows for some
more recurring growth. Um, in
this session as well, which the
committee has left aside. Um,
some undesignated, um
Lots of money for that.
But the challenge is how do you
take this huge surplus that is
It's not one time surplus, but
it's like a plateau owing
surplus and spread it out over
the next 3 to 5 years, and I'll
talk about a new concept that
LFC introduced and is
considering legislation on for
how to do that, so that that
backdrop really provides a lot
of context. Why the LFC came in
with the recommendation of about
growing the budget about five
point
9% and starting to ease into, um
what the out year revenue growth
will be while still recognizing
that we've got a lot of needs
and challenges that that need
attention within the state, So
you've done a good job as a
Legislature of
Basically setting aside vast
sums of money over the long term
to take care of those long term
needs through building up the
trust funds like the early
childhood, the severance tax
permanent, um fun that are going
to provide really strong
revenues in the out years.
You've grown the budget, you
know 28% over the last two
fiscal years, So in terms of
near term, we're probably
reaching capacity to be able to
to push out new and innovative
interventions to get better
outcomes. Um, and veering into
just paying a lot more for
getting the same which we don't
want And so really, the
challenge is how to ease into
the midterm where
Setting aside, you know,
capitalizing new big trust funds
is is really difficult with some
of the surplus because it's not
going to generate a lot of today
money.
Um
So if we're going to the next
slide, just a real quick
overview of the LFC budget
recommendations.
Like I said the the budget
recommendation calls for 10.1
billion and recurring spending.
That's about 5.9% increase. Um,
that includes a compensation
package for public employees,
including educators of 4%.
There was not
Um, really any targeted pay
raises built into agency
budgets.
Why? When we've got some
agencies that have got a lot of
challenges that that they're
experiencing with hiring
Current you all appropriated
money to lfc and in consultation
with DFA to do a comprehensive
compensation and classification
study. We're in the middle of
doing that, with the contract
with Deloitte, that won't be
done until, um, the next interim
that will position us to make
some other compensation changes.
Where agencies might be behind
market. There might be a new way
of doing business that is more
competitive for being able to
get public servants to work for
agencies. So rather than go
continue the kind of
Targeted pay raises without
having good analysis or
information. Lfc didn't do that.
You'll see that in the executive
recommendation, and that's why
they can afford to do 3% pay
increases because the
environment Department got a
really big increase in the base
budget. So when you look at some
of those different
recommendation includes about
900 million that includes some
transfers and specials and
supplementals funding that is
next, ordinarily large, non
recurring budget.
Um, you know, I can recall
really healthy, non recurring
budgets being in the range of
250 to $300 million.
Um
The recommendation also
Um, attempts to try to balance
out the way that our reserves
are working.
By creating a new higher
Education endowment fund.
For financial aid. This would
essentially endow cradle to
career investments that you've
been making in early childhood
in K 12 and in higher education
through scholarship funding for
free, um, scholarships. It would
also, um and that would require
legislation to set up
And it's basically moving money
that is essentially stranded in
the tax stabilization reserve
into this new, higher education
endowment that would still act
as a backup in case you needed
it for reserves but wouldn't be
counted as part of the overall
reserve calculation.
Um
And that kind of tries to
resolve some of those issues
that Mr Torres talked about with
too much money spilling into the
Tech Stabilization reserve, and
it's just sitting there not
being put to use this is putting
it to use while still
maintaining it as essentially a
reserve account.
Um I'll go into more detail
about the Government
Accountability Trust fund
proposal. This is a proposal to
try to get at that midterm
funding need, um and and I'll go
into more details about how that
that works, because that's going
to be really important as you go
through agency budgets where you
see well, lfc is not only lower
than the executive their lower
by a lot, what's going on there?
Well, it could be that that is a
priority area for pilot funding
multi year through the
Government Accountability Trust
Fund, where the recommendation
is basically
Not? No. But how do we get to?
Yes. If you can prove that
you're implementing an evidence
based intervention that's
actually yielding better results
before we entertain building it
into what in the out year might
be a 3% budget growth. Um
The other is cash financing
capital outlay. Um, another
recommended year for doing that,
as we continue to to research
and maybe start hearing
proposals on what to do to
reform our bonding program.
Overall, the LFC recommendation
really tries to prioritize
investments in human capital.
Um to to both boost personal per
capita income, both on the short
term through targeted training
programs for things like trades
and vocational education, too
Um to to both boost personal per
capita income, both on the short
term through targeted training
programs for things like trades
and vocational education to long
term, um, gains as well as a
result of higher education
levels.
And that's really important
because we see this as a
potential replacement, largely
And not what dollar for dollar
but in terms of transition for
having a healthier economy as a
way to offset some of those
losses that will come from the
oil and gas industry over the
long term.
You know, we don't need a much
more educated population post
high school Then we have today
In order to get the kind of
employers we need to boost
people's income, um, going
forward, and then that would
help sustain a level of
government spending that new
Mexicans have come to desire.
Overall, the package leaves
reserves at 30%. It also leaves
money in the operating reserve,
which is important in case
revenues deplete very fast.
You've got quick liquid cash to
be able to resolve those
I'll go into a couple of
highlights public schools,
public schools.
Um
The growth in appropriations
since the Yossi Martinez has
been an extraordinary um, you've
done a number of different
initiatives to address the
findings of that particular
case. I think the question now
is whether the implementation of
those evidence based strategies
will yield the kind of results
that we want to need going
forward.
The public schools,
Recommendations continues with
the reform platform that the
Legislature has been working
under things like investments in
teacher quality. Um
Developing school leadership
That's highly effective. Um
Continuing inner investments in
extended learning. Um, despite
what you hear their districts
that have done a lot of extended
learning so much so that we need
to add more money to cover the
cost of theirs. You know, you've
got districts such as Gallup,
you know, going for more than
190 days. Los Alamos going for
190 days, even rural
Small school districts with high
populations of Native American
students like Cuba goes much
longer than the standard 180 Day
school year.
180 day school year. Um
Has been funded in the base for
many years.
You added enough money this last
session.
For elementary schools to add 25
additional days.
Um, and for secondary schools to
add about 10 or a little bit
more, But you gave districts the
flexibility on how they built
that additional time in. So
what's important nonetheless, is
that you've built in enormous
amount of money to expend extend
the amount of educational
opportunity that time that
students have and whatever form
With guardrails you put in
guardrails for districts on how
to implement that, um, going
forward.
Um, public schools. You can also
you can see the extraordinary
growth on the next slide in the
suite of at risk program
funding.
While at the same time you've
been pumping money into schools,
large amounts of it are not
being put to use forever Rieti
of different reasons. Um
There.
In the LFC recommendation.
There's some budget proposals
that asked school districts to
start putting up matching funds
for all of these different
targeted initiatives we have.
Why is that?
One. They've got resources to be
able to match but to
They need to start building in.
You know if we're going to do
community schools building that
into their base operating
budget, um and so the state can
provide seed money for a couple
of years, But over time we want
the districts to take that on
into their operating budget.
The next slide, higher
education.
When the state implemented the
lottery tuition program.
We shot up to one of the top 10
in the nation in terms of high
school going rates. That's
Students graduating from New
Mexico High School and the next
fall and rolling in post
secondary education.
As we started having discussions
that we couldn't afford to do
that anymore, Um, as well as
other demographic changes, those
high school college going rates
started to fall off and we were
no longer nationally ders and
really enrollments and higher
education had plummeted over the
last decade, as you can see on
the graph on the right
Well, at the same time we've
been using a lot of this surplus
to continue to invest in higher
education, recognizing the need
to improve our educational
outcomes. The recommendation is
to have a moderate growth in
higher education while still
protecting and maintaining the
financial aid investments you've
been making, um the moderate
growth would continue.
To make improvements to the
performance funding formula, Um,
to actually enhance how much
money is going towards improved
performance, as opposed to the
market sheriff performance
within the higher education
system, Um, for those entities
that are not performing as well
as others, money for support
student support services.
This is one area where there is
targeted compensation for, um
faculty.
Early childhood.
And the next slide.
Making huge investments over the
last decades. The thing I would
caution and that we need to
start having more conversation
about is the number of kids
coming into the early childhood
pipeline has been shrinking
every year for the last decade.
So the cost per child that we're
spending many of these services
continues to just increase.
We're not really doing anything
new and different. The LFC
recommendation. Um
Would use 250 million, um, from
the early childhood trust fund,
um for investments in child care
assistance as well as pre K
quality, and it would use about
17 million that's coming from
the voter approved
Constitutional amendment, an
increase in in that flows
through the General fund.
Um for continue pre K expansion
as well as quality supports. The
trust fund can handle an
increase in the distribution
outside of its normal formula,
because it's sitting at about $5
billion today, expected to grow
to $10 billion, and the formula
just hasn't caught up to its
ability to expend that money
going forward.
Child welfare will be a
I predict a major topic of
discussion this session as it
was all fall during the interim.
Um this is a recommendation
where you'll see
C Y F D s budget for the General
fund and in the LFC
recommendation virtually flat.
And that's because there's big
investments for child welfare
reforms that are coming out of
the Government Accountability
Fund, where the committee has
recommended four years worth of
funding items for evidence based
prevention and early
intervention programming. Have
the department demonstrate that
it can get its federal plan
approved so we can get federal
matching funds.
That it can implement some of
these, um high cost benefit. Um,
interventions and that it can do
it well before putting that
money into their base budget.
This will be a budget that's a
little bit complex, because, um,
the department had requested a
reorg of moving different
programs around so getting an
apples to apples kind of
picture.
Of what the different
recommendations are will be
challenging. I am concerned that
that Reorg also came with a
request to be able to move money
between those programs because
they're not sure how much each
one is going to cost. That to me
is a flag of we're not maybe
ready for prime time. Aside from
whether that reorg makes sense.
Um, but these are evidence based
interventions on the left hand
side that
Through our cost benefit
analysis would have high cost
benefit and could be
Um
Funded through federal funds at
a Medicaid matching rate if the
department were to get its plan
approved, and then start to
implement those
We think about the child
maltreatment prevention
framework as having a couple of
different levels. Um, one very
broad. These are things like
regular nurse home visitation
through early childhood
department school social workers
at ped, um, the types of work
that D O h might do for general
population health.
There's a secondary level where
agencies even see why FD starts
serving families with higher
risk factors. Smaller set of
them were targeted. Um
And then there's tertiary
services where maltreatment may
have already occurred. Um and
that we want to prevent repeat
maltreatment. Some of these
services on the left hand side
deal with all three
Finally, um, Mr Chairman.
Medicaid isn't the
Under any circumstance going
forward is going to be the big
Pac man in the budget if we get
richer as a state through higher
personal per capita income, the
federal government says, that's
great. You can pick up a larger
share. So in this budget, we're
picking up a larger share of the
Medicaid costs less than a 1%
decrease in the federal matching
rate cost the state about $68
million
Um, in general fund, and you're
not buying anything new so And
if we continue at our current
poverty levels than the cost of
health care continues to grow,
um and the cost of Medicaid we
were able to do, um, Another
round of provider rate
increases, um, not at the level
of the executive best I can
tell.
Um, but trying to shore up and
use Medicaid and leverage those
federal funds to shore up our
overall health care system and a
number of different priority
areas, including prioritizing
rural healthcare providers and D
D providers are built into that
medical. Finally, um, the
chairman asked that I go into a
little bit more detail about the
Government Accountability Trust
fund.
And this is a transitional
strategy to get us through that
hump that you just saw in the
long term oil production and so
The Government Accountability
Trust Fund.
So, like I said the
Under both recommendations near
term funding.
Would increase 34% over the LFC
recommendation over the last
three years, including the FY 25
or 38% with the executive
We are noticing real capacity
constraints to be able to grow
budgets that fast. Um, be able
to hire people put things in
place. You're going to see a lot
of requests for reauthorization
of record of appropriations that
you've made to allow agencies to
spend that money into the next
fiscal year because they can't
get it out.
This fiscal year.
Like I said earlier, the more
the state spends on recurring.
Now, the faster we get to
starting to build 3% budget
growth.
What we've learned over many
years is that once you put an
agency's new initiative, that
sounds great, but maybe it
hasn't been tested. They don't
have a good track record of
implementation once that gets
into an agency's based budget,
it is very difficult to
reallocate ineffective programs
to other things.
Um And so the
That's one of the challenge.
Like I said many of the long
term funding needs, um, in a in
a spectrum of areas will be met
with the endowments that you
have.
Those are able to grow larger
because you're not having a
capitalize them out of this new
money. You know, there's just
extra money flowing in from oil
and gas that is being diverted
from the general fund. That's
how severance tax and early
childhood would grow so large
But
As we all know those endowments
Tie up a lot of money. Um, that
don't produce very much now.
Money unless you've got a really
big corpus, so that's the
challenge is to figure out
something for the midterm.
So the potential solution um
that lfc had recommended is
multi year in this case of four
year funding strategy for large
evidence based or promising
interventions and programs that
are intended to improve results
for some of New Mexico's most
pressing performance challenges.
We're not recommending this for
lots of different things. It's a
select sweet
Of things that agencies asked to
do that didn't meet sort of the
test for getting into the base
budget, but it's an opportunity
for them to be able to
demonstrate that it's worthy of
that going forward. So how would
it work?
The first part of the proposal
would be to create the trust
fund itself. And you would
capitalize that with maybe in
the LFC recommendation. I think
about that, in terms of
capitalizing at least
Two years worth of doing, um,
this round this strategy, um for
the next couple of years.
The next one would be and that's
663 million to the trust fund.
That trust fund would
essentially spin off 25%.
Of its corpus.
Or $300 Million, whichever is is
more as a baseline spending for
those initiatives.
To what's called a program fund.
That's where you would make
appropriations from from the
program funded be purely at the
Legislature's direction to
determine which projects to fund
um and, um
And that we recommend a limited
limited suite that would be
funded for fy 25 to 29.
The LFC recommendations for this
funding can be found in your
volume one.
And they are going to be in a
new section of the bill called
Section nine, and you can see
the list of those projects
starting on page 232, and they
arranged for everything from
piloting a wage and career
ladder approach for childcare
assistance workers to the UM
human capital investments,
forgetting
Disengaged youth engaged into,
um the workforce or education.
the C Y f D items that I talked
about.
The clinical practice. Um
Um, initiatives for educators
and our K 12 public schools.
Um and there for the community
colleges on page 233 line 508
for community colleges to do
industry recognized credentials
in things like traits. So a
small suite of these would get
funding for the next four years.
Um, coming out of this session,
we would work with D F A to
identify the evaluation strategy
as well as the performance
metrics.
To assess and monitor over the
next four years on how those,
um, programs are implemented.
Agencies. The following cycle
would be required, just like we
did through. Lfc, Um
To use the government
accountability, budget
development tool and elements of
high quality program and so an
agency's budget request in the
fall if they wanted access to
expand programs through the LFC
budget process they would need
to fill out, um and have more
detailed answers about what's
the premise of the program. What
problem? Are you really trying
to solve?
You'd be surprised at how often
we find government programs that
we don't really have.
A good idea about what to do.
From that standpoint, there's
been they need to do a really
thorough needs assessment. Are
we going to be serving the
entire population or just a
portion of the population? What
is that need and an actual
detailed program description?
Who, what? When, where and how
on the implementation plan, as
well as a plan to make sure
they're going to implement the
programs effectively. We've seen
Time and again and Lfc, where
agencies are implementing an
evidence based intervention at
research section should suggest
gets better results, but the
implementation of it is so poor
that you don't
And then finally, the
measurement and evaluation plan
building in systemic performance
measures as well as program
evaluation to understand whether
or not this strategy in fact
works to give you the
information going forward on
whether you should continue
funding for it. So in
conclusion, Mr Chairman
We've got booming revenues A
need to finance and plan for the
midterm because we've got the
near term in the long term
really going, Um and really
Battening down the hatches on,
um, strategically targeting our
increases in budget, two things
that actually will work to get
better results for new Mexicans,
because as we see the oil and
gas plateau, if not, peak is
coming, and it's coming soon and
you're going to have to have a
much more high functioning state
government. Um
That works with public schools
and higher education to get a
much different economy in the
long term, when we can't rely as
much on this oil and gas
revenues we've been so fortunate
to have up until now.
Thank you. Mr Chairman, and I
turned it over to Secretary
perhaps and then we'd stand for
questions. Thank you, Director.
Sleep Secretary Pops. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. I don't have a
handout or a presentation today,
however, you do have to think
for the first time in a number
of years we have produced what
we call a budget in brief.
You should have this. It does
only cover executive.
Branch agencies as well as I
believe we have a section in
there for the for the courts as
well. But this will give you
kind of detail that hopefully
will be useful to you as you
begin your
Really deep dive over the next
two weeks with the experts from
both DFA and LSC on agency
budgets.
We had hoped Mr Chairman also
provide you with a copy of the
full executive budget. But, um
We produce our recommendation a
little bit later than the
Legislature does, Although we
did have it done a day earlier
than it was, do we had it done
last Thursday and to the
printer?
But it is now sitting in
Albuquerque waiting for the snow
to stop. So as soon as soon as
we can get it up here from
Albuquerque, we will get you the
full document and I apologize
for not having that briefly. Mr.
Chairman, um
You probably read and oppress
quite a bit about the executive
budget recommendation overall.
We are recommending a recurring
budget of 10.5 billion
Which is an increase of $950
million, or 9.9% over fy 25.
Uh, In addition to the recurring
increase, we are requesting 2.5
billion in General Fund for non
recurring appropriations.
Um, we are recommending a $850
million Capital outlay
appropriation that includes both
statewide as well as additional
capital outlay from, uh
Passed by the Legislature for
the House Senate and the
executive
We all also Mr Chairman and
members of Committee have
allowed in our budget for a $500
million tax package during the
upcoming session.
All told with those
Pieces. We would we estimate a
ending reserve of 34.2%.
One thing in particular Mr
Chairman area of an agreement
Always good to point out the
agreement that we find before we
get to the disagreements.
I've noted, I believe that you
have fully funded
The land of enchantment. Fun, Mr
Chairman. A lot of people in
this room. I deserve great
credit for
Establishing that fund. It's a
real
Legacy to now be able to fully
funded in this physical
Year.
It's particularly a great legacy
as chairman for someone near and
dear to my heart.
It was starting her new job
today, so I know she's very
proud of you, Mr Chairman for
your leadership on on that, and
it's really good to
Get that. So? Thank you, Mr
Chairman and thank you to the
LoC for that.
Mr Chairman. We do recommend a
3% across the board compensation
for all state employees and
public school personnel.
We do have a specific
compensation recommendations for
correctional, probation and
parole officers at an 8%
increase.
And and 14% increase for state
police.
Again. Mr Chairman, As I noted,
with the executive
recommendation, we we estimate
that FY 24 reserves would be at
47% of recurring appropriations
and 25 would be a 3.6 billion or
34.2% of recurring
appropriations.
A couple of highlights from the
Executive recommendation. We are
recommending $11.9 million
increase to the opportunity
Scholarship program again,
thanks to the Legislature for
fully funding that during the FY
24
4 fy 24, But there are some
additional costs as additional
students are added. So we are
recommending 11.9% increase for
the opportunity scholarship.
87.9 million to increase in
Medicaid provider rate
reimbursement beginning on
January 1st of 2025
21.8 million to increase snap
benefits for seniors, uh, and
those with disabilities from $25
225 dollars a month.
And $28 million to the early
childhood department to expand
kindergarten. Pre kindergarten
slots by 22,000. Excuse me,
2000.
700
With regard to non recurring
appropriations. Mr Chairman, we
are recommending a 5 $500
million 500 million dollars for
statewide housing initiatives to
the mortgage Finance authority.
Um and that is that makes up a
significant portion of that
overall $2.1 million in special
supplementals and deficiencies
that I had noted before.
We have for the first time Mr
Chairman put statewide road
projects in the executive
recommendation for Section nine,
Although I guess maybe if
there's a new section nine,
maybe it will now be re
numbered. But we have set of
facts set aside $200 million for
a statewide road projects.
Uh, $100 Million to provide
grant matching funds for state,
local and tribal governments.
We know Mr Chairman and members
of the committee that the amount
of federal dollars that are
available to our communities and
to the state is significant.
We want to make sure that we're
doing everything that we can to
help your communities access.
Uh, that that those funds we
started off this last year with
I believe a $10 million
appropriation.
To begin that process or that
program. I believe we spent all
but are obligated all but
400,000 of that $10 million, So
I certainly think it's a
worthwhile effort Tickets to
consider increasing the amount
of money available for funds to
match federals.
Dollars for our states and local
governments and tribal
communities.
We are recommending another $100
million. Mr Chairman for the
rural Healthcare Delivery fund.
You appropriated $80 million is
this past year we have
distributed that $80 million.
There was a great demand for it
far more than the $80 million,
which we I think we all
anticipated, so we would like to
see some additional dollars in
the rural healthcare delivery
fund.
We want to continue the good
work that the Legislature and
the executive done in
partnership.
On ensuring that we are doing
everything we can to recruit law
enforcement personnel for the
state of New Mexico, So we are
asking for an additional $35
million to continue those
efforts. And we would suggest Mr
Chairman or are suggesting that
we broaden that to correctional
off need for correctional
officers in the state. In
addition to
Uniform. Uh, police officers.
On taxes, Mr Chairman and all,
probably close with this. We as
noted, we have set aside $500
million tax package.
Noted that the LFC has set aside
$200 million
I think we'll come to a good
agreement on that. And we
certainly aren't drawing a line
in the sand on $500 million, but
we thought in the interim
But that was a reasonable place
to start.
I think if we come lower than
that, Mr Chairman, some of the
The slides that Charles
presented particularly slides
five and 6 may equalize a little
bit, and they certainly equalize
a little bit because of the
decisions that executive made
with regard to the tax package
and the last session, So with
that, Mr Chairman
Forward to working with you.
During the session. All in all,
there's some new concepts that
we will be analyzing from the
executive perspective that we
haven't had a chance to yet, but
we appreciate your
thoughtfulness the budget having
now set on both sides of that
process. I know how
Thorough and thoughtful LSC is
in developing its record. Thank
you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Secretary. Thank you again.
Director Sally were girls
straight to questions first.
We're going to go to ranking
member Armstrong, please. Thank
you, Mr Chairman and thank you
for the presentation. We got a
little bit of a sneak peek.
But you know, it's this is a lot
of information.
Really, really fast. I had a
couple of questions on the
Government Accountability Trust
Fund. So my biggest concern
Is is I understand Mr Chairman,
that we're making it for pilot
projects, so I'll just use C I f
d as an example.
Um, even though it's a pilot
project, and we have money in
here for my F D under Section
nine
They are still going to have to
either.
Shift their thinking to
implement this pilot project or
they're going to have to add
more employees to implement this
pilot project. Where do you see?
Um
Which direction do you think
these entities will go? And do
you see a problem with hiring
more people as we've heard all
interim long that they've had
problems with that?
So sure, Mr Chairman, um
Yes, they would be probably
hiring term positions because it
would be like, uh,
Not a permanent position. It's
not permanently in their budget,
So it'd be like they do for all
their federal employees that
you've got a four year granted.
And when they grant ends, you
need to figure out what to do.
Um
The
This particular example C y f D
would need to get approval
before getting access to the
funds for the
Um, the federal government to
approve which programs they're
going to implement.
Um, because we want those
programs which the federal
government has deemed evidence
based. They have a strong
research behind them to impact
the kinds of things we all want
improved.
Um, and then they'll pay for the
at the Medicaid matching rate.
So if at the end of the four
year period, they do a good job.
The cost to build that into
their operating budget should
be, um, pretty affordable, even
with the out year revenue
projections and to the extent
that they're implementing it
well, we should be seeing better
outcomes and lower foster care
caseloads, which then also
relieve the budget pressures on
child protective services.
Thank you for that answer. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. Thank you,
Charles. I I think I saw in
here. I can't find it right now.
Um, for Medicaid expansion.
And is it and is it under nine
as well?
Medicaid is not in Section nine
medicated in their base budget.
Um
We're asking for rate increases
for a variety of different
providers where we've got
shortages, everything from
behavioral health, um to infant
and maternal health. Primary
care. Um Lfc has got
recommendations for their rural
clinics, and they get rate
increases as well.
And there's also money in the
LFC recommendation to just keep
up with the Medicare rates,
which are adjusted for
inflation, so that we stay with
or whatever those targets were
that you set
Okay. Thank you for that. And,
um
Is it?
Is the majority of the time Mr
Chairman when we do a pilot
project
The majority of the time it
turns into
Something that we we've been
growing. Uh, you know everyone's
budget around 5 to 6% some more.
But on average about 5 to 6%.
And so if these pilot projects
work, and they're still doing
other things
Does it not look like we're
going to grow P These entities
budgets even more at an average
of about 6.7% over the next few
years at the same time, um, our
income for the state of New
Mexico is deemed to be going
down, and so aren't we really
literally growing?
Projects and bro and growing, uh
Um, their budgets.
In a way that is not
sustainable.
So what we've been seeing And if
you looked at the
This graph.
Towards the front.
And slit the one with the yellow
slide. This is where if you have
sustainable growth of 6 to 7% a
year, you will have surpluses.
Um, at the end of
That pilot projects, um, life to
make a decision.
Do I put that in the base budget
or not, and what we saw with a
lot of the base budget increases
were not a lot of
Um
Request for
In some cases for new programs,
but a lot for just paying people
a lot more through targeted, um
increases.
Hiring more staff to do largely
the same thing or backfilling
and our long term budget
projections that we worked on
with the committee. This interim
showed that many agencies don't
have a lot of workload related
cost pressures.
There's not a lot of other
inflation related cost pressures
within agency based budgets, So
there's in fact room in the out
years and our view to be able to
accommodate some of these
programs if they can prove that
they're getting kind of better
outcomes. In this case, it
should be saving money in the
base budget. Um if they're
working with families further
upstream before the need to
remove a kid and put them in in
foster care.
And the the child can safely
remain in the home that will
save money in their base budget,
so creating even more room to
where you might not even have to
to increase their money, their
budget significance out years
and if it's not working, then
why would you want to build that
into their budget anyways?
Thank you for the that comment.
Mr Chairman and Charles, But,
you know, we see a lot of red
In this book, Mhm.
We see a lot of of entities that
are not spending correctly, not
doing their job. Well, not we're
and we're not holding them
accountable. We keep still
funding it.
And so that's my concern is that
we're we're not holding entities
accountable.
They're scoring in the red. We
keep finding it. Keep funding
it. Keep funding it. And now
we're gonna go into, um pilot
projects and pilot projects
usually turn into reoccurring.
So my that's my concern, and I'm
I hope that I'm wrong, But I
really don't think thank you
very much, Frank. Remember, I'm
Sean. Next, we're gonna go to
represent Garrett and then
represented Montoya.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
My head is reeling and I feel
like I've been presented a whole
new menu of things to think
about.
Um, following up Mr Chair on
representative Armstrong's
question.
I'm not getting who the
gatekeeper is on the government
Accountability Expenditure Trust
fund.
Like who's deciding? It says
that if it seems to work the
Legislature with then decided to
make it a recurring expense.
But who's how program comes is
it decided by staff members to
be recommended? Who's the
decision? Maker of what actually
gets funded? Mr Chairman,
representative. Ultimately, you
are as the appropriating body,
the Legislature so there would
be
Um
Forecasted if this goes through
for the next cycle, there would
be a request process that
agencies would submit to the F
A, A and to LFC.
That would be considered during
budget development during the
fall, and then a recommendation
to the full Legislature for
which projects to fund based on
the kind of detailed budgeting
tool information that would be
received.
And then you make a decision
over which projects to find out
what level
I think I'm just not getting it.
It's gonna come in a budget
proposal from LFC R H A. F C The
first time will actually make a
decision on it is in a
legislative session. Um, Mr
Chairman in this particular case
for year one. Those are before
you in proposed Section nine.
Those projects that I listed at
the back of the page. That's
what LFC recommended.
As an initial funding. Um
The funding elements for those
projects.
The proposal would be to do that
again that whole process next
year.
With another $300 million or
more, depending on how much is
in the trust fund.
And then that process would
start and coincide with the fall
budget development process with
a full recommendation or
recommendation to the full
legislature the following
session for a different set of
projects that could be funded
for four year period.
Mr Chair and and Charles.
During the interim committee
process. Would there be any deep
dive? Mr Chairman
representative. Yes. And then
that's the point of time to do
the kind of oversight that
representive Armstrong was was
talking about that would be
needed.
What's the implementation? How
that's going. What are the
results that you're yielding?
What deep dive evaluation. Um
it's what that's telling, Um,
the agency as well as the
Legislature on whether that
should be continued when the
pilot ends.
Okay, I have more questions. But
I'll save that Mr. Chairman.
Next question is you brought up
so gracefully. Section nine,
Section nine traditionally
looked at road projects and
transportation projects.
That not only benefits specific
regions such as what several
people talked about the roads in
Southeast New Mexico. Um, I have
major. We all have economic
drivers and road Section nine.
Specialized and focusing on
funding for roads that
contributed significantly to
economic development.
And and helped it. Move forward.
So what happened to Section nine
where the the governor's budget
has, Mr Secretary pointed out?
Specifically had money for
Section nine, which we have
learned just now there's no
longer exists. Can you discuss
that? Please? Mr Chairman,
representative.
The Legislature is supplemented
road fund appropriations through
the General fund for just the
last couple of years. That's not
been a long term.
Something that's been done. So
Section nine was a relatively
new
Phenomenon.
Um and you've done you've
supplemented that road funding
to the tune of about a billion
and a half dollars and that
money is still working its way.
Through the system, and the LFC
did not recommend another large
set aside. Um
For those types of major
investment projects because one
you really delegated the
decision making over those
projects to the executive
branch, and we've seen good use
of it with a lot of heavy
maintenance, but not necessarily
major infrastructure projects
for that would have an economic
development.
Impact outside of upgrading
roads in southeast New Mexico.
There is a $40 million
supplement within Section five
specials for Department of
Transportation.
They will also be receiving some
extra
Freed up money that was tied up
in in bond repayments that will
be available, um to the
department, and that will be
discussed problems. The
transportation budget is
developed.
Camera, Mr. Chairman on more So,
Mr Chair, Mr. Secretary, could
you anything about your talked
about 200 Million from the
executive budget?
Towards roads in Section nine.
Could you just comment?
Mr Chairman, members of the
Committee representative. I
don't have the specific projects
that we're recommending, but
again. Historically, the
executive is not included
recommendation in Section nine
for general fund expenditures.
Frankly, we've been criticized
by the Legislature for not doing
so. So we've done it this year
We put in $200 million in the
original request, I think was
closer to 350 million, but
through the budget process
That the executive goes through.
We reduce that slightly to $200
million recommendation.
Thank you, Mr Chair. There is a
proposal about a Transportation
trust fund, which several people
have discussed.
And, um
It seems to me that we really
have to have a permanent
Um, situation.
To work such
Hopeful.
And current driver state. My
last question, Mr Chair.
It, Uh, two last questions. I'll
try to make it quick. The $300
Million Legacy Fund does that
include the opportunity
scholarship?
Mr Chairman, representative that
separate the legacy fund there
for natural resources agencies,
a variety of them to get
Um, the income distribution and
then many of them will use that
to match federal funds on a
variety of different natural
resources related grants. The
opportunity scholarship is in
the higher education budget. I'm
sorry, that's what I meant.
Education. Higher Opportunity
Scholarship is in the higher ed
budget. Um they
Did experience some cost
increases likely through
enrollment. The LFC recommend
the executive recommendation I
think uses General fund the LFC
recommendation uses the proceeds
from the new financial aid
Endowment contingent on
enactment of that endowment.
Thank you. And my final
question Mr Chair is there's an
assumption in the LFC budget
that the rulemaking proposed by
the ped to mandate 100 and 8080
days will take place as you
know, there's statewide
opposition to that plan. So if
the rulemaking for 100 and 80
days does not take place, how
that Mr Chairman,
representative, the budget is
unrelated. The budget
recommendation from LFC is
unrelated to
They're rulemaking. You've
already paid for all the
instructional time. We believe
in House Bill to this year's
House Bill two.
Okay. Thank you. That's it for
now, Mr. Chair. Thank you very
much represent Garrett next for
seven months later than
represents Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
Mr Silly, Uh,
Really sad, maybe to follow up
on representing Garrett's
question about the projects that
are going to be presented.
Um
How did that
Despite gets the two that may be
to the question she's asking
How did that list that were
being presented this year?
How was that formed? So Mr
Chairman, Representative. Many
of those items came from the
agencies based budget request
where they wanted to increase
their budgets as you saw all
fall like a really large amounts
like the aging department they
wanted.
This new program to help with
home care services for seniors
that don't qualify for Medicaid.
The thinking was rather than put
that in their base budget where
we don't know whether that works
or how it's going to work or the
sustainability of it is to fund
that on a pilot basis through
the Government Accountability
Fund as an alternative financing
means and then let them have
four years of funding to go
prove that it really works and
keep it out of the base budget,
So thank you, Mr Chairman, Mr
Sully.
So the question that will be
presented us is whether we want
to fund them at all.
That's the first question. Do
you want to fund them out of
this new, um, funded all or is
there a different priority? Um,
And then the second question if
you do fund, um
Four years from now. Do you want
to keep funding it or not? Thank
you, Mr silly. I think that
Frankly, I'm gonna have a hard
time.
Until C Y f D gains a little bit
of confidence back from this
body. I'm gonna have a hard time
funding a new project for them.
maybe do it with the same
quality that's been that we've
received from the rest of what
they're doing. So I'm
So I think for
For representative Garrett. I
guess we understand now
something that the
administration is asking for in
one of the base budgets, But
it's a new program.
But we
First off, decide whether or not
we want to fund it at all. So
that will happen in the future.
I would imagine this will happen
through this committee's budget
development process. That is a
decision, Mr Silly, Um
Secretary Probst. I have a
question for you about the
Um, the 35 million for law
enforcement recruitment.
That is specifically state
police correct.
Not just state police. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. Thank you, Mr
Secretary.
Um, the pay increases that are
being read. So, um, Mr Chairman
and Mr Secretary, I think that
works at odds with recruitment
at the local level.
I've had several
Uh, police departments reach out
to me and suggest
They already have a hard time.
Holding their employees.
Because they can
With the same qualification they
have. They can go over to the
state police.
And make more money right now.
the majority of our sheriff's
officers and the majority of our
local police departments.
Pay.
Well less than what state police
is paying now.
And so, Mr Chairman, I think
That's what I was told by my
local sheriff was
The body needs to be very
careful when we do something
that it may help in one area,
and it may hurt hurt.
Somewhere else, And I would
suggest for those of us who
I don't live in the the the
Metro area and this and the
Let's say the Rio Grande
corridor. Most of our policing
is done by local police. And if
we
Ah make such a huge increase to
two state police. Uh, officers
pay it will harm
Our local folks. And I would
suggest if Mr Secretary if we're
going to try and do a an
increase to pay
We need to handle it the same
way that we're handling that
fund for recruitment.
And that is figure out.
What we can get to state police
officers and what we can also
supplement to local police. Um
Mr Chairman. Uh,
And silly.
I have a question for it on the
price of oil and gas, currently
Versus our
What we have based the budgets
on for the next two years.
Um what I believe we're at $68.
A barrel currently.
Um
Obviously, there's a direct
Ship that we take.
Um, but if production goes down
In out years if productive if
the price remains low.
Um, I'm just concerned that
we're building this budget and
currently are dollar the price
per barrel.
Yeah, it's quite a bit.
Lower. I mean,
Not not quite $10 a barrel
lower, but
And and as we've seen the trend
over the last couple of weeks,
and it's continuing to drop
So, um
I'm I'm very concerned about
what we're looking to increase
for year over year.
Even the LFC budget. But with
what the governors asking for
That's gonna be really hard. Ask
with the price of you have any
thoughts? Uh, Mr Silly on on the
price per barrel and our
assumption, Mr Chairman.
Representative.
That
There's a couple of different
mechanisms.
Well, insulate us from any price
weakness or production weakness.
And those are the early
childhood trust fund and
Severance tax permanent fund.
There's
You know, in the LFC
recommendation.
The new Higher Ed Endowment Fund
and the Government
Accountability Trust Fund would
act as further
Reserves before you even need to
entertain.
Moving into the Tax
Stabilization reserve.
So there's a couple of big
buckets that you know the
Government Accountability Trust
fund is saying, Don't spend all
of this now.
Not even on specials. It's like
save it for the next two years.
And
Don't just say no to like a new
idea. Let's say prove it.
Before we build it into your
base budget, and we don't have a
lot of cost pressures in the
base budget. We don't need to
grow.
You know, See why FDs based
budget You know, it's only
growing 1% and in the LFC
recommendation if you don't want
to supplement that, you know,
that's a decision pointed the
body, either because you're
concerned about
Prices dropping further and and
those other buckets not being
able to
Sustain the head or you're
concerned about
Moving too fast to bringing up
the day that you're putting
together 3% budget growth, and
that's at that point in time,
your prioritization process
really needs to be strong to say
what what needs to go in there
versus what's gotta have versus
need to have
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
It's the last thing, Mr Silly.
I would suggest we watched that
real close. If it's if it
remains low. I think at the very
least or
Our assumption for 20.
25. We need to adjust. We'll
need to adjust that rather
rapidly because what happens, Mr
Chair and and members of the
committee is
This price fluctuation. It
doesn't hurt.
It only hurts the price per
barrel that we're receiving.
Immediately, but it multiplies.
Within a year. It starts to
multiply because what happens is
the these companies will stop
acting on
Leases that they have, because
the price isn't
Isn't as good so they'll wait.
To start drilling.
Um, Initially they have
contracts in place several
months out.
Maybe half a year, eight months
out.
Um, but
If if the price remains low, we
get on that the last 9 1011
months out.
Ah, they just won't be drilling
on some of those leases. They'll
put it off to the following year
to see if the price goes up.
So that that that it's not just
the
Uh, price per barrel that takes
a hit in this month's out. It is
that production drops because
they are just a caution and and
I think we've all heard it
today. I think we're all
expecting.
Some sort of a correction high
and I and
It. I'm just suggesting within a
year we'll see those the effects
to the budget multiplying
because because they projects
that they will not thank you
very much for seven Montoya.
Next we have observed Sanchez
and thank you, Mr Chair. Uh,
I just had a couple of questions
one related to read. Montoya was
asking. Ah,
I definitely support increases
for law enforcement. But what
are some mitigations you guys
are looking at to prevent
poaching from local governments.
Because I'm hearing the same
concerns from sheriffs and
cities that they're going to
lose their
Enforcement to state police.
Have you guys
Consider that in
What are the solutions you guys
are looking at?
Mr Chairman, members the
committee and represents
Sanchez. You know, we're
certainly aware of that.
The poaching I hear from state
police is that it's going the
other way, particularly
Albuquerque.
Albuquerque is increased
officer's salary significantly
over the last four or five
years.
So what we hear Secretary Bowie
will probably amplify this and
explain it better than I do that
if we don't continue to try to
stay competitive state police
state police officers going to
leave and go, particularly
To Albuquerque or Santa Fe. So I
understand I understand the
concerns, but the governor has
made a commitment to having
state police be the highest paid
police force in the region, and
I think that's a goal. I know
that's a goal that we all share.
Um, but, um
We don't control salaries at
local levels. Local governments
do that appropriately, so
Um, but it can. It can work both
ways if we're not cognizant of
the fact that other states
And entities within New Mexico
are also it is a commitment that
the governor has had for the
last five years. I think it will
probably continue that we
Compensated so that we can So,
Mr Chair, I guess my question
you haven't thought of any
mitigating factors for, uh
We have the Big Albuquerque, Big
Santa Fes. Las Almas County gets
a lot of grt from Llano.
The P high high rates are real
rebound. What bill lose
sheriffs.
To these enforcement, and now
they're going to lose them to
the state Police. Uh,
So I guess my question. Have you
guys considered anything to
address that concern? Mr
Chairman, we believe we have
I believe we've done that, in
collaboration with the
recruitment funding that you all
have appropriated last year.
And there's also a fund that is
available.
Um So Ms Chairman, I to the
extent that we can address
funding for law enforcement at
the local level.
Uh huh.
We will try to do so. But again,
the decisions with regard to
that our commitment is to the
state.
Thank you, Mr Chair. My next
question regarding the Section
nine Fundy, which was
traditionally uh
But for roads and the
Transportation Committee on
Appropriations had a lot of
input. I'm sorry I walked in a
little late.
Something changing with that?
Who's who's uh
Going to control and determine
where that funding goes now.
Well, Mr Chairman,
representative, the
House Bill three. The main
Appropriations and House Bill
three end up in Section four D
O. T s main operating budget.
Starting a couple of years ago,
the Legislature started
supplementing that with large
general fund appropriations, and
those were listed out and
Section nine of the bill. The
LFC doesn't have a
recommendation because we've
done so much over the past
couple of years, the LFC didn't
have a recommendation to
continue doing that much. That
would justify a separate section
of House Bill two.
And instead that's being used
for the new government
Accountability try demonstrate
that they're working. There's a
separate appropriation that
supplementing the transportation
budget in the specials section
of the so, Mr Chairman.
Did the LFC make the decision to
do that?
Who's the one that that is? The
LFC recommendation is there's no
large transportation
appropriations Legislature had
typically
Outlined in one chamber projects
they'd like to see funded.
And the other chamber said. You
have discretion over where to
spend it. And ultimately, House
Bill two is provided that
discretion to
Ah!
I guess my last question. Um
I guess I made a pointer. I
pointed out something earlier
that instead of fixing some of
our core departments, and, uh,
trying to fix him, since sounds
like we're
Doing more expansion. Um
I guess, uh,
I really think we should work on
fixing what we have and doing
that, right?
Before expanding to other areas
unless those areas are gonna
help compensate for the
shortfalls of our
Or other departments or what
we're doing. Currently, Mr
Chairman, Representative
Sanchez. I mean,
The UM executive agencies it's
built into their recurring based
budget for many of those same
items, so it would be don't do
any of them.
As an as the other alternative,
which is an option.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much for
sanctions. Representative Tom,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Secretary. Thank you, Charles.
Um
I'm going to just go back to
the, um
It was a page five. The
government? Yeah. The Government
Accountability Trust fund.
Um
So you said, so we're building
in as a maximum of $300 million
in that, so my question is, and
we're looking at recurring.
Based budgets.
Um
What is the what is the average
special request asks them from
these agencies as well. You
know, as we're looking at
As providing the substitute.
Is what I'm what I am seeing
here. We're going to substitute
this funding mechanism rather
than give them a special Is that
correct Mr Chair rather than Mr
Chairman, building it into their
base budget on a recurring
basis. So when you look at those
items and
232
You divide that amount by four,
and that's how much they would
be getting per year.
Okay?
As part of their demonstration
project.
So it amounts to less than you
know, less than a percent a
year. That's why it seems
affordable in the out years. If
you're wanting to build it in,
especially if it's generating
savings.
So that's that's the Macon.
That's how we're going to look
at these requests that they're
going to give us as a as a
whole. All the agencies are
rather Are we going to
prioritize those maybe based on
how they're using federal
matches and such Mr Chair?
That was part of the criteria
that we use to prioritize things
that look like they were
promising, but maybe not ready
for prime time to be built into
the base budget.
Things that were seemed to be
priorities for funding for the
committee. Um, they're all
interim people have been
clamoring to do something
different Child protective
services as an example. Well,
here's some pretty strong
guardrails for doing something
different at Child Protective
services.
They still have to go
demonstrate they can do it
without the alternative is to
either say, We're not going to
do anything which didn't seem
tenable as the budget was being
developed, or
Build it into their base budget,
and you've already built in
millions of dollars of
prevention and early
intervention money that
Is not being implemented The way
that you know the law says it
should. Or the federal
government would give us
matching rates for so that was
the kind of the happy medium.
Thank you. I'm just trying to
get a grasp it a little bit
more, and I appreciate it.
And you're the general review of
everything. I think it's It's
good. I'm just I might, You
know, um
Be a little concerned how we we
tweak some things or how things
turned out when we go through
the actual process of this
In the future if we get this
through this year, which sounds
like it's a good it's a good way
of addressing what we've been
going through and actually
looking at. Maybe the specials
earlier on and how how budgets,
maybe pushing budgets, um, for
their head for discussion. Mr.
Chairman, you're right.
The Legislature has been doing
these large multi year
appropriations now for a couple
of years without having all of
these different
I call him guardrails. Um
There's some of those projects
that is hard for the agency to
get
Up and running in time, and
they're continually coming back
asking for extensions. So why
not say Okay? Here's four years
Go figure it out.
Um, rather than coming back and
saying, you know, we couldn't
implement this particular
program at the Environment
department because we couldn't
hire anybody or, you know you'd
be able to monitor that. And you
could
Cut off the money if after year
two. It's not working as well.
You still hold that power. Thank
you, Mr Chair, the other That's
how I'm gathering this
information, just making sure
that I'm gathering it correctly.
Um, and then I just wanted to go
over to
Um, secretaries. Uh,
List of requests for the from
the executive. The $100 million
to provide grant matching funds
to the state, local and tribal
governments from D F A. And
that's something that was
proposed as a special that's
still a special three d F a Mr
Chair.
Thank you, Mr. I just wanna I
really I actually appreciate
this, and I want to just
emphasize that and maybe have
some other off conversations
about it, but I think this is
really important as we're
looking for some of these
securities and getting these
federal dollars spent and in
assuring that we're going to get
these things in place. I might
have some other questions.
And I think that's why I have
And I think that's why I have.
Well, we're we've got a fairly
We still had a number of
members. Thank you, though,
Representative Han, we're going
to go next to represent
Pettigrew.
Have some pedigree, please.
Thank you, Jeremy.
Hmm.
Um
Chairman. I think my first
question I want to go back on
the questions with respect to
enforcement.
I think it's important that
We note that
Um
Our local agencies are the ones
that hiring the majority of
these of our kids and their
you're just sort of get them
their certifications, and then
that's when they are pulled from
state police.
And and I know, I know. Um,
what's respect to this chairman
That secretary said that you
know, he sees the opposite in
Albuquerque.
But in reality there are
More than three areas. CRUCES,
Albuquerque attacks So
What happens in the rural areas.
It's not defined by what happens
in the metropolitan areas, and I
think it's important that the
executive look at it from this
standpoint.
Um
Mr Chairman, Charles, R. Or
secretary. I'm not sure which
one should answer this.
Charles. I think it was actually
in your presentation. You talked
about a 4% public.
Pay incentive.
And with respect to that.
I think we've increased public
employee educators, salaries
starting 2022 or 2023. Is that
about right? What? What's the
total percentage on both that
we've increased over the years
Because I know during Covid. It
was flatlined.
Mr Chairman really started
before covid as well. I'm
starting to try to catch the
last decade, the teacher's
salaries would be considerably
higher because he raised the
minimum so high, so those are
Um
Public employees have been more
measured last year was saying
that
Um there's agencies that have
been getting other increases
within their base budgets, you
know, like child protective
services, and that's why I think
the LFC recommendation said, you
know, let's do another 2% Cola.
And then do 2% You figure out if
you need to make adjustments
because of that comprises the
4%.
But let's not go beyond that,
because we need to get a better
handle in total on what's going
on relative to the market
relative debate rather than what
was, in my view, starting to
feel like a haphazard way of
Kamal's, You know the I T
planning, and they're getting
big increases figure out where
we're at overall and then move
forward on that. And the next. I
appreciate that. Thank you,
Chairman.
With respect to that.
You know our, uh elected county
officials haven't had the
opportunity for pay raises since
2018 in the 2022 session.
We ran a bill.
I think I got it between both
houses within it was pocket
vetoed by the governor.
Last year. I ran it through two
committees within a day and a
half, and then the speaker
tabled it.
Um, for the rest for the
remaining part of the session.
I'm curious if we look at
The problem that we have is
Within county government.
We have
Our assistant county clerk.
Her deputy county clerk,
depending on where they're at
what they call them. Same thing
with our treasurer. Same thing
with, uh
Anybody in those elected
positions.
The person that probably is most
qualified or the people that are
most qualified.
Number one number two number
three in line.
Are getting paid more than the
clerk does getting paid more
than the treasurer does.
And we haven't done anything
about that. What are your
thoughts director on that?
Mr Chairman, representative that
that's um
If there's a statutory barrier
to adjusting those, and
You know, like for the state
constitutional offices they
hadn't been adjusted for decades
and need adjustment. Then I
would expect the locals to
You know, study what those
adjustments might need to be.
And if there needs to be a
statutory change, come to the
come to you.
It would not affect the budget.
Thank you, Chairman. And thank
you, director for that answer.
Exactly. It doesn't affect the
budget. There was no reason for
a pocket veto when other people
were getting
Um, getting raises.
Within within government.
There is no reason for it to be
tabled last year.
And so as we look at that, and
the situation that you brought
up, I'd be interested in
learning more about as well
because they don't necessarily
affect the budget, but they do
affect
The impact within our county
governments.
And the quality of people were
so I was just curious what your
thoughts were on that and how
we've increased over time and
some other areas.
Chairman, not the next question
for this for secretary.
Um
I believe I heard
200 million out of with respect
to
The section nine for the D O T.
The the governor's put in there
and had
Had it pulled up. It looks like
it's 240 million.
There's a piece of me that's
concerned about what what I'm
reading in Section nine now.
It looks like that whole section
that there was a huge effort.
By specific group of people
before I got here to get Section
nine set aside for D O T
projects.
And it looks like it just got
stolen.
On the outside from from from
the way I'm looking at it right
now.
And so can you correct me where
I'm seeing something wrong. And
how do we propose?
To to to fix that, because that
was an effort that was put in by
Uh, thank you, Chairman. And
thank you, Secretary for that.
Yeah. $110 million less than
what was requested.
Mr Sorry, Secretary approach is
you make sure you can You make
sure your mind is your mike on
okay, Graduates.
Mr Chairman Members Committee. I
apologize for that, Um
Representative, Um I believe the
original request that the
executive received through the
Department of Transportation was
probably it was somewhere in the
neighborhood of
303 $150 million in projects.
Like you did Throughout the
interim. We received requests
from state agencies. We
evaluated them. Virtually every
state agency didn't get what
they wanted. They got less than
they asked for. This is one of
those areas where we didn't fund
to the full request. Instead, we
refunded it. We funded at 200.
Chairman. I appreciate that
sector. I appreciate the
executives attempt with respect
to that.
We can. Chairman Director
Secretary Would you agree that
when there is an investment that
That it's prudent to make
investments with the larger
return on investment.
Is that a good way to run to
school?
Your fiscal business.
MS chairman members of the
committee. I would I would say
yes, I agree with that. I would
caveat it, though, that there's
a lot of discussions about
setting up funds.
For the future. I think that's
important. You did some good
work on that. Just this last
session.
But I would say based on my
experience running a $17 billion
trust fund.
That if you are investing $50
million and expecting a lot of
return on investment to fund
future programs, you're probably
going to be disappointed. You
have to capitalize these funds
at a level that they're going to
get the kind of returns you need
to fund into the future. So that
would be the only cautionary
note I would say. But, yes, in
general, I agree. Thank you,
Chairman and thank you,
Secretary. And I'm just curious
because as we go through
This if you go through the D O.
T in the Tampa report
The state of New Mexico from an
infrastructure standpoint is
about $6.5 billion in the hole.
And we continue to under fund.
Transportation.
Every year.
We continue to say yet it's a
problem. You know, we really
don't want to kill people on the
roads, but we don't fund it to
the level that it needs to be
funded to have access and would
be happy to share the access
with multiple white papers that
tells you that $100 million
invested on the road in Lee
County has a return on
investment at $1.5 billion
To the state.
And so as I look at this, and I
look at a mere $200,000, which
Doesn't fix the two top priority
roads in Lee County. Um that's a
concern for me, and it will be
an issue that we continue to
have conversations with with
Secretary Serna when when he
comes to the table in front of
the in front of the
Transportation Committee.
With respect to that we were at
Uh, we're pressed the cyst Right
now. We're at a point where if
we do not start taking some of
these additional funds that were
making and investing them.
In the areas of the state that
are turning the return on
investment for the social
programs we have. We're going to
go in a bigger spin than than
being predicted.
And that that's a concern for
me.
Mr Chairman, Secretary. What's
the the with respect to the
governor's budget?
As you're aware. Last year, she
basically struck half of the
maintenance budget for the sixth
districts that we have
What is the governor's
perspective this year?
Chairman and secretary I
appreciate and thank you, Mr
Secretary. That's fine and
making sure that the microphone
seems to cut. Yeah, sorry about
that. Just leave it on new
gadgets and just leave it on. Mr
Chairman. I don't have the depth
of knowledge with regard to the
districts their funding levels,
etcetera would just respectfully
defer to secretary surname for
that answer, because I don't
want to get it wrong.
Chairman and secretary. I
appreciate that answer. My
concern wasn't what the
secretary is asking for because
we know what it was last year.
And we know that it was
basically cut in half.
My question specifically, what's
the governor's position on how
how she will treat maintenance
funds in other words, repairs
and all the issues that happened
on the side of the road that
keep the roads of today.
When we design a road and we
costs estimated road today.
That goes with today's
construction costs also built
into that cost is a three year
The eight year in the 15 year.
Maintenance pieces that have to
go on that road for that road to
hit a 20 year fund Lifecycle
And when we reduce
The capacity.
Our district engineers to do
that last year's last year's
reduction in funding will
actually echo for years.
And that's a concern for me, So
I'm like a very good question
wasn't talking about dollar
amounts. Questions specifically
was had as the governor intends
to look at that this year.
MS chairman, members of the
committee and representative, I
have not spoken to the governor
about this again. Secretary
Secretary Sarna will probably
have a better answer. I will say
that the executive
recommendation
Yeah. Project design and
construction is a
5% increase.
And for highway operations. I
believe 9% increase
So So what? Thank you, Chairman
and thank you, Secretary. So and
I think I just heard from you is
that she's gonna increase it
from last year that it will
still be 40% less than what was
requested last year.
I appreciate that answer.
Um Hmm.
German. I know there's a lot of
people on the list. I'll hold
off.
Great. Thank you very much
represented a group. Next we're
gonna go to representative
Herndon representatives, said
Indiana. Hernan, please. Thank
you, Mr Chair, and, uh, Mr
Subtly, and Secretary pops one
of the things that you've talked
about a lot today is the
decreasing revenues that may be
coming in the years ahead and
then also by looking at there
could be some supplementals of
some of the dark endowment funds
that we have in place.
But do have the two of you and
are you working together with a
strip and putting together a
strategic
Innovative team to look at.
Where else are we going to be
able to get funding in the
future? And then are you
presenting that plan to us as
legislators?
Mr Chairman, Representative
Herndon.
Yes, we both recommendations
fully Fund the Legacy Endowment
fund.
Um, the LFC identified a
mechanism to
Um, offload from the General
fund, the out your liabilities
for financial aid programs and
higher education through a new
endowment fund. Um, and the LFC
recommendation also includes a
new strategy for, um
Funding programs in a more
controlled environment to make
sure they're yielding good
results as well as well as
Providing a pool of resources to
act as a back.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Mr slowly for that
response. I think that my
question was more directed about
toward innovative ideas. There
were money will be generated
from areas that are not in place
right now. But perhaps that's
something we can talk about
later. I'm not sure that I'm
actually seeing that and perhaps
it's there, and I just don't see
it, Mr Chairman. Those, um,
endowment funds will start
spinning off.
Significant amounts of a new
revenue. It won't show up in the
General fund, but it will be a
part of
Um, available money that you can
appropriate
In lieu of general fund
increases so you don't need as
much General fund because you've
got these other revenue as an
option.
Thank you very much. And Mr
Sully and Secretary pause. We
also heard a great deal about
funds not being distributed to
programs in a
In an effective manner, and
sometimes money is not
distributed until it's close to
the year end to the fiscal year
in and it's very difficult for
programs to be to be effective.
My question to you is who is the
or what is the enforcement
mechanism for making sure that
agencies are utilizing the funds
as they should be utilized?
And I will just give you 12
Examples. Money has not been
distributed for school baseball
centers and money has not been
distributed for health
counselors and we are already in
January chairman members of the
committee and representative
will try to answer that, Um
First of all, uh,
One of the mechanisms you have
is that oftentimes if agencies
don't spend the money, it
reverts.
Um, so that's one pressure that
you put on us and state agencies
to find projects and get them
off the ground, and it fully
implemented as is another.
I would say, Mr Chairman, I'm
not trying to make excuses, but
this has been an extraordinary
three or four years as you well
know.
With the pandemic as I mentioned
earlier with the
Really almost unimaginable
amount of federal funds flowing
into Mexico.
There were $252 million
To the essay alone.
That we were required to spend.
Even for D F A. That's a lot of
money.
In addition to that again, um
God bless us. We've been
fortunate with our own revenue
streams that have been at
historic levels double digits
for three years.
That has
Resulted in a number of new
programs, expansions of
programs, um and at the same
time facing headwinds being able
to
Recruit and retain employees,
all the things that you've
spoken
About during the interest or
headwinds that have faced state
agencies in a way that they
haven't
Been required to face
previously. Um so I think
I think money is moving.
alright, think programs are
being implemented.
And I think, um, you know,
agencies are doing
Nobody wants to revert money and
nobody wants to have a program
authorized by the Legislature
and not implemented. That's I
don't know of a single capital.
I would just say that there's a
lot of
Extraordinary factors facing
state agencies right now, um,
that may make it seem like we're
not moving.
And Mr Chairman representative.
There's just there's very real
capacity constraints when you
put this much money.
Into the system. And then it
could example is d O. T.
Where you know they have of the
$1.6 billion. You've been
supplementing their operating
budget.
You know they have been able to
spend about 745. But there's
still another 318 from the last
couple of years that hasn't been
spent as through December.
So I mean, the LFC
recommendation doesn't
Proposed adding to that, you
know, and that large amount you
know, with another big trench of
general fund appropriations and
tying that up. There's
opportunity cost to those types
of things. You know, D O T s
budget.
Their main operating budget that
transportation will work on is
an LFC recommendation and
executives similar $1.2 billion.
It's not as if they don't have
money in their base operating
budget to do some of these
things. They've got increases of
almost $100 million a year from
federal grants through the
Infrastructure Act. They've got
money getting freed up in there.
That they don't have to spend on
bonds. So there's just there's a
lot of money out there and just
because it doesn't show up in 11
place, that might not mean that
there aren't resources
elsewhere. So that's it's good
to to flag where those where
else they might be.
Mr Chair and Mr Sully and and
Secretary perhaps thank you for
those answers. I just have two
other quick questions for you
the first one since we are
talking about D O T.
In the state of New Mexico. We
have no interest state airline
at all. There is a process now
for helping the rural areas have
access to airlines. Those
airlines are flying out of the
state of New Mexico. They're not
flying interest state, the only
one that seems to be is from
silver City into Albuquerque.
And so
We have talked a lot about
putting more money into more
roads and roads. We really do
need to build, but we also it
seems to be
Necessary to be able to move our
population across a large, vast
period land in a quicker manner.
So if we're not seeing those,
uh, items occurring my question
to you as D F A and lfc.
It is.
Your proposal for helping to put
those types of things on the
agenda for this Legislature.
Look at
Mr Chairman, representative
Herndon. One of the challenges
is yes, We do have a large
landmass. But there's not very
many of us and just so make a
viable, You know, airline
business to only fly in state
and move lots of people. There's
just
It's hard to make that work
financially. There are
Um, you have put money towards
subsidizing interest state as
well as the out of state
flights. I think there's flights
that come up from Las Cruces.
Now I think there's a new one
starting possibly. But most of
the rural communities have also
wanted flights to larger
business connections as well as
leisure travel.
But those are very small planes.
Maybe 10.
Cedars little prop jobs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Sully.
Secretary Pops. One last
question is, when will we see
the side by side budgets of the
Ledgett executive and LSC. We've
talked about them. Are they
already here are where are they
would move will see them. Mr
Chairman Representative, we
handed out a small packet and
maybe lost in all the paper you
have in front of you that shows
you a high level side by side
for the overall financial
picture.
As well as um the larger
agencies will have this by every
agency for you.
And then the packet also
includes some topical areas just
for the LFC recommendation
Executive for things like the
LFC is public safety Package
Child welfare Package, Natural
resources, housing and the like,
because there's a lot of funding
and a lot of different spots
that seem to be a priority that
were a priority for the
committee.
Yeah, maybe a priority for HFC
as well. And you can see where
all of this those pots of money
are because they're not all in
in one. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much from
Herndon. Representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Um, and the secretary and Mr
Silly so
And I'm sorry to interrupt. I
apologize. I scratch it. I, um I
have representatives. Narayana
first part so we'll go to
representative Santayana
represent Brown and then
representative Allyson represent
of Sardinia. Naples. Sorry. I
apologize. Thank you. Um, first,
I want to think, uh,
Props and and director silly for
all your hard work this intern
session. I know I've learned a
lot from everything you guys
have taught us about the state.
So thank you for that. We know
you're working. I'm gonna say
okay, so I'm I want to talk
about the trust fund on page
232. So, Section nine. I didn't
see anything about the
environment. Um, I did see the
geothermal resource development
but
Um, when we think about the
environment on the executive, um
Sheet, The on page 32. They talk
about New Mexico's air and water
quantity quality, and one of the
graphs is always be math
teacher, so I gravitate toward
your graphs says percent of
population of breathing air that
meets federal health standards,
and it looks like it's 100%.
On on the graph, but but we know
that 50% of gas and oil industry
isn't following the Clean Air
Act 50% 66. I think we have
67,000 Wells. 50% of the
industry isn't following the
Clean Air Act. We know that Eddy
County is I think they're 19th
out of 380 counties in the
country. There are areas so bad,
um
I believe that BP is looking at
it.
We have 16,000 spills that have
yet to be remediated. So our
water we have to wonder about we
have the Sackett decision, which
makes our water very vulnerable
to threats in in so many ways we
need mapping there. So is there
anything that would fit into
this as far as the environment?
Well.
Mr Chairman, Um representative
side Indiana.
The departments, um
Operating budget request.
Included mainly to to request
One was for the General fund to
pick up the cost of their leases
or offices.
And two was for the General fund
to pick up the cost of raises
for their employees. Since 2019
No, like expansions and
regulatory function. No detail
despite request that if the
Legislature subsidize those two
items with General fund and
freed up there special revenue
and federal funds what would we
see different in terms of, um,
environmental regulation? If you
funded those things, I would
encourage you to ask what's
going to be different if you
free up.
Money That's not going to leases
and not going to pay for your
people.
And what would that be spent on?
There are a number of special
appropriations in Section five.
Um, that support the
departments. Um, you know,
promulgating new rule making
Um, subsidizing their
operations. Um, there's
reauthorization of prior year
special appropriations for the
same thing, so they're just in a
different spot, but they didn't
ask for any new kind of evidence
based approaches to
environmental regulation that
would have caused us to divert
that into the government.
Accountability. Okay, Thank you,
Mr Chairman. So I thought you
were looking at like the
dashboards and
And different things, too. Okay,
That's that's one place that we
started. The one that didn't
come through a necessarily a
formal request, but kind of
since there's a lot of interest
in trades and and industry
certificates. Um, the one in
higher education was, you know
more lfc drip. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you very much
for percent. Santayana. Next
we're gonna go to represent
brown, please.
Again. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Um, Mr Secretary, and Mr Silly.
Ah, I'm going to talk
transportation to just a little
bit more and a member of the
choir and, um, I just
I wish that we could
See this from the standpoint of
the eyes of the people who
travel our roads.
They don't really know what
happens in state government.
They probably don't even know
what happens in this committee.
and when we deal with our budget
bills
All they know is that and this
is true, I think for all six
transportation districts, they
know that
Many of the roads are not in
good condition.
And Mr Chairman and Mr Secretary
and in particular on page 36 of
the handout.
We see that there's a graph on
the right hand margin.
And it says that the number of
lane miles in poor condition
For 20 fiscal 21 was Evin 1000,
or condition.
Poor condition. I believe
there's a direct correlation
between
Poor condition of the roads and
accidents, so little better
improvement and fiscal 23 there.
There has been some of many of
these roads, but the bottom line
is
My constituents and I believe
again. Citizens all over this
residence all over this state
believe we need to do more with
transportation funding and I do
not see it.
As being much of a priority.
Mr Chair. I say that because for
the last two years, the extra
money we call it new money we've
had is about $7 billion
And you have this recommendation
for non recurring help.
Is only 240 against. That's
apparently what the governor is
asking for. Lfc apparently has
not seen fit to include that in
Table five under Section nine
funding again that Section nine
funding now apparently is not
for transportation.
It is for other things.
And as one of our members
already said, Mr Chair, we
worked really hard.
To get Section nine funding.
It's more directed by the
members.
As the Legislature than it is by
agency heads or even the
executive.
And so I think we're losing
ground.
And Mr Chairman. I look at our
transportation budget. It will
be about 2.1 billion
For fiscal year 2025. That's
projection. I think we topped a
billion a couple of years ago,
and that is money that is
desperately needed.
It's mostly an enterprise
department.
Um, gas tax diesel tax.
Uh, couple of other sources,
plus federal dollars. And so
when we talk about adding some
general fund money in, I think
that is more than so. Mr.
Chairman. I just wish we could
get a message through.
To the fourth floor that we need
more. And I know this committee
will have a lot to do with which
way we go. Will we go with the
new recommendation of Section
nine finding going to non
transportation projects?
Or will we do something else?
Maybe go back to what we had.
So just putting that in there,
Mr Chairman, Mr Secretary.
Um, I I've heard something, and
I just want some knowledge from
you if you've heard anything
about this, but there's a
proposal being talked about.
Of taking the transportation
budget.
Which again is usually found in
House Bill three. That's usually
what that's devoted to and
turning the transportation
funding the whole structure into
General fund.
And I'm alarmed by that. I don't
think that's a good idea. But
could you tell us if you are
aware of any discussions, Mr
Chair?
Mr Secretary.
Mr Chairman and representative.
No, I am not. Thank you. Glad to
hear that.
So, um
I do have one other question.
It's on page 36. Once again,
there's a little bit of a chart
at the top of the page.
It's looking at recurring
funding for, um Department of
Transportation.
And it says the total funds in
fiscal year 23 65 million and
some extra there is that member
accurate. It looks so low
compared to what we're seeing
for fiscal years. 2425 Mr.
Chair representative. I'm sorry.
That's that's not accurate. It
would
I see. So, Mr Chairman, that, uh
Mr Secretary, Mr Minor, So this
is a typo. Okay, Alright. That's
all I had. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. My
apologies. Well, Mr Thank you.
Thank you very much for percent.
Brown will conclude with
represent Alison. And then just
as a quick note, we will. As we
started last year. We do have
public comment. Uh,
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Um
I want to take advantage of this
presentation titled Executive
Appropriation Recommendation.
And the director.
Who holds the purse string to
the biggest purse.
Um
My question to you, Mr. Director
is, uh
I've been running with the
legislation for the past two or
three sessions were I was asking
funding for health councils.
County and tribal health
councils.
Are you able to give me an idea?
Of the chance of survival for my
asked for appropriations.
Mr Chairman, representative.
That's up to this body. Not
there. There was no increase for
health councils and the LFC
budget. There was not a request
for it from the Department of
Health, and I
I don't believe there's and not
sure if it's in the executive
recommendation or not.
Okay, Mr Chair.
I would
Planting to the mind of this, uh
Committee here.
We have been asking for
appropriations for the Health
Council for the past three or
four sessions, and then
I check the transfers out of
personal services.
Where the Department of Health
has reverted 77 almost 78
million
And yet you are not able to fund
our Health council. So I would
like to ask for you to consider
my legislation when it comes up
before you were asking. Not for
We gladly asked for the 78
million, but
We'll go small, small percentage
of that. So just to put a bug in
everybody's ear that I need
support on my legislation for
tribal Land Council County
health councils. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you very much.
Representative Allyson. Okay.
Uh, Mr Secretary, Mr. Director.
Thank you very much. This is
wanted to take extra time,
especially because this is going
to be the first time that we're
getting the chance to sort of in
full committee.
Begin to discuss the structure
in the the
You know the outline of what our
work will be for what is a very
intense and short sessions. So
thank you all for for your
questions. Thank you both for
the work. Thank you to your
staff's for all of the work that
made today possible. I think
we're farther along in terms of
knowing the places where we have
to work very hard, uh than ever
before. So with that members, we
do have
Uh, 15 minutes of public comment
That's been reserved. We don't
have to take all 15 minutes. Uh,
Unless there are folks, we're
going to take that. So we have
two pieces we have on zoom. I
believe we have four people. We
also if folks who are here in
person to give public comment,
can you raise your hand? Great.
Okay. Uh, as the uh, director
and secretary step out, we're
going to go ahead and start with
public comments. We try to go,
you know?
Two minutes. If you can do it
quicker, great if you need to go
a little bit longer.
You know, let's work through it,
Um
And, uh, whomever wants to start
us off. Please come on up to the
microphone. Um
Yeah. And please make sure the
microphones on Thank you. Thank
you. Chairman and members. My
name is Katherine Crochet to and
I'm, a registered lobbyist with
the New Mexico counties.
I just want to provide a little
bit of feedback on what what
we've seen so far in the
framework.
The state is legally obligated
to pay for the cost of housing
parole violators and the county
detention facility Reimbursement
fund was created to fulfill that
obligation. Well, the counties
are grateful for the 5 million
appropriation. The state has
consistency consistently failed
to appropriate sufficient funds
to fulfill this legal
obligation.
7.5 million is the average
annual cost as calculated by the
state Sentencing Commission.
Even that is a drop in the
bucket as last year counties
with detention facilities
collectively spent 336.8 million
for operating facilities for all
detainees. Additionally, as
reported throughout the interim
There is a staffing crisis and
county jails they can see rates
are critically high. Last year,
the Legislature established the
Law Enforcement Workforce
Building Fund with House Bill
357, including a fund for
recruitment and retention of
detention officers to help with
the vacancy crisis. During the
interim, the county's advocated
for a 10 million appropriation
to this fund.
These are difficult jobs to
recruit for, and counties can't
compete even after a recent
round of salary increases, the
county's urge your support of
this fun and current that
currently has no appropriation
recommendation. Thank you very
much. Thank you very much.
Good morning members of the
House Appropriations Committee
chair, representative Small in
members. My name is Valeria
Alarcon and I represented
Mexico's county and tribal
health councils and as
representative Allyson noted,
there's been great effort from
our elected officials in
allocating and annual funding
for our health councils at an
average of 143,006 0.6 million
in the context of the operating
budget of the state of New
Mexico. I think that's a
worthwhile in
Vestment in the health and well
being of communities across the
state.
Particularly given that you
Mexico is consistent of about
60% of rural tribal border in
frontier towns who experience
significant health disparities
and health councils are
literally the lifeline between
the resources they need, Um at
the local level. They also hold,
um, critical role in the public
health infrastructure in
partnership with N N d. O a
judge.
And 2021 housing memorial to
public health infrastructure.
Study Tests, force made
recommendations and convenient
by convening public health
partners from across the state
to recommendations emerged from
that study.
21st health councils and to
create a sustained robust
funding stream to build local
capacity and engaging meaningful
in a meaningful way community
for community health planning
and coordination of public
health strategies linked to
county and tribals, chip and
ship the statewide health
improvement plan.
Um, addressed the foundational
capacity to Community
partnership development by
convening and mobilizing these
partnerships and statewide
coalitions to improve community
representation, Active
participation in implementation
of much needed services We're
talking about education
intervention prevention when we
think about the statewide
community health improvement
60% of New Mexico has identified
behavioral and mental health as
a top tier, most pressing
public.
Health priority. This is
intersectional to substance use
and abuse, homelessness,
domestic violence and others
forms of violence.
Health councils are at the
intersection of addressing
public health priorities,
whether health and otherwise,
Um and that's uh please finish
the thought, Mr
Conversation without state
funding we're looking at about
20% of our Health Council
ceasing operations. As of May
31st 2024 when CDC funding ends
and that's a present poses a
huge risk.
To community members.
Thank you very much. You thank
you for the opportunity.
Okay, well, before we do that,
we're going to ask folks online
to raise their hands will go in
order. And now we'll go to Mr
Saavedra. Thank you. Mr Karen,
represents smaller members of
the committee. Mark Saavedra,
the New Mexico Council
University presidents. Um, I
just want to recognize the work
of the L. C. Work of the
executive in this committee and
also your chief of staff for
working with us on the interim.
The recommendations to reflect a
lot of that work with the
subcommittee's, um and we're
really excited and looking
forward to working with you
starting the session, So thank
you for the recommendation for
the workforce training working
on for years, and so we're very
delighted with that
recommendation for our
comprehensive regional schools
and community colleges. We hope
to continue keep that funding,
so thank you for that
recommendation.
Um and also we want to work with
the committee on trying to fund
and support our public safety,
our institutions as well, which
is in our priorities that we
presented back in December, But
basically, we all work together
so interim I was at every
committee with everybody, So
that's what I recognize the hard
work and the support and we look
forward to working with
everybody. Thank you very much.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Okay, we are going online.
And again if you're online,
please raise your hand if you
wish to give public comment.
I don't We don't see any hands
up yet for our attendees online,
which is okay.
We'll give it a little bit.
Um okay. Seeing no hands online.
Thank you for watching. We will
conclude the public comment for
this morning again. It's on the
agenda. Uh, later as well. Thank
you all very much. We're gonna
break for lunch. We'll work to
take as much will take an hour.
We're a little bit behind. I
think that is very
understandable for this most
important early framework part
But we will have to catch up as
we go through the rest of today
and then into the rest of the
week. Kate with that we're
adjourned for lunch. Thank you.
