Budget recommendation. I
apologize for agency code 770,
which is the corrections
department, you'll find that
information behind tabs seven.
You can find more information on
the lfc. Reckon on in volume one
page 133 to 36 and volume two
page 393 to 400.
Um, volume. I'm sorry. Volume
Two Volume three pages. 46 to 49
also has some supplemental
graphs and tables that give you
helpful overview of department
operations.
You can also find a digital
information in the key hearings
memo in front of you.
He was a today Cabinet secretary
Alicia Tafoya Lucero.
In the conscripted Smith, the
director of N M. C. D s s stupid
And Diego Jimenez, My
counterpart from the Department
of Finance and Administration.
The key differences between the
recommendations are the degree
to which each recommendation
uses vacancy savings to fund the
agency's priorities for context
in the last 10 Years, and NCDs
General fund budget grew by
64.4 Million, or approximately
30% of prison populations have
declined by 14.2%.
The LFC recommendation. Adjust
the personnel budget and the
inmate Management and control
program to fund most of what the
agency asked for both within
iMac and throughout the rest of
the department's budget.
This is accomplished by reducing
the personnel budget to more
closely aligned with FY 23
actuals one accounting for the
$24.5 million that the agency
barred out of the two hundreds
in FY 23.
Let's see recommendation also
assumes the Legislature approves
the purchase of the northeastern
Mexico Correctional Facility
from the town of Clayton,
resulting in approximately 5.55
$0.95 million in savings in FY
25.
All told, the LSE recommendation
reduces the corrections
departments overall budget by
9.4 million, or 2.4%, from FY
24, including a reduction of
11.4 million, or 3.3% from the
General fund.
The executive recommendation
increases the overall budget by
9.4 million, or 2.5%, including
10 Million, or 2.7% more in
general fund over FY 24.
Programmatically. Both
recommendations support the
majority of the agency's
request. As you can see on the
high level packet in front of
you, these, including increases
for rates for premium healthcare
premiums, utilities, food and
least cost as well as specific
programmatic changes, including
increased funding for
transitional living services and
re entry programs for veterans
in the Community of Vendor
management program.
Medication, assisted treatment
in iMac and electronic records
storage in the administrative
services division.
Finally directs for specials are
nearly identical. The exception
is the executive recommends
$750,000, a special for
medication assisted treatment,
or is the lfc instead grants the
expansion of $2.5 million, which
the executive does not fund?
And with that, I'll hand it over
to Diego. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much, Mr Sanchez.
Thank you, Scott. Thank you, Mr
Chair and members of the
committee. As Scott mentioned
the
That the differences here are
pretty vast. But there are areas
where we found similarities and
in the approach
For instance, but both the
executive and the LFC
recommendations did utilize, um,
vacancy savings to to fund some
of the initiatives that the
department had requested.
However, from the executive
perspective, the LFC
recommendation really overshoots
and under anticipates the need
that of the department. Um,
there was a reference to the to
the bar that or is that a number
of bars that the agency did last
year? And if that's what
What the primary driver of the
LFC recommendation is, then you
know, from the executive
perspective that, um
The appropriation should be
Reality ated to the other
categories.
Um, and the fact that they only
reverted about $2 million, which
is less than one or it's about
one half of 1% of their
Total Operating General fund
operating budget really
indicates that
Um, they do need the money.
Ah, perhaps it. It's
Currently located and in the
wrong place, But, um, with the
LFC recommendation, and I think
Secretary will go into greater
detail about what? What's the
more specific issues are. The
LFC recommendation is inadequate
to attempt to meet whether
agencies needs hard.
Um, to get to a little more
specific, Um, is Scott mentioned
some of the the LFC recommended
recommended funding for mad the
medication assisted treatment
programs.
Um
On the live on the last page of
your packet, then lfc excited
that
They They did not recommend, uh
Especial appropriation that the
department had requested to to
begin implementing this product.
Yet.
Within the operating budget.
There's $4.5 million and from
the executive perspective, it's
uh
It's a bit premature to go in
with that level of investment
for this kind of program. The
bill that you all passed. I
believe it was last session gave
the department until
Um, there's two different
deadlines that January 1 of 26
and 630 of 26 for the program to
be fully rolled out. And so the
The executive did not recommend
Funding and in the base budget.
For that program for that
reason, But, um, the executive
did recommend the $750,000
specialty so that they have some
funding to
Um, begin their planning and get
on the right path for that.
Um The other thing Mr Sanchez
mentioned was
The LFC recommendation removes
about $5.6 million from the base
budget for the
Purchasing of the northeast New
Mexico facility.
Um, I spoke with
G s D this morning, and if the
Legislature does decide to make
those appropriations and that
purchase is able to be made
Uh, probably won't be able to
get done before the fiscal year
starts. Um, so by removing that
full amount from their budget,
effective July 1st, um they'll,
the department will probably
have to
Still pay for the lease for that
for
At least a couple of months,
Probably two or three and a
quarter of the fiscal year
basically.
With that, Mr Chair, I will hand
it over to the secretary for her
comments. Thank you.
Madam Secretary. Thank you.
Please feel free to introduce
members of your team.
Great. Thank you, Mr Chair. I'm
Alicia to foil Lucero and I am
the secretary of the Corrections
Department. I'm accompanied
today by Mr Ed Smith. He is our
stage director, Deputy
secretaries Melanie Martinez and
Garry Marshall Probation and
Parole Director Lupus Sanchez,
Reentry Director Byron Brown,
our health services
administrator. When's Asatiani,
and there's a few other members
of our team, and at the end, we
will all be available for your
questions.
So in the Corrections
Department we supervise about
14,000 people on probation and
parole in five regions that are
made up of 46 district offices
located throughout New Mexico,
and we operate eight state
prison facilities and contract
services at two
Today. I'm will go over the
General fund recommendations for
FY 25. I'll share a brief
history of appropriations in
comparison to some of our costs
discussed the major differences
between the executive and the
legislative recommendations, and
then I'll share some data on our
inmate population and our budget
over a period of time.
So Please feel free to follow
along with the slides and I'll
operate the machine from here.
So I'll first draw your
attention to the slide that's
titled FY 25 General Fund
recommendation and in the chart
you're going to see
The requests.
For
I'm sorry. Not the not the
request. I'll start off. The
first column is the operating
budget for FY 24. The next
column over is the FY 25
executive recommendation and
then over as the LFC
recommendation, And then in that
last column. What you see is the
difference between the two
recommendations. Um, as you can
see here, the Legislative
Finance Committee recommendation
is nearly $21 million below the
executive recommendation.
And it's more than $11 million
below our FY 24 operating
budget.
On the next slide over
The top portion of this slide is
some information that we shared
with the group at our
Legislative Finance Committee
hearing that we did in December,
and it shows our budget
appropriation history from FY 21
through FY 24, and it includes
total change in dollars, as well
as the percentage that our
General fund appropriation
decreased during that period of
time.
Now I have included for
accuracy, cumulative legislative
compensation increases that were
separately appropriated to state
agencies across the board during
this time period, and what
you'll see here is that over a
four year period of time, the
corrections Department has been
reduced by 1.2% and when the
legislative increases are
included, you'll see that over
four years the department has
seen increases of just 4.2%.
So this department, you know,
we're all we're all aware of
what work we do. We're
responsible for the care of
incarcerated people, and that
includes everything from
clothing for inmates to uniforms
for staff, footwear vehicles,
gasoline for vehicle patrols and
transport officers Education
program activities for inmates.
security, staffing and equipment
for corrections officers and
probation officers.
Blankets, pillows, mattresses,
televisions, games and other
equipment to keep inmates from
being idle. Like other
departments. We've seen
increases in rates for employee
health care, lease costs and GST
rate increases, but we're also
responsible for ensuring that
working conditions for staff and
living conditions for
incarcerated persons are safe
and are adequately maintained.
With the aging facilities that
we operate. It's important to
note that it's we have to be
able to keep them functioning.
So doors have to be able to
lock. Um they everything has to
be functional from our plumbing
and H fact cooling everything
has to be up and running. Our
perimeter lights need to be
bright. These are all very
important items and none of them
rise to the level of capital
projects.
So in the bottom portion. What
you'll see here is just some of
the agencies expenses not
including the ones that I've
just discussed here. So to be
clear, all of our costs have
risen and there these are just
for examples of the costs that
were easily extracted so that we
can show you an example of the
rising cost of doing business.
So in this section on this
slide, you see
Medical and behavioral health
contracts. Food. This would be
food for inmates and facilities.
This is utilities and just
facilities across the state, and
then the building leases will be
for all agency leases that we
have across the state. Um, both
for probation and parole, as
well as for our facilities.
Um
Now the total of these four
areas is just a fraction again
of what the cost that we are
seeing are and the increases in
those costs. And as you can see
there, we've seen an increase of
22.4%.
So as well, Uh,
As I discussed already right
costs in every sector are rising
and the executive recommendation
provides a responsible 2.7% over
FY 24 and enables the department
to meet the basic needs of our
inmates while working to expand
services in our facilities and
make sure that we're working
hard with our people Post
release so that they succeed
when they're outside. And while
they're on supervision is with
us. We're also working to
increase housing options for
people that are on supervision.
And just overall in general,
increased services that are
available for people that are
being supervised on probation
and parole across the county.
And if you'll recall that,
somewhere in the neighborhood of
14,000 new Mexicans.
Now in these next two slides.
I've highlighted the major
differences between the
responsible increase of 2.7% as
recommended by the executive and
Well, I believe to be a
recklessly.
Seriously deep cuts as
recommended by the Legislative
Finance Committee.
Yes. First the executive
recommendations supports a vital
Public safety.
Compensation increase for
correctional officers and
probation and parole officers
were competing right now to fill
roles that are an important part
of maintaining public safety in
our state.
Uh, the legislative Finance
Committee is silent on public
safety compensation, which
leaves New Mexico vulnerable to
losing potential staff to other
states. Other types of careers
and it keeps our facilities
understaffed.
The Legislative Finance
Committee recommendation, cut
salaries and benefits in the
inmate and management control
area by $14.5 Million, and by
15.5. Overall, it is millions
below the bare minimum that we
need to operate at the levels
that we're operating now in FY
24
These drastic cuts leave no
funds to recruit.
To hire new staff to retain the
staff that we have, and even
worse, do not even cover the
salaries and benefits of the
staff that currently work for
the department.
The executive recommendation, by
contrast, includes $1.3 million
increase in iMac and responsibly
uses vacancy savings to fund
several initiatives while
leaving adequate funds to
recruit, hire and retain
Um
Now this next slide includes a
few things I'm only going to
cover a couple of them and then
I'll move on and and give plenty
of time for your questions. Um
The executive recommendation
includes a $4.2 million increase
in community offender management
supports all agency requested
initiatives that includes an
increase to a program that
utilizes veterans to assist with
substance abuse, testing and
Taser replacements. And while
the LFC recommendation appears
to include a $2.1 million
increase in this area and
support some agency initiatives,
it does so by diverting funds
from salaries and benefits in
the iMac program.
The executive recommendation
includes a $1.8 million increase
in re entry and reentry
division, and it supports all
agency initiatives, including
increases to community
corrections services and to
project echo, Uh, an area within
the University of New Mexico and
that I know that this group is
familiar with they provide
pyramid Intershop to our inmates
while they're incarcerated, and
they also are working with our
Inmates as they leave facilities
into communities, Um, in order
to help them walk through those
difficult steps of the first
time that a person is out of
incarceration, and and all of
that is supported by the
executive recommendation, while
the LFC cuts the re entry
division by $1.2 million
Now our responsibility. I've
said it's wide ranging
From community supervision to
treatment and housing support to
providing day to day basic human
needs for medical care, food
linens, clothing treatment,
education, mentorship and
meaningful activity and to do so
within safe environments.
When reviewing the Legislative
Finance Committee
recommendation. I was truly
shocked to see the extreme cuts
to an agency that is so vital to
community safety, It is more
surprising to view the deep and
extreme cuts recommended by the
LFC in comparison to our ask
Through the executive, which
reflects continued fiscal
responsibility and stewardship
of public money.
I could only surmise that the
Legislative Finance Committee's
proposed cuts are due to
misconceptions surrounding
population and cost. And then I
wondered, does the LFC believed
that the inmate population has a
causal relationship to lower
costs? Well, in truth, while
some costs will be lower due to
inmate populations, such as the
number of inmates receiving
medical care and the number of
inmates that are being fed meals
and facilities, other costs are
fixed.
So regardless of whether a
facility is at 100% capacity or
at 60% of capacity, the building
still has to function. The
utilities still have to be on.
We still have to have officers
in control centers, transport
vehicles on vehicle patrols,
administrative staff escorts and
all of the other personnel that
it takes to run an institution.
The other administrative. I'm
sorry. The other perhaps, which
maybe is a more pervasive
misconception.
Is what I address here in this
slide.
And it may be the belief that
the New Mexico Corrections
Department has seen a very
dramatic drop in population.
So in the top portion of this
slide, What you see is the
average inmate population from
FY 21 through FY 24 and yes, If
you look at these numbers,
you'll see that between FY 21
and 22, the population fell by
354 and between 22 and 23, the
population fell by 149.
But between 23 and 24, the
population so far has risen by
253 and appears to be on pace to
continue to rise as offenders
are being arrested and held
accountable for their criminal
activity.
In the chart below. Um you see
that the blue line represents
population while the Orange Line
represents General fund budget
in thousands
And as you can see there between
FY 21 and 23, the Corrections
department and the inmate
population both fell in pace
with one another. And then in FY
20 for both the population and
the budget saw increases.
Although the budget did not
increase as closely with the
population as it has, as it had
in years past.
So if in fy 25 the LFC
recommendation stands and with
the population trending towards
an increase in 25.
The LFC recommendation would
have the Corrections Department
budget dramatically decrease
while the inmate population
increases.
Mr Chair. We have been
responsible stewards of the
public dollars and we've been
able to manage increased costs,
even with decreases in our
general fund appropriations.
Cuts in the LFC budget are
extreme and would effectively
prevent the agency from hiring a
single new correctional officer.
Or they would force the agency
to close the facility, which
would impact facility safety
across the state and for one
community.
Eliminate a major source of
pride and a very large employer.
Mr Chair and members. I implore
you to vote in favor of the
executive recommendation.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and I'll
stand for questions. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. Thanks to your
team. I want to go to Mr Sanchez
to offer any additional lsg
thoughts. Then I'll start
Uh, yes, Mr Chair. Thank you
again. I think the main takeaway
from this discussion that Mr Sun
Yeah. Sorry. I think one of the
things that we want to make sure
that we're clear about is that
the LFC recommendation fully
believes that the
Agency is responsible steward of
public funds. However, we've the
LSC recommendation reflects the
committee's belief that if
They're going to adjust so much
out of their personnel budget
largely circumvents the regular
legislative appropriation
process and if the agency needs
additional funding and contracts
and other costs to other things,
like deferred maintenance or
increased costs and behavioral
healthcare, such needs should be
addressed in the budget request,
not included as part of the
personnel budget that by all
accounts
Not
The agency will be unable to
spend the fully allotted money
in previous years.
Again. We talked about a $24.5
million transfer overall to
other needed programs in the
last year. So far this year,
they transferred $6 million
already has a jeweler January 1.
So with that, Mr Chair
Great. Thank you very much. Mr.
Sanchez. Madam Secretary. Madam
Secretary. I guess we can just
start here. This starts us in FY
21. What was happening before
then we're have we seen a
significant drop in the inmate
population preceding fy 21.
Sorry about that. Mr Chair. I
believe that the agency started
to see a drop in population
starting around about 2017 2017
1819 20. Then in 21. That was a
bigger drop than what it was in
20 was probably the biggest one
that we saw. Like 500. Something
was that number. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. So just so
we're clear.
The this, uh
Pre the preceding years, and
some of the lines that you
showed us
The inmate population was
dropping starting.
Uh,
Four years back before this
roughly
That's right. 2017, Mr Sanchez.
Anything to add there?
One of the supplemental charts
and graphs provided in volume
Three on Page 48 also tracks
inmate population over the last
I believe 15 years.
Okay. And which page was that?
Page 48, Mr Chair. Okay, great,
So we can make sure that members
seeing that
Uh,
Madam Secretary. Um what is this
Has we rely on different areas,
including the said Sentencing
Commission.
There's a sentencing commission
forecast increases decreases or
sort of static population.
Mr Chair Since the pandemic,
they had a very difficult time
predict, predicting inmate
populations, and so they were
having to look at our population
every quarter instead of every
every year like they used to.
and so what they thought was
that we would see a significant
drop that would continue to
drop. But what they're telling
us now is that they've seen a
slight increase, and they're
starting to see a leveling off.
But as far as projections, I
don't have any static
information from them. That's
fair. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. You just said in your
testimony that you expect of
population to increase the
sentencing commission is
predicting has been predicting
continued decreases perhaps were
and I'm welcome would welcome
new information.
But you just said that they're
saying it's more of a leveling
off.
I would. I think this is an area
for us to continue to ask for
information on
If we're going back four plus
years
And we've seen decrease after
decrease after decrease, leaving
entire wings of institutions
that new Mexicans have paid for
empty.
Then that that obviously goes
very much to the heart of the
conversation. We're having
moving forward. Madam Secretary,
you mentioned Matt. What is Matt
again?
I m a T.
Mr Chair. I didn't mention that
in my presentation, but what
Haiti is Medicaid assisted
treatment. And Madam Secretary,
you have a number of inmates. We
have a number of inmates in the
state.
Who are AH, substance use
dependent on a number of things,
including opioids. Is that
right?
Mr Chair. We
I mean, I can't speak for the
state in general, but I can say
that within our institution,
sure, And we do have treatment
programs inside facilities.
Thanks, Madam Secretary, but the
mat medication assisted
treatment. That's one of the
most evidence based
Uh, treatment to help folks, uh,
to deal with those substance use
disorders to lessen their need
for illicit substances.
That's the reason why this
Legislature and Governor Luhan
Grisham
Brought this program in is that
correct?
Mr Chair. I believe that the
treatment community considers it
a standard treatment method.
And I've welcome any any input
from the from the analyst. My
understanding
Is that it is in very strong
evidence based treatment that in
fact, medication assisted
treatment is one of the few and
all one of the few ways
especially with significant
opioid use disorders that we can
count on treatment. Helping new
Mexicans move out of what is a
terrible, addictive cycle.
If that's wrong, I welcome that
infra standing
Do you have anything to
I disagree with that, Mr
Sanchez. Anything to add, Mr
Chair? Thank you. Yeah, it's as
reflected in an lfc performance
evaluation from the last interim
medication assisted treatment is
shown to be an evidence based
program that helps reduce
substance use disorder
populations. Okay, that did
include a review of
The corrections departments
ability to implement those
programs, and it shows promising
signs, although it's just
getting started. Got it, and I
think Thank you, Mr Sanchez, and
in that area, which is an area
that we fund aggressively, it's
been difficult.
For the organization that you
lied. Madam Secretary to
implement medication assisted
treatment.
Is that correct?
Mr Chair. No, I don't believe
so. In fact, a couple of years
back, we started to participate
in several research groups
participated with Samsa in a
policy academy with our staff in
conjunction with Human services
Department, and so what we're
trying to do is make sure that
when we implement we do it in a
responsible way.
So perhaps, Madam Secretary. We
should ask.
For those folks who are in your
population who do have substance
use disorders. How many of them
are receiving medication
assisted treatment?
Mr Chair at this time we have a
pilot program in grants that's
very limited with the types of
medication. We have very few
participants there and then we
do make it available for
pregnant and lactating females,
But we do not otherwise offer it
yet. We're in the process of
developing a pilot program.
developing rules with Human
services Department and then
getting ready to make sure that
we're able to meet the
requirements of the law.
God. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
So for all of these folks and
what we hear daily is that more
and more opioid addiction
challenges.
I guess. How long do we have to
wait? How long will those
inmates have to wait to receive
the benefits of this? We're
ready to fund it. There's
funding there.
Do you have any timeline for
that to expand beyond one
institution?
We are looking Mr Chair right
now at being able to
Move closer to a larger pilot
around the end of this year,
which is a full year ahead of
what the law requires. Um I
don't know definitively yet
because this is a partnership
that we're working on details of
how it will work when a person
gets out into a community to
make sure that they have those
services. So we're working with
D O H and H s D right now on
that.
Okay, Madam Secretary. Thank
you for that would love to see
from the, um from you all and
partnership with the new
healthcare authority. That was
the old HST. What That timeline
is because it's one of the few
lifelines that is there for, um
For folks who are addicted to
opioids. You know, it's one of
the again the evidence based
ways that we've been told on
this committee is effective in
re consequences. Madam
secretary. I want to briefly
touch on sort of just how much,
Uh, unused space in state owned
institutions is there
There are because
So
Like we said this chart which
only goes to fly, 21.
At least four years prior to
this inmate populations were
dropping.
There's been a small rebound.
With projections of either
increase continued drop, or
perhaps static.
How much unused space are you
managing at this point?
Mr Chair. I can tell you, Um,
first I'll start with the Santa
Rosa facility in the Clayton
facility. These are both
facilities there are almost
identical in their physical
structure. 600 bed capacity,
Both of these facilities had
been operating where only half
of the building was full sort.
about 300 inmates out of 600
typically was the population but
both of those facilities were
only budgeted to run one half of
the institution.
Um
At the penitentiary of New
Mexico. There's three facilities
on the compound. Um maximum
security, close custody and a
level two facility and right now
the close custody facility is
shut down. Um and then at
Central there's several housing
units closed central's in Los
Lunas. There's several housing
units closed, as well as the
farm, which
Used to be referred to as the
farm. But it was a level one.
Thank you, Madam Secretary. My
mom both taught at the
correctional facility out and
grounds we moved lost blueness
or else several mission and she
taught there at the correctional
facility for a while, Um, so
that sounds a significant amount
of space, a significant number
of beds.
Are not being utilized, and I
don't see here that we're going
to suddenly you know, open up
brand new wings of spaces. Madam
secretary moving into sort of
the personnel piece you told us
Or perhaps Mr Sanchez told us
there was a $6 million bar out
of the personnel category.
But was it
Why was it hard to hire
employees? Why? Why? Why did
that happen?
Uh, yes, Mr Chairman members of
the committee, so we did do 1 $6
million bar this year in the M
eight Management control
program. Um, last year at this
time, we did a $15 million bars
So those that are additional 9
million. We already redirected
in the 24 budget.
Do the things we had asked for
last year, but this year are
we're still short with the
medical contract. So 50% of that
$3 million is to cover that. And
then we had some miscellaneous
expenses. Still in the four
hundreds of the other cost
category an iMac for you know,
we've had cost increases in the
food contracts. You know, we're
already anticipating.
You know?
Santa Fe area. Los Lunas Western
Those that kind of area through
there had, you know, quadrupled
gas rates last winter, and we
had that cold snap, And I just
heard on the radio again this
morning that
They're anticipating Albuquerque
area is going to be another 100
some percent next by the end of
January Bill, so there's still
just for some shortfalls. Yes,
we're having and you know, we're
still struggling to fill, but so
we did have some vacancy
savings. But overall, the 6
million was about
A little under 2% of our budget
that we moved mostly for
medical. Like I said, for some
of those other costs, okay?
Thank you, Mr Chair. I also just
wanted to let you know that our
most recent graduating class of
correctional officers was 47 in
total, just a huge number like
it's a very large number and it
is able it starts to change the
vacancy rates right now. We have
a class that starting later in
the month, and they're so far on
pace to start with 51 cadets to
be correctional officers, So I
mean, we're definitely moving
forward and we're
Uh, taking some really deep
action in communities to
recruit.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Secretary. Thank you, Mr
Director for that, Um, the I
guess. Couple other quick
things, uh and all sort of, and
then I want to go to committee
members. Um one, madam
Secretary, um
The executive recognizes vacancy
savings here in the budget is
when penned on from the FAA.
Thank you very much, Madam
secretary moving into, I think a
few other areas. Um, we've there
have been sort of frequent or
consistent attempts and we
talked about this right before
we speak about it here.
For sort of independent, uh,
opportunities to review to sort
of share. Um
Essentially independent on buds
or other approaches. Madam
Secretary. You've repeatedly
opposed those efforts is that
fair share? Yes, I have thus far
appealed or rather opposed the
bills that have been presented.
Thank you, Madam Secretary. I
think
What I heard in your
presentation was pretty pretty
aggressive characterization of
The budget that's being put
forward.
Madam secretary. I think when we
look back, we see consistent,
repeated and often, I say, um,
likely to be repeated either
Continue drops an inmate
population or perhaps things
static.
And the
When there are things like
medication assisted treatment,
attacking one of the most
Pernik UIs.
Dangerous that we have in New
Mexico, which is opioid use
disorder, and right now it's
being implemented at one
facility that there's no
timetable or there's not a
specific timetable about how to
grow that out.
Uh, which is one of the things
If folks are coming in addicted
perhaps they come in. They're
not yet addicted. They become
addicted.
They're not yet having the
treatment options at this
legislature and the governor has
said her necessary.
Um
And on top of that there is a
repeated refusal to partner with
the Legislature for independent
oversight. Independent
Accountability Anything like
that. For me, that is a super
challenging space, especially
when there have been the the
transfer it So, um I appreciate
the committee's time and
indulgent.
We'll go first to representative
Chatfield, then to represent
Garcia.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
I'm not gonna be very original.
I'm afraid I I, uh it's kind of
What is this? Volume? Three. The
list. Your
Transfers in reversion out of
personal services.
An employee benefits category,
and I know you guys were just
talking about it. But I just
didn't I didn't hear an answer
that I understood. So I'm
looking here at, uh,
$24,000,531 531,828 dollars.
Ah transferred.
$2,763,514 reverted. So just,
uh, like I said, I know you guys
were just talking about that.
But
Did really
Get the answer. I mean,
Uh, yes, Mr Chairman,
Representative Chatfield, so
Within the main program where
you're talking about MH member
control. Those bars were 22
million. Those were used for
things like the we needed $7
million last year for the
medical contract. We had a
large, um, quite a few expenses.
You know, when you start
talking, you know for 5500
inmates, it turns into millions
when you need additional money
for food utilities.
You know, we we needed we
created another small unit in
one of our programs, and I had
to buy some vehicles because
they didn't have vehicles
available from GST. And then we
also because you know the the
hiring issues. It's not like we
want. You know, I'd love for
that to all be people. But, you
know, we all know the hiring
environment right now, so we're
trying to use the budget as best
as possible. So we moved that
money and we've done a lot of
small, you know, replacing air
conditioners, compressors and
done small paving projects at
facilities to try to knock a few
things off that
That massive capital out like
You know, deferred maintenance
list. We have a 300 million. So
we've done a lot of the small
projects when we have the
vacancy savings. I mean, we we
prefer to spend it on people.
Uh, the 2.7 million reversion
last year was about 600,000 and
program support. Um
Under. You know, we have. We've
been likely over the last about
10 months have a new general
counsel who has been able to
take the bureau from the 75%
vacancy rate to 25% recon. See,
they can see right in a few
months, so that's 600,000
probably disappear next year and
then and it made management
control. In part of those bars.
We had some leftover money.
That we had had committed to our
previous LFC lsl in If we didn't
need all the money we moved from
medical would reverse so out of
that 2 million an iMac.
Um 900,000 was for the medical
we didn't need so instead of
trying to spend it on anything.
We gave it back like we
promised. And, you know when you
have 1800 people on a program,
you don't spend a penny. So we
reverted six or 700,000 in
salaries and benefits in that
program, And then at the end of
the year when you have $100
million budget
A lot of that stuff. You order
either the whole orders don't
come in. They don't arrive by
June 30th. So in a program that
size some of those year and
Purchases fall off. So the
accumulation of those few things
and I, mac reverted in a $2
million, but $2 million
reversion for the whole agency
was about 8/10 of 1% that we
reverted.
Hmm. Thank you for that. Answer.
It's I know it's a pretty
Uh, complicated machine with a
lot of moving parts, But I'm
just thinking that we miss that.
That far $24 million when we did
the budget last year that
That we didn't appropriate money
for that many things and we
appropriated too much.
For this one thing, So I mean,
if that be true, we need to
really sit down and talk so that
we don't miss it again. Just
briefly, Mr Chair and represents
Chatfield. We did address part
of that in this fy 24 budget we
already re allocated, so I think
that might be some of that
disparity and that big
difference in the salaries and
benefits is we in our request
for this year that we received
in this op, but we already moved
9.2 million out of salaries and
benefits. 6 million for medical
And 3 million into other costs
in Imax, so you know we've
already moved, you know?
Not quite 50% of that, but a
good chunk.
So that's where you saw that
much smaller bar this year
because we've already moved that
money.
So, Mr Chairman, you know, we
want to give you what you need
to do A good job, And I don't
think that, uh, full prison
means a good job or an empty
prison means a good job. I
think.
Low numbers in be incarcerated
People with low crime rate
numbers equals a good job. And
so you have to kind of look at
both things and
And I hope that we can
Rice to meet the need.
Thank you.
Thank you very much represents
Chatfield. Next. We've got to
have some Garcia, then pedigree.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Thanks
for the presentation today. Uh,
I don't know if I heard you
right on your presentation that
you said was a budget if you go
to the lower, you cannot hire
enough guards, and there's a
safety issue with that. Is that
correct?
Mr. Chair, representative
Garcia. Yes. The cut in the IMAX
salaries and benefits is so
large that we literally can't
even afford the staff that we
have, if if it goes through and
we wouldn't be able to hire any
new staff.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And the
reason I brought that up, I'm
reading the
The people here and this is
states here that you have about
17.2% of the agency position
that run field and then at the
Lord Line, it says you have 38%.
Position of filled gardens. Just
38%.
With a 38% 70% that comes up to
50% vacancy.
It might reading that right?
Mr Chair.
And representative Garcia. No,
but I can tell you what those
numbers look like. Right now.
We're looking at 28.7% vacancy
insecurity in prisons.
Um, I'm sorry. Representative
Garcia, Mr Chair, but
It's important that we have the
vacancies in the facilities
right now, because with the
vacancies that we have in the
staffing areas were able to make
up for that, right. So like
Santa Rose is a good example. I
have have to place filled
because I have half the staff
that I need to run the full
facility. Right. So it
essentially is 100% staff
because the inmate population
isn't
0 600 is that 300? So it meets
the needs of what the staff
levels are? Yeah. Thanks to be
under reading here, 17.2%
agency.
Total position run field, and
there's a November for his
public private correctional
officer. Vacancies. Is that 38%.
I mean, 34.8%. That's what I'm
reading. And you're seeing that
totally worth breaking through
rate of guards, including, uh
Stop, you know.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garcia. That's the vacancy rate
for security staff specifically,
is 25.66%.
Hmm.
Okay, Mr German and took it,
Terry. Oh, these are vacancy
rate. How many positions that
Mr Terror. I apologize. I didn't
bring the number exactly of the
amount of vacancies that it is.
Um, um, Mr Chair. You know, this
question are important.
Because, you know
Of all these vacancies, how many
are funded vacancies?
Um, after you answer that
question. What are you doing
with the fun? The funding that
is available to you, and you're
not funny in these positions.
Mrs. This microphone is right
Apologize, man. I'm saying
they're they're quite sensitive.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garcia.
So I think that this question
was answered a bit by Mr Smith.
I mean, we're always looking to
recruit and hire people and have
these big classes in our
academies. Probation, parole
corrections officers, right?
That's always our goal is
recruit, recruit and and keep
the people that we have, and it
doesn't always work out that
way. Which is the reason why we
have had to do these bars in
past years. And we do believe
that we rectified that with this
recommendation by making some of
that internal movement
ourselves. We recognize that
The money that we needed wasn't
in the right categories. And so
we made those adjustments in our
recommendation for FY 25. I
mean, as far as other things
that that type of those type of
dollars get spent on when they
get moved in a bar is things
like this stuff I mentioned
during the presentation like a
door lock, for example, right
like that's not something that I
would take to capital. It's just
not a big enough project, and
it's definitely not something
that can wait.
So if I have a door to a cell
that doesn't work, I would have
to make that sell unusable or be
able to fix it somehow. And so
we moved money from that area.
Into a different category in
order to cover those types of
expenses. I mean, a lot of it
really comes down to like that
basic day to day repair of old
facilities, you know, making
sure the H facts work and the
air conditioning and all of
those types of things that have
to be functional. Um, those are
things that we we need to be
able to do and react to in an
urgent way, Mr Chairman, Madam
Secretary, I guess my question
was
How much money are you saving on
positions that are paid for
their not field? That's what I
would need to know.
Madam Secretary, if you want to
talk about it offline, I'm I'm
fine with that, too. But you
know, these are important
questions that you know you have
a vacancy rate is great. It's
huge and yet
What I'm asking is what are you
doing with the funding that you
were paying for funded positions
that are vacant.
So Mr Chairman represent Garcia.
So those vacancies savings for
when we haven't been able to
fill positions or is there many
we've moved via those bars.
For help cover the medical
healthcare contract. You know,
we we sweat we went with the new
vendor in 2019 and you know,
just like all our healthcare
keeps going up. We haven't
really asked for much and there
we've been using our vacancy
savings for those increases over
the last few years and thereby
vehicles and to do small
facility maintenance. You know
the capital out there, you know,
we get about this. Last year. We
got $20 million, but that was
really an outlier. We usually
get
Somewhere between five and 10,
But we have a list of $300
million and deferred maintenance
and all these old facilities, so
a lot of those vacancies
savings you know, we'll spend
four or $5 million a year on
small projects because you know
when we get that 10 million
that's usually like two or three
or four. Maybe large projects
for you know, like roofs and H
fact system so
Those vacancies. Savings are
used for facility projects. Like
I said vehicles, you know if
we're short on the food or the
medical contract, and then we've
reverted to the $4 million a
year just because you can't
spend the penny and an agency
this size, so we have given back
a little bit anywhere like sit
anywhere from 2 to 4 million
over the last three years.
We revert
Thanks to that
just wanted to ask Mr Sanchez
wanted to weigh in there and
we'll stay with you. He wanted
to add something.
Mr. Chair represented Garcia.
Thank you. On page 13 of your
package. You'll see the PS count
for this upcoming fiscal year.
Um, you'll see that under
Alright, calm G. The agency
requested 2525 ft for next year
of which we predict that 367
will be additional funded ft
that are vacant. That will
amount to, at least by the
projection that we had in
October. Approximately
32,500,000 and vacancy savings
for FY 25.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Secretary you
mentioned
The Jamaican Caesar because, uh,
Some of the facilities are happy
used My correct
Mr. Chair, Representative
Garcia. What I was saying was
that there's certain facilities
that are only funded for half
the facility to operate. Right.
So I don't take those positions
off the books because we think
it's possible that at some point
that other side of the facility
might need to be, um, filled.
But like in the Santa Rosa
facility again, good example.
That facility is only budgeted
for
Half of the building to be open,
only to operate at that 300
capacity and only to fill the
number of positions. So while
there might be a certain number
of positions that show up on our
vacancy rates, they are not
funded vacancies.
Thank you. Mr Chairman on the
next question is going to be in
regards to the prisons. You
haven't grants. What is your
vacancy right there and most
facilities.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Garcia, our rep our vacancy rate
in grants in the custody areas.
Security only is 23.1% and
overall, it's 21.6%.
And then thank you for that. You
know 22%. How many enemies do
you have in that most of
facilities and you're only 23%
Vacancy. Mr. Chair,
Representative Garcia. I'm
apologize. He's pulling that
population number up right now.
Mr Chair, Representative Garcia,
just for a quick point in time
reference. If you look at page
49 of your volume is re you'll
see our prison facility Fact
sheet, although this reflects
populations at the end of fy 23,
you'll see that the western New
Mexico Correctional Facility
North had 350 I'm sorry 334
inmates out of 353, representing
a 95% occupancy rate, whereas
the western New Mexico
Correctional Facilities South
Had 566 173 available beds
filled representing an occupancy
rate of 83%.
Thank you for that. You know,
that's a concern.
We've talked about this over and
over.
Of guards.
Complaining that they're married
to the unit prison because they
do not have enough guards. What?
Take care of the prisoners and
what they're afraid of Mr
Kellerman and Madam Secretary.
Of something happened like it
happened in Santa Fe, and they
cannot control it. We gonna have
a big problem, and the issue
here seems to be
Oh, vacancy rates at the biggest
issue. You're facing vacancy
rates everywhere.
And I'm concerned about those
two prison and grants because
they're both of almost like
capacity.
And yet we're 23% vacancy.
That's all I have, Mr Chairman.
Thank you very much for seven.
Garcia represent pedigree. Thank
you. Chair. Thank you all for
the presentation. Thank you for
being here, Madam Secretary.
Um
Chairman. I would like to start
off with asking for you to
consider a subcommittee to sit
down and have a conversation
with L S C and the secretary's
death with respect to this
And talk through the different
pieces on the budget. I've had
some conversations with Charles.
He's He's reinforced some of the
things that are in here, but I
think it would be good to still
sit down and have that
conversation.
It's at your will. With respect
to that, Um
Madam secretary.
Nonetheless, questions you
answered. What chairman was with
respect to the centers of
facility with half of the
building being
Being empty right now.
When did we start seeing that
breakdown and in what year?
Mr. Chair, representative
Pettigrew. So that facility
classically had issues with
staff shortages when it was
operated by Geo, the same
situation existed, of course,
motivations of private
corporation are different,
right, so they lose money when
they don't have enough in Mason
population, So when we took it
over
We said from the very beginning
that we would only fill it to
the extent that we could staff
it, And I mean, in truth, we
hover in that facility between
30 50% vacant and so that's the
reason that we've decided to
only fill half the facility and
only budget ourselves for half
the facility.
Thank you and Chairman and Madam
Secretary. What year? Did you
take that over from Geo.
Mr Chair representative pedigree
that was in 2021.
Chairman and secretary, So that
would be the year that, um, the
legislation went through the
started transitioning from
private to state.
Would that be correct?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigrew. We actually started
the process of taking over
private prisons before the
legislation was finalized, but
it was around the same time.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Secretary. The
Is that is like go through the
graph It LLC provided for us.
Do you recall? Madam Secretary
Chairman? Um what year The Bell
Reform bill went through.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigrew. I do not remember. I
do remember seeing it on the
ballot as a voter, but I don't
recall what year that was.
Thank you, Madam Secretary and
thank you, Chairman. I'm just
trying to put some things
together in my mind.
16
So that's thinking of
Chairman, not trying to put
together things in my mind where
your P population started to
come down.
Yeah, And and what? The impetus
behind those things Where and I
do not think
Chairman and madam secretary
that the majority of that
Was something that was caused
internally within the
Corrections Department. I think
those were decisions that were
made by the Legislature.
Yeah. And, uh um
Multiple fourth floors, not just
the current one. But prior to
that, as well.
Um
And then
Chairman. Madam Secretary Do you
recall what year
We released inmates with the
cannabis bill.
So people that were charged with
cannabis and we had to release
Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigrew. I do believe that may
have occurred in jails to some
extent. But when the cannabis
bill passed, we scoured our
population and we didn't have
one single person who was
incarcerated solely for
possession of marijuana. They
were all um anybody who did have
that as a charge also had
another aggravating charge that
accompanied it. And so we did
not release anybody. When that
bill passed
For that reason. Thank you,
Chairman. And thank you, Madam
Secretary of that That helps me
a lot.
Madam chairman, Madam Secretary
was there a time in the state of
New Mexico? That, um, as we had
people
Coming in.
Um
An illegal population coming in.
Yeah, it seems to me remembering
that there was a time as if
there was an aggravated piece to
that person. They were kept in
in our prisons. Was that was
that accurate before they were
either transferred back to
Mexico or whatever country they
came from?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Pettigrew when we have a person
in custody, I mean, if they have
any type of detainers, so it
doesn't matter if it's that type
of a detainer or detainer for
having committed a crime in
another state, or what have you
We work to reconcile the details
of that detainer and then part
of our prerelease processes that
we have to find suitable and
safe residences for people to
leave, too.
And so if a person didn't have a
safe and suitable place to leave
to be that here in New Mexico,
another state, another country,
Um, we would hold that person
into their parole term until we
were able to find a safe and
suitable place to go. In some
cases. We were asked to detain a
person if they have a detainer,
But that is not an uncommon
practice because
You know, as an example of
Arizona had a detainer on a
person but couldn't come and get
them for a month. We would hold
on to them for a month for
Arizona.
Okay?
Thank you, Chairman. And thank
you, Madam Secretary for that.
Um
Madam secretary, Do you believe
Chairman? Do you believe that?
Um
Over the last
Three sessions that I've been
here there's been
Uh, In my opinion, a big push
towards pushing, um
Criminals to and re identifying
them towards some kind of
behavioral health issue.
Madam secretary and chairman. Do
you believe that part of that
transition? Maybe part of reach
part of the reduction that we've
seen Granted, the graphs show
that we're going back up.
It actually is.
Steeper rate than we lost from
2021 through 23.
Which can be defined from a
month to the reasons but, um to
do you see the mental health
side of this is being part of
the the reduction in the number
of, um
Incarcerated people.
Madam chair and representative
Pettigrew.
Um you know, we we and I think
this is a fairly well known
thing in our country Is that a
lot of people that have mental
illnesses and substance abuse
issues end up incarcerated
situations. I mean, when we have
dealing when we're dealing with
people on supervision with
probation and parole, we're
always trying to get them into
treatment and get them to
address whatever issues that
they have that mental mental
health issues or or substance
abuse issues.
And we try to do that inside
facilities. I don't necessarily
believe that I've seen any
diversion that's lit. Let's
contributed to the lessening in
population in the sentencing
commission, as Mr Chair
mentioned earlier, they do put
out a report they do try to make
population projections, but what
they've really emphasized to us
repeatedly is that they have not
been able to make any valid.
Projections as to what direction
our population will go because
there was such an extreme
anomaly in projection when the
pandemic happened, and that
really changed a lot of things
as far as, um, policing and
whatnot, But I can say what I've
seen in the last, uh, blip,
right? We talked about the 23 to
24 numbers and this increase of
350. I think it was 358.
In the number of people that are
incarcerated. And so this is the
first year in a little while,
but we've actually seen an
increase. And I can say that
we've seen, um increased
prosecutions in some
communities. And while I haven't
looked at the data on that yet,
and I will talk with the
sentencing commission, it does
appear that some perhaps of our
larger communities are making
sure that people are being held
accountable for criminal action.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you, madam. Next year, um
I appreciate having
conversations with you because
you told me that you tell me how
you feel about whether I You
know, I'm gonna agree or not,
And and I am thankful for that.
Um
So my next question is probably
a tougher question for you.
If you look at the madam vice
chair and and secretary, if you
look at the percent populations
From a corporate standpoint, I
would sit there and say, Okay,
it's time to shut one down and
move people together.
Yes. If you were to do that,
What facility? Would that be?
Madam Secretary.
Adam chair, representative
Pettigrew. You know, I think
it's a bigger question than
that. I think that we'd have to
be able to go out to communities
and have like listening sessions
with communities and see what
their concerns are. And I also
think that as a state, we would
have to be a responsible, um,
partner in the community by
helping any community if we did
have to close an institution by
finding alternative
Um, economic development
opportunities for those
communities. I definitely don't
think that it's appropriate to
keep a facility open just
because a community needs jobs,
right? I mean, but I do think
that having the facilities and
the leeway that we have with the
inmate population right now
really does help us balance the
population of inmates with the
staffing vacancies. So in many
of our facilities, we are really
able to do a one for one where
if we have a 50% vacancy
And staffed and we can have a
50% vacancy and inmates.
So my concern about closing a
facility would be that I
wouldn't be able to do that
anymore, and I would have to
shift inmates into other
locations, even if those
locations we're very short
staffed, so that's why I felt
like closing a facility at this
point in time, um, would
potentially be harmful to all of
the other facilities in the
state.
Thank you, Madam Vice chair and
thank you, Secretary for that,
and I
It kind of assume that's the
direction you might take with
that, and rightfully so.
You know, and I do appreciate
the fact that so many of our
departments nowadays are
starting to look at if something
happens, what happens to the
economics of the area?
Madam vice chair and and
secretary.
We obviously didn't do that.
To the north northwest part of
the state when we decided to
shut down coal mines, or we
wouldn't have put so many people
out of work without a solution.
So, um
With that.
It's it's just
Maybe an out of the box thought
something that we can look at is
I look through behavioral health
as I looked through moving
Department of Health to
Healthcare Authority, and we
talked about how much we're
looking at with respect to be
behavioral health. I'm not. I'm
I'm curious if if
Maybe there's a proper facility.
That through good face shutdown
could quickly be transitioned
into
Behavioral health facility.
And so and I'm sure madam Chair
vice chair and Madam secretary.
You guys probably already
started those conversations. I'm
not, uh, you know, I'm just like
like I said, looking on the
outside, looking from the
outside in
But
We're not too sure that that may
not be the right approach with
respect to that, because we have
a whole bunch of communities
that are asking for money for
behavioral health centers. How
many of those coincide with
communities that we have, Um,
prison population in that maybe
only 50% served.
And so just a thought outside
the box that and love for you
guys to consider and
A cyber conversation about Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
madam Secretary.
Thank you, Representative. Um I
have a couple of questions and
then um, we'll wrap up.
Um, and moved to recommendation.
I think most of my questions are
actually for Scott.
Um
Scott. What is Lfc s projected
vacancy savings for fiscal year
24.
And I'm looking on page 390 for
volume two.
Madam chair. Thank you Looking
at the page 13 of your packet. I
don't have a volume two handy.
We project vacancy rate for fy
24.
Appointed vacancy will be $28.8
million.
You find it under column. K 28.8
million
Thank you, Scott. So $28.8
million in
Funded vacancy savings.
Um
What is the projected vacancy
savings? Uh, in dollars for
fiscal year, 25.
Madam Chair. Alexey projects
funded vacancy savings in FY 25
the total $32.5 million 32.5
million dollars. Thank you,
Scott. Um, And of that, Um, what
is the expected savings just in
iMac.
Madam chair just to clarify. Are
you asking the vacancy savings
implemented in the LFC
recommendation?
Um so
Or vacancy savings just in iMac
funding. I'm sorry.
The funded vacancy in dollars
for iMac alone and you'll find
that other column in 29.3 $75
million. It's um
Sorry, essentially $29.4
million.
So that we call them in.
Under iMac.
Ah, okay, um and then
For, um
Sorry. I'm just, um, comparing
with my book here.
Okay. And so if it's 29
Yeah million dollars of a
projected savings. Pardon me.
What is the
How much has lfc recommended be
reduced from the budget in that
line.
For 25 fiscal year, 25.
Madam chaired the LFC
recommendation applies a $14.5
million vacancy savings to iMac
and FY 25. And you can see that
under column P
Um and Scott, What is the
difference there and in figures
between, um
So how much are you not
reducing?
Are you leaving for his lfc,
leaving for a buffer, Madam
chair. I believe around $15
million is, uh, out of the
projected vacancy savings is not
being applied as vacancy savings
in the FY 25 recommendation.
Thank you. Um and
Why this is, um more of a
101 question, but
Can you tell me? Why do we have
p codes?
Um
In state government.
Why do we break things out?
Into different codes and, um,
the personnel lines in general.
Madam chair. If I may. I believe
the
Answer you're looking at is that
we're breaking into P codes.
Expenditure categories, so that
at the highest level in
accordance with the Government
Accountability Act, the
Legislature has
Kind of directed where agencies
can put this money, and that's
what the regular appropriations
process aims to do. Um, I
believe consistent with LFC
Budget guidelines. The FY 25
rec.
Essentially points out that
The
Practice at Corrections is to
move money out of personnel to
end up in the 304 hundred's
expenditure category and
consistent with our narrative
with the LSC narrative in volume
two recognition of the fact that
if the money needs to be there,
it should be requested to be
there in the budget at the start
of the process and go through
the regular legislative
appropriation process.
Thank you, Scott. I just want
to, uh
Read for the committee members
and others here. The last line
in the first paragraph on page
394,
however, because the agency
routinely makes these
adjustments rather than align
its program budgets with actual
expenditures, it has largely
circumvented the appropriations
process, which the committee
recommendation attempts to
address
So I'd like to point out that
the LFC recommendation is
designed to bring in line.
The Department of Corrections
spending practices with, um,
where they should be allocated.
and that is the purview of the
Legislature through the
Government Accountability Act.
Correct. Okay. Um, thank you so
much. Um, I have no other
questions.
Thank you, Madam. Vice chair.
Thank you, Madam Secretary would
turn over to you if there's any
final closing comments.
And please, Diego. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Members of the committee.
Um, so there's been a lot of
discussion about funded
vacancies and from the executive
perspective.
Uh, our opinion is that that the
PS Kalac that is using the LFC
recommendation omits a lot of,
um, fixed cost. Um
And so I don't have
Our version of the calculator
with me, but our version of I
remember correctly had about
double the UNF ain't the
unfunded vacancy rates so and I,
Mac this the lfc recommendation
is about 10.8%. I think in our
version
It was about
20% of the positions and I'm a
queer and funded and
additionally for the Corrections
Department
According to their own
projections for this year.
An iMac that inmate management
and control program
They are only projecting two and
the year with
About $500,000 and excess budget
there.
It's that they thank you very
much. I think, Madam Secretary.
If there's I'd like to wrap this
up.
Uh, we have a number of other
presentations. Thank you for
sort of pointing out that
there's some differences in
approach on the PS, Cal.
Anything to conclude with Madam
Secretary, Mr Chair? Yes. I just
want to thank the committee. I
mean, I know that, uh, these are
difficult decisions to make, and
I do want to just acknowledge
that we did recognize that we
needed to
Be, uh, more mindful or more
accurate rather with the places
and the P codes that we
requested for funds in and we do
believe that we rectified that
in FY 25. And so it means if it
is a possibility for a
subcommittee to talk more and
perhaps meet with us and meet
with the lfc together. Um I
think that we could come to a
place where we're meeting the
needs of the legislative Finance
Committee, while
Continuing to, um, improve the
way that we seek the funds, So I
appreciate your time and the
time of the committee members
Thank you very much. Madam
Secretary. Thank you to you to
your team. Uh,
Well, I'm gonna ask for the that
we adopt the LSC recommendation.
I want to ask the analysts and
also asked director Salad to
help
Um, work through.
Sort of what has been a
challenging history. Bless you,
man. American member Um
And get us a. I think there are
potential areas to sort of come
closer. We understand, And I
think this committee believes
staffing knows the importance
especially of staffing.
Ah, Perhaps there are ways to
work on pay packages similar to
what we've seen proposed by
other agencies that reward
longevity or other things. Um,
but at this point, I think we
have to adopt the LFC
recommendation. I do want to see
more work at this, Madam Vice,
sir.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I moved the
committee adopts the LFC
recommendation. Okay, it's been
moved in second. Is there any
opposition to that motion?
Okay. Please show represented.
Well, please show represent
pedigree. Great. Okay. Thank
you. Madam Secretary. Thank you.
All thank you members.
Okay, We're gonna move forward.
With inviting up. Um
The Attorney general's office.
All right. Please start us off.
Afternoon, Mr Chair members of
the committee. My name is Austin
Davidson and I'm, the judiciary
analyst for the LFC. Today we're
gonna be discussing the attorney
General's budget recommendation.
You can find that in Tab three
with the agency number 305. I'm
joined today by the Treaty
General's staff and I'm joined
by the Department of Finance
Diego Jimenez.
The LFC in the executive
recommendations are overall
similar with differences in the
legal services program related
to the expansion of personnel.
The total differences amount to
$49,000.
The LFC and executive
recommendations differ and that
the D F A recommendation
provides less funding and the
personnel category.
Due to the agency's higher than
normal vacancy savings related
to the legal services division.
The analysts reached consensus
on all performance measures and
targets Diego would you like to
discuss the legal services
division?
Sure. Thank you, Austin, Mr
Chair and members of the
committee, Diego humanism, the
public safety and criminal
justice team leader at D F A. So
This is not an agency that I'm
normally assigned to and less
familiar than say that the
Corrections department
Uh, but
As Austin mentioned at the
overall recommendations are
pretty close that the primary
differences in the approach of,
um
Funding positions that are
That are that are at the at the
agency currently or
As the executive did was, um
To add expansion positions.
And
So that the approach taken here
by by the executive was because
The attorney general's office
does have a
Fairly hide percentage of
vacancies in the legal services
department, um or program.
Excuse me, the executive
recommendation.
Reduce the budget for those
positions slightly because
because they haven't been able
to fill them. But conversely
added some additional positions
for, um constituent services,
some investigative personnel and
victim I believe the reason for
that was because
In these kinds of
classifications where if they do
have them currently at the
attorney general's office. Those
positions are filled and the the
vacancy issue comes with comes
in other areas. So where they do
need positions. The executive
recommendation provides those
those certain types of
classifications.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much.
Please have sorry. We're
obviously the attorney
general's. Please feel free to
introduce yourself and any other
members of the office. We're
here, Mr Chairman, members of
the committee. Thank you for
having us today. I am Carla
Martinez er for the Attorney
General's office or Excuse me
now the Department of Justice. I
have to get used to that.
Um
The attorney general sends his
deepest regrets. He had every
intention, Lou
And so unfortunately, he could
not make it But he wanted me to
extend to you. His apologies for
not being here.
I am also joined by our chief
Attorney general Deputy Attorney
General James Grayson.
And our CFO Melissa Spangler.
Also in the audience is an
intern we have from Harvard Law
School, Daniel Moses, who I
highlight him because the last
time that I was before the LFC,
the attorney general was unable
to be there because he was doing
a recruiting event at Harvard in
Boston, and so as a result of
his trip out there, and also
some job fairs that we did were
Mr Moses met one of our
recruiters at
The federal Bar Cities
Associations Indian bar
conference, Mr Moses took an
interest in our office in his
current
I would like to highlight again.
I will try to keep this very
brief because I know you have a
long afternoon.
As was presented by both the
executive and the legislative
recommendations. They are very
close as far as the
The recommendations related to
personnel. However, I would like
to highlight a few things as the
executive has done, they have
recommended the 10 positions.
For the legal services program.
Those 10 positions would fund
for special agents for consumer
advocates for intake and
constituent services division as
well as to victim advocates.
And I understand that the
approach was reflective of the
vacancy savings, but we are
hopeful and confident that this
year we will be able to fund a
lot of those vacancies that are
related to attorneys.
As I presented back in November.
We have hired
Approximately 95 people into the
office, but because it was a
transition year, we also lost
almost the same amount of
people. And so essentially, we
were treading water.
But if you things that have
happened, um in addition to the
job fairs and other recruiting
efforts that we have taken
In December of this year this
past year. Excuse me. We
presented in front of the state
Personnel board to request a
collapse of attorney pay bonds
to make it easier and more
flexible to recruit attorneys.
The SPO board did accept this
new change in the structure, and
it is being applied statewide.
Our understanding is it'll be
rolled out sometime here in the
near future.
And so our hope is that with
that change in the
classification structure, it
will make it easier for us to
recruit attorneys.
The other thing that they did as
part of that approval was to
look at the market related to
attorneys and determined that we
were
Hey, not paying attorneys in
state government enough. And so
we expect that the pay ban will
also be increased as a result of
this role. I think I raised that
for a couple of reasons, because
I know the executives
recommendation reduces our
current based budget due to
Bacon sees
We do anticipate raising our
salaries for our attorneys to be
more competitive.
And we have have already started
to do that. So I anticipate that
we will start to eat into some
of that base budget.
To even just fund and retain
current.
Attorneys in our office as well
as to aggressively recruit
others, so I would ask that that
be taken into consideration, and
I would also ask that the
expansion of those 10 positions
be taken into consideration.
Because we really do expect to
Utilize those bacon attorney
positions and therefore would
not have the ability
To feel some of these needs and
I, um
I really like I said, Want to
keep it short so I can get into
other things, but those are
sincerely the highlights that I
wanted to raise. Thank you very
much. Ms. Martinez will go
straight to questions. We'll
start with reps of Sanchez,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I just have
a
Actually, one big question. Um,
um I represent the north and in
the past year and a half
I had a best friend that was a
close friend that was murdered
in Albuquerque.
We've had some land grant
issues.
Uh, there's been issues
regarding the mortar fires.
And I personally tried to get
ahold of the attorney general
via text and left in voicemails.
And I just want to ask. I don't
have an issue getting ahold of
secretaries in the state, but
Not one time Did he respond to
me, So I don't know if it's me
or what The issue is. So is
there somebody that's better to
to contact
To get some responsiveness to
these types of issues that are
important to me and to my
constituents.
Mr Chairman, Representative
Sanchez. I'm sorry to hear that
that has happened. I will
definitely, um, express your
comments to the attorney
general.
And you're welcome to contact
me. You're welcome to contact
Taylor Bowie, who was also
cheapest staff or office. I off
the top of my head. Do not know
Mr Buoys number, but I'm happy
to give you my number. You don't
have to give Mr Chair. You don't
have to give me your number now,
but offline. I'll get it. Thank
you. Thank you very much, Mr
Absent Sanchez.
Next we go to represent Garrett
then represents category.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you
for being here and, um
Forgot your last name. Is it
tourists? Martin Martinez, Madam
Martinez. Um, your voice carries
very well on the mix. We've had
all these problems So you're
doing something right? I have a
question from volume two page
67.
It says that in fiscal year, 22
data compiled by the LFC and the
Medicaid Accountability Report
noted that the A G recovered 3.3
million in Medicaid fraud cast
is down from 8.6 LFC report also
noted the state could collect a
larger percent by amending the
state's fraud statue.
To comply with federal rule. Is
that something that's being
done?
Mr Chairman, Representative Gary
turned that over to Mr Grayson.
Mr Chair. I represented Garrett.
I I'm not. I'm not sure I know
that That was something that was
discussed at the last
legislative session. I will
follow up and find out and
report back to you. Thank you
very much. And thanks for your
help on the purple also
Um, and my other question is
just very briefly. Um, I don't
know who knows what
Why did the G rebrand is the
Department of Justice and what's
the cost of rebranding? Has that
been analyzed as you do
stationery cards?
You know, there's always a
rebranding cost, and it's sad
and incorporated in the budget.
Mr Chairman, Representative
Garrett and I'm sure Mr Grayson
can speak to this more
eloquently than I can, but I
believe in statute, it does
start to justice. And so I
believe that he felt that that
was more in line with the law
and wanted to do that.
As far as the cost of
rebranding. Um, I believe
It's costing us about $5000 to
get to do the papers, the
stationary everything that you
have have mentioned, so it's a
minimal amount of money that
The design parties. 5000. Yes,
okay.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Representative Garrett. Next
we're going to go to represent
pedigree and then we'll go to
represent dela Cruz.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you for the presentation. Um
actually, representative Garrett
asked my question My follow up
to that is just gonna be you Do
me a favor. Thank you
represented a group. Next. We're
gonna go to represent daily
Cruise and some Garcia. Thank
you, Mr Chairman.
We talked about vacancy savings.
I'm curious and what categories
are the N attorneys, others?
And what are the general
percentages of the positions?
Mr Chairman, representative Dela
Cruz are vacancies are primarily
in our attorney positions. We do
have some vacancies and other
areas, but I think we've been
more successful in filling some
of those other vacancies and our
challenges have been more in the
attorney area and that's ways in
which we can recruit and retain
and part of that is, for
example, the SPO job.
Classification. We're trying to
find you unique ways to deal
with the EU. Have the flex. Mr.
Chairman, Do you have the
flexibility to increase pay
rates of your attorneys?
Mr Chairman, representative. We
do have to go through state
personnel for those what they
call in pay bands, and that's
part of what we anticipate doing
once state personnel rolls out
the new attorney
classifications and as a result,
I think
My comment about the executive
cutting the base budget.
Actually, And at the time I have
spoken to Mario or analysts
about that, obviously, at the
time that we submitted our
budget, or even the analysis
happened. We didn't anticipate
this pay bond classification to
happen. It happened in the fall
of last year, and just we're now
waiting for it to roll out. So
it's a long answer to your
question, Which is we do
anticipate going through state
personnel to do some adjustments
to pay.
Mr Chairman, And you mentioned
that, uh during LSC, the
attorney general is not able to
be there because he was
recruiting
And I do recollect that.
Uh,
Where do you recruit? You
mentioned Harvard. I'm curious.
Where do you cast that net?
Mr Chairman, representative. We
are trying to cast a wide net.
We are working with our local
law school Union School of law
we have done and I have some
notes on it.
Um, we have done last year.
We did about 10 job fairs, both
in New Mexico and nationally.
We have participated as I said,
in some events at the local law
school, Harvard, the attorney
general is anticipating taking a
trip this month to Berkeley and
Stanford to do some
presentations there to the law
students and we sort of want to
take those models and replicate
that I'm through the nation.
And also identify other job
fairs that we want to do The
other thing we've done is we've
hired an additional recruiter
now in January, who's so focus
will be on recruiting attorney's
The one recruiter that we do
have has been very busy.
obviously recruiting 95 people
to the office, but we recognize
that we really need
To diversify and do like I said,
cast a wider net out across the
nation.
Mr Chairman, Crime prosecution.
And Justice Justice Department.
Uh, is paramount in this state,
all of the chronic issues where
they haven't talked about
chronic. It's chronic that we
here at almost every
presentation, Mr Chairman, that
that we are having difficulty
recruiting, you know, there was
a time where people wanted to be
civil servants that it was. It
was
Very, very appealing thing to
work for government.
And it doesn't seem so anymore
and I do think it actually
started very foundational level
and that that is paying if you
don't have that.
Then morale and everything else
that goes on top of it with the
existing employees is just
simply not going to happen.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you very much.
Representative cruise. We're
going to go to rip some Garcia.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Thanks
for the presentation. Uh, more
of a concern and a question.
And if you can answer to it
fine.
His attorney general involved.
In what's happening in Mora
County, northern New Mexican
those wires because there's a
lot of people up there are
really struggling.
To get FEMA to do what they're
supposed to be doing.
And representing stanchions kind
of beast and a little bit ago.
And you know, that's not my
district, Mr Chair, but I eat a
lot of calls from people up
there because I've been up there
to try and help and you know
there's the issues.
And I don't know if the attorney
general is addressing those
issues, Can you actually that
little bit?
Uh huh.
Mr Chairman, Representative
Garcia. I can touch on some of
it, but I will.
Do you want to?
Address.
Representatives. Garcia, Um
Represented Garcia.
Yes, our offices has been
involved in the fire recovery on
two different levels.
Um, we have
In our consumer division we're
looking at
Making sure that individuals in
the community or not not being
taken advantage of
Um, that is one area of focus
that we have. We also have
engaged, uh, in with outside
counsel for a fire recovery
contract in terms of making sure
that the state's interests are
protected.
In securing the federal recovery
that has been made available by
the by Congress. Um, but it is a
central focus of the attorney
general, and we have been in the
communities themselves. We have
sent people
Um, to community meetings. We
have been involved in discussing
matters with local legislators,
And, uh, we have essentially a
fire recovery team within the
office that's dedicated to to
that specific topic.
I think the German thank you for
that, you know, And I'm not
doubting what you're saying by
no means
But you know what? I signed onto
a letter that we sent to the
president of United States.
Because he when he was here, he
said I was gonna take care of
the people 100%.
And FEMA is not doing what
they're supposed to be doing and
I get where I got calls from
constituents up there. They're
not my constituents, but people
from New Mexico that nobody is
trying to help them, not the
training general's office.
He was not doing the job. That's
what I'm hearing, and that's why
I brought up that question.
Mr. Chair Representative Garcia.
Another. Another thing is we
have I believe we've now secured
an office.
Um, at the district attorney's
office in in Las Vegas and the
fourth judicial District. We've
been working with District
Attorney Clayton in order to
have some office space there
because we want to have a
permanent president.
Thank you. Mr was in closing.
You know, the regional brought
it up because these people need
help up there.
That's the bottom line. We need
to help them. You know, they
didn't cause it do is they
didn't hear that problem, And we
didn't do make sure as a state
Or the nation to particular
people. Thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Thank you very much
Represent Garcia. Uh, I don't
see any other on the line or any
other questions. Thank you very
much. Mr. Martinez. Please pass
along our well wishes for the
attorney general's recovery. And
with that was Mr Chair, I would
move. The committee adopts the
LFC recommendation.
Kate. It's been moved and
seconded. Is there any
opposition?
Seeing and we've adopted that.
Thank you all very much.
Okay, Mr. Secretary, uh, coming
on down?
All right, Uh,
We get everything situated.
Of course, Mr Secretary, When we
get to you please feel free to
introduce members of your team
will go to Ms Hyla first and
start us off from the lfc.
Yes. Hi, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. I am Emily Hyla.
I am the LFC, analyst for the
Department of Finance and
Administration.
With me today is Wayne props
Secretary of the Department of
Finance Administration, as well
as Nicole Macias, the DFA
analyst for D F A
And so with that before getting
started, I do want to point out
in volume to the budget
recommendation for the LFC is
going to be on page 84 and in
volume three, some helpful pages
will be pages 71 and pages. 72.
That I am going to start with
the overall narrative. Um
For just the beer for the agency
code, which you can find in Tab
number three.
The executive recommendation
exceeds the LFC recommendation
by 7.7 million in general fund
revenues, primarily due to
differences in approvals for
expansions to increase positions
and the other category and
throughout the entire
recommendation. The LFC does not
support any expansions.
Recommendations differ in their
use of fund balances with the
executive recommendation,
exceeding the LFC recommendation
by 19 million. This is
attributed to a 12.5 million ad
that was not considered for the
LFC recommendation because it
was not in the initial agency
request.
And that is for the land of
Enchantment Fund.
As for the base, the executive
recommendation exceeds the LFC
recommendation by 742,000 for
personal services and employee
benefits.
The LFC recommendation exceeds
the executives by 709,000 and
contracts for legal service
contracts.
The executive recommendation in
the base exceeds the LFC s due
to the executive recommendations
supporting the Land of
Enchantment Legacy Fund again as
I mentioned, which was not
included in the department's
initial FY 25 requests.
In addition, the executive
exceeds the LFC recommendation
by 1.27 million to support
additional distributions for
local Wi grant funding to
counties and to support
additional travel costs.
All differences in the
recommendations for other
financing, our users are
accounted for differences in
recommended Tobacco Settlement
program fund balances and
distributions of the opioid
funds.
Differences in the language. The
executive recommendation
includes language authorizing
the department to transfer no
more than 6 million to the state
Board of Finance for the
Emergency fund, whereas the LFC
recommendation supports 3
million for that fund.
In other transfer revenue, the
executive recommends an
additional 3.4 million from the
Tobacco settlement program fund.
The LFC recommendation includes
17.1 million from the Opioid
Crisis Recovery Fund.
Recommendations support language
recommending 73 million from the
county supported Medicaid fund.
The executive also includes
transfer language from the
Enterprise Services fund revenue
to support the costs related to
the share program transfer
request that the LFC did not
recommend.
Another state revenues. The LFC
recommendation is higher by 2.6
million from the Civil Legal
Services Fund balance and the
executive recommendation is 9.2
million higher than the LFC
recommendation when pulling from
the tobacco settlement fund. Uh
Program funds to support
additional Medicaid funding
transfers.
Aside from that analysts have
come to consensus on all
performance nations and for the
expansions, the executive
recommends recommendation
exceeds the LFC by 10 FT. E. And
with that I will turn over to
Nicole.
Thank you, Madam Chair members
of the committee. My name is
Nicole Macias. Now go to the
next page for P 541 within this
organizational unit. This it has
the office of the Secretary. The
Board of Finance and the State
Budget Division.
The executive recommendation
exceeds the legislative wreck by
$1.9 Million in general fund.
The, UM both
Both recommendations fully
support the personnel to fill
vacancies within contractual,
uh, contractual services within
the base. The the difference is
about 531,000 and the executive
was higher because that
Portion will be utilized for BFM
maintenance and operations. Um,
this system, um the budget
formulation and find, uh
Budget formulation system. Um,
is both used by l. F C and D F
A. You do have a copy of this
report from the system? Um, we
also included within the other
category. The legislative
recommendation was higher than
the LFC by 13.3.
Um And then both the
Excuse me.
Uh, the executive and
legislative recommendations
include a decrease of 22.5.
Million dollars from the other
financing uses because of that
transfer food initiative, right,
so that was placed into public
education Department for
implementation of SB four for
the Universal Meals program.
Ah, within the
The language. The legislative
recommendations supports
authorizing no more than 3
million to be transferred for
the State Board of Finance
Operating Reserve Fund for
emergencies. The executive
recommends 6 million. I would
like to note that for FY 24 we
did wreck there was, um $4
million to be transferred.
For the state Board of Finance.
Um, both, uh, animals have come
to Kansas on performance
measures and then within the
expansion includes $1.4 million
total of that total 1.2 was
$11.1 million, was included for
Federal Grants Management Bureau
that includes funding for to F T
E and 900.
$3000 approximately for, uh,
Federal grants, Dashboard
maintenance and then the other
portion of that funding was
260.6000 to support two FTE
within the office of the
secretary for a legal clerk and
Excuse me.
Um for the governor's exempt HR
position, I'll turn it over to
Emily to talk about the next
program for P 542.
Yes, Mr Chan. Moving to P code
54 to program support the
executive recommendation exceeds
the LFC by 518,000 in general
fund revenues. This is due to
the executive partially
supporting the agency's general
fund. Increase for poor program
supports. Um As for the base,
the executive recommendation
exceeds the LFC recommendation
by 412,000 for personal services
and employee benefits contracts
and the other category.
The LFC recommendation supports
the agency's request of 240,000
personnel to cover out of cycle
raises and holds all other
fundings flat FY 24 levels,
whereas the executive
recommendation is hired by 82.4
82.7000 to support additional I
T costs.
Contractual services. The LFC
recommendation is lower than the
executive recommendation by
246.2000.
The executive recommendation
includes 130,000 increase in the
base to support additional audit
costs.
Performance management measures.
Analysts have come to consensus
on all those targets and the
executive exceeds the LFC
recommendation and expansions by
106,000 for one additional
position with the administrative
services division.
And I will turn over to Nicole
for the next P code.
Um I just have one more point to
make for P 54 to Mr Chair.
Members of the committee within
the base for P 54 to LFC
recommended to decrease the
contractual category, um,
completely zeroed out. This
would impact the agency's
ability to carry out the audit
for the entire department. So I
was turning out over two p. 543.
Um, within this unit. It is the
local government division E 911
d wi, um Cdbg civil legal
services and to other federal
programs that we distribute
funding for, um, within the
executive recommendation exceeds
the LFC by 2.3 in general fund
reserves for fun balance the
legislative recommendations
supports the use of 2.6 from
civil legal services funds.
Both recommendations support
equal revenues from all other
sources. Um, now go into the
base. The executive exceeds the
legislative recommendation by
100 and 73.7 within personnel.
Contractual services the
legislative provides 2 million
over the executive
recommendation. This difference
is attributed to the differences
for civil legal services
contracts. Um, the executive
adjusted the fun balance due to
lack of available revenues. Um,
they have fully expanded.
Um, the fund balance within
civil legal services. So what we
did for the executive is that we
swapped a portion of that
funding which General fund, um
in the amount of 1.5 million,
resulting in an increase of $1.4
million in civil legal contract
funding the legislative
recommendation for civil legal
services supports the use of
2.6. But again, general revenue
is flat for that lfc
recommendation for civil legal
services. The other category the
executive exceeds the LFC by 1.2
to support increased
distributions from the local D w
Y fun. Two counties, both the
LFC and the executive support
the agency requests.
To increase others uses to
700,000.
Um, within language again.
That's just the difference
attributed to the Civil Legal
Services Fund balance, both
animals have come to consensus
on performance measures and then
within expansions, the LFC is
higher or sorry. Excuse me. I
want to make sure you following
the executive is higher by
390,000 for l g. D.
This expansion will be utilized
for four additional F T E to
support agency oversight
functions for local governments
in the areas of budget and
finance, rural and frontier
communities and program
management, and I'll turn it
over to Emily to talk about the
next program. Thank you.
Mr Chair. The next program is
the fiscal management and
oversight.
Um, for the revenue. The
executive recommendation exceeds
the LFC by 1.8 million in
general fund revenues and 9.1
million and fund balance.
The LFC recommendation exceeds
the executive recommendation of
other transfers by 13.7 million.
Within the other transfers. The
LFC recommendation includes a
17.1 million transfer from the
opioid crisis Recovery Front and
a reduction of 3.4 million from
the tobacco settlement program
fund Annual distribution. I do
want to point out in Volume
three on page 71 that does have
the LFC projected tobacco
settlement program information
and the reason that for that
reduction is for Lfc s.
Projected decreases within that
fund due to a decrease in
smokers.
From the fund balance the
executive recommendation exceeds
the LFC recommendation. Um away.
Sorry, just said that. Let's go
to the base. The executive
budget exceeds the LFC budget by
485,000 for personal personality
support the agency's request to
fulfill vacancies.
And contractual services. The
executive recommendation is
higher than the LFC is by
560,000 disappoint the agency's
payment card. Industry data
security Standard contract.
That's the LFC and executive
support the other category
increase of 20.4000 per training
and travel costs within the
other financing uses. The LFC
recommendation is higher by 4.5
million to support additional
transfers from the opioid crisis
recovery funds.
And for the language.
Again, As I have stated
previously it is a d 17.1
million for the Opiate Crisis
Recovery fund as well as
73 million for the county
supported Medicaid funds and
another state funds. The
executive recommendation is 9.2
million higher than the LFC
recommendation when pulling from
the department, Selman
Settlement Program Fund balance.
Analysts have come to consensus
on performance performance
measures and the executive
recommendation, um supports
132,000 for the financial
control division's annual
comprehensive financial
Reporting units. And with that I
will turn over to Nicole. Thank
you. We'll go now to P 545 and
these are flow through
appropriations within D F a
there one line item
appropriations, and so the
executive exceeds the
legislative recommendation.
Shin Bi
1.78 million in general fund
revenues with and
12.5 million in fund balance.
This is mainly due to that
transfer for the Land of
Enchantment. Legacy Fund. Mm
Sorry. Um
And noted in the differences for
the base, the executive provided
increases to the fiscal agent
contract in the amount of
$140.1000 an increase of
$707,000 for state planning
districts. 200,000 for Land
Grant Council and then
Below. We also included funding
as an expansion for the Office
of Housing at 700.
Uh and $50,000, and then we also
folded in the inter tribal
Indian serum Ammonia Association
funding and that was flat with
FY 24 $328,000 analysts have
come to consensus, and that's it
for me. I change it over to
Emily.
Yes. And this is the last peak
on Mr Chair. This is a new P
code, and this is for the
transfer of share to share
program, which I'm sure you're
familiar with, which is a
transfer of 5.9 million from the
Department of Information
Technology. Um and
For the expansions. The
executive recommendation, uh,
supports the share program
transport transfer, um as well
as 14 new FTE in the amount of
1.8 million
And with that I will turn over
to the secretary for comments.
Thank you, analyst, Mr
Secretary, and please feel free
to introduce members of your
team.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Members
of Committee. My name is Wayne
props. I'm the secretary of the
Department of Finance and
Administration. Gonna take a few
minutes to introduce my staff
because I am incredibly proud of
them.
I've been fortunate. This is the
fourth agency that I've led
during my time in state
government.
Uh, some good news. It will be
the last if you were wondering,
um
But you know, I've been
fortunate to have good staff in
each of those other agencies,
but I've never worked with a
harder working
Group of people than the South.
Had I d f a start off with Renee
Ward, someone who you may not
have ever heard of, but she is a
deputy secretary of Department
of Finance and administration.
Behind every successful
secretary, Mr Chairman is a
talented deputy secretary that
actually does all the work.
While the secretary gets all of
the credit, and I cannot tell
you how
Wonderful. Renee is tremendous
job she does for the Department
of Finance and Administration
and for the state and certainly
want to recognize her.
Dr Andrew Minor is here.
Probably somebody who doesn't
need any introduction. He's the
state budget division director
Wesley Buildings League. Someone
who you probably interact with
more than me, and that's a good
thing. Trust me. Call him and
not me.
Is the director of our local
government division and is still
wearing the hat of overseeing
our capital Outlay Bureau as
well.
Joey borrows are information
technology director is here is
not only the information
technology director for the
Department of Finance and
administration, but he is often
The information technology
director for the Office of the
Governor. C y F D R L D Whenever
there's an agency that has an I
T issue and a big project that
needs to be completed, they call
on Joey and Joey. Thank you for
all you do for the department.
Diane Snow is here. She's in
charge of our human resources
department, Mr Chairman.
Just a word of advice to you and
the committee as you ever find
yourself across from this
The swan across her on a poker
table. Um
Know when to fold them, Mr
Chairman.
We have. Ashley Leach is the
director of the State Board of
Finance.
No matter how much time I spend
as secretary of the FAA, I won't
understand. How did how bored of
finance works. It is
extraordinarily complex, but
it's also extraordinarily
important to the functioning of
the state of New Mexico and
actually does a wonderful job
there if you need to do anything
about states bonding capacity
and that capacity she is the one
to call as well as Marcos
Trujillo, Where is the deputy?
At the Board of Finance Patrick
Schaefer.
Is a general counsel at the
department. He also wears a
couple of hats. He's also in
charge of our Federal grants
Bureau, something he took on
Willingly. Which tells you
something about Patrick.
Who else am I missing?
Jeanette Gallegos, who was a
deputy director at local
government division again.
Somebody you probably talked to
is as much as you talk to me or
Wesley.
And thank her. We have Kent. Uh,
Heather Kent with our financial
control division as well as, uh,
Clark Crowder with our financial
control division. Mark
Middelhoff couldn't be here
today, but we appreciate them
joining us as well.
Mr Anybody?
Hi Maki.
Matthew Romero, who is our
budget director at the
department and somebody I may
rely on for the presentation.
today. We have some analysts
here. I'm not gonna introduce
them, have you? You've met them,
but, of course, very proud of
the work that they do as well.
Mr Chairman start off by
thanking Emily and Nicole for
their work on their respective
recommendations.
There's a there's there's
agreement here, and I want to
always start off by recognizing
that and thanking the LoC for
the effort you put into our
budget throughout the interim.
The thoughtfulness of Emily's
recommendation, as well as
Nicole's recommendation as well.
Mr Chairman. I started my career
in state government 19 years
years ago this April, April 4th
Uh and early in my career after
a year at the Department of
Health, I became analyst for the
Legislative Finance Committee
for two years.
That was my first real exposure
to the Department of Finance and
administration.
The department of Do You have
any D s A Today is not the D F a
yesterday.
Frankly, it's not even the D s a
just a few years ago.
The scope and mission of the
department has grown
exponentially.
The amount of funds coming into
the agency has grown
exponentially.
Particularly during the
pandemic.
But the work of the department
has also changed. We don't just
take money and and send money
out any more. Often times we are
now asked to serve in a
programmatic role, and that is a
change that we welcome.
We don't shirk from it.
But I can tell you that we are
starting to feel the effects of
not only the additional revenues
that have come are coming into
the state, but he also
additional responsibilities that
have been ask of the department
over the last several years.
A couple of examples. Recent
examples rental and homeowner
assistance.
This last year for the first
time DF to implemented a loan
program as a result of Senate
Bill six.
To help with the impacts of the
fires.
North.
We now oversee a law enforcement
recruitment fund to help with
recruiting of law enforcement
throughout the state.
And I said on the warrant
enforcement funding as well.
Those are but just a very, very
few examples. Examples of how D
F A is as been a task with new
not only as I said revenue, but
also responsibilities.
Our budget. Um, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee. I'm
not an empire building.
I don't ask for f to eat. I
don't think I need I don't ask
for funding that. I don't think
I need either.
Our budget was built based on
what I think is the need of the
growing responsibilities.
Of the department.
This is my I think, sixth or
seventh presentation to a
committee this week, Mr Chamber
chairman, So I'm taking a break
from power point.
I just couldn't do another power
point presentation.
But what you do have Mr Chairman
and what I'm gonna talk about a
little bit are a few of the
differences.
Uh, and their potential impact
on the department.
I have shared a copy of my own.
She cheat with you.
I'll go through this briefly, Mr
Chairman and then happy to stand
for questions.
In. Um the P 541 policy
development.
P code. I would note in
particular the first bullet, and
Nicole did allude to this.
There's a difference of 531,000
for the budget formulation and
management system for
maintenance of that system. That
is a system that allows you to
create your budget allows the
FAA to create our budget as
well.
Mr Chairman. This was actually I
think an oversight on the part
of the F A and not submitting
this request timely.
That is my oversight. My my
responsibility, and I apologize
for that.
But I know that you
I assume you share our desire to
make sure that we maintain that
system that the appropriation
for that comes to D F A. And we
would ask that as you go
continue your review and
Produced production of the
hospital, too, that you would
consider that 534 $1000 for the
Yeah. B b s m system
maintenance.
Mr Chairman. We do also managed
a number of federal grant
passports.
Uh, there is a difference here
between the LOC and D F a both
in personnel and contractual
support to support those
dashboards.
We would respectfully request
that perhaps we could get a
little bit closer there as well
in P 542, and this is an
important one. Mr Chairman.
There is a difference. It's not
a large difference in terms of
dollars overall dollars, but
141.1000
For agency audit. Um D F a
actually produces three audits
every year General Fund Doc
audit the state's acts for audit
and our own internal audit.
I may be the only secretary in
state government that actually
welcomes audits.
I always have. I think they're
extraordinarily important. Both
us as the executive but perhaps
even more important to you as a
legislature.
And so, Mr Chairman, if I was
going to
Do some picking and choosing
amongst this list. I would I
would ask that we see if we
could, uh, fully fund our fy
2425 audit.
Under P. 543. And you've heard
me say this, Mr Chairman in
other venues. At other times,
this is my number one priority.
Our local government division.
Um, this is where the rubber
meets the road for you and your
communities and the state.
Um I have become absolutely
convinced that the local
government division is
understaffed.
To a point that it concerns me
about their workloads. And I
know you hear that from a lot of
agencies.
But I am genuinely concerned
about the workload of the local
government division.
And the need to expand, provide
some expansion positions there.
So we did ask for four FT.
Approximately $400,000 and so
approximately $200,000.
Um, to cover unfunded vacancies
that would respectfully request
an opportunity to perhaps
continue discussions there as
well under financial control.
We're a little short, there
appears primarily related to
funding to support our payment
card industry, Uh, industry data
security standard contract
costs.
This is a one of those contracts
that escalates every year. We
provided a little bit of a
description of the honest with
you. I can't exactly explain
very well the whole PC I process
but Heather and Cantor here
Heather and, uh um Clark are
here to help me with that. But
this there are some potential
ramifications if we are not able
to meet those payment card in
that industry standards.
Which increase every year.
Uh, not quite find me close to
find me under share. Mr Chairman
in November of this year,
Department of Information
Technology and D F a Senate
signed an MOU to bring share
back to DFA.
Historically D F a have chair
has existed at D F a
Uh, through a memorandum during
the Martinez administration, D F
A was transferred to the
Department of Information
Technology. We're very happy to
have share back at the FAA. One
of the reasons is because share
is reaching its end life.
And the Department of Finance
and Administration will be
taking the lead on what comes
next after share.
Um, we have requested, uh,
General Fund but also transfer
of funds from the Department of
Information Technology just to
support share share team at D. F
A. We understand that the all
seeing is not included that
Certainly respect that one of
the things I want to point out
is the
Office of the state chair is 19
years old. Um, it's never been
thoroughly audited. In fact, I
don't think it's ever been
audited at all.
It is the state's financial and
human resources system.
Everything flows through share.
Recently and to his credit, the
state auditor issued a
requirement that we conduct what
is called a service organization
Organization controls audit.
There's a short sock.
There's a sock one. There's a
sock, too, and there's a sock
three.
These are expensive audits. We
anticipate that the cost of this
audit will be between 1.5 and $2
million.
But they are It is extremely
important and I welcome the
opportunity to take the lead in
producing a sock audit for the
first time for the state of New
Mexico. It's gonna be a complex.
It's going to be across multiple
agencies, but it is needed, as
noted here to ensure share
system agency data.
And ensure that customer data as
well. A good example of customer
data is everyone of your bank
accounts because you received
per diem.
From the state of New Mexico.
That means you are in the share
system.
And I again I think this is
extremely important that either
through General fund or through
a transfer of funds from
department information
technology that we have the
resources to
To conduct that that audit five
Mr Chairman, as noted by Emily
Last year, we reached an
agreement with the Legislative
Finance Committee to increase
the emergency loan fund at the
Board of Finance from 2 Million
to $4 million.
The LFC recommendation brings
that back to three millions, so
it seems like we're going out
slightly backwards there, Mr
Chairman Already this year we've
had over $2 million in requests
for that fun again. It's managed
by the Board of Finances. Man is
very well. So, Mr Chairman, if
we can't get to the $6 Million
request from the executive for
that emergency fund
We would like to at least
maintain the status bullet $4
million. And with that Mr
Chairman myself and I are happy
to answer your questions.
Thank you, Mr Secretary. Miss
Helen, Did you have anything to
add? Before we go to questions?
Yes, Mr Chair. It was in regards
to the share transfer. The LFC
in December actually met with
Deloitte, who oversees share.
And they told the LFC that share
is not
Dying, but it is functional as
it is until 2032. The only
difference is that it's not
keeping pace.
Quote to Deloitte's, um, with
current innovation, but that
doesn't mean that it is dying or
will be dysfunctional until
2032.
As well. With the share program
underneath the do it, There's
actually going to be a stock to
audit statutorily that will
start. I believe in March of
this year. Um and so I just
wanted to point that out to you
all. Thank you. Thank you very
much. We'll go straight to
questions first was
representative of the meal.
Mr Chair and secretary props. We
are kindred spirits because I
love audits. Um I live for
audits and especially when we're
spending state money.
So I'm extremely concerned about
P 54 to our ability to perform
that audit.
P 544 and noncompliance with P
C. I
Um and also the civil legal
services with a 1.4 million
difference from the executive to
the LFC is quite concerning to
me. So, um
What will happen to civil legal
services without that funding,
Mr. Chair representative had a
meal, so the impact would be if
you do take the LFC
recommendation. Correct? Um the
there's at least $2.6 million
that will not materialize for
fun balance so it would be
And and basically beat. Sorry.
Please continue basically before
latte with FY 24 with no
increase at all. And Mr I just
wanna Is there somebody from the
FAA who wants to provide any
additional
Insight into that.
If not, that's okay. Thank you
very much, Mr Sears.
Afternoon. Good afternoon, Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Jeanette
Diego's from the deputy director
of local government division and
one of the programs that we
administer as a civil legal
service program. So initially
when we met with the committee
with the CLS Commission Excuse
me. They asked for $8 million
for their budget.
Two.
Accommodate the increase need of
civil legal services across the
state for low income families.
Um, at the time there was
I thought that there was some
unbalanced that could be tapped
into
That was not the case. There was
no fun balance. So we're asking
for General fund.
Increase to get them to the 8
million that they requested in
order to cover the services
needed for low income families.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
secretary props. I wonder if we
could do something. Mr. Chair
ticket. Thank you very much
represents to me over percent
ranking member. I'm Sean,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and thank
you for your presentation. Um, I
was curious on P code 544.
Um, on the other financing uses,
there's 106 plus million
There, and I just wondered what
that was.
Sorry, Mr Chair representative.
I'm trying to
Find that on my
Different sheets.
But for the 160 million year
referencing for the other
financing uses.
Mr Chairman. Sorry, No. Six.
The 10 say.
Okay, That's fine. We can that
we can move on and you can get
back to me. Thank you.
Um, Mr Chair? Um, Representative
Armstrong. I can answer that
question. So it's a difference
in, um so county sport and
Medicaid is flat at $73 million
Total, and the other
distribution is the LLCs
recommendation is basically the
distribution of tobacco
settlement program funds. They
also did a swap for opioid
funding.
Um, And so that's mainly the
difference.
Um, but we we didn't use as much
of the program funding
Okay. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you. Ranking member
Armstrong. We're going to go now
to our representative will hunt,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Secretary and everybody that's
worked on. This is probably
huge.
I think that every lifted
everything, the D F A does, um,
it's you know, they're making
sure the state is safe
financially with with everything
from
Housing, though to energy to
infrastructure to I'm just
looking at all the list of them
of the specials.
And working with our local
governments working with our
rural communities, and a lot of
new initiatives that we put, um
into your agency or
legislatively, um, done and I
was once a thank you and I see I
understand why you're asking for
the increase in your FTS and all
the things you need for the
functionality of of getting
these, um
Getting everything done that you
do.
I'll just say shortly. I
understand the share of
transition as a former state
employee working at the state
treasurer's office understanding
that the the financials, uh
portion of it and also the the
workforce part of part of it
that we've already had with
payroll and all that is already
there.
My understanding it makes sense
to me. I'm just going to say
that your d f A. These are
financials that shared actually
makes sense to me. But
I don't think it's it's a huge
thing. Um
Let's see.
So your your office of legal
counsel stood out to me too.
Can you tell me how many how
many legal vacancies you have?
Or legal counsel vacancies? You
have, Mr Mr Chair.
Mr Chairman, I'll double chair
and representative. Thank you
for that question. Um, also,
thank you for your support. I
appreciate that as well. Mr
Chairman, members of committee
and representative, I don't
think we have any vacancies in
our office of general counsel at
this time. We do have to, um
attorneys and the essay
Uh, again. That's not enough
because as I indicated, with
Joey and our I T department,
Patrick is not just the general
counsel for Department of
Finance and administration. He's
general counsel for virtually
every department that has a
question that calls him for an
answer. So, um, we do. I am
concerned that two attorneys at
the department is insufficient.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
agree. I have to say that
throughout the interim, I
reached out to d f A. I don't
know how many times in different
capacities from dealing with
what you're you're supporting
and getting money out for, uh,
the cast canyon fires and all
these other things, and just the
responsiveness and the attention
to detail to talking to
To Wesley about our local
governments and their spending
and all those sorts of things,
But I have to say I didn't wait
even a day for a response. And
But so I just want to say you're
on top of things. I'm I'm very
happy with the way you're doing
things, but I also saw that
there was a need. Um and people
are really working their
hardest. The other thing without
said P
Um 543, your local government
division. Did I hear that? Can I
get some clarification on that?
Lfc say that we got a late
request on that.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, Mr
Chair, Members of Committee and
representative. Yes, that is
correct and again. I also take
responsibility for that.
Certainly not the responsibility
of Emily or the lfc. Um
So yes, the answer is yes.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
But I also I want to focus on
that, I think is a good catch
for you to to readdress that,
Um, we're always things are
always moving, and that's
something that I think we need
to look at. Mr. Chair. Um
I'm just putting that out there.
I think we need to look at that,
and I think it's a good catch to
to to readdress if we if we can,
If it's the will of our
committee, and there are chair
um the other thing
I need some clarification on is
the emergency fund, Mr.
Mr Chair can
Can you tell me a little bit
about that emergency and Flynn?
What we're doing with it? What
we need
Yes, Mr Chair and representative
of the board, the State Board of
Finance administers and has for
as long as I can remember, which
is 19 years.
A man and ministers and
emergency loan and grant fund.
Uh,
Ashley can certainly provide
more detail than I do. Two years
ago, the amount and that's fun
to be loaned was $2 million last
year was increased to $4 million
this year. Under the LLC
recommendation, it would go back
to $3 million. This is used for
a number of not only loans but
grants this year. We
Made a grant to the city of
Hurley.
Because they had an emergency
with their wastewater system. So
the state Board of Finance was
actually able to provide them
with emergency loans.
Quite often. We see her request
from the secretary of state to
cover shortfalls in Election
administration. That's something
we see almost annually, but more
often than not, these are small
communities that have a
something comes up their water
system fails. There's nowhere
else to go. They come to the
Board of Finance and asked for
either alone or an emergency
grant.
We almost always expand that. As
I said, the 4 million that we
have available this year we've
already allocated $2.2 million
in the first half of the year,
so we do expect to fully expand
the appropriation there.
Thank you. I really do
appreciate that. I know that
there's going to be a bill to
address the secretary of state's
shortfalls. Um
I guess repeated shortfalls to
cover election costs. I think
that's really smart of us to be
looking at that.
I know that I heard during the
interim, and I don't. I'm just
asking for clarification if you
hear if there are any other
bills or even from the executive
addressing, um emergency funding
because of climate change
because of of, um expected, um,
need for it as we saw with the
calf Canyon and other fires in
our state, Mr Chair.
Mr Chairman, members of
Committee representative, We
have. DFA has believe their
special appropriations made a
couple of requests for some
parts of money that would be
available primarily to local
communities that experience
emergencies that they have a
fire truck that you know they
that needs to be replaced. And
and we're in the middle of
You know, fire season in May and
six or seven months away from
the legislative session, So we
have asked for somebody there.
We are also looking at a, you
know. Last Bill Senate Bill six,
which provided $100,100 million
in loans once those loans are
paid their attended to go back
to the General fund. We are
exploring whether or not that
could be a pot of money instead
of having that simply revert
back to the General fund if we
come to agreement with the
Legislature
Keeping that money aside for
future emergencies at a local
communities could access either
through loans or grants. So I
think all of us including many
of you sitting up there are
thinking along the same lines on
this, and we just need to decide
on the number and a mechanism.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I really
want to draw some attention to
that. I know that there's been a
lot of discussion presentations
throughout the interim about,
um projected emergencies and in
our near future.
I appreciate your response is
that is a really good
information. I think that the
last thing I want to just kind
of just closing and addressed in
clarification is
Not seeing it. Maybe I did. The
100 million
Yes, I'm looking at our specials
page. Not sure page. It is, but
it's line six.
And to provide matching
assistance to local entities for
matching local and federal
funds.
And the request was $100
million, and looks like our LFC
recommendations at $20 million.
I I see that this is something
we need to look at as well. I
think it's significant to say
$100 million considering
All the federal dollars that are
out there that we need to kind
of leverage and implement and I
just wanted to to ask how that
is related to the governor's
request. And if it's the same if
you can clarify that for us
today, Mr Chair, Mr Chair and
representative, it is the
governor's request. 100 $100
million. This would augment a
$10 million that you all
Appropriated this current fiscal
year to provide similar grant
matching grants appreciated that
and again. I just like to draw
some attention to see that, um,
maybe
Looking at increasing that Mr
Chair and that is really all I
have. And I know other people
have questions, but again, Thank
you for all your work, all of
you that are here today and all
those that aren't here that are
there working for our state.
Thank you. Thank you. Seven.
Garrett.
Thank you, Mr Chair. It's
amazing how the longer you're
here.
There's questions that you
didn't even know existed
previously, so thank you. This
isn't like the sexy kind of
agency. But I'm realizing it's
really foundational for the
state's operations. So thank you
and your staff for what you do.
I have two questions. The first
one is on share.
I'm hearing based on what's been
said What's in the book? What's
on here?
Um, that there's kind of a major
issue.
Where that should be governed.
Should it be in Dok, should it
be in do it? It has the
statewide implication.
For all these systems, Can you
just It just sounds like there
has to be further discussion.
Mediation. I don't know if it's
through a working group.
Mr Chair.
Please continue with your
questions, and we'll wrap up,
Okay. They continue to outline
areas of question and or
concerned, Okay, so that's a big
question. I have. Can you just
comment on that Mr Chairman and
members of the committee and
representative? Yes. You know,
his historically share resided
at the FAA.
As I noted during the Martinez
administration, and this is not
a criticism of the Martin is, um
ministrations. Um, they made the
decision to relocate it to to do
it.
Um, I
Hmm. I think share
De ESA is responsible for the
states, Um financial systems and
human resource systems. So for
me share belongs at the FAA.
It's their natural home.
I don't I don't mean to be
disagreeable, but I will
disagree. Mr Chairman. That
share is not close to the end of
its life. And Joey can certainly
provide more detail on that if
you wish.
Is it going to doesn't need to
be replaced next year? No, But
Joey, why don't you provide a
little bit more background on
that? Thank you.
Um, Mr Chair representative
members of the committee.
What we're referring to the end
of life is the infrastructure
itself. Now the application may
be passed and they are correct.
They can go ahead and extend it
out. As long as they want you to
keep patching it fixing it.
However, the hardware and
infrastructure that we rely on
to run this from a daily basis
is what's coming into life.
This can be noted in performance
issues that staff may have seen
agencies have been reporting.
These are the issues that we're
referring to, as far as this
coming end of life at this time.
The history of the application
itself. The hardware etcetera
was purchased back in the
martini and administration. It
was implemented over a period of
time.
Took an extended period of time
to get fully implemented. Now
we're in the position that it is
nearing its end of life, and we
need to look at a solution.
That's either a replacing the
entire infrastructure going to a
cloud provider that will help
support the overhead costs and
FTE s was supporting such an
environment or a hybrid of both,
But that is something that we
are looking at at this time.
Mr Chairman represented. Just be
clear. We're talking about a 3
to 5 year process here again.
It's not going to happen next
year, but it needs to start now.
And I believe that having shared
located at the Department of
Finance Administration because
they are really going to be the
keys to whatever comes next is
is where they should be.
So and that's why we entered
into that mou. Thank you, and
we'd invited Miss Fisher. If do
you want to add anything,
please?
The one other thing to consider
is if um, committee does go with
the executive wreck regarding
the share team that, uh, you'll
also want to consider that
reduction in staff in do it
right now. I'm currently that's
not worked into. I think their
budget side on do it, So we want
to make sure that you know
There's not an adding of staff
without a reduction of staff and
understood and it might bring up
some other things. I think there
will have to be additional work,
whether that's a subcommittee or
whether that's analysts
following up with this because
we have additional agencies back
to you represented Garrett.
Thank you because it just really
stands out as an issue, and my
other question is, um
The request in 541 for the
Federal Grants Management Bureau
to get two additional FTE s. It
seems like that is a major
concern because that how much
money
Does that grant writing bring
into the state like last year
average? Can you give me a rough
figure?
Mr Chair and members of the
committee, um, for
Um
Last year alone.
There.
Um, for FY 23. We don't have f
like 24 data representative. But
there were 58,500,000 and
federal funding that flowed
to the department The year
before that it was almost 1.8
billion. Of course, that's the
pandemic years. But yes, Mr
Chairman, we You know it's it's
why we're asking for matching
funds that $100 100 million
dollars in matching funds.
This is something one of the
probably top three issues that I
hear from legislators on is
federal grants. What's available
are federal grants. Parole
frankly, was sort of as sort of
been an orphan at D F A. I don't
want it to be an orphan anymore,
and that's why, because of
Patrick's passion for this, uh
he's taken on ownership of this,
but
That office is significantly
understaffed.
For the demands.
Thank you. So just the addition
of two people, we multiply the
impact. Thank you for
identifying that. That's all my
questions, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much represented Garrett. I
don't see any other questions
from committee members. Um, I
would just note briefly, Mr
Secretary. The were also we want
to sort of on the record and in
discussion.
Working with you on an
infrastructure division within D
F a. Anything that you'd like to
sort of share about that
briefly.
Mr Chairman. Just simply say
thank you. We agree that that is
unnecessary and it's timely. I
know you have a draft
legislation that your staff has
been courteous enough to share
with us. We're looking at that,
and we may have some a little
bit more back and forth to go on
that. But I certainly want to
get there with you, Mr Chairman.
Great. Thank you, Mr Secretary,
and a big things to Cali. Who's
here from L S C.
For her extensive work along
with the rest of the LSC team.
Uh okay, members.
Um, we there's clearly a
significant amount of work to
continue to do here. Mr.
Secretary Appreciate you noting
that in a couple of cases where
it was sort of following up,
sharing the information
information didn't get from the
FAA to lfc. So it's really no
fault of analysts. No fault of
anyone. This is a chance for us
to catch it.
I think given that had asked
that the analysts take the first
crack at bringing back some
recommendations focusing on
local government division
committee members as well as the
federal grants Bureau. Um
And with that, we'll ask for Mrs
Mr Chair I moved the committee
adopts the LFC recommendation.
Okay, it's been moved and
seconded. Is there any
opposition to that motion? Hey,
I don't see any. Thank you all
very much.
And now, Madam secretary. Uh
Thank you for coming on up.
Yeah, I don't
Okay, I know there's a number of
folks who are here. Uh, please
clear the room if you're not
here of earth, you're leaving
after the last presentation, Mr
Rodriguez. Please kick us off.
And Madam Secretary When we get
to you please feel free to
introduce key members of your
staff. Also, if you want to ask
folks who are here on your
behalf to sort of raise their
hand or otherwise sort of show.
Attendance. Please feel free to
do that.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Okay, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon.
Members of the committee. My
name is Julie. PSA and I'm lfc,
analyst for the Department of
Cultural Affairs for this
agency. Please refer to document
that are to have five. That's
agency code 505. You should also
have the presentation in front
of you. You can also refer to
volume two page 220 for the full
lfc.
Recommendation and I'm joined
today by Cabinet Secretary
Deborah Garcia. Greg Go as well
as um Do you have a budget
director, Dr Andrew Minor
Okay, so starting off on page
two of your packet, this is the
high level. This is the full
business unit for D. C. A, um,
so overall, the executive
recommended 2 million more in
general fund revenue than the
LFC. Um, the executive reckon
recommendation recommends an 8%
increase while the LFC
recommends a 3.1% increase.
There's three main differences
in terms of spending.
The first is that for the Land
of Enchantment Legacy fund I
mean, it's more different in how
the two recommendations are
accounting for the use of the
fund.
The s phase has a different as a
separate category for spending
while the LFC includes the 1
million amount in other
services.
In terms of personnel. The
executive recommend 76.3000 more
and that specifically for the
program or mostly for program
support, and then finally, the
third main difference is in the
other services category. Um, and
that's because the executive is
recommending more in ground
maintenance, office supplies and
computer and equipment
replacement.
Surrender the expansion. The
executive is recommending 1.3
million more than the lfc, and
that varies between
archaeological studies I t
training and other expansions.
The LFC does include an
expansion for the tailor Macia
historic site, but at a lower
amount than the executive and
then, frankly, the analysts have
come to a consensus on all
performance measures.
Thank you, Julissa. Good
afternoon, Mr Chairman and
members of the committee again.
I'm Andrew Minor, and it's my
pleasure to be here this
afternoon as the executive
analyst for the Department of
Cultural Affairs.
So the executive recommendation
is 8% General fund, increasing
as Julissa explained, majority
of the differences are going to
be in some a few expansions and
some base operations for museums
and historic sites that will
cover on the following pages
before we get started. I just
didn't want to, uh, just a
little bit of explanation on the
land of the chairman of fund
just because you're going to see
this in D. C a as well as M nerd
and environment. They're going
to follow us.
So the language of Senate Bill
nine, specifies that these
distributions that are being
added to certain agency budgets
this year are valid for
basically two fiscal years, and
that's not something that we
usually see. In Section four in
the recurring budget, where
almost everything is one year,
so that means that basically
when we get to 26
These agencies are going to get
another distribution per the law
bust, but the FY 25 distribution
will still be valid through the
end of FY 26. So the executive
made the decision to separate
these out into a separate line
item sort of what you will see
with a few other agencies in
House Bill two, such as D, F A
and AOC.
Uh, that just would make things
easier for budgeting and
tracking purposes for these
agencies to make sure that they
are keeping these buckets
separate and tracked well with
their own budget code, So that's
that's why you see those showing
up that way in the
recommendation.
So I'll go ahead and turn on. Go
to the next, uh, page, which is
going to cover the museums and
historic sites program Now this
is by far the largest program at
D. C A, because it contains all
eight state museums and all
eight historic sites.
So in terms of revenue in this
program
The executive recommended 1.28
million more in General Fund and
the LFC.
And overall, the executive
increase General fund by about 2
million, or 7.1%, while the LFC
was $766,000 increase, or 2.7%.
And then on other terms and
other sources of revenue, the
executive and the L C
recommendations were aligned and
increasing federal revenues by
20 about 20,000 and and
increasing other revenues by
about 400,000 as per agency
request. Most of those other
revenues are Forum Museum
admissions rental fee stuff like
that that are rebounding after
the the years of Covid.
So turning to based expenditures
in this program.
The executive recommendation
Increased contractual services
by $21,000 more than the LFC
executive recommendation.
Increased security and I t
contracts by 111,000 while the
LFC increased them by about
90,000.
The executive recommendation.
Increased other services by
592,000 more than the LFC.
So the executive recommendation
increased General fund in this
category for maintenance for
supplies and operational costs,
such as utilities at all of DCs
facilities, and that's a total
of 680,000 increase there.
Well, the LoC only increased the
General fund for these costs by
157,000.
And then in terms of personal
services and employee benefits.
Both recommendations increased
that category by 248,000 as we
used vacancy rates the
recommendations since they are
the same. They support an 86%
funded vacancy rate.
And I would just like to note
that you'll see kind of as we go
through that the CIA is funded
fairly tightly in psdb, and they
have had reduced vacancy rates,
which I believe the secretary
will discuss. And so it's very
important that we that they are
funded fully enough in in PSDB
in performance, analysts have
agreed to all targets and then
turning to expansions in this
program.
Here's where you'll see a
majority of the difference
between the recommendations.
So the executive recommended
670,000 more in general fund
expansions, and these include
ground maintenance statewide
partnerships and DCs education
program and for the J. Paul
Taylor Historic Site in Macia.
So the LFC only recommended the
expansion for that this the J.
Paul Taylor historic site.
They? The LFC recommended that
expansion at 350,000, the
executive recommended the full
requested 520,000, and that's
due to the somewhat unique
nature of this site, which wind
fully open will require both A,
um of fully guided tours of the
historic property as well as a
fully staffed visitor center.
The other expansion I wanted to
hit on is the grounds
maintenance expansion. The
executive recommended $400,000
for this kind of builds on last
year's request for janitors
throughout several state museums
and historic sites with which
the Legislature did support and
this is just providing more
funding.
For landscaping grounds
maintenance to make sure that
all these facilities are looking
their best for their for their
visitors that come from around
the world.
Um the LFC and the executive
boasted, Recommend instead of an
expansion in the base, they put
in some non recurring funding
$300,000 for economic
development at the Lossless Eros
historic site, so that's one
area where the L C and the
executive dated a line and with
that alternate back to Julissa.
Okay, Moving on to Page six.
We're now on the preservation
program. That's P code 537.
Um, so the executive recommended
476.3000 more in general fund
revenue than the LFC. Overall,
the executive is recommending a
47.7% increase while the LFC is
recommending a 4.9% increase.
The executive or both
recommendations were aligned and
other transfers and other
revenues, and that includes the
1 million from the Land of
Enchantment Legacy Fund.
I'm going down to base. The
basic expenditures. Um, the
executive recommends 6.3000 more
in personnel while the LFC does
not, and that's for staff
insurance cost.
For contractual services, both
recommended increase for
preservation support contracts,
while the executive recommends
an additional 60,000.
And in other services, you'll
see that the difference there is
960,000. That's because the LFC
is including the Land of
Enchantment. Legacy Fund in
other services. Um, but the
executive is recommending an
additional 40,000 for computer
and equipment replacement.
Um And I'm gonna move your eyes
to page seven. You will see to,
um
Two recommendations on language.
The first is an appropriation
from the Department of
Transportation for our
archaeological studies, and then
the second is, um, the transfer
for the Land of Enchantment
Legacy Fund. Um and then for
expansions. There is a
difference, um, where the
executive is recommending
370,000.
For the archaeological office
while the LFC is not
Thank you. Julissa on that
expansion recommended by the
executive for the Office of
Archaeological Studies that's
just a way that the executive is
recommending for the obvious to
be able to reduce its reliance
on more client based services
kind of like a fee for service
type activities and be able to
expand its mission, Uh, to
include education and research
activities that would benefit
the general public as a whole.
So turning to the next PICO.
That's the music commission. Uh
so you might notice if you've
been around. This is a new P
code for the department. It was
separated out from the New
Mexico Arts program the
department requested this
through the process and that was
approved. And so you see it here
as its own P Code Music
Commission is authorized in
statute.
And it's been revived in the
past couple of years, and
there's been some legislative
interest around that. So here.
you see it in terms of revenue.
It's a very, very small program
at the executive recommends
65,000 in general fund more than
the LFC.
That's for an expansion.
In the base. The LFC
recommendation included 25,000
more in the base for contractual
services to support the award of
more contracts for music
festivals, events that's
actually reflected in the
expansion for the executive,
which I'll see what you'll see
in a second and so it's
basically a wash. Um, so in
terms of that expansion
The executive recommends 40,000
to support the commission's FD
basically enough to take
The commission's one part time
FT and supported as a full time
F D and then 50,000 for expanded
outreach and events. So again,
the LFC did not support the
expansion but did have that
25,000 for contracts in the
base, Mr Chair moving on to
library services that's on page
10 and 11 of your packet.
The LFC recommends 20,000 more
from the General fund than the
executive. Um, and then the
recommendations were aligned and
all the other revenues.
In terms of the base. The LFC,
um recommendation and increased
funding for computer and
equipment replacement by 20,000
more than the than the executive
And then there was one
expansion, which the LLC and
executive both recommended, and
that's 100,000 for an additional
FTE position for continuing
education coordinator
Thank you. Julissa, Mr. Chair
moving to and members of the
committee moving to the next
code, which is program support.
P 540.
The executive recommended
232,000 more general fund
revenue than the LFC.
Difference in general fund
revenue was primarily associated
with the expansion and personnel
funding you'll see below.
Overall, the expansion
recommended a 400 Excuse me, the
executive recommended 415,000
increase to the total budget
while the L. C recommended 182
182,000 increase.
So in the base, the executive
recommended 70,000 more General
fund for personnel recommending
a total increase of 144,000
versus the L. C. Recommended
increase of 70,000 again going
back to my earlier point. This
is just to make sure that the
the department is of fully
funded can support all of its,
uh
All of its, uh, FTE in this
program.
Additionally, the executive
recommended 12.1000 more General
fund in other services for
operational costs, and then both
recommendations increased
contractual services by 50,000
for ticketing system license
costs.
There's an US expansions in this
program where the executive
executive recommends two small
expansions $100,000 for I t
training, security and equipment
replacement.
And 50,000 for operational costs
for the director of Real Estate
LLC did not recommend those
expansions. Mr. Chairman of the
committee, the last P code,
that's the arts program, and
that's on page 14. The LFC and
the executive recommendations
were identical and actually
aligned with the agency's
request. Um, so you'll see that
there is a decrease.
In the general fund. However,
this is also reflective of the
movie or the transfer of the
150,000. The New Music
Commission program.
Um, so after taking into account
of 150,000, there's actually an
increase in the General Fund of
54.1000.
Both recommendations were also
aligned in the base budget. Um
and after taking into account
the 150,000 to the music
commission programs. Um, both
recommendations increased
personnel by 27.6 and
operational costs by 26.5000
Julissa. Mr. Churkin remembers
all finish my presentation by
briefly.
Touching on a couple of special
appropriations couple here
recommended by the executive.
First there is representative
Luhan. Based on this morning's
discussion. Maybe interested.
There is $150,000 recommended
for outreach and education for
the 100th anniversary of zebra
and then, uh, little bit larger
there. There's a $10 million
infusion into the
Rural libraries Endowment fund
recommended by the executive.
This would increase the corpus
of the fund from 28 million to
$38 million and per the
statutory guidelines for
distribution of that fund would
increase the maximum payout to
the eligible libraries from
about $24,000 per library to
$33,000 per library.
And the state librarian is here
today. If you have more specific
questions about that with that,
Mr Chair that concludes my
presentation, so I will turn it
over to Secretary Thank you very
much. Analyst, Madam Secretary.
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Thank you, as always
for your time this afternoon. I
always appreciate the
opportunity to share with you
The good work that we're doing,
Um, I do have with me today.
Deputy Secretary Michele
Gallagher Roberts and I echo
Secretary props. Uh, comments
about how important deputy
secretaries are, and she is an
outstanding asset not only to my
department but to the state.
Um I also have a great Geisler,
CFO and SD director, and Jesse
Greenspan, who is our
Hopefully, this is a little bit
better. Um, who is our
legislative liaison? Um, as
always, I have with me. Many of
our division directors from
around the state, um, some of
whom have come in from Las
Cruces and Alamogordo to be with
us today. Um, and most
importantly, I have with us and
members of our friends groups
are foundations and supporters
and if they could just raise
their hand to indicate who they
are, and appreciate it
And I want to thank both of our
analysts. Um, they're truly a
pleasure to work with. They are
incredibly responsive. And, um,
that brief summary represents so
much work. Um and I just want to
pause and acknowledge and thank
both of them.
Um
I promise not to explain every
picture on every slide, but I do
have to explain my cover slide.
Um, this is a future astronaut
who visited the Museum of
Natural History and Science when
we had the Mars Rover on display
her father had built her a
replica that she also brought
with her and she came in her
little outfit and enjoyed it,
and it just speaks to me so much
about
Um, at the end of the day why
the work we do is important.
and, um, what it is doing, which
is building future scientists.
Future artist, Future
preservationist, um and people
who are connected to our
culture. So thank you for that
moment of indulgence, and I
promise not to do a whole lot of
this is
Next. I always include our
mission, vision and goals, but I
share with them. You share them
with you every time I'm before
you So, um briefly stated, our
mission is to preserve, protect
and present all of New Mexico's
unique cultural heritage. Our
vision is essentially that when
any new Mexican interacts with
any part
Of our agency. They somehow see
themselves reflected in that
work.
And our goal is to serve every
single person in our state in a
meaningful way.
Um, we focus our work over
essentially four different
program areas. Um, education is
very visible, and is that at the
heart of everything we do,
whether it's tours and classroom
visits, activity kits, preschool
reading hours, lectures,
presentations. Uh, programming
is probably our most visually,
um
Uh, visible program. It's our
exhibits or performances, events
and partnerships.
But the other two areas are a
little quieter, and so I always
highlight them when I'm before
you, uh, stewardship, which is
preservation, conservation and
collections and the little tiny
image you see, there is
actually, um to beekeepers
removing a bee colony that had
found their way into one of our
historic structures.
And then scholarship. We do
groundbreaking research and our
institutions on behalf of the
people of the state of New
Mexico, and I'm going to
highlight, um, a really
significant bit of research and
scholarship that was recently
done, but we also maintain
libraries and archives have
fellowships and databases that
are open and important to the
public.
Moving on. Um our focus is comes
to comes to the public in four
different areas are museums. Um,
are historic sites are statewide
services and our statewide
support services, and I want to
talk briefly about two of our
statewide services. So whenever
I have the opportunity or need
to call a lot of the division
directors into one place, we
always take the opportunity to
have an in person division
directors meetings since we're
typically anywhere from
Called a to Missy at any given
time. And so around this hearing
we've had a day and a half of in
person meetings yesterday
afternoon we were at the state
library. Um and we had the
opportunity to see many of the
things they do. And I encourage
you if you've never been to the
State library and gotten behind
the scenes tour, you should do
it.
Um, I guarantee you don't know
everything that this state does
for New Mexicans are library
services, and you don't
recognize how unique they are.
But one of the things that
really struck me was the
library, Uh, for blind and
print disabled, which offers
digital books that go out
digitally or in the mail. Um,
they offer a large print books,
and they offer Braille books.
And yesterday I learned that you
can get Rolling Stone magazine
in Braille.
And we have it at the State
library, along with the NFL
schedule for this year.
Um, and then this morning we
were out at the center for New
Mexico Archaeology, which is
houses, uh, portion of the
Museum of Indian Arts and
culture as well as the Office of
Archaeological Studies, and, um,
we had an opportunity to visit
with
Dr Marvin Row and Shelby Jones
to view the low energy plasma
radiocarbon sampling lab. It is
a dating instrument that Dr Roh
himself invented and operates.
Um and it allows, uh tiny, tiny
samples of objects to be dated.
And so not just archaeological
resources, although we certainly
use it for that, Um it can be
used even recently. It was
involved in debunking a
fraudulent Picasso, using a
tiny, tiny bit of the campus. Um
so I will move on. I'm probably
be laboring, but I'm just those
were at the top of my mind is
some really special things we
do. Um, this year, we were lucky
enough to partner with two
different entities to do some
economic impact studies.
Um and I wanted to share a
little bit of that. We partnered
with Americans for the arts for
arts and economic prosperity.
It's the sixth nationwide study
they've done And from that we
learned that the arts and
cultural sector only the
nonprofit sector generated $741
million in economic activity in
New Mexico in 2022, and that's
just looking at the nonprofit
sector that leaves out a whole
bunch of the sector.
Um, We also partnered with the
museum in New Mexico Foundation
to do an economic impact study
on our museums and historic
sites. And in 2022, on average,
just the state museums and
historic sites had a $133
million impact on our states.
Um, some interesting, per, uh,
attending and out of out of
state, attending to a nonprofit
arts and cultural event in New
Mexico spends an average of
$121.74 Spence that is twice the
national average for an out of
town attending and the price of
the ticket or admission is on
top of that.
And then when the individual
comes from in state or from in
area, it drops to $57.73. So
those might be things like
parking a meal or a coffee, A
babysitter. Except, but still
that statistic that $57 is still
almost twice the national
average.
Um Americans for the arts also
looked at some social impact
indicators. So, um, serve this
study was done by doing audience
in power intercept studies so
actually asking people as they
were walking in and out of
venues. Um almost 90% of the
respondents stated that the
event or venue that they went to
is an is inspiring a sense of
pride in the community or
neighborhood in which it was
located.
And 87% indicated that they
would feel a great sense of
loss if this activity or venue
were no longer available.
Um, when I was before you before
lfc in November, I shared some
of our successes. We, of course,
opened the bladder.
contemporary. Uh, we launched
the Cultural Properties
Restoration Fund. Um, we
expanded hours at some of our
historic sites. Um, I went over
these in November, so I'm not
going to belabor them. I want to
update a couple that have
happened really? Just this week.
Um, we have announced the 2024
Arts in the military mini
grounds to nine organizations
that go from farming to non
barbecue Alamogordo to Silver
City, and these are for programs
that specifically engage
veterans in the arts.
Ah, um we also Monday was the
first day on the job for Dr John
Taylor. Montoya is the new
division director for the Office
of Archaeological Studies. Uh,
he is a native new Mexican from
Albuquerque, who has a PhD from
Southern Methodist University.
Um, and if you picked up any
paper in the state or watched
ABC, NBC, CNN or Fox News last
night.
You may have heard that, um New
Mexico is home to a new sub
species of Toronto Saurus. That
was, um
Uh, dugout and Elephant Butte
and has been recently reassessed
by staff members from the Museum
of Natural History and Science
along with her colleagues around
the state, And so, uh, this is a
older cousin to T. Rex. Um, so
that's really exciting news that
we're very proud of.
And in your packets, we included
a schedule of activities,
exhibits and other things that
are happening in the Santa Fe
Museum during the session. I
know none of you have time to do
that. But perhaps if you have
family or friends in town during
the session, and you will be
getting your annual pass to the
museum soon.
Um, moving on to some of our
operational successes. Um, we
have taken our vacancy rate down
to 12.6 that's reduced from
16.1 last fiscal year, and it's
actually down from the 13.3%
that I shared with lfc in
November. Um again, we got all
16 of those janitorial FTE s
created and posted and we have
15 filled with an officer letter
pending for one.
So I'm hoping by Tuesday. We
will have our last janitor
position filled
We had no transfers out of our
category. 200 fy 23
Um, we completed the transfer of
all of our personnel, uh, from
the various sites and locations
into the facilities Management
Bureau, and we hired the
Southern facilities manager that
you all created. So thank you
very much for that.
Really reverted 0.2% of our
general fund budget in FY 23 So
again, that is 0.2% of our
General fund. We expended over
$14 million in capital, our
foundation partners raised 12
Really reverted 0.2% of our
General fund budget in FY 23 So
again that is 0.2% of our
General fund. We expended over
$14 million in capital Our
foundation partners raised $12.6
million to support programs and
services around the state.
We increased our audience
Attendance by 22% we on boarded
a new data analyst position to
help us better, Uh, convey to
you the impact of what we do and
we completed phase one of our
cybersecurity project and before
I move on from this particular
side, I really want to thank
Um, this committee for its faith
in giving me those janitorial
positions. I know it was a
unique and somewhat contentious
ask, Um, but you did it, and it
has made a tremendous difference
in our facilities or facilities
are cleaner. They're safer and
the biggest surprise impact is
my staff. Morale has gone up.
It is amazing what happens when
people go to work in a place
where the front entry is swept?
Where the bathrooms are freshly
stocked and clean where the
carpet has been vacuumed, and
they're not having to do the
work themselves. So thank you
very much for taking a leap of
faith, and I hope that we have
delivered, um adequately on
those 16 positions for you.
Um, I'm gonna skip this side or
through the slide pretty
quickly. Um, I think our
analysts covered this very well.
Basically, we're looking at the
difference between an 8%
increase from the executive 3.1%
increase from LFC, and that's
basically a $2 million
difference.
Um, I wanna acknowledge some of
the key recommended increases
that come from lfc. Uh, $350,000
for the tailor Macia site
expansion. Those are for FTS
contracts and operating. Um,
thank you very much for those
those are going to be critical
in getting that site towards
operation.
Um, and it's a great start to
phased approach in FY 26. I will
hope to do it again, like I did
with the janitors and come back
and ask for the other stuff
positions that are needed as we
actually start to move towards
operating
Um, on behalf of every librarian
and my brand patron around the
state. I want to thank you for
the 100,000 FTE for the
continuing educator position
that's really important to
helping make sure that the
librarians working in all the
libraries are properly trained.
Um, I appreciate, um, having
enough interest in the economic
development work that is
happening at Los Lucero sauce,
too, Although you're not able to
fund a recurrent request to
really strongly recommend a non
recurring request, um and we
will spend the next year proving
why that is valuable. Um, but
thank you for acknowledging that
work.
And I also want to thank you for
recognizing, um, that I think we
do a very good job and spending
our general fund money and for
the $826,000 increase in that,
So, um
We do have a few differences.
Um, in some areas that are
really key for me. I know not
every agency gets everything
they want. That would be a
unicorn session that I'm sure we
would all love to sit up. Um, I
try to be very transparent and
honest with you about what I
need. I do not implant my
request, but I am able to
prioritize and so for me these
kind of key differences.
R $404,000 for landscaping. Uh,
$441,000 for other costs. Those
are in the museum and historic
sites. P 536. Some general
funds, um, funding for the
Office of Archaeological
Studies, P. 537 and some
spending support personnel and
benefits support.
In P. 540.
So why are these things
important? Um, I mentioned, um
that landscaping is or that the
janitorial positions were really
critical for such safety. These
landscaping contracts are really
around the same thing. It's
about maintaining the safety
nets and cleanliness of our
facilities on the outside.
Um, this isn't necessarily about
having beautiful planters with
overflowing flowers, although
that would be great. This is
really about fire mitigation,
ice removal, repairing
irrigation lines past control.
Um, as you can imagine, we spend
an awful lot of time and money
keeping all sorts of critters
out of our museum and museum
collection.
But they get in their from the
outside. So part of it is around
that, um, and it's also about
that sense of pride that
communities take earlier I
shared with you, Um, the
statistic that nearly 90% of
respondents felt that the venue
they were out was a source of
community pride. We want to make
sure that we continue to be a
source of community pride in
that starts from the very
outside.
Um, we really cannot continue to
fund these services pulling from
cash balances or pulling from
our other contracts. Support
were pretty very tight on that
already. Um and it's a really
critical need. When I asked for
the janitors last year, the
question came up. Why couldn't I
contract out this year? I'm
saying I need this money to
contract because it will be more
efficient than getting the FTS
asking you for a bunch of
FTS to do landscaping
Landscaping company has all of
the equipment has the personnel
can move with the seasons, But
this money is really important
for keeping our facilities and
shape.
In terms of, um, the other cost.
Um, I've showed you a slight
chart before I decided not to
belabor it again, but in essence
over the past decade, plus,
we've been very, very lucky to
get increases in our budget. But
the majority of those increases
have gone to personnel and
salary, which just keep going
up. That's the nature of it.
But in essence are other costs
have either remained level or in
some cases gone down, so they
not only they're not only not
keeping up with the cost
increased cost. Um they're not
even keeping stable from year to
year. Um and we do have
specialized facilities. So our
utility bills at a museum are
going to be much higher. Given
what we have to run the kind of
I mean, we some of our
facilities, We keep 28%
humidity.
That's a lot of humidity to keep
in a building.
Um, so it's really becoming
very, very unsustainable for us
to not have increases,
especially in museum and
historic sites in these basic
other cost.
Um, Office of archaeological
studies. There's currently only
one piece of general fund that
comes into that office and that
is to support the director's
salary. That is the only general
fund it is entirely dependent
upon client based services. Um
this really limits the type of
education and research that can
be done for the greater public.
And the interesting thing is
this isn't just a wishin and
desire that we want to educate.
The public and do research. It's
the statutory mandate. Um, the
statute statutorily OS is
actually not required to do
client based archaeology. It has
a tremendous value and there are
some areas of core competency
that we're going to be expanding
on in terms of doing work for
other state agencies and in
downtown Santa Fe in particular,
we feel a really important niche
in that market, but it is a
niche.
But the actual statutory mandate
of the Office of Archaeological
Studies is to preserve and to
educate, especially the youth of
our communities. So right now we
have an educator. She's actually
the woman standing in that
picture who is a temporary 180
day higher and she has been all
over the state in that time.
And so I really in order to have
the office of Archaeological
Studies meet its mandate and to
provide more services to more
new Mexicans. We really do need
to work some general fund money
in there, why we refine and
increase our kindly services.
And then, um, last, but
certainly not least. This
program services the unglamorous
side of the sea. A HR legal. I t
my office. Um, we're currently
utilizing all our budgetary
funding for personnel and
benefits in this program area,
The labor market for these
particular areas is simply
requiring higher compensation.
Um, to retain stuff H r i T
legal staff. They have all
Become harder to attract, and
actually, I believe H r, uh,
class and comments that he was
done and we had to do cement
Tory increases with HR. And
there's currently I believe a
legal study going on as well. So
those costs are going to go up
and the budget just really
hasn't kept pace with those
costs. Um, when I was before lfc
in November, Um I said when I
took this position five years
ago.
Um
Great guys are my CFO and I
agreed we would higher, higher,
higher, higher higher higher
until he said Stop.
And in November, he was starting
to go. Don't know Secretary.
He has cried uncle on our
personnel and benefits. And if
you actually look on page 67 of
Lfc, volume three, you will see
that we are hired past our
funding vacancy rate at this
point.
Uh, where 3% over are funded
vacancy rate.
Um
If you ask three analysts, what
a vacancy rate is, you probably
get five different answers. It's
an inexact science to say the
least. Um and so in order if we
are really gonna maintain that
funded vacancy rate, or actual
vacancy rate will have to hover
more around that 16 17%.
Um, we can continue to work and
write it out and kind of see
where the labor market goes on
all the other areas, but the
program support areas starting
to get really difficult. We're
holding two positions back right
now. We're holding back in a lo
one NASD and we're holding back
a paralegal in our general
counsel office.
And we're going to have to start
doing the same thing with
museums and historic sites at
some point, But we're gonna wait
and see where our revenue goes
this year. Um, but I know I hear
a lot about vacancy rates. I
hear a lot about people
reverting money or transferring
money out. We are not an agency
that does that We are as we are
full up as far as we can go, and
it has become very, very
critical in this program Support
area.
So I would respectfully ask that
this committee continues.
Consider adding 400,000 for
landscaping, 200,000 for other
costs and museums and historic
sites. 250 in General Fund of
allocations for the Office of
Archaeological Studies that
would allow us to hire an
instructional coordinator, a K
and educator.
And a laboratory manager.
Um, along with a few other
costs and then $70,000 in
programs, support for personnel
and benefits.
Um, with that? I conclude my
presentation. Thank you for your
time. Thank you. Madam
Secretary. We're going straight
to questions first with ranking
member Armstrong.
Thank you so much for your
presentation. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. Um, we're all looking
a little glazed over. We
apologize for that. But it's
been kind of a long week. But
this is a fun agency. As far as
I'm concerned, um some of them
are like scratching your
eyeballs out. Um,
sorry. Um
Uh, one of the questions I have
is on P code. Uh, 537 under the
language.
And and it states that the LFC
recommends the following
language that
Other state funds appropriations
to the preservation program of
the Department of Cultural
Affairs, including $1 Million
from the Department of
Transportation for
Archaeological Studies as needed
for highway projects. Do you do
all of the studies for highway
projects? Or is that? Um uh
Subcontracted out.
Uh, Mr Terror representative
members of the committee. Um,
that language had been in D. C A
for a number of years in our
budget, and then it went out for
a year or two. And we're asking
for it back. We currently do not
do any work for the Department
of Transportation because we
were we owed the Department of
Transportation. Three reports
from projects that were 20 plus
years old.
The new leadership of O A s has,
um, worked on getting two of
those three back and we're very
close on the third and so we are
looking to re engage with D O T
to do work for them on highway
projects. So it is authorization
to move that money, but it
doesn't necessarily mean it goes
so we would be one of several,
um cultural resource management
firms that they would contract
with.
But it would go a long way to
helping us stabilize the earned
revenue side of away US.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
Secretary. That's interesting to
me because I I just had never
seen that before.
Um So do you have
archaeological, archaeological?
Whatever archaeological
Yeah. Archaeologists on on on
staff. Yes. Uh, Mr Terror
representative members of the
committee. Yes, we do have
trained archaeologists on site.
We have archaeologists that are
permanent to do work in New
Mexico, and that is currently
how the office of archaeological
studies is funded is through
that contract Archaeology work.
So right now we're working on a
few utility projects in downtown
Santa Fe. We also working with
Highlands University. Um, and
there are a couple of other
contracts have it in here, but
we do. We do do contract
archaeology, and we do keep
those individuals on site funded
through that earned revenue.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And how
many do you have on staff?
That is it. You can get back to
me on that. I was just curious.
Um, the other question. Um, is
rule.
Library.
Um
I I I represent the largest
house district in the state of
New Mexico. And so, Mr Chairman,
I have a lot of rural libraries
in my district. And so I I think
that there might be a little bit
of confusion, possibly on the
disbursement of those funds. And
so I would. I would hope that,
um
The people that need to hear
that are listening and that the
that education happens or, you
know, refresher happens so that
our rural libraries are getting
that disbursement because I'm
concerned for rural libraries
all across the state. Um
And and I would encourage to, um
um
Pad up that endowment so that we
can keep helping these libraries
across the state. A lot of these
libraries are in town for the G
R T is nothing
And they really and they're
fully utilized, um, and in rural
New Mexico, rural libraries are
fully utilized. So thank you for
that. I just needed to make that
statement. And then the other
thing, Mr Chairman that I would
like to bring to people's
attention is the New Mexico
Historic Women's Marker program
that was established in 2007 and
You know, come back and beg for
some money here and there and
someplace else, But be nice if
we didn't have to beg for that
money and that if you know we
had
Some money in that program to
keep putting up those historical
markers and doing all the work
that is done in the past, so I
would encourage that. And, uh
other than that, I thank you for
your for your work. We've had
the pleasure of being able to
visit a lot of these entities
and it it is there truly gems of
New Mexico. So thank you. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. Thank you very
much. Ranking member Armstrong
Well said, Represent Sanchez,
please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I just want
to echo what are up Armstrong
seen about the real libraries.
We definitely need to provide
support to them.
I just also want to commend
Secretary Garcia Garrido and her
department for all the hard
work, Uh
A lot of the facilities that you
guys manage and oversee. Um
A large part of the revenue that
comes to our state. It. Uh
definitely, uh
Provides an experience that
educates people on our culture
and history.
Ah, I also want to commend Mr
Patrick Moore on his workout,
Lost Lucero as
Ah, great work over there. I
just want to ask you to continue
to work to build that
relationship with Los Amigos de
los heros. Uh,
Other locals within the Alcalde
area, Mr Zaching terrorists, uh,
he restaurant recently gave us a
tour of art exhibit at the
Hispanic Hispanic Cultural
Center. So I want to thank him
and that very beautiful.
Um and I'd be recently invited
me to reception of the Palace of
the governors, My whole life.
I've lived in that area and I've
never been in the palace of the
governors, and it's really
beautiful in there. Um
And this goes with a lot of the
museum's insanity. I think a lot
of
Local areas around sanity. We
have all these beautiful
museums and they don't get
access to them, or I don't know
if it's the funding or whatever,
But in the future. I wanna maybe
started initiative where we get
the local schools where we
provide them the ability to see
these museums. There's a lot of
abuse beautiful museums in Santa
Fe.
And last year I like to
recognize my former class. Meet
Mr Luna Herrera.
Ah, we were in school since
we're in head. Start three or
four years old at JFK and okay,
we can get Pablo. So I just want
to say hello. That's it, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. Thank you very
much for the incentive. We're
going to go next door. Assembly
hunt, please.
Thank you.
That was Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. Representative that
was heart felt.
Um, I think growing up here in
Santa Fe, um
I take a lot of, uh
The access for granted myself to
a beautiful seeds, and I've seen
them grow, develop and change.
Um, since I was a little kid, um
So I I just want to say I would
second what, representative
Joseph Sanchez said. And yet we
do have some programs with the
kids, and we have summer
programs.
And again, I'm going to say I
take it for granted because I
have my my Children have been
involved.
And I have an adult child, and
he he still remembers, and I
still have the tablas and the
different artifacts that you
participated in making.
Um, and now I have a 10 year old
and she's she takes advantage of
that. So I'm
Mr Chairman going to get down to
this really fast because we
don't have the time, but I'm
looking at the numbers and
performance measures and there's
some missing. There's some gaps
of information but in the most
part just to summarize things I
see an increase of access and
use and visiting and all
especially, I mean I'm amazed by
the volunteer hours.
All right. Under the the dollars
contributed by or administered
by private sector foundations to
departments, education programs
and
Exhibit. I think that
We are rich in culture. We are
rich in protecting and taking
care of our art museums in our
culture here, Um and I'm always
supportive. I've We just
recently opened a new museum
here in Santa Fe, where I got to
go. Um, And it was amazing. Um
But that was one of those things
we had. We had a large
contribution to private
contribution, but without those
contributions, you know that
that helps us with this budget.
Um what? What is the leverage?
And I read here, too, that we're
losing some federal funding, Can
you? Can you elaborate on that?
How
In for the entire state. What
are those Federal funding is
going, How are they going down
How they affect your budget?
Mr Chair representative members
of the committee at the
Department of Cultural Affairs
are primary sources of federal
funding. Are they any age? I'm
sorry that any a National
Endowment for the arts? Um, the
National Park Service, and I am
a last Institute of Museum
library sciences Got that
backwards. You know what I'm
saying? Um, those are the
primary funding and those
agencies. Their budgets tend to
fluctuate and tend to be a
little bit more. Um
At risk than many other federal
agencies. Um so we do move along
with those, um, that's what
makes the matching funds that
are allocated supercritical,
especially like New Mexico.
Arts, Um, where an agency where,
you know we're overmatched. Um,
I have to commend Eligon name
Michelle of Limb, Childs and Dr
Jeff Pappas on their handling
their agencies and staffing.
Um, that's another, you know,
kind of personnel.
An interesting thing that
happens with personnel budgets
is that when increases are
granted, and they're fantastic
increases, they don't
necessarily reflect the federal
side, so there's a lot of
balancing that has to be done.
But generally, I think our
federal funds are fairly stable.
We've been very lucky in the
past years to get a lot of the
special funding that has come
out, especially libraries and
new Mexico Arts. Um so I have a
great deal of confidence in our
division directors to manage
those fluctuations.
Thank you. I believe I
appreciate that commitment and
you're working towards that, But
I just want to really, um
emphasize
How important like New Mexico
and even our capital City, of
course, we're an international
visit, visitation, say, and we
we we heard from cultural
affairs. Uh, you never were
putting from you today and, um
Sorry, and and it's just
important that we we look at the
economic factor here in the
growth of this and we heard
earlier about the route 66
centennial that's going to bring
in a lot. I feel like these
numbers are just going to really
increase with those types of
investments. How are you working
with with those with our other
agencies to
To maybe a compound the effect
and prepare for what they're
developing economically, That's
going to really impact impact
you in our museums, Mr Chair.
Uh, Mr Terror representative
members of the Committee. Um, we
work very closely with tourism.
I enjoyed a very good working
relationship with Secretary
Shire. And I'm really enjoying
getting to know. Um uh, in terms
Secretary Adams. Um, we work
together. Actually, I brought up
the women's history Marker
exhibit when Representative
Armstrong mentioned it.
That was a partnership with the
tourism department. Um, and the
International Women's Forum. We
talked to them about
advertising. We actually uses
our services. So we coordinate
with them quite a bit, uh,
economic development. We do have
a seat on the outdoor recreation
advisory Committee. Uh, we are
also in conversation with him
about creative industries were
part of the main street and
cultural district programs.
So we do coordinate with them
very closely, and the Department
of Cultural Affairs also has a
seat on the route 66 Commission,
which Dr Morris sits on for us.
Thank you. Mr. I just want to
emphasize that as those as we're
growing those, um
Agencies and their budgets. It
is we are tired of saying have
many, many other things going
on. I apologize. Mr Chair. I'm
trying to be succinct here. But
I just want to say that this is
going to have a compound effect
on our cultural affairs
department and our visitations
and everything else that is
going on because you've done
such a good job.
And I want to say, and you're
the morale that you spoke of is
is felt. I talked to your your
folks all over, especially here
in Santa Fe. But in Albuquerque
and everywhere I travel, I tried
to hit a site.
To to explore and visit. So I
want to say you're doing an
exceptional job and you're not
going to get all the dollars you
want, but I want to say could
keep up this incredible work,
but
Make sure that we're prepared
with that information because
that is a huge compound effect.
I see that we're going to have
and that's all I have I school
thing Maybe we can talk more
with representative Sanchez
about Thank you. Thank you.
Representative of Cruz, please.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Many
years ago, I was the director of
Parks and recreation when I just
started that job as director of
brilliant County parks and
recreation. One of my mentors
was a gentleman by the name of
Orlando City Orly. He had been
the director of city parks and
recreation for many years.
And so I asked Mr Sergio, what
advice he had for me as a new
and young director. And he, he
said Art. This is the advice
that I would give you.
He said. All of your facilities
are important. Your community
centers are important. Your
swimming pools Your parks are
all important things but the
most important
From my estimation or your road
medians. He goes when you have
pretty flowers out there. The
trees are maintained as people
drive down the road. Everybody's
on that road. Everybody's gonna
see engage.
Your performance by how well you
maintain
Those mediums.
And by the way he goes, it makes
people feel really good when
they've had a hard day or
they're on their their in the
rush to work when they see that
that prettiness around them.
My extension, Mr Chairman.
Hmm. I believe the same thing
holds true with the operations
that we're hearing about today.
You know, not everybody is
homeless. That's a taxpayer, not
everybody is incarcerated.
Not everybody needs behavioral
health services.
But almost everyone Mr Chairman
goes to a museum goes to the
National Hispanic Cultural
Center.
And I could name them all. But I
don't have to. I think everybody
gets the idea how important
quality of life is for the
taxpayer. This is where the
rubber meets the road. This is
how state government is gauged
whether we do a good job or we
don't whether their taxpayer
dollars are well used or not.
And so I submit to my colleagues
and to everyone. That's
That's in attendance, however.
That this is a key aspect of
state government more than we
often realize. Thank you, Mr
Chairman.
Thank you. Representative
accrues Next. We're gonna go to
represent Garcia, please. Thank
you. Mr Chairman. I just need
clarification. Question answer.
You mentioned rural Lay Berries
and your statement earlier.
Funds always because you know I
have a Afghan bombarded with
emails that jealousy budget does
not have.
There's not a good appropriation
school libraries.
Where do you fit into that
picture?
Mr Chair representative members
of the committee. So most likely
the emails that you're getting
are for constituents talking
about the rural Library
endowment, which was set up in
2019 and has received several
good sized appropriations. Um,
this year, Uh, the executive
recommended another $10 million
appropriation to that fund. The
LFC has a recommendation of zero
into that fund.
So ideally, um, the fund will
reach $50 million. It's
currently at 28. And right now,
that means that, um of the 54
eligible libraries. The payout
is about $24,000 a year, which I
will say does not sound like a
lot, but it is a tremendous
amount for a role library.
Um, to keep their doors open or
to hire staff. Um, an additional
10 million into that fund would
bring the principal up to 38
million, which would increase
that amount by about $18,000 a
year, So that would be about
$30,000 a year. So that is
probably the emails you're
getting, Um, is there talking
about the rural library
endowment and a special
appropriation request that's in
the executive but not in the
lfc.
Hmm. Thank you for that. Thank
you. Mr Chairman. One of the
question one more. It's just a
comment. You know, I had the
opportunity to go to Hispanic
cultural center and another
entities that are doing this,
you know, and no, like
representative Good luck. You
said, you know, you know, that's
our history. People need to
really look up to what we have
the beauty of what's around us
all the time, you know, and
people just take it for granted.
And I'm going to give you a good
example. I live by a moral
national monument that I have
never been there.
You know, that's kind of sad.
And all the national monument is
not what we're talking about
here, but just an example of
what people miss out on for just
not doing it without Mr
Chairman. Thank you. Thanks for
the presentation. Thank you very
much represented Garcia. I don't
see any other questions. I have
a few, very quick ones. We do
have two additional agencies,
Madam Secretary, Do you
interface with straight ST
Uh um.
The
Tribal preservation of of
offices.
Uh, Mr Chair members of the
committee? Yes, we do. So the
state Tribal, um
The Thibault's tribal historic
preservation officers are
certified by the state Historic
Preservation Officer Jeff
Papa's, uh and he does interact
with them provide guidance, um,
help them out with issues. A
goal of his when he took the
position was to increase the
number of Pablo's and tribes
that hand those and he has
succeeded in that. Um so at some
point, we will ask for some
special funding to actually get
them together in a conference
setting where they can share
information, but yes, we do.
Interact with them on a pretty
continual basis. Okay, Thank
you, Madam Secretary, And I
think if
Ah!
Are going offline on a few other
things, Madam secretary. I just
want to also, thank you.
Everybody here. Really? I think
we've heard incredibly, um
Eloquent and really, uh, nuanced
perspectives from committee
members, and it reflects. I
think a lot of energy that we
see from your department. See
the folks here today I think
probably all of us have
interacted with this with the
CIA in different ways. And so
it's really a kudos and
reflection on you all.
Um, similarly sort of asked
staff to go back in. Madam
Secretary also, you've really
prioritized a few of the play
increases. You've also heard
some feedback from the committee
particular around the rural
Library fund if there's a
consideration for increased
investment there think we want
to avoid what happened last year
were very few payouts went out.
And so there needs to probably a
little bit more clarity about
how what would happen and this
is a general thing. What? You
know what more are we getting
for? What if we invest more with
that Julissa would ask you to
work with the LSC. Dr. Miner on
perhaps prioritizing, Uh, based
upon what? Okay, thank you very
much. Madam Secretary West for
the LFC recommendation.
Really appreciate you and your
all of the
Partners in your agency.
Mr Chair. Members of the
committee. Thank you very much.
And representative Armstrong. We
employ six archaeologist at the
Office of Archaeological
Studies. Six archaeologist.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I would
move. The committee adopts the
LFC recommendation.
I can remember. Is there any
opposition to that casing, and
there's no opposition on my
behalf. I'm just concerned of
the price difference over $2
million difference between one
another Just concern. Thank you.
Thank you very much represented
Garcia.
Okay. We have adapted that
recommendation.
And now we'll invite Mr Fuse to
come
And please clear the way so that
everybody can. We can switch
quickly.
The committee. We expect to be
here for a while longer. Um
Okay. Thank you very much. Thank
you guys. So much, Uh,
Randi.
Mr Sanchez, please kick us off.
Good afternoon, Mr Chairman.
Name is Scott Sanchez. I'm the
LFC analyst for natural
resources. Today we're going
over the Energy Mineral Natural
Resources Department Agency code
5 to 1. Find that information
behind Tab five.
You can also find more
information on the LFC
recommendation on invite one
page 151 to 133 and Volume two
starting on page 238.
Here with me today. Acting
Cabinet Secretary Dylan Fusion
and Donner Bera, My counterpart
from the Department of Finance
Administration.
Differences between the
recommendations are that the LFC
Recommendation Increases General
Fund by 3.8 Million or 10.6%,
whereas the executive
recommendation increases General
Fund by 7.8 Million, or 22%.
Compared with the executive the
LSC recommendation allocates
more resources to the
contractual services and less
for the other cost category.
Let's see also budgets. The
agency's distribution from the
Land of Enchantment Legacy fund
in the contractual services
category, where the agency plans
to spend the funds rather than
separate expenditure category as
used by the executive.
In the base budget. Both
recommendations include
additional general fund for a
second hotshot crew and
equipment.
The executive adds An additional
1.2 million for the energy
conservation and Management
Division for great
modernization, grants and
marketing.
And 1.1 million above the LFC
recommendation for vacancy rate
reduction in state parks. L. C
at 900,000 for that purpose.
The LFC recommendation includes
expansion funding for 1.4
million for expansions in the
oil conservation division, where
the executive recommends 2
billion for expansions in oil
conservation, mine reclamation
and energy conservation and
management.
With alcohol and it's donathan.
Thank you, Scott. Um thank you,
Mr Chairman. Members of the
committee. Um, the executive
would just like to point out a
couple of important points
regarding the executives
recommendation.
Um, particularly for the energy
Conservation and Management
division.
The 1 million grants is to
improve infrastructure as far
as, um
The grid grid. Uh,
Grid. I'm sorry. The grid, uh,
modernization Thank you and the
other part that's really
important. There's 75,000 in
other costs not included in the
LFC recommendation, which is for
data acquisition.
Expanding public sharing
information with the public and
developing long term strategies.
The executive fills that's very
important that we support that.
And within, um, the other parts
of the executive pills would
night would needs to be noted,
is that within the parks
Division, although, um, there is
less revenue. Um, the lfc notes
less revenue. There actually is
an increase of over 1.8 million
of other revenue connect.
Collected by this particular p
code necessary. Um
That the agency would like to
use towards, uh a lot of the
park maintenance and the
increase in costs utilities that
are necessary for all of the
different 34 state parks
throughout the state.
Uh And finally, the other part
of the executive would like to
You know point the committee's
attention to is the increase of
other I'm sorry. Federal funds.
It's close to 20 $21 million,
depending on which
recommendation you look at, and
that comes through programs
support that that the attempt to
achieve other federal grants
doesn't just happen. It actually
happens through the support of
personnel within program
support.
So with that, I'd like to turn
it over to
Mr Future. Uh, good afternoon.
We're ready to go. Yes, Mr
Acting Secretary. Good
afternoon, Mr Chair and
Committee member of members. My
name is Dylan Fuge. I'm the
deputy secretary at the New
Mexico Energy, Minerals and
Natural Resources Department,
And I appreciate the opportunity
to talk with you about our fy 25
budgets.
Um, we're here in support of the
executive recommendation. Um,
which will make which will allow
injured six divisions to make
critical investments in our
programs and positions us to
successfully stand up the Pecos
River and Eagle Creek Peak
hotshot firefighting crews that
the Legislature authorized last
year. It will allow us to
continue our investment in
responsible industry oversight
and the oil conservation
division and the mining and
mineral divisions.
Allow us to make investments to
enhance the visitor experience
at our state parks, improve the
solar and green building tax
credits certifications we
provide for New Mexicans Support
Water Data Act implementation
and help US maximize deployment
of significant federal dollars
that's available to em, Nerd.
Well, we believe the wreck
provides a better path to
achieve these objectives. I also
want to appreciate the work that
went into the LFC wrecking the
investments that it reflects in
our department. I did want to
flag a couple of key areas of
difference in areas of potential
add backs that I would ask the
committee to come to consider
First I'd like to focus on our
state parks. I think that
leverages nicely on the
preceding presentation. Ah, with
35 locations in 25 of the
state's 33 counties, it provides
a distributed footprint that
reaches millions of visitors
each year.
I was getting the eco sorry.
both in state and how to state.
It also means that the division
has significant increasing and
recurring operational costs,
most notably in the four
hundreds. We have extensive fuel
utilities and solid waste costs
that we don't control. Um and
the LFC s proposal to hold 400
flat. The four hundred's flat
does not allow us to
Uh, make
Will constrain our ability to
make operational investments
alongside the investments that
we very much appreciate that the
committee has made in our 200
budget. We're also funding new
initiatives to enhance connected
activity of our remote remote
facilities were rolling out
StarLink Internet services that
are offices. Well, folks don't
think of state parks is a place
where you want to go Search the
Web as you're managing
employees, facilities, sort of
other components. Having robust
Internet connections is actually
key.
Unfortunately, the starling
services not cost less. In that
vein, we would request that the
LFC wrecked be amended to at
least match the D s a wreck and
increase, uh, providing
increased funding in the four
hundreds of at least 575,000.
Um, second, we would like to
encourage the committee to
restore funding for the Grid Mod
program to the levels
recommended by DFA. Um, as our
analysts noted, that was $1
million. The Grid Monde program
provides unique opportunities
for us to provide pilot projects
about that deploy functional and
operational upgrades to the New
Mexico grade.
That are going to be critical to
our energy transition. It allows
us to test them out by way. Of
example, the Grid MoD program
when it has been funded, funded
the El Rito Community Micro Grid
project that is now in the
construction phase. That project
will provide critical power for
this rural community during fire
and and whether events and show
and and provides a template for
other communities across the
state.
Similarly, we use grid mod
funding to support the city of
Albuquerque and its brain
project.
Um, which is allowing the city
to have all of its energy use is
at its fingertips and better
optimize energy use and
demonstrate how to best manage
renewable energy resources
flowing in, so we think it has
the capacity to provide
different projects at scale
across all sorts of communities
in the states, and we would
encourage the committee to fund
it.
Ah third program support as our
analysts mentioned, there's
significant federal funding
being deployed by successfully
deployed by M nerd by the
forestry division in the oil
Conservation Division. Um, both
of those divisions have more
funding that we know is coming.
The oil conservation Division
has another 72 million in
The orphan, well, plugging in in
the coming years $14 million
under the program. There are
other significant programs in
forestry and the energy
conservation and management
divisions has submitted
significant grants for both the
home and appliance rebates and
the home energy efficiency
programs through the D, O E and
and the Solar for all grants.
Well, the heavy day today,
workload for those grants and
programs falls on the division
and the division staffs
implementing those funding those
getting vendors on boards and
other things like that requires
investments in R. A S D in RAS D
program. They're critical to it.
We can't We cannot do it without
while we appreciate the LFC
support and realigning our
internal staffing with the move
of our regulatory affairs
office, where it belongs in SMD
that move
Involved a shift of the entire
budget for those positions
because of some time it had
taken to because of some delays
in filling those positions. We
have still the director and the
attorney roll. Those roles had
been used for vacancy savings by
the agency and our program
Support office.
As a result, with the move. We
are concerned about some
challenges supporting the
workload by this unprecedented
funding that we're going to land
in the next year, and as a
result, we are requesting a
$300,000 Add back into the two
hundreds and then similarly,
although smaller, there are some
slight differences between
I believe the lfc wreck holds
are 400 flat in the FAA has a
small increase of around 87,000.
We would request those be
restored prior to budget
Submittal. We have had some
growth in personnel and employee
based on commitments and
investments made by this
legislature. That's required us
to increase our footprint, and
there were least expansions and
other components in Albuquerque
that we're not factored into the
budget.
At at at the time of submission,
and so we are requesting an
expense. A small expansion in
the 400. Then finally, this is a
flag, but we wanted to flag it
for the finance Committee. Um,
we believe there will be
discussions in the upcoming
sessions surrounding state
support for geothermal
development, electric vehicle
tax credits and other
components.
Um, that will be, uh, that will
have work load that falls on em,
nerd. Unfortunately, neither
recommendations supports the
positions we had requested to
support that potential work. Um,
we just wanted to flag from the
committee that M nerd will need
resources to support that. And
with that, I look forward to
your questions. Thank you very
much.
Uh, any additional comments
Like those were the additional
comments. Okay. Thank you were
gonna go start straight to
questions and thank you for
being briefed. Representative
Han, please. Thank you, Mr
Chair.
I just want to get right down to
it, Um, on the
As I am thinking, please excuse
me again, Um, the grid
modernization budget line. What?
I'm trying to look for some more
additional information we put in
a 1 million. What were you
asking for Mr Secretary, Acting
secretary culture? We were
asking, uh
Um Mr Chair represents
Representative Luhan. We were
asking the exact correct
includes a million dollars to
support the Grid Mod program,
and I believe that isn't other
forgetting where that sits, Um
other costs and the LFC budget
for that has no money for that
program. Okay? I'm tired again.
Um, I need clarification of what
you just said.
I'm Steve Williams. Just maybe
Scott needs to answer. Mr Chair.
Please go ahead, Mr Sanchez to
clarify that there's not money
in the LFC recommendation for
this, And there is money in the
D F a
Mr. Chair, Representative Hunt?
Yes. You look on the high level,
which is the page one of your
package under the Grid
Vandalization Grants program
that will be line two. I'm
sorry. Line three. It does
reflect that. The LFC
recommendation did not include
funding for this, whereas the
executive included $1 million
for that purpose on the
different sheet for the
Energy Conservation and
management program, which would
be page
Five year packet. You can see
where that $1 million is
reflected additional costs.
Additional
In the other cost category.
And that would Mr Chair so that
would be through D f a well
through the executive record
Executive recommendation to not
LFC recommendation. I want to be
clear. Mr Chair. Representative
Luanda is correct. Thank you.
Um so I just want to
Support the we We, uh, work on
that part of this budget. I
think we need that million
dollar. I think we need much,
much more and I would support
And if there's any additional
information if we talk about
this with me regarding this
federal grant funds that were
also supporting through, um, D f
A. If that is a way that we are
reaching a goal of getting the
grid modernization dollars in
place.
I think this is critical and
essential for the work that
we're doing when we are looking
at having the biggest transition
line in the United States
already in place, I This doesn't
make sense to me that we're not
putting full effort here. Um
And then Mr Chair. The other
thing that you, uh
That the acting secretary
mentioned was the geothermal.
Um, recommendation from the
executive is there is that Scott
I want to go to you. Is that
reflected anywhere else in any
part of our budgets?
Mr Chair.
Mr. Chair, representative Luhan,
the LFC recommendation as
reflected on that same high
level. Um, shows that the
executive recommends 400,000 for
that purpose, whereas the LFC
recommendation does not, um,
also on the specials Different
street towards the back of your
packet. There is a $20 Million
executive ad.
That was not a request the
agency made it was added through
the process after the executive
Donovan Jackson on that
Yes. Thank you for clarifying
that the executive did support
400 of the $600,000 request for
geothermal that is tied to the,
uh, The governor's, uh,
Attempts to begin trying to, um,
have funding for geothermal
legislation. I don't know if the
agency would like to add any
more to that special. I think
we're okay with that. I
appreciate that amount of
information. Uh,
I think that Mr Chair
Again as somebody that's been
just
Really focused in on our
tentative types of energy and
how
Crucial it is to meeting our e
t. A, um
Goals. I think that this is
really essential and we're
talking with our state.
Um
Commissioner, Um, Land
Commissioner. Excuse me and the
fact that the in the investments
that they're making from that
office as well, I think that
this is really crucial that we
zero in in these types of
alternative.
Um, green energies, so to speak,
and I would just ask that we
take a closer look at those
things. I know you're asking for
other things, but I'm going to
just focus on those on those
those budget items right now, Mr
Chair. Appreciate the time.
Absolutely. Thank you very much
Represent Luhan. Next, we're
gonna go to represent Garcia.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Mr here for the
presentation. I don't have any
questions. I just have a
comment.
We had an opportunity to go to
Navajo Lake.
And then he was a tour of that
and give us a fishing tour of
that.
And then after that, we had an
opportunity. Mr Chairman to go
two story Lake.
And have a tour of that and my
hats off. I wanted to just
director Kobe Blazquez.
Professionalism.
He showed us
The kindness.
And that means he is just a good
asset to the state of New Mexico
because, you know, he really
went out of his way. We're up in
farming to non to show us
everything. And then the same
thing happened when we were in
our story. Lake.
Hats off to you, sir.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you
very much, Mr Garcia. We'll go
next to representatives. Sarah
Nana. Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you for the presentation.
Very thorough. I have a question
on O C, D, uh, expansive
expansions for evey tax credits
Lfc. Why? Why do we not have
anything for that?
Madam Chair or Mr Chair,
Representative Sanjana, while
the LSC recommendation for the
recurring budget
Um
Amidst the well. It includes the
expansions for the troika
Specialist Compliance
supervisors, field supervisors,
um, in the underground
inspection control unit, as well
as funding for the environmental
control. If you look on the back
page of the high level page two
Um
The executive right, actually
emits the funding for new FTE in
the environmental control
portion of that expansion. So I
guess just to clarify is that it
was in the expansions as well as
there was an LFC ad of $2.5
million in a non recurring
special appropriation. I'm on
page 18 of your packet for
inspection and compliance
backlogs and they will
conservation division.
Mr Chairman, but I was talking
about the expansion Zeevi Tax
credit program, so we don't have
anything for that. My apologies
and Mr Chair representative
Sanjana for the TV tax credit
program it looks like rather
than include this expansion. The
Loc supported, uh, the transfer
of additional ft from the
program Support division and did
not increase the recurring
budget in the CMD. That's okay.
Alright? Um one more question
with the expansions with the
expansions and how many people
will be will you have to work on
compliance and expections and
inspections specifically? And
can you tell me how many wheels
there will be inspecting and how
they gonna done in a year, Mr.
Chair representatives are
Indiana. Uh, we
We will be adding we've got
currently 16 direct compliance
super supervisors, So those are
the those Those are the field
inspectors were we would propose
with the new per new
propositions under either Rex to
add to positions there. That
would be 18. There are
approximately
70,000 Wells in the state. Um
and
You know that backing out some
of them because there are
certain tribal wells, which we
do not inspect, uh, about about
62 5000 Wells or so that that we
inspect and we and we anticipate
will stay within our historical
range over the last couple of
years, which has been about
30,000 inspections.
Okay, So, Mr Chairman, the last
time we met, you said for the
first quarter.
Um, you inspected 3.2 soul.
That's about 2000 Wells. Maybe.
So, how do you get to 30,000?
Uh, Mr Chair Representative
Sarah, Indiana, According to the
reports provided to lfc in the
first quarter of fiscal year, 24
We, uh, did 80/8200 inspections
which would put us on track for
roughly 32,000. I would expect
a fall off in the current
quarter because much of the well
inventory is in the Northwest
and snow on the ground does
impact our inspection rate.
Okay, so I don't I guess that's
okay. Um
So of the of the 18. Now you
have 18 field inspectors. How
much of their time is used
Specifically Mr. Chair
Representative Sarin, Yana. We
took the steps to convert R O. C
D compliance officers to
dispatch Hable employees, which
means they don't have a fixed
office location. They take their
O. C D issued vehicles home and
they go
Directly to the field most days
and undertake inspections. They
do stop by offices to file
reports, but we've made
significant investments in Ipads
and other technologies that
allow for the submission of
compliance is and other reports
from the field, assuming they've
got an inner and Internet
connections, so we've taken
those steps to reduce.
Historically, inspectors used to
have to come to the office to
pick up truck. Um and that
wasted time. And so now they're
they are dispatched directly
from home on their inspection.
100% of the time they're pretty
much
Or
Doing on the floor are Mr Chair
representative. Our compliance
officers are 100% devoted to
inspections. Some of that is
going to be some subsequent
reporting and other components.
It's witnessing
it is witnessing mechanical
integrity test. It's inspecting
plug jobs. It is inspecting
operating facilities. It's a
whole range of things. But that
is that is 100% of that
particular categories. Job.
Alright. So again one more time
you used inspect about 30. Mr.
Chair Representative. Yeah, we
we we undertake about 30,000
inspections a year, which is
roughly a cadence of hitting,
hitting a site once every three
years because some of the
inspections and deployments are
to witness events like
mechanical integrity, tests and
other things like that.
They say that one more time so
once go ahead, see that one more
time.
Representing you're fine. Just
remind
Um, Mr Chair, Representative.
Our field inspectors go to sites
to inspect conditions, see if
they're evidence of releases
Make sure operational
compliance. They are also
deployed to do other things. So
if an operator's conducting a
mechanical integrity test, which
determines the down hole Ah
That determines the well bore is
in good shape. There aren't
leaks, cracks sort of other
components. We like to witness
those also when there are
plugging crews operating, we
send inspectors out as part of
the plugging close out to verify
that proper plugging occurred in
that the site can properly be
released. I thought you said,
Okay, so, um do you does your
Year. Department deal with
leaks.
Uh, Mr Chair, Representative.
The O. C. D has comprehensive
jurisdiction, uh, over leaks,
releases and other things like
that from oil and gas facilities
that it regulates. So I had
information that said, there are
16 bleeps that have not been
remediated or haven't been
inspected lately. So were you on
that. Is that part of the
remedial? Uh,
Compliance and inspection. Mr.
Chair Representative, Um I can't
confirm that number but would be
happy to follow up, Uh, field
inspectors would be out
investigating leaks, determining
if they have occurred the
environment of my mind our
environmental bureau would be
responsible for lead remediation
working with operators on clean
ups, parents and other
components. And we recently did
a comprehensive update to our
website to provide more clarity
about the exact status of
releases in the cleanup process.
Okay?
So do you have enough people to
do so 16,000 still not not
looked at or complied with.
Do we do You have enough people
to do what you need to do, then
we still need more people or no
FTS.
Um, Mr Chair Representative, I
think is reflected in our
original agency budget budget
request the DFA wreck and the
lfc rec. Uh, we feel that
continued investment in the
capacity when the soil
conservation division is both
needed and prudent. Um, and we
feel like we are adding
positions and FTE s at a rate at
which we can fill train and
onboard those positions to to
continue to manage the growth
that we're seeing in the oil.
Patch.
Thank you Wrap Ah,
Representative Allyson, and then
we'll go to her advice here,
Dexter. Thank you, Mr Chair. I
just have a question on my house
Bill 142.
The title on that was generating
facility and mind remediation.
Dealing with the San Juan
generating station closure.
Um
He had asked, Uh
Or we had asking our bill
requiring the energy, Minerals
and Natural Resources Department
and the Department of
Environment to investigate
remediation and restoration
option for the San Juan
generating Station facility and
mine.
Provide reporting requirements
authorizing the E N. M.
In our D and the environment.
To contract with outside
professionals to assist in the
study.
And then make periodic
reporting. I'm just asking for a
progress. I have not heard any
reports or any communication as
to what has been going on with
the bill.
Mr Chairman, Mr. Chair,
Representative Allyson. Um, I
will let Secretary Kenny who's
batting cleanup today Address
the enemy D portion. But I can
tell you on the M nerd side that
we have issued the RFP. I do not
believe it's been filled.
Uh, Mr Chair representative, the
deadline for responses is this
Friday? Um and then we will be
working on board the contractor
expeditiously and move it
forward. It took us a little bit
longer than we'd hoped to get
that RFP out. We had some
critical thinking they vacancies
in programs support that delayed
some of those components. And so
that was the base. That was one
of the basis for my ask earlier.
Okay, Mr. Chair. Thank you. For
that answer. I will ask the same
question to the next presenters.
Thank you, Mr dear. Thank you
Represent Allison, Vice chair,
Dixon.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Hopefully
really quick questions. Um,
first, where is the geothermal
central located?
Uh, Mr Chair Vice Chair, Dixon.
Ah.
I believe the proposal in the
budget is the center for
Excellence is proposed to be
located at New Mexico Tech.
Okay. Thank you. Mr Chair and
presenters, actually for, um,
interim secretary acting
secretary.
Oh, you cannot. You can pick a
title. Okay. Um, what is the
outstanding balance for solar
tax credits?
From people who have applied but
applied after the funds ran out.
Mr. Chair Representative Dixon
based on applications that we
Denied because of caps. We
believe the number is in between
five and 6 million.
Um, we anticipate that there
are, um other people who may
have been following to our
announcements that we've hit the
cap and didn't apply. So
There may be people who are
potentially uncovered as high as
10 Million and I'm going to look
back at my E. C. M d director to
see if I butchered any of that,
Uh, Mr Chair. Uh,
Ms Vice chair. Uh,
Closer to 10 to 20 Sorry about
that. Thank you, Mr Taryn. Thank
you, Secretary.
The reason that I bring that up
is because we talked about
adding new
Tax credits for things like
electric vehicles and, you know
more solar tax credits. And yet
we have 10 to $20 million of tax
credits of people that
Invested in that technology,
expecting a tax credit so
You know, I guess At some point
I would have expected it to be
on our
Like a specials request, but
I just wanted to flag that, Uh,
Mr Chair of
Vice chair, Dixon, um, the
reason for the denials was the
legislatively imposed cap on it,
And because it is a tax credit,
we couldn't make a special
request for it. It would have to
be an adjustment to the tax
credit cap that was the sole
basis for the denials. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Secretary. Have you has M nerd
looked into drafting
legislation.
To fix that. Ah, Mr Chair Vice
chair. Yes, we are. In fact in
discussions, uh, of both updates
to legislation that would raise
the cap to a level that we think
is more sustainable and
potentially have elements in it.
that would allow for
Um, some of the folks who have
possibly missed out to come in,
but that legislation is
It is not
Out yet, but it's we have
definitely had those
discussions.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Last question. Um what is the
current balance for the oil
reclamation fund?
Um, uh, Mr Chair Vice chair.
It's roughly $50 Million.05 0.
Yes.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
Secretary. So, um, has the money
in the oil reclamation fund only
been used for, um, plugging.
Wells, or has it been used for
other things in the past?
Uh, Mr Chair Vice chair. Um
In recent years. It has only
been used for plugging wells.
Historically, there were
legislative authorizations and
appropriations, uh, in leaner
times to use wreck fund dollars
for other purposes. But O. C d
on its
Own volition can only use it for
those purposes, and most recent
appropriations were there and
one note on the wreck fund. Um
because of our need to expand
the 1st $25 million in two
years. Um, we prioritize
spending those federal dollars
as opposed to wreck funds so
you'll see a little bit wreck
fund use than I think you'll see
going forward for that reason.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Secretary Appreciate the
information.
Thank you, Madam. Vice chair.
Thank you, Acting Secretary.
Thanks to your team.
Um, we there
I think there's a lot of good
progress that we've seen. I
appreciate your recognition.
This is one of the strongest lfc
recommendations. It's out there
A couple of quick requests. Um
first, Mr Acting Secretary, can
you come back? The $2.5 million
Currently, Special appropriation
focus would be great to see how
that adds to
Uh, this sort of baseline
inspections that you detailed
with representatives. Sanjana
think we're hearing, you know?
To have that that tempo and
inspections going is really
positive.
Um, and then, Secondly, we'll
likely have a work group that
comes together next week. There
are some other
Thoughts about
Or I think there are diverse
thoughts around how we sort of
maximize increasing economic
opportunity drawing in federal
funding. M nerd is in this sort
of the nexus there. Um, and
there's probably more work to
do.
In in those areas, but
We're at a late evening or late
hour for tonight.
Go to the vice chair for the LFC
recommendation for now. Thank
you, Mr Chair. I moved the
committee adopts the LFC
recommendation.
Hey, Is there a second?
Okay. It's been saying by
representative Allyson there any
opposition to adopting the LFC
recommended
Okay?
We'll invite Secretary Kenny and
his team up. Thank you for
taking
Bearing with one to say a big
thank you to our staff.
Of course, it's you know, we're
here. But the staff is here
before us. We'll leave after us.
And is
Your work is
And Mr Sanchez. You're taking on
additional load, and we really
appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr Terrible. Still
having fun so
Yeah, There's been proposals
just to go through specials will
keep the keep going tonight. But
I think now, Mr Chair Yeah, the
ranking members removed, Okay?
Are you pulling up the
presentation OK.
Mr Chair. We've consolidated so
we shouldn't be quick.
Fantastic. Thank you very much.
Brilliant,
Alright. Good afternoon, Mr
Chairman, members of the
committee. My name is Scott
Sanchez on the LFC, analyst for
Natural Resources. The request
for review in today's
Environment Department Agency
code 667. You can find
information on that behind Tab
six. You can find information on
the LFC recommendation and
Volume one starting on page 148.
In volume two starting on Page
357.
Here with me today, Cabinet
Secretary James Kenney.
My counterpart from the
Department of Finance
Administration, Mr Psyllium ever
met us and, uh, Daniel Gilliam
are I'm sorry. The deputy
Secretary for SD
I'm sorry, Secretary for the
Environment Department
Differences between the
recommendations are that the LFC
recommendation includes a
general fund increase of
approximately $1.3 million or
5%, whereas the executive
recommendation in crude includes
an increase of 6.9 million, or
27.1%.
The LSC recommendations. General
fund increases primarily in the
resource management division, or
ASD. Um, and this is the fund
agency lease expenses while the
executives general fund
increases spread throughout the
divisions for appropriate
placement of Imedi staff.
Ultimately, the remaining
differences in the overall
budget are in federal and
overrode other revenue, which
the executive increases by about
$11 million above the LFC wreck
and then keeping. We're trying
to be briefed all handed to
Cecilia.
Thank you, Scott. You guys can
hear me. Okay, right. I'm
notoriously too loud. I'm just
going to go over briefly, Um,
the executive recommendation.
There are a few major
differences between both
recommendations as they relate
to General fund, federal funds,
revenues and FTS across the
agency.
The executive recommendation
fully funds, the agency's
request for personal services
and employee benefits for water
protection, resource protection,
Environmental protection
division in the new
environmental health division.
For the agency's resource
management division. The
executive recommendation aligns
with the agency's requested
General Fund for personal
services and employee benefits,
effectively addressing the
agency's concerns as it relates
to compensation, appropriate
placement and possible union
grievances. In addition to
addressing the compensation
disparity presented by the
agency, the executive
recommendation also provides
$825,000 in general fund to
address shortfalls on project or
special revenue lease payments,
which equates to 30% of any
meat.
DS 30 current leases across the
state and an annual average cost
of $2.7 million for this agency.
For those 30 leases.
Second, the executive
recommendation for water
protection resources, the
agency's permanent recommends
for the restoration of the
agency's permanent positions to
that of fiscal year 24.
Um, it's an increase to the
agency's original request to
eliminate those two positions.
The executive recommendation has
also maintained federal revenues
flat to fiscal year 24, allowing
the agency essential budget
flexibility to use funds
independently, according to
their budget needs.
And lastly, the expansions FTE s
that you're seeing that you see
on the lfc recommendation, um,
have been built into the
operating base for the executive
recommendation, along with the
adjustment from term to perm
position across various
programs. The executive
recommendation aligns permanent.
FTE s with the increase in
General fund, which is
considered appropriate practice
across the state for these types
of positions.
It is important to note that
term positions are typically
regarded as project funded,
further amplifying this
adjustment.
The expansion FTS and their
total transfer revenue of former
million 188,000 has been added
to their respective program
basis, however, read these new
transfer funds originate from
special revenues.
And then there Special Revenue
Fund Pho to therefore the
executive recommendation
adequately accounts for those
transfers in the origin of those
funds to appropriately balance
both the revenue and
expenditures for those
expansions. Um, and with that,
Mr Chair, I will pass it over to
Secretary Kenny. Thank you,
Analyst. Mr Secretary. Great to
see you. Please feel free to
introduce key staff members and
also
If you want to record
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the Committee. Um, I know it's
late hour and you've been here
all day, and I'll be cognizant
of that and just spend a quick
90 minutes going through my
presence getting going through
my presentation rather quickly,
but
Ah!
With with before I began. I
wanted to just introduce that I
have Daniel Gilliam or Decker,
deputy secretary of sort of
internal operations.
Deputy Secretary Lindemann.
Over here, our deputy secretary
of policy and programs, I'm
joined by a number of our
financial staff or SD Director
Cristina Keys. Um, our CFO
Miranda is here. Our division
director John Roderick. A number
of other employees are here, and
I'll just again recognize them
as they come up to speak or
answer questions.
That you may have when you get
to that portion of the
presentation, Mr Chair. There
are also a number of employees
from the Environment department
who are here today because they
wanted to be part of the budget
process because of what we're
asking for represents or impacts
them so directly.
Um, including one of our
hazardous ways, Compliance and
enforcement individuals. Erin is
here.
I can't see everybody behind me,
Erin, Um
And then, uh, just highlight
that we have some of our surface
water team here led by Shelley
Lemon, who I just saw out of the
corner of my eye. As I know
there's gonna be questions that
what we're doing in our service
water programs and then finally,
I just want to highlight that
You know, our communication
Workers of America Union Rep
leaders are here. Their
Environment department
employees, so they have jobs
within the environment
Department, But they have
collateral duties in the sense
that they represent the union.
We work with them as as
employees and we work with them
as as the union So again, they
are here as well. And I
appreciate them being here.
So, Mr Chair members of the
committee we have put together
are typical fact sheet for you,
which is four pages of
information. It is chock full of
information.
Um, but as I go through it,
there have been some significant
updates based on feedback that
I've gotten from you about
things that you wanted to look
at and hear about in the either
interim or the water and Natural
Resources Committee budget
presentation or even the LFC
presentation that took place
We're using this one, right?
Thanks, Scott.
Um, so starting on the left hand
side of page one, Mr Chair.
members of the committee is our
mission and values. I'm not
going to highlight them today,
but you hear me talk about them
off and they are cultural in our
department and that we make
decisions based on science,
innovation, collaboration and
compliance. We talk about them
every day. They hang in our
office, but we put them into
practice by what we do.
On the right hand side. I
rewrote the letter to my message
to legislators, which basically
highlights from our September
1st budget submission three key
areas in which we intend to
focus on in FY 25. Those three
areas continue to focus on
bringing more money into the
state of New Mexico.
Using the bipartisan
infrastructure Law and the
inflation Reduction Act.
Ah, working on cleaning up
groundwater pursuing alternative
energy sources and desalinating
water, which we have a lot of
salt water in the state. Both
Brackish water and produced
water.
Um, protecting communities from
public health concerns you may
have seen recently this week We
announced that we're going to do
blood testing in Clovis, New
Mexico to continue to understand
how people not only through the
environment, but moving through
individuals who live in that
area. Typically, residents,
farmers and even based
personnel.
And finally, the third bullet is
to protect public health and the
environment through our
compliance assurance activities
and you'll hear more about that
You've invested in us in many
ways, and I feel like we're
returning those benefits to the
state of New Mexico, but we're
also returning money to the
state of New Mexico and I don't
need diversions. I mean civil
penalties that go back to the
General fund.
Um, And with that, in that
letter highlighting that we
asked as you heard from both Lfc
and D F they were seeking $6.1
million in recurring money for
appropriate placement of our
employees and 825 in recurring
money for leases so we can
continue to have both personnel
and places for them to work out
of
On page at the bottom of Page
one. There's just a, uh
Code there that I can think of.
The name of that would take you
directly to the this
presentation and the information
on our website.
For those who are following
along on line. Um Mr Chair,
members of the community. I just
want to spend a minute talking
on page top of page two, because
I think this is a lot of
interesting research that you'll
find valuable. Um and it
basically the Environmental
Council of the States, which is
an association of environment
secretaries from across the
country.
I have the privilege of now
being on their board as a
secretary treasurer, Um, it's
led by North Carolina as the
president. Texas T C Q. As the
vice president and myself now as
the secretary treasurer position
we've been doing a lot of
research both on how states are
funded. And then both. I was in
D. C earlier this week, lobbying
the hill for additional federal
funds coming to this to state
agencies.
But in terms of how
environmental agencies are
funded on average 61% are funded
with federal funds. 27% are
funded through permit fees and
12% are funded through check.
Sorry, the average distribution
of funding I should say it that
way 61% of their funds. Their
budget comes from federal funds.
27% from permit fees and 12%
from General fund.
Here in New Mexico at the
Environment department were 40%
federal funds, 43% permit fees
and 17% general funds so you may
ask yourself why do you have so
little federal funds? And are we
over funding you in General Fund
anticipated that question, So
I'm going to head it off now,
um, in terms of federal funds.
We, uh many of our federal funds
are population based, because
their formula grants so we have
a low population high need, we
typically typically get less
federal funding.
Um and again, these are air
water waste kind of programs
that we get from the feds permit
fees. Um, we have a very wide
assortment of programs that the
Environment department very
different from other
environmental agencies across
the country. OSHA radiation
control food programs, so we
have more permit fees or more
permitting programs in the
environment Department, then
typically other environmental
agencies.
And then, finally, General fund.
Um we do receive more General
fund on average, then many of
the other environmental agencies
at 17%, but I think that's
reflective of the lack of
federal funds as well as the
diversity of permitting programs
that we do have
Um, because again, our breath is
larger, but, uh, in our programs
are therefore
Bringing in some of that money
that makes that 43% a little bit
higher.
So one factoid here is that
nationally over the last 20
years, federal funds have not
increased. And here's something
very interesting that I just
learned this week is that when
hazardous waste programs where
handed over from e P A to States
which we are acting on behalf of
EPA with our with our hazardous
waste program?
E p A and told states that they
would be responsible for 25% of
the cost share so the feds would
pay 75%.
States. We paid 25% today. We're
paying 78%.
Out of the state and the feds
are paying. It's completely
inverted and the states are now
paying. That's that's new
Mexico's numbers. By the way,
78%
So we're paying a lot more out
of our state.
Programs and not receiving the
federal funds again. There is
federal funds have been flat for
20 years, which is why we're on
the hill asking Congress to
increase those federal funds.
Um
And then our permit fees are
legislative permit fees have
have our funding. Our funds
basically have restrictions on
them as to how we can work with
an increased fees, so we haven't
been successful in bringing
increased bees into the
department, which then puts us
back in the position of coming
here and asking you for General
fund.
And two highlights. This is
taking a little while in this
particular piece. I'll move
faster as we go along, but you
highlights that I wanted to
share with you because we are
not in front of you asking for
more money as an atypical
environmental agency
Legislatures all over the
country are hearing these exact
arguments. And to to that stand
out both my colleagues in North
Carolina and T C Q shared with
me.
Um, North Carolina, Their
Legislature adjusted all at
once. All their permitting the
programs and in index them for
CP I consumer Price index.
Um, And they did that because
they couldn't deliver services
if they didn't properly
compensate their people because
they had such high turnover
rate.
Um and lost our high vacancies.
T c Q. Just our neighbors to the
East Texas. Uh, they did some
research and found out 79% of
staff salaries were below
midpoint. Soon You'll hear our
number. They have a two year
budget cycle. They put 36
million into their budget to the
environment Departments CCGs
budget there to get every one of
their 2700 employees up to 70%
of the pay scale.
So they found that employees
were working 2 to 3 jobs
couldn't afford a car loan
couldn't afford a house so they
needed to fix that, in order to
have successful performance
outcomes in those agencies. So
again, I've heard you loud and
clear when we're coming to you
and asking you for money like
how does it look across the
country? I'm sharing that
information with you.
You have in front of you What
I'm sharing with you here, which
is basically the executive and
lfc request comparison.
Um, I'm not going to get into
this because I think you your
first in and at this point,
however, if there are questions
about it when we get to that
point, I was certainly speak
with you about it, but of grave
is concerned to me is the
distance between the executive
and the lfc on personnel cost.
Um
And I appreciate for sure that
the multiple conversations I've
had with most people in this
room from LFC and D f a about
our budget. And you know, maybe
the distance between the 6
million and the zero between the
executive and the LFC could be a
good reason for us to continue
the conversation. If it's the
world that committee to allow us
to do that.
Um, let's go to the next slide.
The next thing so here this is
dense with information, and I'm
not going to go through each of
these numbers, but I'm just
going to highlight that the
inflation reduction Act and the
bipartisan infrastructure law
have prioritized economic
development through carbon
reductions and environmental
issues, which then put New
Mexico Environment Department as
an economic development agency.
And I'll just highlight for you
that while you may think of us,
and we talk about regulatory
issues often, um that we do we
have provided 100 and 38 almost
$139 million in grants and
capital outlay to communities,
and that's not one time that's a
relationship we have with those
communities, making sure that
they understand their finances
are in order.
Making sure that they can accept
that money, helping them move
through the technical issues. We
just talked about Las Vegas
before we came in here. Um and
we are in one year relationship
and helping them continue to
manage their source water
protection as well as their
treatment for their drinking
water. So we we invest and in
bed with these, um
municipalities and and grantees.
Ah, you can see also in that
same block. I just want to
highlight when we talk about
645 acres of contaminated sites
cleaned up. You know, those are
cleaned up in communities and
main streets and in many areas
and right for economic
development, So I want to
highlight the again we continue
to develop, um and clean up
communities.
Ah civil penalties. I alluded to
earlier reverted to the General
fund last year. We put it about
1.1 million back into the
General fund this year. Year to
date were 3.6 million. Um, you
gave us a $1 million special
appropriation, which we put to
good work and so bringing now
$3.6 million year to date back
to the General fund. I just want
to highlight that
The more you invest in us, the
more we can hold those looters
accountable, who many of which
try to do the right thing, and
they're not paying the $3.6
million, But there are many who
just disregard doing the right
thing. I shouldn't say many a
smaller amount that disregard
doing the right thing that we do
want to hold accountable.
Here's where our numbers compare
with North Carolina and Texas.
Um
You know, 64% of our current
employees remain compensated
below midpoint without
appropriate placement.
88% of our employees have 10
years of career experience or
more. So when you look at if
you're below midpoint, you have
10, EUR 10 years or more into
your career. You're kind of a
little further along than being
an entry level employee, So
we're concerned about that
dichotomy of having such
experienced people below
midpoint still
And then 20% of our employees
who left enemy D in the last
year and a half had more than 15
years of experience. So when we
start looking at having a newer,
younger workforce, and I don't
mean younger, necessarily an
age, but a newer, younger
workforce in the environment
department when we're
administering so much money when
we have such heavy
responsibilities placed upon us,
You know it is a concern to us
that we have those senior level
people with lots of experience,
leaving
Just diversions. Um, word 0.5%
of our general fund, so I wanted
to highlight that we are budget
hawks on making sure we spend
what you give us.
Yeah.
So I think I don't want I don't
dwell in the glass have full
area but just to highlight for
you that, um
Our risk to the state. We have a
grievance that we are now past
step three at which means that
the, uh, Union can can take it
in a different direction,
through arbitration or
elsewhere. Um, vote that union
grievance came into us in
September. After we submitted
our budget. There is an IBRA and
that appropriate placement data
was provided to the union.
They filed a grievance and
alleging that 90% of the
bargaining unit employees were
not appropriately placed. So I
wanted to highlight that for you
as well that there are risks and
as you're aware, as we're all
aware that the executive as well
as the Legislature agencies, in
particular were named in a
lawsuit, um, known as the
intensity a lawsuit, so I just
have a clipping there from that
so again risk to the state from
Appropriate placement not
happening, I think are are there
Uh And finally, Mr Chair as we
get to the end of this
presentation, I'm not going to
go through our workload.
Snapshot. You've heard me talk
about it many times, but we try
to quantify based on budget
staffing, how long it would take
for us or what the workload
looks like within enemy D. It's
daunting, but we're we remain
undeterred from continuing to do
what we do.
But whether you're interested in
ocean air quality groundwater
surface water or even our
engineers who work on making
sure that they're managing
projects in the construction
programs Bureau. You have a
snapshot there of what
Uh, your current sort of
investment in us allows us to do
for the state of New Mexico.
And finally, I'm really proud of
when you do When we do get
appropriated money. Let's go
down, Scott. We do get
appropriated money.
Things like wastewater drug
monitoring dashboard or what
we're doing in public high
schools to look for opioids.
math, um, and all sorts of
drugs, illicit drugs. You know,
we will have 100 and six schools
tested.
We're finding about, uh, I think
it's we initially found 87%
cocaine in the wastewater. It's
dropped a little bit as we've
expanded outside of the Metro
area of Albuquerque, but it's
still is the number one illicit
drug we're finding in, Uh,
public school wastewater, which
gives us ways to then act on the
science the data to have
intervention.
Um
Intervention approaches.
With that, Mr Chair. Thank you
for listening so attentively and
we stand for questions. Thank
you. Mr Secretary will go
straight to percent. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. Thank you for your
presentation. Um, I'm glad
you're working on compensation.
That's that's very important to
people who work so hard and I
know your your your department
works very hard. Everyone in it,
So thank you for that.
So
On one of your side, it said.
The last suits has the mix of us
failed to protect environment,
communities from oil and gas. So
the people bringing that lawsuit
er, frontline, indigenous and
kids that are having to inhale
this or are being affected by
the emissions, and and many of
them are their school are going
just going to school and being
affected and they're surrounded
by some of them are surrounded
by extraction sites. So
What do you say to that lawsuit?
Where are you at with that
lawsuit, Can you since you
brought it up? If it's in your
presentation, I thought I'd just
ask. Yeah. And Mr Chair and
representative, I think because
I know my general counsel Zach
gasses here, Zack.
It's on this side. I think he's
going to advise me that since
we're in litigation that we
wouldn't be speaking about the
lawsuit.
Um, specifically giving you an
update here today about the
lawsuit. Uh, I
So I think I'll just end it
there before I have my new
General Council decided that
he's done with me. Um okay, just
you. You had it on your slide.
Mr. Chairman you had on your
slide, and I just, um
We're part of it. The
Legislature and what I've read.
I've read the last suit, and it
seems like
Between you and M nerd. We are
not doing enough. Um, within a
mile of extraction site,
especially the kids. Schools
surrounded by 100 and one school
in units has
Um, school surround 129
extraction sites around that
school, So I just think about if
if I lived there, and my kids
were at that school, and they're
they're inhaling Methane and Co.
Two and what's going to happen
to him in five years? Are they
gonna get cancer? Do they have
asthma? These are the things I
think about as a teacher in the
room, So I just that last year
just
Mr Chair.
Just really quickly. Mr Chair
and representative outside of
the lawsuit, you know, with or
without a lawsuit. The
Environment department is active
in the
Uh, Permian in San Juan B sins,
you know, conducting right now.
We started in an effort to look
for violations through an eye in
the sky kind of program. We have
NASA carbon map, or we're
working with the EPA to deploy
more inspection resources in a
synergistic way than we could do
on our own.
We have those efforts all going
on. We recognize the ozone data
tells us there's more emissions
happening then are being
reported. We we we understand
the environmental impact the
public health impact and we're
out there and I'm gonna say it
this way we're doing everything
were appropriated and funded to
do you need more money? Um, Mr
Chair and representative, I
think our executive
recommendation is
More than a hand. Yes.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for the
hunt.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I'm going
to try to keep it together. Um
So I just want to ask, Um,
because we were so focused on
trying to get you to a better
place or more whole place
funding wise for
For, um, your f T. E s and I
feel you and I have been a big
advocate for that as well. But
you know, we're working towards
that.
And we're giving you more work
to do, And we might even be
giving you even more work to do
in this session. It remains to
be seen. But what I'm
Looking at it looks like this.
This is sort of things that are
going to happen. My my question
is you brought up
The the way that you've lost. Is
it 15 years of experience
workers?
And you? Did you give us a
percentage of how how many
employees wrapped ease that
represents Mr Chair.
Um, Mr Chair and, uh,
Representative, I think you
should for your support number 1
20% of employees left the last
year and a half.
Um, I don't have let me
calculate that number for you
and get back to you on that. I
don't have that number of my
head. That's the percentage of
the 20%. That's that's quite a
bit.
And I had had a discussion about
this with flannel and they
haven't too.
Because they are probably one of
the biggest industries that are
taking up our employees with
with our our experienced
employees because they're able
to pay them more.
And it's a It's a It's an issue.
Sandy as well. I would assume I
think this is a really big
issue, and I asked them, um,
during the interim to give me
some information and how many of
our state employees they are
taking on because I want to know
what as we're having our
workgroups on our workforce and
trying to understand what is
going on and how we're trying to
be the retention and
reformatting and of our pay
schedules and everything that
that we're asking of our state
agencies to do.
Is there anything that we have
in place in statute that
That requires that if a state
employee goes to land or any
other industry related industry
or and work that they may be
doing
That would this tied to the same
type of work that they were
doing for the state that they
need to refrain from that type
of work.
For a certain amount of time or
anything like that, Mr Chair.
So, Mr Chair and representative.
Thank you for the question. Um
The the Government
Accountability Act. I believe it
is, uh, if I'm butchering the
name, I apologize, but
basically that would be
governing the code of conduct
employees have when they're part
of the agency reflects on what
they can do as an employee, so
they all sign a code of conduct
and that that limits their
ability to, um
You know, outside employment and
things like that without. But
but
In terms of once and employees
separates than it is the I
believe the Government
Accountability Act. If again I
feel like I'm saying the name
wrong but would be governing on
that so representing back and
all those other things, um,
would be relevant there. Thank
you. Scott. Did you want to trim
in on that Mr Mr Chair?
Uh, no, Mr Chair representative
and everything that we're
looking at that, but I think
it's something we need to look
at. I'd like to know how many if
we are able to I don't want to
tax anybody with anything that
we haven't
Uh, we're not paying them to do
it. Um, but you know how many of
these employees especially from
from M nerd and from an M, e, D
and other like agencies that are
going away to land on sandy into
getting these other types of
jobs and higher wages? I don't
know if we are looking at that
already, but I'd like to know
how that is affecting our
workforce for our state.
And maintaining that that
knowledge base and everything
else that is so important and
relevant to the things that we
need to get done for our state.
And if the you know that could
lead to us, Maybe do you know,
collaborative type of thing and
making sure that we're creating
some kind of balance I knew were
separate entities are separate
governments and Lionel and sandy
or contracting with the federal
government. But I think that
this is something that
There needs to be dived into
because
You're coming back to us. Year
after year you're figuring out,
you know.
Ways of
Other states are managing their
budgets and so forth, And I
think that that's maybe
something that needs to be
looked at Mr Chair. That's
That's really a principal thing.
I have, um
Maybe to look at and maybe
because I'm tired, and I'm like
Maybe to look at and maybe
because I'm tired and I'm never
work. But, um, The other thing
I'm looking at is the
recommendation for our River
Stewardship program. Um
I think I is it in our specials,
Mr Chair, Or is it something
that you requested or looked at
through your budget?
Um, Mr Gerin representative. Did
you say River storage ship? Yes,
Mr. Chair, Mr Chair and
representative in the I C i P
request, which I don't know if
that's
Okay?
Please, Mr Chair. I don't need
it. Now. Just get it back to me
later. And that's all I have.
Thank you, Mr Chair for the day.
Well go on now to represented
Garcia.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Secretary
Kenny. Thanks for what you're
doing, Uh,
I have worked with director of
Rodrick on small utilities that
have either out of them.
Tehran with their other
compliance. What are you trying
to do to help these people?
Because, you know, it doesn't
matter how much money we give
them.
Can you mention grants for
smaller communities?
If you get them, you can't spend
them because they're all
compliance, and what we need to
do is fix the compliance Part or
the odd is what What are we
doing to that? We can help
people out. So, Mr Charron,
Representative, Good to see you,
Um, I give credit to director
Roderick as well. He came up
with a number of things that
he's doing out of the water
protection division, using his
core value of innovation.
Um, but he was he put together a
contract and funded a consulting
firm that would get these small
communities ready to receive
grants. So we offer that right
now Small community can come to
the Environment Department and
say we want to grant and we
could say your fiscal audits or
your ability to absorb dead or
things that you need to do to
get your house in order will pay
for that for you.
So we're starting there were
getting, uh, those
municipalities ready to come in
and take money from us, so we
want to hire
Return. You know, we want them
to be successful. In addition to
that, he's he's working on
regionalization efforts to have
operators trained waste water or
drinking water operators work
between multiple small
communities so they don't each
have to have their own operator.
So those are some of the
examples in which he's brought
into the his his position as
both a longtime career
environmental employee at the
department and now as a Kovacs
Leader in the department.
Thank you, Mr Secretary, Mr
Chairman, That's very important
for the small communities.
Because it was happening here
and we all know what
To get further and further
behind and they're going to get
to the point. Mission Road
Regatta Town Hall meeting back
twice already out there.
And we're trying to work out
with these people, and it's very
important that we follow up was
happening.
Because it's not these
communities are gonna fall
further behind.
And last meeting we had with the
director road trip. Mr Chairman
was
You know, he said, We don't want
to, uh five
Uh, on anybody, you know, we
don't want to sue anybody. We
need just to make it right.
Advice knowing somebody or going
against him because they're out
of compliance. That's not
solving the problem. They're
just creating a bigger problem
at the end of the day, and I
really appreciate what you're
doing, Uh,
Direct road repair. Appreciate
what you do all the time, and if
you want to have another town
hall meeting to devise these
people are not available to him
will be really nice. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. Thank you,
Secretary. Thank you very much
for President Garcia Represent
bound Brown, Please. Thank you
very much. Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Secretary. Good to see you.
Um, I have a few questions about
the wastewater program where
you're looking for illicit
drugs.
I'm very interested in hearing
more about that. And I know you
can give us a brief synopsis. It
looks like both lfc and the
executive or suggesting a
million dollars. It's a one time
appropriation. So, um, just kind
of give you the
Questions I have. I'm going to
lump them together. And then you
just couldn't tell us about it.
But I know the one of the goals
of enemy D is to hold polluters
accountable.
And so, um, the focus here is on
schools, wastewater from
schools.
Um, So first of all, who
requested this program? Is there
a federal money involved in any
way?
And what will be done with the
functional Mr Jarrett and
Representative Good to see you
as well. Look forward to
visiting with you during the
session. Um
The
The
Wastewater program is not
federally derived its not
federally funded its state
funded
Um, in the executive order in
the public health emergency
declared by Secretary Alan about
gun violence and illicit drugs.
It came out of that effort with
funding coming from an executive
order from the governor's
office. And that, uh
Funding.
Was put to use for
The illicit drug wastewater
testing program that we stood
up.
Um, we are requesting a special
appropriation so we could have a
second round of testing. So
basically we will cover
essentially all the public high
schools in the state of New
Mexico with the first round of
funding, which I think is around
a half million dollars.
$750,000 and a second round of
testing is what we're looking to
do with that special
appropriation so we can look if
there's any Delta between the
initial
Test and the follow up testing.
Um
That's our plan right now and,
uh, what we're going to do with
the data. The data is going to
be the baseline for which we
look to see if intervention
methods in terms of whether that
is having, um
More, uh, you know, working with
public high schools or school
superintendents to understand if
the intervention methods that
they have now are working if
they could be improved, you
know, in a different direction.
Could we learn something in one
school that isn't having a
problem and transfer that
knowledge on intervention to a
different school, So those are
the kinds of things we're
looking to do.
Well, you brought up compliance,
There's no federal or state
standard, if you will, for I
feel funny, saying it for
illicit drugs and wastewater. I
think we all want to say that No
detectives best that there's no
high school are using illicit
drugs. Um, but there's no
holding people accountable from
the Environment Department. Um,
and how public health
professionals both at the state
and local level, choose to then
use that data. I think he's yet
to be
Mr Chairman and secretary.
So we have a bigger problem that
I think most people would
acknowledge. Um we have illicit
drugs, and we could probably all
list of what those are.
But because of the way some of
the laws are phrased
It is possible for anybody of
any age to go to, for example, a
neighborhood
Gas station.
And by synthetic
Cannabis.
Um
It can. You've heard the word
Cray, Tom, or you've probably
seen that somewhere. That's what
I'm talking about.
Talking about Delta eight, Delta
nine.
Anybody And I mean, like even a
five year old or younger.
Whoever has the money can go in
and get it.
It's accessible and it's cheap.
So I don't know if your tests
will pick up on those types of
substances. They're not
Illegal.
Under the law, but I think they
affect Children.
And Mr Chairman I've heard from
a drug expert who goes around
the nation.
Speaking about Children and
drugs.
He says that the rate of
seizures will be going up for
students because these types of
drugs cause in many Children
seizures.
It has a terrible effect.
It's um, highly addictive. We're
going to see a much bigger
problem than I think We know
what I hope that you're
including these substances and
what you're filtering for so
Mr Charron and representative,
I'll double check and and we'll
follow up with you. Offline. I
just
You know, the Environment
department has not typically
been in this space before, so I
am not an expert but learning a
lot as we go. Um, I give a lot
of credit to the governor for
thinking so broadly about how do
we disrupt this illicit drug
cycle and then relying on the
whole of her cabinet to bring
ideas forward?
And what we learned during Covid
is the Environment Department.
We typically test wastewater. We
spend time in sewers every day.
Um, and the fact that we could
do predictive Analytics on
Covid. And now that we're in
this space, I think it's a real
I feel really good as a civil
servant that we're working with
public health professionals,
educators.
To really figure something game
changing out and I appreciate
your interest in this topic, and
I'll certainly follow up with
you. I I look, I can give you I
think some pretty good
information your your knowledge.
Thank you. Thank you very much
Represent brown next week and go
to represent Garrett, please.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Mr. Secretary. Can you just give
us an update on the 500 million
brackish water, diesel
alienation?
Um, the first word that came was
extravaganza. But I don't mean
that. Can you just update us?
Where is it? Is it now? Where's
the money? What's happening? Mr
Chair really quickly and
representative Thank you for the
question. I know there's a
little bit of information void
and we're working to fill that
void. Um, but essentially
The idea here is to treat
brackish and produced water and
have the state procure the
cleaned product.
Not pay for the capital to treat
That water so we'd be purchasing
the commodity of treated water
as opposed to paying for the
infrastructure.
Um, but how do we get there? So
The severance tax bond.
Notes would be the revenue
source that would be in the
capital bill That would sort of
be the kickstart funding for
that.
The environment department.
Fingers crossed, will put out a
request for information from the
brackish and produced water
types of industries. Um and
solicit some information from
them. Hopefully during the
session and that'll last for
about three months, and then
once we synthesize that
information
We'll go back and put out a call
for concept papers basically a
very specific. Here's all the
things we want you to address.
Um, and it's sort of think of it
like a bid. It's going to be
very specific.
And then that will probably take
us into the early fall. And then
by that point, we should be
ready to work with GST on
procurement vehicles contracts
to basically say, Here's what we
learned from the R F. I hear in
the high ranking candidates from
the concept paper, and here's
how Here's how we want to
proceed in awarding contracts to
procure that water.
Then it will be up to those
individual entities awarded
those contracts to build.
The infrastructure to treat the
water and then ultimately, um,
once the state is in the
position to purchase that water,
the environment department will
have
Do you think of it like a tax
credit, but it's not a tax
credit at all. The Environment
Department will serve the role
of ensuring that the quantity
and quality of that water meets
the spec of the contract. So in
a nutshell, that's what we're
working towards and my goal is
to get some information out as
soon as possible. Um, the trip
to D C was a little bit of a
curve ball to
Lobby the hill for more federal
funds, so kind of torn a little
bit here.
Thank you.
Well, thank you very much
represented. Gareth. Mr
Secretary. Thank you Have a
couple of quick things. First Mr
Secretary working with represent
Garcia and others. Um, many, so
take the drinking water
Revolving loan fund and some
other areas is their technical
assistance that comes from enemy
D to help smaller communities.
Uh, work through how to put
projects together.
And even if there is, could we
stand to have more technical
capacity to help local
communities better utilized that
Mr Chair? Um, the second answer
the second question You asked us
or resounding. Yes, we
absolutely could use more
technical capacity. Um
Currently the Environment
Department. Remember where
regulatory program when it comes
to safe drinking Water Act and
clean water act in those types
of requirements, But
essentially, we divert some of
our technical resources from
those regulatory programs to
work with.
Those applicants. In addition to
that are Construction Programs
Bureau, which is currently
managing 149 water
infrastructure projects per
person.
Is also in that business of of
providing technical assistance.
Um again, it's heavy engineering
work, heavy stem type work, and
that's why are appropriate
placement so important so we can
compete to have those engineers
in our department. Got it. Okay.
Thank you very much. Mr.
Secretary. I'm sure we'll have
additional follow up.
But appreciate sort of linking
that back. Secondly, Mr
Secretary, we hear you. We know
that you and your team, the
deputy secretaries here, even
though there are a wide range of
things that you work on which
we're grateful for the first
middle and last thing that you
always talk about are your
employees And so I think we hear
clearly.
That raising your employees
Salaries is clearly your first
priority, the first priority for
the department.
What I would ask for in return,
especially since we're so late
this evening is
In depth information by program
area with the fund balances that
are there we have included sort
of your breakdown of, or the
really helpful breakdown that
shows where picking up more
share, which is okay, but we
want to maximize the share
that's coming from the different
funds.
Better being that you administer
that Come federally, So I think
you have a commitment from us to
raise salaries and to to do
really hard work there. What? We
desperately what what we really
need and require is detailed
Work program by Program Federal
Fund by federal fund.
And we will commit to doing the
work to sort of maximize about
to get the increase, maximizing
the balance of federal funds,
but committing to sort of the
share that we need to pick up.
And and that's going to be a lot
of detailed work. I'm glad that
Director Celia's Your deputy
director, Courtney would just
ask for that sort of
preemptively from you as we go
through the authority.
Um And then, finally, Mr
Secretary. I just, uh
When it comes to water. You
know, we have chances for a
surface water permitting program
to begin that work this year,
which is vital, it's vital to
protect our waterways. It's also
vital to be able to better, uh,
engage in public private
partnerships down the road that
enhance water security.
That safeguard New Mexico's
water resources, and so, uh,
there are a wide range of things
that you're doing like we just
talked about with an initiative
that we did not assign you but
you've taken on and that's very
much also a hallmark of you and
your team, which is serving the
state.
Perhaps an unexpected cap
capacities while holding true to
sort of the core regulatory
mission. Um, with that, I would
ask for the secretary for the
vice chair to move the LFC
recommendation. We will have
Extensive work in this area.
Focused on employee salaries,
and that's something. Thank you,
Mr Chair. I moved the committee
adopts the LFC recommendation.
Okay, it's been moved second by
representatives Indiana and
represent Garcia. Is there any
opposition to that saying none
we've adopted that?
Okay, Committee. We're gonna
wrap up there. We've, uh,
committee you don't have to
stay. I will. We will have
public comment We committed to
that this morning. Um, the
And we'll begin at 9 A.m.
tomorrow, going through an
initial pass through specials
will be informational only
across the special supplemental
and deficiency appropriations.
Thank you very much, Mr
Secretary.
