Representative Little here.
Representative Lujan here.
Representative Pettigrew,
Representative Pettigrew,
Representative Sanchez.
Representative Sareana.
Representative Silva, here.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
' s mom.
Uh, I'm here. Great. OK, uh,
members, we're gonna go to uh
the chair. This is something
that we have historically HAFC
I've gone over to Senate Finance
to summarize what we've uh done
our work here, uh, um, I think
this is great and Chair Munoz
appreciate having you here.
We're sort of, uh, closing that
loop. We're not gonna be taking
public comment today simply
because it's an informational
update, there is a chance to
remember questions, um, with
that, uh, Chairman.
director so we'll go to you
guys. Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
It's been a lovely day. I sent
you some pictures of milk if you
didn't see that this morning,
I've already been 340 miles
since 6:44 a.m. and so, uh, with
that, Mr. Chairman, House Bill 2
came back over with 6% spending,
uh, like we agreed to, 30%
reserves. Uh, there was some
shuffling that we had to do, uh,
put money back in maintenance
for roads, uh, reduce some other
sections. Uh, this is a total
spend of 33.
billion dollars when we include.
Uh, federal health care, um, and
other state funds in the
House Bill 2 now sits at 10
billion.
504 million.
22 uh 27,000 and 40 cents or $4.
And so that's where it sits
today. We did meet with the
exact, the exec came in with
about $80 million in reoccurring
costs. Those were, uh, handled
and we ended up at.
$6 million worth the exact that
came in with $480 million of
non-reoccurring costs and we
settle that $80 million and so
Mr. Chair, I know there's a lot
of questions about what we did
and we'll stand for questions.
Great. Thank you very much,
Director Sale, Mr. Avila,
anything to add or we'll just go
to the committee for questions
and just real quickly, Mr.
Chairman, on recurring Senate
Finance amendment, uh, fully
funds the secondary factors, uh,
weight increases for uh public
schools, you'll see in the
recurring side, uh CYFD
remaining largely flat the
executive came in with
additional ask in Senate
Finance. Those were handled just
like, uh, what came out in, in
HAFC through
Uh, grow appropriations, uh,
for, um, 2 years.
Great. OK. Uh, thank you for the
summary. Members, we have the
budget. We also have the LSC
summary here, um, I think we'll
have questions we can refer to
this. We're gonna start and go
to the committee starting with
representatives, so.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I didn't
expect to be first. Thank you.
Um, Chair Munoz and um in staff
director Silly appreciate the
work that you all have done. Um,
I just had a couple of general
questions. So,
One, very general. Is there a
table of contents for this, um,
or like what's the best way to
then find specific things, um,
in, in this, in the amendment,
uh, Mr. Chair and Chair Munoz.
Uh, the amendment is in front of
you, the rack up sheet, I think
you do have in front of you, so
those are all the amendments.
I'm, I'm assuming you have them
in front of you.
And this package here
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate the question because
there's several of us who are
new to this committee, so
appreciate it. Thank you. OK. So
thank you for that. Um, this is
the first time I think we're
doing sort of.
At least during my time as
chair, where we're having this,
we don't have, um,
What we have here is the final,
the, the summary of key hearing
issues.
There is not a full sort of
amendment list, what we have.
Oh,
OK, uh, members you have in your
email.
From the budget director, uh,
the list of the entire set of
amendments. So and I think we'll
make ourselves available to go
through those as there are
questions.
And back to you, Representative
Silva. Thank you, Chair, and
thank you, Chair Munoz. Um, I am
also wondering, um,
What was the main conversation
in Senate Finance. I was able to
follow some of the
conversations, um, as you were
working the budget out, uh,
would love to know what were
some of the, the themes and um
and yeah, the conversations
around how to to reconcile HB 2
with the needs and concerns of
Senate Finance, Mr. Chair Cha
Munoz.
Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, you know, the
house pretty much got everything
uh and reoccurring on House Bill
2. There was some cleanup on
education.
Uh, CYFD was a big issue because
there was bills still floating
out there. They're still
floating out there, um, but we
think meeting with the secretary
and the executive, that those
are handled correctly, that they
have enough funding. Uh, there
was money, uh, they did not.
Requests from the feds, their
overtime pay. There was two non
non-recurring costs, one for 12
million and one for about 10
million and we told them to come
back and reconcile that pay
before we put money in, we
authorize an authority with
language to come back and
balance that back out. Those are
key issues. Those are key issues
everywhere. Foster kids, uh, uh,
foster parents taking care of
foster kids. How do we balance
that and bring that number up.
So we're not at the top.
but start making that
adjustment. We did a 25%
increase in there, um, there was
a lot of, of talk back and forth
with the executive on early
childhood, uh, how we're gonna
handle that, that bill is gonna
get amended on the floor.
Uh, or was amended on.
I think it was amended in Senate
Finance, it's on the Senate
floor.
There's a lot of conversation
about roads and the roads
package that came over with
general fund total in there. Uh,
we came to an agreement with the
exec on roads and how we're
going to handle those that bill
is on the floor. Uh, there's a
lot of talk, uh, uranium was a
big talk and cleanup sites with
the environment department,
they've only used as the one
they had, they only used 1
million over since 2022. They
only use 1 million, uh, they
came back in, in said we can
handle this in one year.
Let us prove it. Uh, that was a
big issue. Uh there was issues
everywhere when, when it's on
your side, you guys are kind of
handling the agencies. We're
kind of negotiating with the
exact and really clean up and
really hardline what you have to
have and what you, what you
really don't need the exact uh
always does this to you, they'll
bring you one set of books and
request this from you, and then
they'll get it from you and then
they'll change their books and
come to us, and we have to
reconcile what they got over
here and what their requests.
Here and what their new requests
are, so there's, there's quite a
bit of negotiation between exact
uh exec did do a good job this
year with with secretaries, not
having them come in and and just
ask for everything under the
sun. Uh, there was some control
there, so we knew that we had
targeted what they wanted and
where they were exactly short
and that's what we try to.
Great. Thank you, Chair Munoz,
thank you, chair, um, I
appreciate the, the negotiations
and the work that the Senate
Finance, uh committee did.
Um, after, you know, we did our
work, so thank you so much and
I'm, I'm gonna spend some more
time with this, obviously, so,
um, appreciate the conversation.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
Represent. Next, we're gonna go
to Representative Do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you to the LFC
staff for working on this. Um,
so where, what, what is the
total now? Where are we at on
early childhood.
Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, we'll get a
total once that bill passes the
floor for early childhood
spending, uh, they did ask for
$500 million increase out of the
fund. Uh, we amended that bill,
uh, so that.
The the funds that transfer in
there, the two revenue streams
will be moved off at 50% each.
To, uh, behavioral health and
the Medicaid trust fund, uh,
there is categorically lines in
there if the trust if the early
childhood trust, it's a level
before, at the end of this year,
2025, that's the level it'll
maintain those, those funds will
trigger back until it gets back
to that level. Uh, if not, those
funds will stay in place till
2030 and then trigger back to
the early childhood trust.
Chair and senator, it's, it's
Are they getting the 500 million
they wanted for the purpose they
wanted, or you change the
purpose, what is the end result?
Concurrence takes about 2
seconds, Mr. Chairman, the
Senate Finance Committee, uh,
amended.
The amount of money going to
ECECD to meet the exec's request
for a childcare assistance,
which is 96.5 million. That's up
almost 30 million from HAFC.
Mr. Chair and Senator and
Charles, what's the part about
behavioral health? Was that, was
that, are you talking about fit
in the
system, Mr. Chairman
Representative Doo, that was
their main ask incentive finance
was to go to the exec rec on
childcare assistance, which they
were able to accommodate. OK, so
thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Charles. So no other
change.
Just going back to what it was,
I just heard the word behavioral
health and I thought that was
the Senate Finance Committee did
do, um,
Uh, a number of additions to
match the package for behavioral
health, suicide prevention, and
school suicide prevention in
general. Uh, those are outlined
in the the packet that you have
before. OK, thank you. And those
are out of the early childhood
fund. Those are not oh, OK, OK,
thank you. OK. Um, Mr. Chair and
Senator, uh, can you please tell
me, I'm still trying to wrap my
head around the 80/20 ratio for
employer-employee healthcare.
What is the total cost of that
and where are all, where are all
the streams that's coming from?
So, Mr. Chairman, in order to uh
implement that bill, there's
about 78 million, that's
appropriated in Section 8.
Uh, to pay the cost of the
premium increases as well as
the, the employer share.
Uh, increase.
To where the employer will cover
80% of the cost, and that's
coming from the healthcare um
affordability fund.
Mr. Chair, Senator Charles,
that's the, it only, that is the
100% of the cost of the 2080.
OK.
Um, yeah, I'll have to, let me
see, let me look real quick with
it.
I think that's all I've had time
to look at so far. Mr. Chair and
Senator, where did we end up on
the DAs, especially the two DAs
that inherited a budget that was
flat or not right? Where did we
end up for those DAs?
Um, are you referring to the
11th judicial district.
Uh, I don't think it was 11, I
think um I think we'll go to
director sole this, I think it's
the, the, and I recall the 3rd,
I think it's also the 5th, it's
the uh Luna Hidalgo.
Right, the, the and Donana, so I
think it was the 3rd and the
5th, if I remember correctly
Mr. Chairman, uh, Senate Finance
amendment, uh, moved the third
to the exact correct, which was
a, a slight increase that you
can see in your, in your tables
in the packet.
Can you point us to that page,
please?
And I think that that is a way
to go through this.
So members on page.
Um
For
7.
We're able to see.
The albeit with very good
glasses.
We're able to see the recurring
changes and um sit down to go
back to you, we're talking about
the, the district attorneys now,
the 3rd and the 5th.
Uh, I think we also want to go
back to the PED recurring
because that's one of the other
large Senate, uh, changes,
Director Sali to you to talk
about the DA's, please.
So, Mr. Chairman, you can see
On line 46 on page 4.
In the Senate Finance Amendment
column, the increase.
Of the 156.8000 and
Mr. Chairman, for folks that are
new.
What the Senate does is they do
one big amendment that basically
replaces the guts of House Bill
2. So it will look very similar.
Um, to what you sent over in
terms of format of section 45
in, in the back of the bill.
And then there's a series of
spreadsheets that you can see
what's changing in section 4.
We've published
Uh, an online database that if
you want to go in to see all of
the agency request, LFC
executive, HAFC and Senate
Finance.
Back of the bill, specials, you
can see all of those in an easy
to use format by agency on our
homepage, um, as well. Great.
Thank you back to you. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Maybe I'll
just like highlight, ask
questions about what I'm
interested in. Um, did we leave
money in for the sheriffs to
transport prisoners as they're
statutorily obligated.
It, it went to the Senate with
half a million dollars to help
sheriffs cover the cost of
transporting.
Uh, uh, we didn't, I don't
believe we touched that. We, we
didn't touch that, so we'll look
it up, but we didn't doesn't
recall that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you,
Senator. What do we have in the
budget for federal match
leveraging federal match
dollars.
I mean
That could on page 2 if you go
across the line item there. If
you look at federal match
dollars.
Where we totaled the budget up.
The federal match is $11
billion.
Uh, across the board through all
agencies that could be
environment, could be CYFD that
could be $11 billion match. Can
I, I'm sorry, it's $14 billion
on the bottom and
Represent, OK, that's sort of
the overall total HB 2
representative Dow are you
asking specifically about sort
of the matching grant funds. Oh,
that's different, yeah, the
matching draft front stayed
intact. That did. It just moved
from one section of the bill to
another. So if you look in
section 5, you'll see 3 million
for the capacity. But then if
you look in the fund transfer
section, you'll be able to see
the other 72 million
as a, can you tell us the fund
transfer number that that
section number?
72 million, which was the same
that came out of the, the house.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you, Senator. Um, on
the school reform fund where any
changes made to the, to what we
sent to the house on the school
reform funds.
Yes, there was uh an item.
For uh the multi-year, uh,
school improvement grants or
school improvement oversight
efforts for the department that
was moved just to a special.
It didn't really fit in. It came
out of an LFC recommendation,
really didn't fit into the
concept of.
Uh, the kind of causal research
impact, um, and so that was an
area.
The department is expressed
concern about having so much
money tied up in that bill as
well and so finance moved 6
million into a special, um,
instead of coming out of the
perf.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. And in the, so then in
the PED budget, there was
something I hadn't seen before
where the the public school
capital outlay fund, a
percentage of that based on
school uh formulas or population
was going to go into
maintenance, see our uh career
technology and capital that came
out, that's the same as what the
house sent over. OK, right. And
then, and then Mr. Chair and
Senator, uh, what, where do we
see the language changes that
were made? How do we see that?
That database that's on our
website would be the easiest way
to see.
Um, any language changes between
any of the recommendations.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you very much Rep
down, great questions, we're
gonna go next to representative
Herndon, then ranking member
Chatfield, representative
Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the presenters as I look
at the key hearing issues on
the, on page one of the document
that you all passed out, there
is 5 million to PED to expand
suicide prevention and youth
behavioral health supports in
school. Is this 5 million more
than the 1 million that was put
in by the House.
Yes.
OK. So, uh, Mr. Chair and um
presenters so that means that
now and I'm asking for a
clarification that there will be
more money for
Wellness rooms and schools
because the 1 million was not
enough, Mr. Chair, uh,
represented the wellness room
was left intact at a million.
And then this is 5 million for
those for that purpose that you
just read out.
Separate, separate
appropriations.
To increase uh Mr. Chair
presented to increase the number
of wellness rooms.
Mr. Chair, wellness rooms
remains intact at a million. And
then there was a separate
appropriation for 5 million for
suicide prevention broadly, but
not specific to wellness rooms.
OK. And Mr. Chair and presenter,
uh just for clarification, uh
depending upon what this is used
for, can that could be used for
additional rooms because there
were 41 schools that applied for
it and we didn't have enough
funding for them. Uh, uh,
that'll be up to the local
control. They'll have to
determine what kind of
behavioral help they need if
those are wellness rooms, I mean
the school districts will be
able to determine where they
want to put the behavioral
health money, depending on their
allotment, I think that's what
they're gonna have to decide on.
on their own.
Uh, some schools we did learn
don't have a counselors or, or
uh to, to talk to the children,
some do, so it just depends on
the school district.
Thank you, and Mr. Chair and
presenters, as I look to the
line above that, the 9 million
to DOH to expand suicide
prevention and youth behavioral
health. How does that interact
with the 5 million below with
PED.
One is appropriated directly to
the schools. The other one is
DOH for expanded suicide
prevention, uh, long time ago
when suicide, we had a rash of
them, so do 8 you'll have to
determine how they're gonna
handle that with you, that
involves all youth, not just
youth in schools.
Uh, so if they're out of
schools, they'll they'll have to
determine that. I don't think we
ever heard how they want. Thank
you and Mr. Chair, uh, and
presenters, so there is a bill
on the house that will be on the
floor, Senate Bill 13 pertaining
to Native Americans and
education, but it also involves
Mr. Chair presenters and
interaction with the Department
of Education. There's been a lot
of concern about whether or not
that department is going to be
cut. And the question I have is,
is, do we have a fund?
that will help with the Native
Americans in terms of that
interaction if there is no
Department of Health that they
would normally be uh receiving
funding for.
Um, Mr. Char Senator, you, you
said the Department of Education
and at the back and you said the
Department of Health. I'm sorry,
Department of Education,
Department of Health doesn't, I,
I apologize for that error.
Yeah, you know, we, we don't
know what's gonna happen
federally and we can only only
budget and, and predict what we
have in front of us today. Uh,
we can't speculate what's going
to happen in the federal, so we
just got appropriate where we
think it needs to go, uh, and
see what happens, uh, if the, if
federal funds do get cut and
they're starting to
We're starting to hear a little
here and a little there, and
we'll be back, uh, maybe in
October.
And, and start shifting money
around, so we'll have to
determine that. So let's see
what the agency says when they
decide that.
So, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, so I got, we were
talking about district
attorney's offices, and I got a
lot of calls about district
attorneys office in the 11th
Judicial District, but I'm not
sure what the issue was. Is
there something that we should
be aware of that we can help
address whatever the question
is, Mr. Chair, and we'll just go
into this last year I introduced
a bill. I forgot this when we
were last night. I introduced a
bill to move that last year in a
30-day special, the exec did not
mess.
that our district attorney has
is the only one in the office.
Uh, she has fired attorneys in
court.
Uh, she's fired all her staff.
They are scanning the files for
me today where employees came to
my office. They were not allowed
to put in for overtime.
They had to work extra hours.
Uh, my wife hired someone during
the session from the district
attorney's office, uh, the Chief
Justice, uh, Judge Curtis Gurley
from San Juan has filed charges
against RDA RDA is the only one
there.
Uh, we have over 600 cases, uh,
sitting in our district
attorney's office, or deputy
director has left. Uh, she did
come to me before they left, and
this has been an ongoing year
problem. We've looked at
everything you can look at to
how do you get replaced and a
district attorney. There is no
way to recall them.
They haven't violated the law.
And there's no way to remove
them.
They violated the law, only two
people that can bring charges
against them or the Attorney
General.
And the governor.
Uh, she has a violated anything
in law that we know of.
Uh, she has been reprimanded by
the, by the courts.
and reprimanded them
for filing against the
magistrate judge.
Uh, they told her to dismiss the
case.
She did not dismiss the case in
the magistrate court, that judge
was suspended from hearing cases
and the state police.
Everybody in our community, we
have looked to what's end on how
we resolve this.
Issue with our district
attorney.
We have 600 cases.
She's the only one in court.
She's just asking for
continuances.
We've
Met with everybody we can meet
with and and done this over a
year on how we handle that. She
just got newly re-elected.
She didn't have an opponent, uh,
The cases are so extreme from
people, I, I personally had to
go down there on a case where it
was a vehicular homicide. Uh,
they had the all the evidence
that they would not prosecute
the case. That was a big news
media on on Channel 4.
If you start looking at it.
But in talking to the Supreme
Court justice this morning, uh,
on my way back from the airport,
he said, this is the only way to
go in consultation with the new
district attorney from 11. So
Gallup is the only district that
has a split district attorney,
and that's because of the
distance.
Uh, between them.
And we got uh Gallop is the 11A.
and talking to the 11th uh DA
Fortner, he was willing to
handle this.
Uh, he was also sending me in
consultation with how do we
handle it because it's gonna
collapse.
He asked the Attorney General to
come in and take over some of
the cases, uh, she would not
allow that.
There's currently
Only heard at the office.
There's no other people in the
office and.
To, you know, to what end?
There's no way to remove them.
Now, when we talked with the DAs
and we talked with.
Uh, the Supreme Court Justice
and Judge Curtis, who was the
head of the 11th at the time.
I don't know if he still
remains, he may still uh they
know that if they hire
In 11, the attorneys to handle
the cases.
That they can prosecute those
cases. She does not have to sign
them. They give them a special
order in order to do that.
And and so they can handle the
cases.
But we're gonna see a total
collapse of a system.
Uh, RDA has shown up for 3 years
on her hearings.
3 years ago, he added contract
labor for her.
Uh, at a higher rate, and that's
what she did, we had contract
attorneys and then in staff.
But you're gonna see a DA's
office in a district.
Uh, just fall apart.
And and
I, I don't know, we don't know
any other way to resolve this.
Everybody that we've talked to
in the courts.
Uh, has that
The big issue for me is, is when
employees and they're hearing
cases and some of them are
consulting.
They're not allowed to get
overtime where they have to stay
because most people may be at
work and get off. There's nobody
in that office now to handle
that.
I think.
Thank you very much. We go back
to you, thank you, um, Mr.
Presenter for that explanation.
I, I just have to wrap up
questions here, Mr. Chair,
and um that's with respect to
the
Um
Table of contents that was asked
about. So when the house puts
together its bill, we do put it
together table contents. So, Mr.
Chair, I'm just asking uh if, if
perhaps our colleagues in the
Senate could think about doing
the same. It really helps get
through the this massive budget
as we're looking, uh, looking at
it. I just want to share that
with you. And, um,
Mr. Chair, um.
I will stop there. Thank you
very much, Representative
Ferndon. Uh, we're gonna go next
to ranking member Chatfield,
then Representative Lujan ran
member Chatfield.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We voted
for a bill, I think that came
over for the Senate to, to bond
out on our roads this year and
uh for somebody that's not been
through that process, uh much. I
mean, I understand bonding and
for other things. What does that
leave us?
when you compare last year's
road budget and what we have in
the kitty for this year, where
are we at on roads?
Well, Mr. Chair and
Representative, we put 60
million back in on the 65
million back in the Senate side
for for maintenance. The, the
road bonding package that came
over was all general fund, a
billion.5, $110 million hit to
the general fund every single
year. Uh, we did negotiate with
the exact on 3 triggers that
would uh allow them to bond 1.5
million.
That bill is on the Senate
floor.
We did put restrictions on the
bonding. I don't know if you
know this, but I learned this,
uh, prior year, not the
secretary, uh, there was bonding
that was done for 200 million at
1.5%.
They agreed to pay 5% for
another 100 million, uh, so we
capped that so they can't bond
over the rate, um.
We
Aligned it with only 2 up to 290
million the first year and they
can go above that the 2nd year
for bonding.
As we move forward, cause it
usually takes 3 years for a
project to get in line and to
get designed and engineered and
go out to bid.
Uh, then we came back and we
said upon LLCs approval of your
budget, you're gonna list roads
that you're gonna place in the
bonding package for that year.
We had a situation last year
where everybody wanted to add a
road and nobody knew where the
roads were and everybody could
figure out the roads, so that
they will have to come to LLC in
their budget hearing list of
roads that they're gonna,
they're gonna do in the bonding
package and so.
LC adopts their wreck. That's,
that would be the place, uh, but
they are gonna work off the
step.
And so that's will be their
priority. We also did did place
in there that it can only be
used for state roads, and I'm
gonna give you two examples that
I learned about. The longest
bridge in New Mexico, longer
than the gorge in Taos is gonna
be in Los Lunas, New Mexico.
That is $175 million project.
Uh, the city and the county
agreed to do that. They got
federal money, uh, and now they
don't have their match. And so
for $175 million road.
Uh, that includes an
interchange.
Uh, I don't know how we wanna
handle that in the state, cause
that is a big.
Big issue. I mean, to have the
longest bridge in the state of
New Mexico managed and
maintained by the city and
county, and so those are some of
the situations we run into with
local roads, same thing in
Farmington, it was all local
deal, wasn't involved in the
state, and they come to the
state for money, and we know
where our state roads and state
bridges.
So Mr. Chair,
Our Mr.
George Representative
senator, Mr. Senator, Mr. Chair
senator Mr.
senator, uh, where does that
leave us bottom line how many
dollars for um,
For a road in the road fund next
year. I think it's 400 million
total last year. What is it? uh
what what's the bottom line this
year, uh, in the road fund, I,
let us look that up for you, and
I think the directorly if in
chair ranking member, it's a
great question. Can you uh
detail the new general fund
dollars.
Separate from the road friend.
alongside the potential new
bonding authority that the house
is sent over to the Senate with
some um
Constraints, the senators and a
great deal of thanks to the
Senate for working on additional
guidance guardrails and
constraints. I think that it's a
good question and it's an
important question for the
committee.
In the Senate Finance has added
new general fund.
Ros, so the, the only thing we
did to the general fund is we
had a 65 million for
maintenance. Uh, the local
match, which also receives um a
motor vehicle registration
excise tax, and, and that's
matched by 45 million, so we
reduced that number, so the
local road maps will still be
around 95 million. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Chair.
George
form one here. Thank you, sir,
uh, thank you, Rick member
Chatfield. We're gonna go next
to Representative Lehan.
And then to uh Representative
Garra and then to represent Baca
represent Wuhan. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Uh, it's just something that
caught my eye was on um
the key issues on the second
page, um,
Under education in early
childhood, but
They, um, we're adding new
appropriations for higher
education, uh, supporting
athletics. Is that?
The, the support for the
athletics is that for like.
Um
I mean, what, what was the
percentage how much cause I, I,
I want, I, I appreciate that.
If you can give me. Um, so the
appropriation that came over was
not reoccurring, I think it was
9 and 6. And so we moved that,
so you and him will get 3
million and recurring and miss
you will get 1.5 in
non-reoccurring for, for
athletics.
OK, great. Thank you. And the
statewide longitudinal.
Titudinal data system.
Um
I that's just for higher
education, Mr. Chair. Correct.
They, that, that gives them the
ability so to track a
kindergarten the first time they
can track him all the way
through the system through
college. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um,
And will they use that tool also
for uh tracking um or helping
PED track.
The data set of um students that
that don't graduate, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Cha and representative
that will track everything from
from K through 12, your whole
history along and it's
accessible by the public. Thank
you I appreciate that and I'm
asking because we just heard a
bill, um, it was carving out
just that population, but I just
was wondering if that's
redundant to what you've already
been able to do or fun and do
with the spill. So thank you for
that. And I think that's
That's the extent of my, my, my
questions. I just want to say
thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Excellent.
Thank you very much,
Representative Lujan. We're
gonna go to represent Baca and
then represent Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Chairman Munoz, uh, my
questions are gonna be around 2
just general areas as far as
public school support and
support for higher ed.
So Mister Chairman, Chairman
Charles, um, what was the total,
uh,
Dollar amount for the public
school support, and what
percentage of growth was that?
Mr. Chairman, you can find that
on page 7.
Line 186.
Uh, Senate Finance added 166,
they move some money around
within the SCG that had come out
of.
The, the house to fully fund the
secondary factors.
Uh, that's almost an 8% growth
for public school support.
So this disproportionately high
compared to the 6% for overall.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, um.
Sent this, you know, this body
has definitely been very
supportive of our K-12 schools,
so I appreciate it. So, Mr.
Chairman and Senator along those
lines as far as the percentage
of increases for the salaries
and the salary adjustments that
were kind of sent over.
We're, where, where do those
fall into that? What, what was
the percentage that was
allocated for that fund and what
is the raise kind of work out
to, Mr. Chairman.
Um, that was in a bill.
Uh, was it representing Garretts
bill?
And, and
at this point, uh, let Charles
answer that.
So the, the rates stayed the
same at 4%. There were some tier
increases that you sent over
that stayed the same for the
licensed teachers.
Uh, other changes in uh pay
outside of schools included, um,
Additional increases for the
lowest paid workers in the
courts.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator and Charles, um.
The other three areas that this
body has kind of highlighted
were CT CT career technical
education.
The school's security and
basically the maintenance funds
that will address some of the
capital, uh, in the districts.
Could you just briefly hit that,
Madam Chair, Senator
made the school panic buttons uh
recurring item we've been using
non-recurring for that for the
last couple of years, so that's
1.5 million.
The, um, public school capital
outlay.
Uh, money that you sent over
stayed the same, where distress
can use that for maintenance,
security, or CTE.
The CTE, uh, special
appropriations remain remain the
same, though there is a, a very
small uh earmark for a specific
type of pilot project, um, for
CTE.
At about 5.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Thank you,
Charles. and for higher ed, I
know that there's a big, you
know, as far as this, but can
you just very briefly talk about
some of the major initiatives
that were basically gonna be
supported through this House
Bill 2, House Bill 3 that have
kind of come back over as far as
um
For our universities, just some
very high level stuff, 2 or 3
kind of big picture, big ticket
items for hire.
Madam Chair.
Mr. Chairman, um, higher ed
largely left intact, uh, one of
the changes the chairman just
talked about was for um
athletics, uh, making that $3
million that UNM has been having
to fundraise for, for basic.
Um, student support service
operations recurring and then
adjusting NMSU's uh
non-recurring amount. I will say
for the committee, um, NMSU does
receive a, a higher percentage
of its total athletic budget
subsidized from the general fund
and then you and him if people
are concerned about why those
figures are different. They came
out of uh both universities
saying how much they were having
to to fundraise to support basic
student operations.
Thank you, madam chair. Thank
you. I, I think the investment
into our programs are into our
universities are gonna pay
dividends back. It is economic
development. It is opportunity
for our families and our
communities to spend time
together and we'll address this,
so I, I appreciate the support,
Madam Chair and Senator for our
public schools, K-12 are higher.
I know that there's been a lot
of support for the ECCD also,
Madam Chair, Senator, I also
appreciate the support through
for my
District, my county that has
seen so much growth in the past
couple of years, so I appreciate
it. That concludes my questions.
Thank you. Uh, there's one
bullet point that we'll touch
base on, we created an online
system across the state for
every university, uh, that's
probably, that's a $12 million
cost this year, maybe a $12
million rerecurring costs this
year, uh, the example your son
goes to in in a ho and probably
takes in in a Sho Global.
3 years ago, we created an
emission global with a risk at
10.5 million, and they came back
and generated 10.5 million in
the first year.
Uh, which we won't need to fund,
uh, but this program creates an
online system for every
university, but allows them to
keep their targeted, uh, classes
that they want to keep social,
social workers in northern New
Mexico, that's a target for Luna
and then it allows them to keep
them intact, but New Mexico has
to get on board with online and
why pay 10 different vendors,
uh, a cost and never get out of
the contract and they get 50% of
the income those universities
will now. Thank you.
and thank you, Senator. My son
actually did utilize those
programs, so I, I do appreciate
the investment to, to educate
and help our students in the
state. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Baca,
we're gonna go to Representative
Hernandez and then Herrera.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair, uh,
senator and um.
Just wanna also uh uh said uh
give my appreciation to the
staff, uh, on, on, on, on both,
uh, uh, committees that have got
us to this point, um, Madam Vice
Chair, on page 215, um, I want
to turn the attention to uh uh
to this line item with
Department of Environment, which
was acknowledged, uh, early on
in, in, in this about um the,
the, the $20 million
for the remediation of neglected
contaminated sites, um, this is
really historical, senator. I've
talked to many, um, uh, national
policy, uh, uh, folks, and I, I
believe that we're gonna be the
first state in the country
that's gonna be making this
initiative to uh clean up these,
these sites and um and uh and
Senator, Madam Vice Chair, um,
you know,
Uh,
growing up, I, I've had to miss
school because of, of uh, of,
of, of doctor's appointments
that, that my relatives had to
go through because of the
contamination of of of uranium,
you know, it, it, it, it
impacts.
A community like no other, and,
and being able to, to start this
process to finally clean up
these sites, although it wasn't
what was initially requested. I,
I wanna appreciate that we are
getting some money into this,
and I'm, I'm looking forward to
continuing to work with, with,
um, with both bodies to make,
continue to, to make these,
these meaningful initiatives
which will create jobs.
In our rural communities. Thank
you, uh, Madam Vice Chair.
Thank you, ma'am, by Sherry.
This money will not, cannot be
used on the Navajo reservation,
they will have to allow them to
clean up and speaking with the
environment department, the feds
have to agree, uh, so uranium
cleanup sites on the Navajo
Nation are completely different.
than any other site that they
did say they had a contaminated
site near Mount Taylor. That
would be the very first one,
they thought it was gonna cost
them between 50 and 7 to clean
that one up, but, but that's
not, it's not bluff my Navajo
friends and saying this is going
to clean up uranium at Church
Rock, Crown Point, Pinedale, uh.
Across the Navajo Nation.
This, this, that is a different
type of contaminated site, and
the feds have to allow them and
the tribe has to allow them
before the state can set up the
guidelines, so let's, let's be.
Great. Uh, next, we're gonna go
to Herrera and then back to
represent Verrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. I, I would like for you
to just expand a little bit
about the additional 30 million,
uh, uh, for peer support workers
through the HCA, I think that's
gonna be important for my
district and uh I, I thank you
for that.
For that increase, yeah.
Uh, Mr. Chair, represented her.
So that was within Senate Bill
2, which you all heard and was
part of the full package, so the
Senate amendment incorporates
all of the 60 million that was
incorporated in that bill, that
uh you all didn't.
Send over. So that includes that
money. So the idea is putting it
through grow before it gets
baked into the healthcare
authority, seeing how it can
work with the Senate Bill 3,
which is the beaver Health, um,
reform and Investment Act.
Thank you very much. Next, we're
gonna go to Representative
Garrett and then Representative
Brown.
Thanks very much and especially
thank you for working in the
secondary factors, including the
6th grade, very grateful, um, my
only question is on hold
harmless, um, I think there's 5
million.
But the language says that PED
can use up to 1 million from the
state support reserve fund, will
that have any impact on next
year's budget, or is that gonna
work?
Mr. Chairman Representative, by
doing the full funding for the.
Uh, secondary factor, the amount
of the amount of hold harmless
that was needed, um, went down
significantly. And there was
some discussion about um PEDs
not gonna need the full 40
million potentially to hold this
year's unit value flat, and
we'll have a little bit extra
and so the Senate Finance
Committee gave them authority to
use some of that money that
would otherwise just sit in
reserves, uh, to go for any hold
harmless if that's, if that's
needed.
Great, thank you. And, and I'll
just um tell my fellow
colleagues here that that
increase in the unit value for
secondary can also help with the
CTE factor that we're all really
concerned about. So thank you.
Great, thank you very much,
Representative Garrett
Representative Brown, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Munoz.
Um,
I wish I were a speed reader,
but I'm not. So could you just,
Charles, whoever wants to
answer, give us um an idea
regarding any language changes
that are material in nature.
Do we have anything like that,
um,
Mr. Chair
Mr. Chan representative, those
are hard and detailed to go
through in a 5 minute situation,
uh, I don't know one we could
point to that would tell you
this really changed something.
Um, we did allow some language
for case there were federal cuts
up to a certain level, that
might be the one that kind of
sticks out in my head, but
language is so it's the hardest
thing we do. I've always said we
should have a language bill and
a budget bill, uh, so that we
can review language cause
language really can change.
anything in the world by an end
or a man in a shawl.
Uh, and so they're hard to
bullet point the language.
Um, and language was all
negotiated with the exact.
We didn't add any special
language.
Yeah, Mr. Chair Representative
Brown, so we set up a
subcommittee within Senate
Finance that looked at all the
language requests from the exec,
and in most cases they weren't
adopted. The language requests
are primarily were adopted were
bars.
And they were very much
constrained and limited in
scope, the one language change
that I would highlight for you
all is in regards to housing,
the request was to basically
expand the scope to include not
just transitional housing, but
housing in general. And then,
um, adding the words up to in
terms of the Albuquerque money.
In order to allow a little bit
more flexibility, and then at
the request of both the county
and city of Albuquerque, making
sure that the money that goes in
that area is split evenly
between them. So that's an
example of like a change that
was made that came down from the
executive that the language
committee adopted.
Thank you for that, Mr.
Chairman, I am
Looking at section 11 of the
bill, which is special
transportation appropriations.
Looks like general fund will be
feeding in $189.5 million. Um, I
heard it said earlier, Mr.
Chair, that Senate added another
65 million somewhere for
maintenance of roads. Um, I take
it they're separate categories.
Mr. Chair.
That's correct in the
transportation section, they
also added some for the rural
Air Service on time. Thank you
for that. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Brown. Next we
have Representative Sanchez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, Mr.
Chair, I just have a quick
question, uh, and I think we
added 6 million for, for the
chests, did the send out any
money for that, and if not.
Not additional money for chess.
OK.
I think uh there was an ask for
additional funds. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much, uh,
Representative Sanchez.
Uh, OK, I think we're, uh, now
we have Vice Chair Dickson. I
know folks will be going on to
the floor soon.
Oy.
Thank you. um, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator. Um, I
think it was chess, uh, regret
the last question that higher
education.
Data system, yeah.
That's right.
Chess is a community college
accounting system
I think they were, yeah.
Um
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, Senator, you
mentioned additional ads from uh
requests from the governor's
office, and the executive, and
I'm wondering if you could
highlight um the larger
additional ads that the 4th
floor came to the Senate floor,
but had not flagged for the
house.
I think we mentioned the moving
of the goalposts that were added
in in reoccurring I mean um or
non-recurring.
Non-recurring would be uh.
Reoccurring were so small,
they're gonna be hard to, for me
to less Adrian remembers them,
we'll have to, he's pulling up a
sheet right now, what we, what
we agreed to and what we didn't
agree to, cause it's only 5
million or 8 million in
recurring at.
480 million was a moving target
every time because you had done
some of those.
Then they came over and brought
additional, and so we had to
reconcile what you did with what
they added, and then it kept, it
was a moving goalpost every
time.
And so I, I know one of the big
ones was the higher end
institution, uh, for the uh
programming to track, we just
talked about it. I forgot the
name of it, but Adrian will go
through from here. Uh.
Mr. Chair, Representative Dixon,
so there's a several items that
they brought to our attention
that they didn't bring to you
also, an example would be like
the 988 crisis hotline, right,
and it was brought to our
attention that it needs $9
million or else the hotline
ceases to exist at the end of
the fiscal year, and that's
something that ideally would
have been baked into the
recurring budget from the get
go, but they never brought it to
you, your attention, and they
brought it to ours. So we did
not address it within the
budget.
we're addressing it through a
fee increase and you will hear
that bill later today to to make
sure that that's a stable
revenue source for that
mechanism. Another example of
something they came to us and
asked for was, um, for example,
with the veterans services, the
Taos Cemetery.
Right, and that's a liability
that they took on and they
didn't bring it to your, your
attention, I don't believe, so
we had to address it. Um,
In regards to corrections. Um,
they wanted the ability to
basically in their corrections
industries division, um, to
initiate commissaries, so $5
million in other state funds so
that way they can commercialize
and sell the products that the
inmates are making, so that way
they generate a little bit more
revenue on their own. So it's
little things like that that
ideally they would have brought
to your attention, but
unfortunately they did not.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Adrian. And then on the, the non
non-recurring side. I feel like
I noticed um large additions for
firefighter recruitment and uh
as well as some additional law
enforcement recruitment funding,
is that correct?
For those additions.
Uh, Mr. Chair, in Senate
Finance, the additions within
public safety focus on um
recruitment in terms of public
defenders.
Um, and then money in relation
to the Attorney General.
For them to handle some more
cases.
Thank you. We're looking, but
that doesn't we can call that
we, we increase that in any way,
shape or form. OK. OK, thank
you. Um, another question, uh,
Mr. Chair, and, um,
Uh, Senator Munoz, so can you
talk to me about the rationale
of decisions between 3 years of
funding versus one year of
funding from the Senate Finance
perspective.
Um, in some of the large
non-recurring um appropriations,
um, just what the thought
process was that you guys had of
whether or not the large
appropriations would be expended
over 3 years versus 1.
Well, in, in consultation with
it, most of those are economic
development is how much money
can you get out in a year and
stand up for program and his
recommendation was, you know, we
can spend this much in one year
and get it out correctly, rather
than, than overspend. The other
thing we think about too at the
end of an administration is you
don't want an administration
throwing.
All the money out at one time
for one project when you have
other projects that could
succeed in other places. Oh,
this is true on the trade port
scenario that that's just
released a number of trade ports
going across New Mexico, so you
need to make sure that everybody
can work cohesively and not one
city gets it all, uh, across the
board, and that was in
consultation with the secretary.
You know, we can't get them all
when his mother passed away. No.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, and, uh, I, I agree with
that. Um, one of the the
discrepancies I would say though
is, you know, a lot of the
funding, let's say for the
community benefit fund, which I
think we all agree has
substantial value, um, a lot of
that is multi-year, so it was
just, you know.
Wasn't sure if there was a a
definitive distinction, but it
sounds like it's agency by
agency.
Uh, yeah, depending on the
agency, if the agency has a
request or just let's use the
uranium deal, if they're gonna
clean up a a mine site in Church
Rock. It's $170 million to begin
that, and they need the full
funding, then you would
appropriate it fully once they
knew that, but if they, they
don't have a dedicated site and
they don't know their dedicated
cost and overspending can occur,
especially as we.
In the administration leaving.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you, Senator. Um,
What, um, funding was added to
with uh trust funds, so was
there money added to the uh the
behavioral health trust fund on
the Senate side and any other
trust funds. We added 100
million to the Medicaid trust
fund, uh, I mean, it's the
behavioral health trust fund,
uh, to get it started and get
its foot in the door as we look
to the early childhood and the
revenue streams to fund those,
um, those two funds, we know
we're gonna get hit by Medicaid
every single year.
It's the highest cost to every
state budget across the 50
states, uh, that's why those
funds were set up and and we're
figuring out how to, to fund
those and, and start them
funding.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator, and I agree that um the
Medicaid, the issue of Medicaid
and and future funding is going
to be um an enormous expense. I
think one of the things from my
perspective, um, you know, there
wasn't, I don't feel like
consensus coming out of the
interim. Um, so I feel like, um,
maybe that's something that we
could continue to discuss, but
um,
The physician loan fund, Mr.
Chair, Senator.
Uh
How is that different from the
healthcare provider.
Loan fund. That was a
non-recurring edition, I think.
Yes.
It's a
A specific fund only for.
Uh, physicians that's related to
some legislation, uh, as opposed
to the broader one where the
department would have discretion
over which types of providers to
repay loans for. You did earmark
coming out of the house 5
million of that.
Uh, loan repayment for
physicians, so with the other
amount, you, you have even more
for loan repayment on top of, I
would say the Senate kept the
huge rate increases for primary
care physicians, uh, in
Medicaid, what Medicare will pay
to 150%, unprecedented to help
pay people to serve our books on
Medicaid.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Um, I think that, um,
you know, a lot of the, the
additions are are wonderful and
um very much needed and
appreciate the Senate, uh, sort
of working with the executive in
particular to um balance some of
their uh requests and um
additions. So thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. It's pretty
good when you go from 80 to 5 in
reoccurring costs in 480 million
to 80 million in non-recur, it's
a hard negotiation and.
Ems get very hot at times, and I
think we left the office once.
Great. Uh thank you very much,
Vice Chair. Uh, we'll go to
Representative Little.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you so much for the
presentation, uh, trying to
locate one specific thing. Uh,
can you tell me if the where I
might find the seniors market,
uh, senior farmers' market
nutrition program would be
located.
Oh, it was in, it's under DOH
and Charles is looking up that
section. We did see that the
feds are cutting that program,
um.
It's not a good time for us to
we didn't know a week before, 2
days before we could have kind
of made some adjustments, but we
didn't know that, um.
We're gonna be tracking that DOH
probably has some food
flexibility to do that, but
We also did.
$30 million.
For all the food banks across
the state of New Mexico.
That may help alleviate some of
that pressure, and they may have
to
To step up to that represented
smalls went to Road Runner
Foodbank. I went to Roadrunner
Food Bank. They said they could
in hunger in New Mexico for $30
million. That's a cheap price to
pay. So I imagine we could have
flexibility is on page 2 to 12
and 180.
Thank you very much. I
appreciate that. I've got the
senior citizen program programs
across the state that were
looking for this, so thank you.
We need to buy a computer so we
can just search it right here.
Additional questions for.
Awesome. Thank you very much.
Uh, OK, great. Um, uh, thank
you, uh, members, great
questions. I appreciate us doing
this, chair. I have a few quick
questions. Uh, first, uh, what
was the final four vote?
Uh, it was, I don't know what it
was, uh, the, the Rs took a
caucus position, I know that.
There was no R's on, OK.
Uh, OK. Uh, second, um, uh, on
the recurring, the biggest
changes as we've sort of talked
through the, it was by far the
biggest increase was on the
secondary education factor, um,
are there additional large
recurring increases that are
being sought in future years
from K-12 education to your
understanding. Uh, not to my
understanding. I don't sit on
the LSC, but I mean that was one
of the biggest ones that they
did a 2 year.
Program to get that completed,
uh, that was a factor we were
missing. I have not heard, I
don't know if John's in the
room, but I do not know of any
other thing that LESC. OK. Uh
thank you for that. Um, around,
I, I wanna, I know.
Regarding the 11th District
attorney.
Uh, director Seli, it's, I think
it's our understanding and uh if
you could provide the
documentation is the caseload
per attorney in that district
for McKinley is that the highest
case load.
In the, in the state.
Yes sir, Mr. Chairman, by far,
we've been detailing that in the
quarterly performance reports.
And can you give us sort of a, a
sense of what that means by far
is sort of compared to other
districts.
What's the highest?
In this case, over 2000 compared
to like 150.
OK. Another DA's.
And, uh, director, I think
members um
So there's that, uh, number 2
was with the Attorney General.
Is, are there any opinions as to
sort of the this approach from
the Attorney General.
I, I
Don't, I, I'm trying to think
when we had the conversation
with the Attorney General.
In looking at removing the DA or
how we moved around the DA.
He could not do anything unless
she allowed him to assign him
the cases, which she denied him,
and he may have an email of
that.
But whether there's one specific
case, there were 2 that one was
a local person, the other one
was going down I-40, that really
brought the news attention where
they wouldn't prosecute, and,
and it went through by a lapse
of time.
Uh, I'd have to look back. I was
thinking this morning as I was
going, my wife was looking for
the file from the employees, uh,
the, and the file from the uh.
Uh
Director that quit, uh, so we
could scan those in and get them
up here to the Attorney General
and I had a long conversations
with judges, uh, and so I do not
remember off the top of my head
if there's an email that exists
between that I'd I'd have to go
search. OK, thank you for that.
And I think the, it seems like
the, the sort of core concern is
if that the, the office isn't.
Sort of prosecuting cases that
there is a concern about how um,
whether or not there's access to
justice at the end of the day,
uh, moving, I guess the uh the
other just the recurring
spending.
is at 6% in what the Senate
passed off the floor, is that
right? That is correct. And it
reserves are at 30%. That is
correct.
OK.
OK, uh, I appreciate us having
this public conversation. We're
working very hard to do more, I
think it shows as we go forward,
sort of in and appreciating a
lot of the work that's been
done.
When there's
We have the ability in
From from our work to go back to
public conversations with a wide
variety of stakeholders. There
is a great deal of benefit in
that, in that we capture more
perspectives, members have the
ability to go through and ask a
number of questions and it, it
definitely takes extra time,
which is challenging because
you're obviously the 2nd 1 to
see the budget, but there's a
great deal of benefit that we're
seeing in being able to sort of
have public touch points, but
appreciate all of the great
work. Thank you for being here.
Thank you.
All right. Remembers, that's uh
