These have first up we have a
Loretta Perella from the New
Mexico compilation commission as
the chair said this is agency
two zero eight and this agents
will be on page four and volume
two if you'd like to fall on
their.
The LFC recommendation for at
this agency decreases general
fund revenue by eighteen point
nine percent the executive
recommendation keeps general
fund revenue flat with FY twenty
three.
from the LFC recommendation
decreases revenue to account for
HSD cost savings that resulted
in a difference between the
agencies operating budgets and
the agency's actual expenditures
from FY twenty five FY nineteen
excuse me from FY fifteen FY
nineteen the HSD expended eighty
eight percent of its operating
budget of its contractual
services budget slide from FY
twenty two FY FY twenty to FY
twenty two HSD expended less
than sixty percent of its
operating budget on those uses
on now turn it over to Mr
cynically at if he has anything
to add.
Good afternoon Mister chair of a
committee member's name is Maya
cynically of the judiciary
analyst for the executive branch
you see a lot of me this week
thank you Mr grey LFC to good
job at highlighted the
differences there so we were
able to reach consensus on
performance measures target so
with your permission Mister
chair handed off the Mr Perot
here her staff with the
compilation commission thank you
so much thank you Mr three of us
for a the sister chair members
of the committee of the red
umbrella the executive director
for the commission and with me
today is public Tackett the
chair of our advisory committee
and Wendy Lewis with our CFO.
For those of you who are not
familiar with us the completion
commission is the official chair
for the state.
We maintain support in Mexico
one source dot com which you may
be familiar with since may of
tardiness borough yet let's get
the microphone.
You can.
Yes please.
Since may of twenty nineteen
which has offered Mexico's
official annotated laws import
content on New Mexico one source
dot com free to the public.
In June of twenty twenty two we
issued an RFP for a digital
publishing contract our FY
twenty four budget request was
submitted in July of twenty
twenty two when you contact
costs were no and the
contractual services request
remained at the previous years
funding level to ensure
sufficient funding was available
in anticipation of the new
contract now that our new
contract is in place our FY
twenty five budget request more
closely aligned with our current
digital publishing costs.
She has six FTE one of which is
currently vacant we anticipate
recruited for that vacancy in
July of twenty twenty three and
with that position is filled we
fully staffed with that a simple
question.
Thank you very much Mr thank you
very much miss but a
If there are let's go to members
for questions I know there was a
bit of a challenge with with
some of the the presentation we
might miss but Representative
Brown refer back to for a couple
of questions particularly around
the the contract timing that you
mentioned let's go to questions
from members and if there's
anything to the state we're
going to go first to
Representative out please.
Chairman thank you miss Peru I I
do have a question for you
regarding New Mexico one source.
I have to many times use that
website to gather information
and I have had difficulty using
it myself and I've heard from
others who have as well I
noticed Mr chairman that the
usage of that I went from three
hundred fourteen thirty five
thousand.
Actions
Looks like per month to five
hundred eleven thousand so it's
being used more over time what
are you are you finding any kind
of feedback about problems with
the website Mr chair no no Mr
chair and Instagram we are not
okay it might just be a Mr chair
internet connections or
something okay thank you.
Thanks.
Thank you very much
Representative Brown.
Any other questions from
committee members I just might
ask Mr Birla use sort of close
your presentation with the
discussion around sort of the
the contract timing the note
that the LFC made which is that
over the last two years less
than sixty percent of the
operating budget has been used.
Is there anything that you'd
like to add their that maybe
details why or is that just sort
of the the uses that you've seen
over that time Mr chair we with
our new contract we have brought
all of the services in house so
with our previous contractor in
twenty eighteen our costs were
one point six million dollars
we've significantly cut that
back that's due to the fact that
we have brought everything in
house all of the work.
thank thank you very much for
that agency for a and I think we
want to make sure offline that
you have the ability to hire the
additional FTE that you're
looking at but
I think with that we can go
ahead and set the most.
Mr speaker I would move the LFC
recommendation.
Hey there's been a motion for
the LFC recommendations second
from vice chair Dixon second by
Representative a cruise there
any opposition to adopting the
LFC recommendation.
Okay please show one
from of some Montoya.
Correct my vote.
Once for the whole day.
That sounds like an excellent
idea yes please Representative
monthly thank you Mr chairman
once again I have been voting
quite often against a budgets
that have been presented it is
not necessarily.
Weather report was presented to
this committee
Is.
A worthy or unworthy it has
nothing to do with that has to
do with the fact that the last
four years we have ballooned our
year over year spending from a
little over six billion dollars
a year to over nine billion
dollars a year in four years and
with the budgets are being
presented both by
that would that would that we're
hearing the combined budgets are
taking us towards eleven behind
and so the concern that I have
is that
We can't continue to just grow
our budgets at this rate so once
again I have voted against every
budget and there there have been
some that I voted for but
generally I'm voting gets
budgets and it has nothing to do
with the merits of the
presentation that's been given
and so I just for those of you
in here I'm not gonna make that
statement again today thank you
for that Representative Montoya
with that.
The end Representative Pettigrew
do you want to be shown in
opposition to this okay great.
Please show
or seven times of Pettigrew in
opposition this that we will
adopt the flat budget or
actually reduce graduated from
last year the LFC recommendation
okay we're gonna now move on to
HSD code to ten this is Anders
Commission.
and we'll be switching up the
order slightly then Chief
Justice we're going to be
hearing the Supreme Court.
will go ahead and start with the
same order Mr gray if you would
pick us off please sure thing Mr
chair
our next agency is to judicial
standards commission agency to
ten this will be on page five of
the LFC going to the LFC
recommendation increases general
fund revenue I one point three
percent the executive
recommendation increases general
fund revenue by five percent.
and
the executive recommendation
increases revenue for person and
the LESC recommendation
increases revenue to match the
two percent target compensation
increase recommended by LFC for
all judicial agencies Mr chair
off on they'll have Mr cynically
have presenting in the comments
this is your committee members
thank you Brandon LFC and
executive staff have reached
consensus on performance
measures target as noted in the
packet no to dismiss Phillis
Dominguez of the additional
standards commission for
presentation with information
Mr.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the commission also with me
today.
Is Chris to do on this Chavis
shape our chief financial
officer and to expense does too
is that the vice chair of the
commission thank you for
inviting us to present to you
today we were here last Thursday
left a lot of information for
you which our offices to include
our annual report and we let
those with the mail room we also
handed out I made another
handout for you today the
hopefully you also have our
annual report includes case
related and financial related
information I just like to make
a brief statement and then I
will stand for questions with
the ethics agency for the
judicial branch of state
government established by
constitutional amendment in
nineteen sixty eight our mission
is to protect the public from
improper conduct of judges
preserve the integrity of the
judicial process maintain public
confidence in the judiciary and
create a greater awareness of
proper judicial behavior among
judges and the public we receive
investigate complaints of wilful
misconduct in office persistent
failure or inability to perform
judicial duties official
intemperance and disability
seriously interfering with the
performance of judicial duties
we receive complaints from
litigants defendants attorneys
members of the public court and
court staff rather and judges
and in FY twenty two we received
one hundred eighteen complaints
and we disposed of one hundred
fifteen.
We recommend the formal
discipline of judges to the New
Mexico Supreme Court which may
include a public censure formal
mentorship or removal but we
also try to correct judicial
misconduct through the informal
dispositions such as mentorship
and with training.
We have an outstanding Judiciary
and the commission's inclusion
of training and mentorship helps
to further strengthen the
integrity independence and
impartiality of our judges
throughout the year our staff
educates judges on the code of
judicial conduct we have trained
district magistrate municipal
and probate judges.
The commission is an
administrative body which
complicates its own rules and
procedures strict
confidentiality is required in
our proceedings as mandated by
the constitution requires
extensive training of
commissioners attorneys and
staff in the code of judicial
conduct we are small independent
agency with only seven fully
funded FTEs we are not part of
the judiciary's unified budget
however we have adopted the AOC
pay Maez and we currently cannot
compete with the salaries
offered to attorneys and staff
by either the executive branch
for other judicial entities.
We are requesting that you
accept the FAA's recommendation
which is an increase of forty
nine thousand two our salaries
and benefits category DFA is
recommendation gives our agency
an additional thirty six
thousand five hundred dollars
over LFC is recommendation which
was small agency is a major
difference this is a small
amount really compared to other
agencies but it will
significantly impact our ability
to recruit train and retain
staff and it will help us to be
competitive with hiring with
other agencies thank you step
for questions thank you very
much assuming as we're going to
go first to raking member
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chairman I thank
you for your presentation
So you were this this commission
was created in nineteen sixty
eight is that correct that is
correct okay and and so I just
want to bring it to the the
committee's attention that the
ethics commission gets a lot
more money to this.
And they the this this
commission though judicial
standards commission here's a
lot more cases and so I would
like to ask Mr chairman if we
could possibly create a
subcommittee to take a closer
look because it's such a close.
difference
just a recommendation Mr
chairman to try to trick to try
to get them fully funded with
the national forty nine thousand
dollars thank you Mr chairman
thank you remember any other
yes.
Representative Chris thank you
Mr chairman I just have a
question please.
So what is the Avenue that you
receive complaints issues
related to any aspect of the
work that you do.
And and Mr chair and
representative bill includes we
receive complaints we have
complaint forms online of
complaints can visit our website
to obtain complaint forms or
they can call our office and we
will send them complaint forms
and anyone can complain you know
of about it a judge can be the a
member of the public at the
attorneys and judges we get
substantial complaints from
litigants and from incarcerated
individuals so can you can you
describe the work volume of the
agency.
Mr chair representative cruise
we
thank in a report we we received
hundred eighteen complaints and
this complaint all of their
complaints that we received get
a thorough investigation whether
or not they're dismissed by the
commission because they are
pelleted nature or the
information we received is
unsubstantiated but every
complaint gets a substantial
amount of work we have to
process these complaints and
everything's and those under the
purview of confidentiality
everything that we do is
confidentiality is confidential
as mandated by the constitution
we have to investigate these
complaints we do witness
interviews we hope we do
depositions and we hold hearings
in front of the commission thank
you Mr one last question we.
What is the if you can what is
the.
On average length of time that
the particular case review would
take.
And Mr chair representative Dale
increased it depends
I hate to use that term but it
does depend the average time
commission their volunteers we
meet six the commission meets
six times a year so typically a
complaint that is
unsubstantiated repellent in
nature takes two to four months
if the matter goes to trial
which is held at the commission
a confidential trial before the
commissioners that can take from
A year.
We did we try to hold these in
have and get them disposed of
within a year.
Chairman I apologize have one
more question we so described to
this committee what is the
nature of your staff is at all
attorneys can describe some of
the.
And.
And
we have I think the director and
I am an attorney we have to
staff attorneys we have two
paralegals and the CFO and
administrative assistant and
right now we are short an
attorney and that's probably one
of the biggest issues we have
right now we can't pay our
attorneys enough money to stay
in the the gentleman that left
you know moved to another
position because he couldn't
support his family and we have
advertised in the bar bulletin
twice and have not got receive
one application from an attorney
and we truly believe that's
because we cannot pay them with
other agencies to pay.
Job thank you very much of the
day a group connected up some
gear.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
have one question on page five
under at a glance it says that
according to the ethics
commission the only means by
which the hearing officer's
let's see.
Can be brought within the
commission's oversight is by
public vote to amend the
constitution it is something
being done about that because
there's a lot of hearing
officers and I bet there's
complaints in Mr chairman and
representative thank you for
that question yes when the
ethics commission was was
They promulgated in two thousand
nineteen an amendment was added
to the jurisdiction to our
jurisdictions that included
hearing officers administrative
court judges and according to
the we are constitutional
commission and our jurisdiction
can only be expanded through a
constitutional amendment yes we
are working on trying to have
that resolved we have a bill in
place right now we could have a
sponsor for this bill okay thank
you very much thank you very
very much Representative Garrett
this to me is looking here at
your funded vacancy rate on our
page three it's just very low
one point five percent you're
clearly doing.
Very good job an aggressive job
with the funds that you're given
so that we're going to go to a
right before we go to the
recommendation think we'll ask
staff Mr Graham's cynically a
to come back with the
recommendation report back to to
ranking member Armstrong
Representative a lot creating is
but it seems like there's a lot
of opportunity here to meet this
difference with that list
Representative do a cruise thank
you Mr chairman I move that we
accept the LFC recommendation.
Second okay it's been moved by
Representative del Cruz second
by ranking member Armstrong is
there objection to that motion.
Excellent please show
Representative the monthly and
Representative Pettigrew in
opposition.
thank you very much for the time
thank you for the work that you
do thanks the members for
excellent questions will look
for to bring this one back thank
you so much Mr Chairman
representative.
Okay now we're gonna go to HSD
code to sixteen members or
shifting our order slightly this
is agency code to sixteen our
Supreme Court.
The need to assist thank you so
much for being here today with
us we're gonna sort of stick to
the same quarter asked Mr gray
and then Mister semi with and
very much look forward to your
presentation.
All right.
Mr chair
your up next we have a.
And six Mexico Supreme Court as
the chair mentioned we're joined
by just the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court Shannon Bacon.
and if you like to follow along
in volume two you can turn to
page eight for the LFC more.
The executive recommendation for
the agency increases general
fund revenues by two point six
percent the LFC recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by four point five percent both
fully meet agencies request and
the LESC recommendation includes
increased compensation for that
Supreme Court justices and staff
I'll now turn to Mr cynically at
for additional information.
Chairman committee members the
executive recommendation does
not include increased
compensation that the LFC that
you're going to see that a lot
with these agencies other than
that though both recommendations
are identical including full
consensus reached on performance
measures so now the under
presenting Chief Justice of the
New Mexico Supreme Court justice
C. Shannon Bacon.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee and to both of our
our analysts you guys have been
a delight to to work with this
year so I like pointing that out
because I'm guessing staff
doesn't get that feedback very
often.
so I have two categories of
information to present to the
committee today first we have
our statewide initiatives which
have fiscal impact and then the
Supreme Court Supreme Court
budget specifically before I
dive into the for statewide
topics that will be of interest
to you I want to highlight just
a a couple of things first I was
listening to Representative
Montoya is comments about
ballooning state budgets when we
got here the entire state
judiciary's budget is still two
point five five percent of the
entire.
Budget.
We're very small the number has
not grown in fact I think it
shrunk in my tenure as a member
of the Judiciary so I ask that
you keep in mind that money did
you make decisions about the
judiciary's um budget requests
this year are Mr Pepin will go
over I think in some some detail
the comparative the size of last
year's entire budget to this
year's budget requests you'll
hear some remarkable numbers
about that.
second in the past this
committee has begun its analysis
of our budget by consistently
taking the lower recommendation
between DFA and LFC I don't know
what the landscape will be this
year it's a new committee none
the less we urge the committee
to start by adopting the LFC
recommendation for the judiciary
for the very reasons that Mr
gray highlighted it's only the
LFC recommendation that includes
the salary increases for the
judges and for staff this year
so I I implore you to take with
real consideration the LFC
recommendation.
So we have four statewide
initiatives that will be of
interest to this committee and
in particular we have other
initiatives that don't have a
sizeable fiscal impact.
For this year are employee
compensation judicial
compensation judicial education
and the elimination of posted
judicata and please.
the for implicated judicial
compensation judicial education
and elimination of the funding
or all bills that will come to
this committee in their and our
next step so I'll give you a
preview or an appetizer about
those particular bill but I'm
also happy to answer questions
that anybody has about that but
today I'm gonna start with staff
compensation in my state of the
judiciary you heard me talk
about the staff of the judiciary
and that they are the life of
the judiciary they're the folks
who never left the buildings
during COVID still interacted
with the public took those
filings in pleadings and kept
our doors open.
I'm judges would be sitting in
the dark in court rooms without
computers lights or any
materials without our staff is
the staff that keeps us going
and so staff compensation is one
of our top priorities this year.
Last year when we came before
you we pointed out that there is
it was a ten percent gap between
executive employees and judicial
employees judicial employees
receiving the lower of those of
those numbers and last year you
recognize that in again judicial
employees at two percent greater
raise than state employees and
we thought fantastic now the gap
is only eight percent.
All that we were wrong CPO
issued a report last week that
now shows that the gap between
our employees and the executive
employees has ballooned again to
adopt Mr Representative Montoya
is word to eleven point two
percent so one step forward two
steps backwards for staff
compensation.
The judiciary is the second
largest employer of women in the
state.
Teachers are first judicial
employees are second.
Seventy five percent of our
employees are women.
And I can't help but think that
that has something to do with
that gap.
This differential in pay has a
significant impact on
recruitment and and and
retention here in Santa Fe is a
it's a great example of the
first additional district were
hot will hire new employees
costs about thirty thousand
dollars to train a new employee
and then within several months
they see advertisements within
within the executive and I see
that it pays more for the same
banned and of course they make
the jump because it's it's
simple to do that and it makes
economic sense for them.
many of our employees and you'll
hear this repeated today and the
and the district wide
presentations many of our
employees work two jobs to make
ends meet and miss Garcia are
chief clerk will to give you
some stories about that specific
to the Supreme Court here and in
a few minutes
we respectfully ask that at a
minimum you adopt the staff
recommendation from LFC to
provide a two percent salary
increase over and above what
employees will receive this year
to percent won't even take us
you know that it barely makes a
dent in the problem but it is a
significant problem.
if the committee was feeling
Slightly more generous than that
the cost to for each one percent
increase for our staff I'm just
take up the glasses for this one
because the phone is.
one for each additional one
percent in salary and benefits
would cost an additional one
point one three six million
million dollars.
so an additional one percent is
one point one three six four
percent would be four point five
and and so on so if there is any
room for additional generosity
we it we acknowledge that two
percent is generous but it is it
is it's a significant problem
and chipping away at it at two
percent per year I will be
retired by the time we we fix
the challenge.
So that is what we're focused on
in terms of staff staff
compensation.
Judicial compensation once again
I think most of you know we're
pursuing Senate bill two again
and I'm really grateful that
it's called Senate bill two
again this year because it helps
keep that in in my mind that
bill passed overwhelmingly last
year for example in the Senate
there were only four no votes.
This bill is the bill that will
tie Supreme Court justice pay
the highest court in the state
judiciary to the federal
magistrate court pay which is
the lowest court in the federal
judiciary.
this bill also removes the state
magistrate court judges from the
pay tiers.
By increasing the rate
consistent with the federal
magistrate court pay we will
better be able to recruit and
retain judges from private
practice.
It will also support the
separation of powers meeting
that a judge will not need to
worry about their salary whether
they're going to be paid or not
because they have to the higher
of one of the other branches of
government.
thinking about that narrative
last year there was a lawsuit in
in front of the Supreme Court
that was a fight between the
legislature and the executive
related to federal arpa funding.
And we made the decision based
on the law and the facts in
front of us but we wondered what
what the result to be and I and
I think we know what it what it
was although I will point out we
gave the power to this body to
distribute the ark of funding
and not one penny went to the
judiciary.
We're the only judiciary in the
country The did not receive are
but funding the only judiciary
in the country for the record
for the record exactly I mean
but it points out something
about the fact that our budget
is two point five percent of the
state's budget.
So being in the good graces of
either the executive or the
legislature and hoping that we
will get a paycheck is by
definition antithetical to the
separation of powers and
independent judiciary.
we want judges to focus their
attention on equitably applying
the law without these types of
concerns.
The pay structure that will
exist upon passage of Senate
bill two is the Supreme Court
justice pay will go to two
hundred and thirteen thousand
nine hundred ninety two dollars
and then it's a percentage step
down at the the really important
band to pay attention to their
is the District Court pay
because that's where we're
really trying to focus the
retention and recruitment we'll
take District Court rate judge
paid a hundred ninety three
thousand one hundred and twenty
seven dollars we believe that is
with the and you know kind of
hunting of what solo
practitioners and law partners
make in New Mexico we will never
meet the the law partner rate in
big you know civil firms roadie
Montreuil and the like even with
the Supreme Court justice rate
doesn't doesn't do that but we
also recognize that we're public
servants but we think this is
the right balance to start
recruiting people who have
experience and water oil and gas
business dissolution and the
like where we really do see an
under representation of lawyers
with those skill sets applying
to be become judges because the
rate differential is just too
significant for them to take the
plunge.
no not only does Senate bill two
need to pass but the funding
needs to appear in house bill
two LFC has recommended a large
portion of this funding but we
know that the LFC recommendation
contains an error in addition.
And it appears that it
accidentally shorts the supreme
court and the court of appeals
this'll be the second year the
court of appeals would be
shorted the money to pay the
salaries honest mistake staff is
aware of it Mr chair we would
like to continue just to work
with staff to to iron out that
that little wrinkle
Mr capital also just take some
time to explain the greater
funding details related to
Senate bill two.
Third is judicial education we
are seeking two point two
million dollars in general funds
and two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars in one time
funding so that we can move
judicial education out of the
university of New Mexico and
into the administrative office
of the courts what is been
recommended is one point six
million I respectfully request
that the our initial requests
two point two million dollars is
really what we need.
We need more money to focus on
state really specialized
training right now the funding
that is received by the
university of New Mexico
focuses on statewide big
conferences were all the judges
are together and we're being
taught issues that kind of a
thirty thousand foot level the
rules of evidence rules of
procedure in the light but there
isn't enough.
Band with either human band with
the funding there to create
trainings on topical issues like
pre trial detention for example.
oil and gas water week we cobble
those things together ourselves
but that is not best practices
and it doesn't focus on how
grown ups adults.
Assimilate information.
so we're asking to both move
judicial education out of you
and and and into the
administrative office of the
courts because we think will
better be able to grow judicial
education if its in house with
that being it you and the
individuals who run JTC at UNM
and I know that the dean of the
law school is he is here today
they do a terrific job with what
they are given but I think some
of you've heard me say this
before judicial education is a
fully on the back of an elephant
at the university of New Mexico
it gets no priority it gets no
attention and it has not grown
in a very long time and it's
that growth in attention to what
the judges needs are where
there's an easier route for
accountability that's really
important to the judiciary.
And then finally the elimination
of posted Judy K. in fees.
Much of state government is
funded through the funding
meaning we tack on fees to a
variety of funds of offenses
that don't necessarily relate to
the offense we're not talking
about the elimination of fines
fines or punishment you all set
the policy on punishment and we
execute on that fine the funding
was away when the budgets were
really tight to create some
mechanism for funding really
important what we do is really
important programs within state
government.
For example all of judicial the
judiciary's I T. is three feet
funding.
the brain injury fund is largely
funded through fee funding.
the warrant Division is funded
through fee funding and what
that does is a couple of
different things first the
funding is wildly unpredictable
it is dropped by forty percent
over the last four years COVID
accounts for part of that but
not all of it so there's no
predictability on our end as a
branch of government to say we
can count on what that money
will Representative because it
fluctuates all of the time but
more importantly there's no
oversight for this this funding
you all don't have any oversight
over the funding.
We oversee what comes to the
judiciary but we're just a pass
through entity to eight other
agencies who received the
funding.
And the amount it costs us to
set up payment plans deal with
compliance issues and the like
in the last three years cost the
judiciary four point five
million dollars so we're
spending four point five million
dollars of Judiciary funding to
chase down about five million
dollars worth of fee funding.
So no no budgetary oversight so
it's it's not best practices for
government there's no
transparency to it and we're
throwing good money after bad
pursuing that funding and then
there's the human side of this
individuals who have fees to
start to stack up because they
can't afford it and let's
remember people of modest means
in New Mexico that seventy five
percent of our population that
are living at five hundred
percent of the poverty
guidelines for lower.
These fees stack up they don't
get paid we spend all this money
trying to chase them down and
then ultimately warrants are
issued for their arrest in these
are low level well these are
folks with broken tail lights
and speeding tickets.
They get arrested they get put
into the criminal justice system
there in the county jails it
costs it somebody can pay off
their fees sitting in the county
jail.
They get paid the federal
minimum wage eight hours a day
so it's a little over sixty
dollars a day and we pay more
than a hundred dollars a day to
house them.
In county corrections so again
we're throwing good money after
bad so I submit to you that if
these programs have value to the
state if they have value to your
constituents.
It should be funded out of the
general fund he should not be
the path forward.
Know that when the bill comes
before you will you will hear
about it delayed implementation
date for the signing the goal of
the ship this year is that pass
the policy related to fee
funding with an implementation
date of July first of twenty
twenty four not FY twenty twenty
four but starting the
elimination in in July of twenty
four and that will give
everybody who subject to the fee
funding a full year to
understand the ramifications
income before you next year and
prove up why there programs are
important to New Mexicans and
therefore should be important to
you also we tried to take a very
measured approach to the walking
back up the fee funding so that
nobody is caught off guard by
the walking back up that few
funding.
So with that Mr chair members
those are the that the big
ticket items as we call them for
the judiciary in this year's
legislative session.
Turning briefly to the supreme
court's budget.
you will see in you all have
received a budget books but also
the the Supreme Court to budget
and all hit the highlights and
in our chief clerk will go into
a little just a little bit of
detail.
It's a total of a two point
seven percent increase over last
year's budget it's a very modest
increase that we've asked for
and the Supreme Court
again ms Garcia will talk about
the details but we asked for
very little in terms of
expansion are bigger concern
Mister chair I don't know if
this is an appropriate time to
make a comment about a special
that we have asked for if we
should wait.
Thank you actually we do have
the special sensors such
significant differences if you
can note that we won't go into
the discussion members but it is
very good to raise it now so for
the Supreme Court we asked for a
series of capital requests and
we fully understand in a year
like this why you would rather
do a special than a capital
request
for that kind of one time
spending LFC we recommended two
million dollars.
Inverting it from capital into a
special to address the security
needs of the New Mexico state
Supreme Court we
members you on the backside of
the Supreme Court different
state is where we can see these
special.
Please yeah.
and we're really appreciative of
that recommendation of two
million dollars.
We are here today to ask you to
fully fund that request which
would be two point six million
dollars the New Mexico Supreme
Court security is by the most
generous definition antiquated.
I'm it meets no modern measure
of security in the in the
country just two years ago we
had individuals with guns breach
the front door and try attempt
to come into the courtroom this
summer we had an individual
walking around with an iPad
taking pictures of all of our
cameras when I walk out of this
is something a little bit scary
to say in a public meeting but
when I walk out of the building
at night and I'm often the last
person to leave it is pitch
black in there is no lighting
where I park we do not have
secured parking at the Supreme
Court.
Much work needs to be done even
the the most modest of modern
standards for security and in
today's climate we think that
that should be a focus of of the
legislature on behalf of the
judiciary.
So while we're really pleased
with the two million dollar
special we respectfully would
ask you to consider two point
six million dollars so that that
is that particular request is
fully funded.
with that
Is going to jump in here but I
would turn it over to Mr C. as
well to talk about the three
particular line items thank you
let thank you very much Chief
Justice we also one welcomed us
thank you for being here today
let's go to Mr gray and then
we'll go to you to progress I
thank you Mr chair I just wanted
to clarify one thing about the
LFC rack and the compensation
the Chief Justice is correct in
volume two there's a mistake the
compensation for the so in the
state that judicial the judges
and staff compensation in the
Supreme Court and court of
appeals does not appear in that
recommendation at the different
sheets in front of you does have
that compensation so the
legislative finance committee
had previously approved those
compensation increases staff to
not clued them in the budget
system in time to be included in
volume two but they approved a
technical amendment to include
them in the different seats in
front of you and lastly just so
everybody's clear LFC
recommendation has two percent
targeted compensation for staff
and P. percent targeted
compensation for questions
that's in addition to the
statewide compensation so the
total compensation recommended
by LFC for a judicial staff is
seven percent the total
compensation Representative
recommended by Alice C. is
thirteen percent for judges.
Thank you thank you very much is
very to progressive thank you
please good afternoon chair
small vice chair Dixon and
respective members thank you for
giving Chief Justice Bacon
myself this opportunity to
appear before you to discuss its
pre imports budget requirements
for fiscal year twenty twenty
four every day I walk into that
Supreme Court courtroom and I
see the words equal justice
under the law I'm remembered by
the that this court is the
highest court in the state of
New Mexico for all cases and
controversies arising under our
constitution and laws and the
important work that we do for
New Mexicans and the cases that
we.
The side we are the guardian of
the constitution we seek a very
modest request
again two point seven increase
from FY twenty three again
thanks to Brandon and Mario for
their work on the budget they've
been very dedicated to our this
process in terms of personnel
costs eighty four percent of our
budget is people it's all people
and with respect to what Chief
Justice justice bacon with
thing.
We have several members of our
staff I would say seven people
from the building commission
that provide our maintenance
needs and security that have to
work two jobs to be able to make
ends meet and support their
families many of them are single
parents who struggle to make
a living and serving our ports
and our state and they do an
excellent job of what they do
any time you go to the Supreme
Court building it is absolutely
beautiful they protect our court
and they make sure that it's a
wonderful place to be but the
cost of living has increased
especially housing in Santa Fe.
R. us additional base request is
in a number of categories one we
have asked for twenty five
thousand to cover increased
prices with building services
including security and fire
system needs inflation has raise
those prices the Supreme Court
also houses the beautiful law
library we've asked for a
hundred twenty thousand two
hire a librarian to help support
the needs of New Mexicans over
COVID we saw a substantial
increase in the amount of New
Mexicans coming to the wall
library of sixteen point fifty
to increase for reference
interactions
And so we have a very small
staff to provide assistance to
New Mexico and that's why we
have a need for an additional
library and lastly we do it ask
for fifty thousand dollars and
four hundred category to cover
inflationary increases in the
cost of print and online library
subscriptions.
When the public interacts with
New Mexico in our Supreme Court
they see the resources that this
body provides to the just
whether it's the courthouses for
libraries I T. needs but our
dedicated staff for frontline
staff to make support run every
day's smoothly and efficiently.
As a result the public gets to
see a positive example of New
Mexico public servants and our
commitment to the rule of law
thank you for your time is up
thank you very much Steve Kerr
Garcia we're going to go
straight to committee for
questions will start with
Representative accrued.
You Mr chairman you did a very
thorough job present presenting
to the judge appreciate that
I'm just curious and you may
potentially hazardous question
but the discrepancy in besides a
math issue the difference
between the LFC recommendation
is all around salary increases.
Mr chair representative yes.
Mr chair that's correct thank
you and lastly I'm I'm just a
little bit puzzle why did you
not receive our per funds.
It was requests I'm sure Mr
chairman.
Mr chairman representatives we
we did submit many request last
year for our for funding and
they they weren't addressed the
we don't know why that not not
our role
but it was you know it makes
things challenging when we
continue to have a very flat or
suppressed overall percentage of
budget for the judiciary is the
third branch of government to do
its work thank you Mr chairman
thank you very much of the day a
cruise next with our
Representative Montoya than
Representative heard.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and Chief Justice bacon
I do believe you probably put
school squarely.
To your point earlier about
needing to be independent from
the other two branches.
I did see first hand as I served
in the prior administration.
how.
A poor relationship.
With a governor can take place
when you are asked.
to be arbiter of certain.
Cases and so Mr chairman this is
gonna be one of the budgets that
I do support today
and in part because of how many
years in a row
I have seen the
Your budgets maybe pass but then
get line item vetoed.
And as you mentioned the art of
funding which was there which.
Wouldn't cost anything to get
for you so
many voting for today but that
doesn't mean that you.
Still we're gonna have to
somehow avoid the line item
veto.
that being said I I I I do have
a couple of questions and one is
because I just don't understand
the process and I don't know why
why is the Supreme Court.
And the court of appeals and
where were all those budget
separate.
Mr chair members of the
we have what's called the
unified budget but each judicial
entity has its own very
different needs a trial court
like the one in Albuquerque
which is massive in busy has
very different needs and then
the supreme Supreme Court it's
also a mechanism for
transparency and oversight so
that as we come before you here
by here you can see kind of the
the upward or downward movement
in those budget so for us it's a
transparency measure presented
to you but it's also a
management in fiscal rule for
the judiciary in particularly
working with a see so that's why
you get those different line
items because it's it's a more
effective way to talk about
individualized needs in each one
of what we call judicial
appointees thank you Mr chairman
so that question is are the
magistrates who are they
connected to very good question
Mr chair and representative the
magistrates are connected
directly to this the same kind
of flows you the Supreme Court
overseas everybody court of
appeals then you have the
district courts and the
magistrate court budgets are
buried within the District Court
budgets because the district
courts oversee the magistrate
courts that was through an
effort three years ago.
At least up to consolidate the
magistrate court so that they're
managed by judges they're not
managed by RT and AOC it makes
more sense in terms of of the
work that they do and it also
allows the districts and the
magistrate courts to work
together to solve problems and
cover for each other and things
like that that so if you look at
each individual district's
budget there magistrate court
funding is buried with in that
base budget as well thank you Mr
chairman so it's not associate
with your budget all because I'd
Mr chair representative.
Thank you okay I just want to
make that clear because at their
one of the.
one of the publications I saw
stated no increase for
magistrates want to harm your
request here.
Speaker because it has nothing
to do with this budget and and
Mr chair representative I think
the the no increases may have
been related to salary.
And when Senate bill two comes
before this body you will hear
the reasons why we're separating
them from that locks that salary
increase last year there was
through the pocket he to there
were really unintended
consequences with the salary for
magistrate court judges their
salary one up to about a hundred
seventeen thousand dollars
and so it if we keep them Google
to us it it kind of holds us
down but we'll talk more about
that we in Senate bill two comes
before you thank you Mr chairman
but once again I I do think it's
a shame.
That the.
Needs of our courts have been.
In a bipartisan manner let's say
hi jacked by
and I'm happy administrator and
I and I do believe that keeping
our courts independent is an
important thing for all New
Mexicans and so I will be
supporting this budget today
thank you Mr chairman thank you
very much for the Montoya
representative her name please.
I would.
Or that.
madam chair madam Representative
I know there there is an
increase there because we've
we've got to start modestly
growing judicial education it is
been stagnant or stymied
whatever one of those you can
pick which just where you want
to use for a very long time so
it has a modest increase in it
and we believe that that's
what's necessary to get this
moving in off off the ground I I
will be very transparent with
all of you and we've had this
conversation with with LFC staff
as well that we will likely once
the dust settles
come back and ask you for an
additional increase next year
but we think that's what we need
to get things started moving in
the right direction this year
you also you will learn also
when that bill comes before you
that has an emergency clause
attached to it our biggest
training of the year it's called
the judicial conclave and that's
where we train Supreme Court
through metro court judges it's
mandatory happens in June and so
it creates some interesting
budgeting challenges for both
the judiciary and the dean of
the law school so we're trying
to be creative with how we do
that so that we don't violate
procurement code issues it's
likely going to require some and
Hughes and things like that in
the first.
to make sure that we hold the
university largely harmless in
in this process.
Mr Chairman representative we
don't know we will have an open
competitive hiring process
because that's what we do in the
need to try and do in the
judiciary is as soon as I'm I'm
speaking very positively here as
soon as that bill passes we will
be posting the in particular the
role of the director we have
encouraged the current director
to apply
but we don't know what people's
you know what their own career
goals are so it's not that's
assuming those employees they
need to make those decisions
themselves there would be moving
into a different retirement plan
for example that may cause them
some consternation but we're
hopeful that we are able to rely
on the skill set that's already
been developed there as we grow
judicial education that AOC.
To.
I look turning around and
looking at the dean of of the
law school because she knows the
answer that said not all of the
employees are full time judicial
education employees they wear
different hats so Mr chair with
your permission I'd turn to the
dean of the law school to tell
us how many employees there are.
If you want to and if this.
I.
The fact.
Okay and we can follow up more
offline this is separate from
the book thank you thank you
very much dean thank you madam
Chief Justice since this is an
before us today we can create
this sort of education we can
follow up offline is the
legislation advances.
Thank you very much
Representative hundred next
we're gonna go to Representative
Pettigrew than Representative
Sanchez Representative Lujan and
Representative here.
Thank you chairman thank you
yes.
But that was my marble for the.
Just depends.
Chairman and chief justice of
the specials I believe I heard
two point six million but that's
not what the special requests
that I have.
HB to section five that up to.
So and then.
Special on here you know that up
to two point sixty years thank
you representative press
Pettigrew that that's right the
the recommendation from the LFC
is for a two million dollar
special the Chief Justice noted
I think
from an educational perspective
perhaps that that they would
that two point six is a closer
number but that was not
submitted in either
recommendations.
Thank you chairman and thank you
for that the I do support the
security upgrades okay so the
and so
Mr chair and and justice.
Help me inside this budget.
Where does it support the effort
behind Senate bill two is there
any money in here that is Senate
bill two was I.
Would would positively or
negatively impact this budget.
Mr chair at Representative the
the initiative at proposed under
as Senate bill two
is funded in the LFC
recommendation and the executive
recommendation under the
administrative office of the
courts as so there's a and we
can discuss that when the issue
comes up and and come back to
that there's no funding
recommended in the Supreme Court
but is and AOC.
Thank you chairman thank you for
that answer so
and this may be more for
administrative office of courts
but last year when Senate bill
two is coming through I
understand that the the
magistrate courts as a whole
supported so Senate bill two
that I had magistrates from all
over the state saying no we
don't support that and one of
the primary concern is change
their budget for.
Not so much necessarily with
respect to.
Hey.
The more concerning because it
moved their budget structure
from one budget structure to the
other and I got one person
chairman chicken and have no one
shaking their head yes.
The song.
Mr chair representative last
year Senate bill two had an
effort in it where there was the
idea of moving the magistrate
retirement into P. E. R. A.
because they're the smallest.
Retirement fund in this in the
state that did not happen and
this year retirement is not a
feature of Senate bill two
there may be I you there maybe
colleagues of yours that believe
that that is an appropriate path
in that conversation may come to
bear but it is not an initiative
that we are pushing this year
the only reason that that was on
the table last year is because
we're trying to make sure that
the magistrates retirement is
actually fund and it is grossly
underfunded
and so it's trying to be
creative in learning how to get
them on a path to solvency which
right now it's on a path to
solvency but I think it's about
a ninety year path to solvency
at this point which doesn't give
people my age that are
magistrates a whole lot of
comfort.
but that is not a feature of
Senate bill two this year but
that would be the only budget
change that was discussed last
year.
Chairman and thank you checked
justice for that that's my
concern and it wasn't for
constituents of mine or
colleagues of mine in my neck of
the woods it was.
For a week.
Different people up here during
whatever that was going on they
were coming through the office
and so at the end of the day
I my biggest concern is we take
care retirement do we make sure
we do that and and so it sounds
like that pieces been separated
and there's still a way that
we're trying to figure out how
to do that in in the current
period should be significantly
funded as well so
throwing something under funded
into something under funded
probably what a good idea last
year but with with all that
being said those were two of my
biggest concerns is sounds like
Senate bill two now takes care
that and
I do appreciate the the effort
in there there's a piece of me
and chairman to justify
understand that that your
percentage of the state budget
has stayed consistent or even
dropped as a percentage.
I think one of the concerns that
my colleague on the other side
of this this table and I both
share isn't.
That the percentages are staying
the same this.
Growth of the budget over a four
year period is this huge and
unsustainable.
When we look at will what the
efforts are with
with respect to five years down
the road six seven years down
the road as as the drive to
continue to get rid of oil and
gas continues to happen we
already chairman.
Chief justice we already only
have five states.
At thirty three the revenue
positive.
Taking the revenue positive away
from three of those are not
states counties speaking revenue
positive peace away from three
of those.
Doesn't make New Mexico's future
look too well so those are my
comments thank you okay let's
move on to Representative
Sweetser you Mr chair R. just a
quick question I have more
questions tomorrow District
Court budget but is there is
that the magistrates got lost
and I guess I'm trying to figure
out what's the justification for
not including them in your asks
to get a motor race because I
got some calls.
Mr chair representative be
curious to see here when you've
got those calls because there is
at Supreme Court or order in
place regarding
lobbying against the unified
budget but that being said the
magistrate court judges salary
went to just under a hundred and
seventeen thousand dollars last
year remember that our
magistrate judges they're
critically important to our
system there's no question we
don't have enough lawyers
we have these large legal
desert's that create significant
challenges for us having lawyers
in each county but what we have
consistently been told over the
course of the last decade not
only by your judicial
compensation commission bought
by AJ FC and Senate finance is
that if you keep the magistrates
tethered so to speak to the
percentages of of pay for the
Supreme Court justices the rate
will never change.
As magistrate judges by deaf by
by large definition with the
exception of Los crucis in
Albuquerque they're not lawyers
we don't have the recruiting and
retention challenges with the
magistrate judges that we do
with the District Court judges
when a magistrate court position
opens it's a food fight over who
is going to get the primary
nomination and then be on the
the general
the general doctor we don't have
that recruiting and retention
problem because somebody who's
worked for example retired from
law enforcement and a lot of the
it our individuals were
magistrate judges and really
good magistrate judges come from
law enforcement this is a
significant step upward in in
their salary as opposed to
attracting people out of private
practice to become trial court
judges where it's a significant
step backwards are down in in
the salary so that's the reason
for what we call the coupling
the magistrates the magistrates
are still well taking care of
the perceived as a significant
raise last year that frankly
wasn't intended by the
legislature it was an unintended
consequence of of politics that
we don't have much control over
I've spent the past year
discussing this with magistrates
all over the state I have for
the entirety of my career.
Worked and lobbied non stop for
the magistrate judges including
their retirement because they
are that important but that
lockstep measure of salary is is
different and a couple of other
differences that are important
magistrate judges can double
dip.
Nobody no no whether judge can
double dip so we had a few
magistrate judges this year who
were unopposed in the general so
they were tired and in
September.
One their election in November
and now they're getting their
pension plus the salary.
Little twists there I didn't
know up until about a year ago.
And second their salaries cannot
be reduced while they're in
their current term and that's
set by constitution and no
whether judge has those
protections so we think there
are enough safeguards there to
answer the concern of any not
just thank you to this research
I just wanna make up here nobody
lobbied me to go against your
budget they just said they were
getting a raise I just wanna
make that clear and also to see
because they don't have a law
degrees that's kind of saying
like
Electrician isn't as important
as an engineer to me are you
guys still get paid a lot more
but these people here a lot of
hard cases and on the go through
a lot so I wouldn't up put down
the work they do they do do a
lot of work thank you Mr chair
thank you very much
Representative Sweetser let's go
now to Representative Lujan
please.
Thank you of sure my questions
have been answered thank you Sir
thank you very much for so
little on Representative
Garrett.
Okay I don't see thank you ma'am
Chief Justice is the couple of
first question although the
transfer out of of U. N. M. for
the judicial education we're
told that roughly the the
funding that goes to U. N. M. is
around four hundred thousand
dollars that are slightly below
are you proposing a so you'd be
proposing a five X. increase to
two million dollars and Mr very
if you want to add anything.
Mr chair at you're correct that
the just education center at UNM
receives about four hundred
thousand dollars in general fund
they also receive between six
hundred and seven hundred
thousand dollars in fee revenue
so the total budget currently
for JVC is about a million give
or take that that's very helpful
thank you for that yes this is
it also so it's a doubling but
also ties in the some of the
conversation about the fees
secondly and I think we'll go to
to Mr grey to elaborate.
The unified sort of the the LFC
approach has been to invest in
the judiciary for public safety
is that accurate.
Mr chair that's correct in this
record budget and across at
judicial district courts thank
thank you very much and I think
members we see the LFC
recommendations which is part of
our framework and so if we adopt
the LFC recommendation we're
staying within the budgetary
framework that this that the
state has that and I think what
we've heard here today
madam Chief Justice of the
there's and there's a a number
of things to work on this pretty
strong agreement that an
independent judiciary that is
able to you're able to do your
job and recognizing justice
Thompson I think there
is is very important and so I
want to just ask that because
members we can adopt the LFC
budget stay within our budgetary
framework and I would just also
note Madame Chief Justice
Your funded vacancies is again
also quite low.
Quite well yet that might be a.
Negative two point three
percent.
And so the.
chief clerk Garcia thank you for
for that so with that we will
it's a pleasure.
Thank you Mr chairman the motion
that's made does it need to
address the math problem in the
budget related thank great
question Representative del Cruz
I think the answer is no the we
have in our different seats and
as part of the the budget that
we passed the the increase so
great question.
By today.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
the LFC budget recommendations.
I think there's a motion by vice
chair Dixon second by
Representative Representative
Sarinana to about the LFC
recommendation there any
opposition to that motion.
Thank you yeah we got second.
Trujillo keeping an eye okay
unanimously with the members
present we without the DLC
recommendations then Chief
Justice to you to progress in
your team thank you very much
thank you very much.
Okay we're going to go now to
our court of appeals this is
agency code to fifteen so one
back.
Right you know to do taken away
please
Mr chair up we have a New Mexico
court of appeals is agency code
two one five I'm joined by chief
judge Jennifer actress
the chief judge of court of
appeals I'm if you'd like to
follow along and falling to you
can turn to page seven and see
the LFC narrative.
The LFC recommendation increases
the general fund revenue by ten
point three percent well the
executive recommendation
increases the agency by eight
point one percent
again the LFC recommendation
includes increased compensation
for judges and for staff and
those are not included in the
executive recommendation all now
have Mr cynically at provide
additional.
Mr chairman committee members
additionally the LFC
recommendation did not include
funding for a building manager
training both of which were
included in the base budget of
the executive recommendation the
executive an LFC also reach
consensus on performance measure
targets like Mr Grayson Allen
now to do this the court of
appeals chief judge Jennifer
after and Mr mark Reynolds the
chief clerk of the court of
appeals.
Thank you thank you very much Mr
chair members of the committee
thank you Mr gray Mr Senegalia
for your recommendations and for
your review again my name is
Jennifer L. Attrep I'm the chief
judge at the New Mexico court of
appeals I'm joined today by mark
Reynolds are chief clerk of the
court we also have dental to
Florida I here in the audience
use our CFO from AOC I also like
to introduce our judges who are
present here today and the
gallery we have judges Bogardus
I just Henderson Baca and right
and your Haaland I really
appreciate all of you being here
today and on behalf of all the
ten judges of the court of
appeals I want to thank you all
so much for taking the time to
hear our budget presentation
today and before proceeding with
the presentation I just want to
take just a couple of seconds to
express how proud I am of the
court of appeals after years of
judicial turnover and I know you
all of heard about their
turnover on our core we have ten
wonderful judges who are
dedicated to serving court for
the years to come for the last
four years the court of appeals
has achieved an annual
disposition rate of over one
hundred percent the court of
appeals has reduced its backlog
over this time and we are
dedicated to reducing the time
it takes to decide appeals and
of course there's more work to
do and that's one reason that
we're here today to ask for the
critical resources that the port
needs to better serve the public
so again thank you all so much
for your time and thank you
again to DFA and LFC the court
of appeals supports the LFC
based recommendation for our
court and we do want to ensure
that that corrected number gets
up before this committee that
includes the targeted
compensation I am not going to
deliver that point I think I'll
defer of court.
Receive the chief justice's
presentation on why LFC is base
budget recommendation is so
important for our point I would
just like to spend a little bit
of time discussing some of the
differences between of the base
budget recommendation for DFA
and LFC there are four
differences
the DFA recommends all of the
following for a hundred twenty
five thousand base budget for
our building manager position.
Eighty four thousand dollars
special requests for a speech to
text software.
Ninety one thousand five hundred
base budget for training and
professional development and
seventy five thousand dollars
special request to replace
furniture I'll just spend a
couple of minutes discussing
those first two items if you all
don't mind the first at the
first item is the building
manager position again that's
one hundred twenty five dollars
to fund it's an existing
position we have the F. T..
The court of appeals is one of
only a handful of courts in the
state that owns its own
courthouse our courthouse is the
minster Law Center in
Albuquerque it's on the UNM
campus right next to the law
school it's a beautiful building
thirty thousand square feet it
houses over half of our judges
and our staff and we currently
have no maintenance staff for
that building and I I think that
that could bear repeating we do
not have any maintenance staff
for that building.
the simple the simple reason for
this Mr chair members of the
committee at we have had to keep
this position vacant in order to
stay within our budget we've
seen our operational expenses go
up over the years our
operational budget has remained
largely flat and so in order to
in order to meet our budget
we've had to keep that position
open being unable to fill this
position has some pretty
predictable and unfortunate
results and I'll just give you
one example in recent years the
control panel for staff and
judge elevator has twice been
ruined due to water leaks if we
had a building manager who could
have identified the problem
early I would imagine that
repairing that would have cost a
couple of thousand several
thousand dollars instead it's
cost tens of thousands of
dollars to repair at this point
we can no longer afford to leave
that position open and we come
before this body requesting
funding for that at the second
item Mr chair if you don't mind
it's a special request that I'd
like to mention and so the
second item again it's it's for
a special appropriation a one
time appropriation of eighty
four thousand dollars to pay for
computer software that's used to
convert audio recorded court
proceedings into written
transcripts so the vast majority
of courtroom proceedings
throughout the state there audio
recorded no written transcript
is ever produced and so when
those cases work their way up on
appeal to us we listen to CD's
of audio files and that can take
hours or judges or lawyers or
staff attorneys listen this
software has the capability to
transform those CD's into
written transcripts and so we're
requesting just a one time
appropriation this year to test
that software see how it works
in practice see if it'll have
the time saving that we think.
It will reading and skimming in
word searching written
transcripts just in practices
it's it's a lot a lot more
efficient Mr chair members of
the committee I'll just end by
summarizing a request they're
also on the one page summary
that was provided to you again
we would request that you all
approve LFC is base budget
recommendation and with that
mass correction it's at eight
million two hundred eighty nine
thousand four hundred dollars we
would also respectfully request
that you consider adding in the
items that I mentioned the one
twenty five for the building
manager the eighty four for the
audio to text software as a one
time special appropriation and
finally there's two additional
items that DFA recommended that
we would respectfully request
that you consider it's ninety
one thousand five hundred for
training and professional
development and this would be
used in parts for specialized
training for our appellate
judges and our attorneys and
then finally seventy five
thousand dollars to replace as a
one time special appropriation
outdated non functional worn out
furniture for both of our
courthouses Mr chair members of
the committee I really
appreciate your time thank you
so much and we stand ready for
your questions thank you very
much we're gonna go first
representative on to.
I just want to make a comment I
just think that we should
seriously consider funding this
building manager because in the
long run it'll probably save the
state money so just trying to
make that comment thank you
thank you very much
Representative Sweetser.
Senator here than representative
Lente and.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
presenting this is a really low
budget request I'm really
stunned that that you were able
to condense what you needed into
this into this request I to Mr
chair support the increase for
the building manager but for all
the requests there.
Desperately needed I think that
Serving in the building that
doesn't isn't conducive to your
needs and having a to paid staff
or lack of staff just doesn't
help this situation at all I
support it I support them I.
The thank you very much
representatives of setting up a.
I agree with Representative
Trujillo the speech to text
software save so much time in
the transcribing this is a great
I packages I agree I think this
one I think if possible to fund
I would like to fund higher
thank you thank you very much
Representative Sariñana
thank you to just
the on the voice to text piece
so again noting that that we
have a higher LFC recommendation
related to compensation which I
think seems broadly supported by
members which is great
The this is sort of a trial run
with the voice to text is that
Mr chair yes it that's exactly
right it's a it's a one time
appropriation for this year so
that would give us the
opportunity to test out the
software see how well it works
and see if it does say the time
that we expected to okay thank
you very much for that and then
given sort of the unique the the
ownership of the building by by
the court of appeals are for the
state on the UNM campus.
Has there now and it there's
there's no sort of interplay
there between Building services
for for the University of New
Mexico Mr chair members of the
committee I believe that's right
not just defer to our clerk of
the court Mr chair that's
correct we get to certain from
university Mexico less security
security in the building but
security around the building as
far as taking care of itself
this is solely upon us okay
thank you for that thank you to
to I think
Noting that that's not in the
recommendation but it's been
brought up by number of members
with us they have to look more
closely at that position
And and perhaps there are other
examples where on the either
University of New Mexico or
other university campuses there
can be sort of a joint agreement
so seems like there's there's a
lot of need it makes a lot of
sense to sort of
have somebody getting ahead of
things that said I don't know
that we're in that position
today but thank you and thank
you members for great questions
clear feedback.
Okay.
Mr chair I would move the LFC
recommendation.
Okay it's been moved by vice
chair diction second by both
Representative Garrett in order
no is there any opposition to
adopting the LFC recommendation
please so Representative
Montoya.
And Representative Pettigrew in
opposition feel like a thank you
very much.
Thank.
Right yes.
Let's go ahead now we're gonna
ask
the administrative office of the
courts Mr happen.
Start off with Mr gray.
I'm sure that and
Please stay away.
Thank you Mr chair up next we
have the administrative office
of the courts this is agency to
one eight
the if you'd like to follow
along going to this start on
page nine.
if it's okay with you Mr chair
Mr some basically had and I had
planned on splitting up are
presentations because AOC has
multiple programs so also
covered the HSD overall and the
first program Mr Smedley of a
cover that second and the third
program and all finish us off.
so on the first page of your
packet yeah you should have a
high level that summarizes the
differences between the
executive and the LFC
recommendations.
the executive recommendation
increases general fund revenue
for the agency by five point
eight percent.
the LFC recommendation at
decreases general fund revenue
slightly by one point one
percent and I can address why
that is.
The and for FY twenty four
agencies largest request was
eighty five point three million
dollar production to account for
the transfer of responsibilities
from the from AOC to the newly
created office of family
representation advocacy that's
reflected on line forty four on
your high level on the first
page if you'd like to for that.
Accounting for this transfer the
LFC were recommendation
increases the agency's general
fund revenue by thirteen point
three percent at while the
executive recommendation
increases agencies general fund
revenue by twenty one point one
percent you can see that reflect
on one sixty six of high level
if you like to turn that.
so that's the agency as an
overall on now turn to the
administrative support program
this is on page five of your
packets.
the LFC recommendation for this
program includes four hundred
thousand dollars for targeted
staff compensation within AOC
aligned with the LFC
recommendation for two percent
targeted at rate increases for
all judicial staff.
other than compensation for this
program LFC and Executive
recommendations are the same.
at all now have Mr Smedley a
percent the next program within
AOC.
Chairwoman committee members
turning to page six of your
packet from move on to the
statewide Judiciary on mission
program the LFC recommendation
increases general fund revenues
to this program by nineteen
point six percent while the
executive recommendation
included an increase of fifty
four point six percent the
executive recommendation
includes one point two million
dollars to swap the funded
positions with general fund
while the LFC recommendation
included one hundred and forty
five point nine thousand dollars
for that purpose the executive
recommendation includes one
point two million to expand IT
person by nine FTE and the LESC
recommendation includes four
hundred forty four thousand to
expand IT person by three F. T.
our next program within AOC is
the magistrate court program
which is page eight of your
packets the LFC recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by nine point six percent over
fiscal year twenty three quality
executive recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by fourteen point one percent
the LFC recommendations not
include three hundred and
seventy five thousand dollars
for three statewide training
coordinators and does not
include a hundred and ten
thousand dollars for a
facilities manager both of which
are included in my rent the
executive recommendation not
pass it back to Mr gray who will
present the last program within
a S. H..
Madam chair committee members
last program is the special
court services program this will
be on page ten of your packets
phone one of the LFC
recommendation decreases general
fund revenue for this program by
fifteen percent the executive
recommendation decreases general
fund revenue by nine point three
percent in this program and both
recommendations decrease
revenues to account for that
transfer from AOC to go for a
Office fender presentation
advocacy.
The LFC recommendation contains
slightly less revenue for the
supervised exchange and
visitation program and for
consulting services the LFC
recommendation includes one
point six million dollars for
expansion to centralized
judicial training statewide
within AOC we discuss that
previously in sprint Corp budget
the executive recommendation
includes two point one million
dollars for that purpose.
And madam chair lastly I turn
the committee's attention to
page twelve of your packet for
proposed technical changes to
the special court services
program budget this proposed
change is a result of an error
with the budget system
and that this there would be
present whether the committee
adopts the LFC or war yeah
that's right.
That's the correct page.
and so this error would be
present at the committee were to
adopt either the LFC war
executive recommendation and so
it's for that reason that staff
have
the staff is recommending the
committee adopted technical
change after you adopted by the
recommendation at the details of
the proposed changes are
outlined on page twelve that
there is no change to revenue
for any revenue source it's just
too easy administrative burden
on AOC staff we've gone back and
forth with them had like for
this technical change.
that covers the budget and all
now have party type and director
of HSD make his presentation.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I apologize for my voice and.
For a little cholangitis so.
I will try to do my best to be a
communicate appropriate.
I'll go through the four
programs I'd be happy to answer
questions with regard each
program or at the end when it's
all done.
With regard to you're going to
hear from me like you're going
to hear from all of the Courts
tomorrow can you hear the
District Court to the
metropolitan courts requests
that you adopt the LFC
recommendations.
in a way this is
counterproductive for courts
because their based budgets are
significantly
better supported I have higher
recommendations
in the executive recommendation
the executive recommended all of
the request made in the budgets
of all of the courts and the
AOC.
LESC did not do that in the
particular care to make sure AOC
didn't get all of our requests.
And the reason for that is well
it's balanced to a degree by the
in concluded compensation the
provisions of the LFC recommends
so the eight percent
compensation for judges that's
in the based budgets and the two
percent composition recall that
special.
Targeted thank you targeted
compensation for employees are
in the recommendations of the
LFC and for that reason because
compensation is are extremely
high priority for the judiciary
as a whole will be asking you to
adopt those budgets even though
in some cases and particularly
in the AOC'S K. it does result
in a lot less of a recommended
increase in our in our base
budget other than the
compensation of peace.
In fact the conversation piece
doesn't do very much for the AOC
because when I have any judges
so for the thousands two percent
for all of our employees which
is great we appreciate very much
the targeted compensation and
AOC but in a forty two million
dollar budget
that four hundred thousand is
this a small piece it matters
more in the in the District
Court but the bigger piece
because they have judges so with
regard to the administrative
Services budget of both the
executive and the LESC of
recommended what requests which
wasn't a whole lot and we
appreciate very much that they
adopted them of course LFC does
include the four thousand there
were five.
Hey budget to pay for these and
so it's important to thousand
dollars higher and we do ask
that you top the LFC
recommendation for the
administrative services program
Mr chair John to go through the
other three or if you want to
see if this questions about that
program thank you Mr Pathan
let's go if you could go through
them briefly and then we'll go
to committee question I will do
that
For the next.
I would address statewide
automation which we call a
judicial information so by aged
which is the judicial formation
Division it's not because I want
to confusion it's because that's
what I'm familiar with although
you budget as the statewide
automation program about try to
remember that when addressing
the committee.
here you see that the a
recommendation from the
executive is to fund.
Nine new positions I know it's a
lot of positions but it's been a
long time since we adequately
addressed the person that we
need automation and as you well
know over the last two years
automation's become even more
important to the operation of
the judicial branch than it was
before we're doing all traffic
citations over a video remote
technology used to come to court
but that's a really tiny little
percentage of almost all
traffics are handled remotely
you can be on your phone to be
the help of.
Computer screen.
But we do them remotely
judges do lots of lots of short
term basically events through
video they do video contacts
with the jails so that will have
to be transported
and this is a whole lot of other
technologies and realize of the
operation of the judiciary
that's just become much more
robust since the advent of COVID
we've also found.
At.
We have serious needs in
cybersecurity the number of our
capital for special requests in
this regard really to
cybersecurity and it's a real
concern.
I I don't even want to say we're
doing well I'm happy we have not
been the subject of any
significant intrusion that I
would like to talk about today
but with regard to these
positions I understand that it's
hard for it's a challenge for
the the committee to expand
agencies year after year after
year but he comes in and ask for
more people and we haven't done
that much with the statewide
automation program that we're
doing it this year because it's
a special emphasis LFC
recommended three positions
there are the three most needed
positions are of course and I
appreciate that that that was
that was heard there are six
other positions and at least
three of those are critical I
mean significantly critical and
that the those three positions
on the network systems
administrator senior position in
our video network operations as
I said the video network is only
relied on more now than it ever
was before.
a business analyst senior to
support data exchange you've
heard probably something about
that exchange if you want to
hear more be happy to talk about
why it's an extraordinarily
valuable
the enterprise goes across
outside the judiciary across
with our partners throughout the
state.
In.
It it in the.
The in the secretary of data and
information exchange
particularly for criminal cases
and and I. T. business analyst
senior for our special projects
division
I would also talk about the
other three are also important
software application developer
senior database administrator
senior also that exchange of
position and I to specials for
the service desk as you can
imagine we get lots of calls to
the service desk since we run a
statewide automated system they
do pretty well but that there
there are highly stressed
considering who's the chief
technology officer for the
judiciary would be happy to do a
better job than I can do
explaining what these people
would actually do how they would
support the operations we
started last summer with the
request for thirteen new FTEs
for statewide automation you may
know and hope you do that we go
through a rigorous process over
several days with our budget
committee sets up there where
you are in the courts come in
and they try to convince a
committee to recommend the
Supreme Court their budget
requests and of course I do that
too and I came in with thirteen
and they recommended line in the
Supreme Court approved nine and
I think those nine of the ones
that we need if if it's possible
the increase in funding for
those nine positions would be
eight hundred twenty thousand
four hundred dollars and if you
would consider it I would I
would ask you to give serious
consideration as the primary
addition if that is any to the
LFC recommendation on our budget
to those six positions of that's
that's the need we have so.
That's a statewide automation
and the six positions that need
funding.
next magistrate court Mr Smith
recalled match report we call
core operations we used to
manage the manage records
directly the judges and
employees in the match reports
and of the thirty two counties
that have them work for the AOC.
It wasn't the best way to manage
the courts around the state and
so the Supreme Court adopted a
transition so that now the
metric which are in the District
Court budgets they're overseen
by District Court chief judge is
we retain.
Parts of responsibility for
match records including
facilities and a compliance
issues and things like that that
a request.
Benefit from a statewide focus.
I within the magistrate court a
budget for corporate operations
what I would call it we did not
get recommended in the LFC
recommendation for us facilities
manager or any of the statewide
integration in training
coordinators I would ask if you
can consider
the facilities manager we are
responsible for all of the
measure could facilities are
leased or owned throughout the
state.
We're just getting underway
building a magistrate court in
Santa Fe that will be over on
the west side it's going to be.
I think it's a twenty four
million dollar construction we
will own and operate that that
alone might make you think we
need a facilities manager of but
we have the facilities person
one who spends so much time on
the road I don't think he's ever
home because he has to go out to
thirty two counties and oversee
the magistrate courts of which
there are sixties.
forty seven facilities
throughout the state so within
that administrative budget
program record appropriations I
appreciate if you could give
some consideration to that
position we did request three
statewide training coordinators
for you get at least one it
would be great it turns out that
there's a lot of residual
expertise that was with the AOC
we would do a lot of training
with the massacres we still do
and we will do more if judicial
education becomes a under the
AOC one of the things we can do
is hire senior level port
managers in the mass records to
be statewide training
coordinators to train areas in
which they have expertise and
how to operate a match report
it's very different from the way
a district court operates a
whole different way of doing
business which I will go to in
this really want to know but
of the spring quarter supported
our efforts to create a program
where we have the statewide
training coordinator for the
master courts and it be great if
we could get at least one
to begin with.
Lastly I will talk about a
special court services program.
In the special processes program
there's really
Well as one area I would like to
give the main focus of attention
to and that is the the statewide
exchanges supervised visitation
program give a recommendation
for LFC to to put a hundred
thousand dollars of the
requested three hundred twenty
one thousand two hundred dollars
into that program.
This is a program where AOC
contracts with people in your
communities oversee visitation
of parents with children when
under usually because of a CYFD
ongoing case the parents no
longer have the children in
their custody.
The this is during the time that
usually CYFD proceedings are on
going trying to maintain the
family connection between parent
and child that is so critical
of.
It's not the.
Sorry I wish I could do and then
Amanda as the.
I have someone here who can
address this.
More directly than I
Issue free label would be happy
to talk to the the committee
briefly very briefly about
For the human aspect of why yes
yes the three hundred twenty one
thousand.
dollars would would do a lot of
that receipt.
Thank you very much have been
ma'am please
yes if you could come and just.
Introduce yourself one more time
please if you might members of
the committee thank you my name
is Kristen freely about I am the
program manager for safe
exchange unsupervised visitation
and I'm here to convey to you
the issues facing supervised
visitation visitation in the
state in your communities and
what it program does and why we
need them party misspoke a
little my programs are not CYFD
related to their demand sorry if
you might speak up just a little
bit sorry.
Nearly I'm sorry not very not a
very a loud speaker I'm soft
spoken but safe exchanges
supervised visitation concerns
domestic relations cases so
these are cases where there are
two parties with children
involved and often times are
allegations of violence or abuse
so safe exchanges supervised
visitation provider will receive
a referral from district courts
and at that time the their
concern is one hundred percent
child center a safe exchange
supervised visitation facility
is there to provide a safe and
nurturing place for a child to
maintain relationships with
their parents on both sides when
there is a contentious case
involves when I first took on
this program if I convey to you
my very first experience with
safe exchanges supervised
visitation I was discussing how
to quantify the.
The benefit of a program to LFC
analyst and so she and I both to
go to Albuquerque to observe a
visit and what we saw from the
monitors was of four five year
old child we watched him come
out of the car with his mom be
escorted into the lobby and then
me has monitor and as soon as
they open the door that child
four year old boy with his
Superman in hands of wearing his
Superman Cape bounded down the
hall went into the room where he
knew his father was reading and
jumped into his arms so we then
got to watch them play for an
hour and then the child left
knowing that he was going to get
to see is that next week so that
is the importance of supervised
visitation and we've seen
studies and we know that better
outcomes for children exist when
they maintain connections with
both children so supervised
visitation provider providers
are allowing for better outcomes
for New Mexico children.
The issues facing supervised
visitation right now are the
issues that are facing all of
our economy statewide when we
give a contract to a state S.
yes we provider they're
providing a facility with a safe
place that is monitored by
camera they have a risk
assessment done there their
staff is trained at least forty
hours they have background
checks and they are encumbered
with providing all of this with
their one contract so right now
with the raising rent costs we
are not able to sustain the
programs we've had three
programs closed in the last year
in Eddy county Cibola County and
now Las Vegas so the funding the
LFC is proposing would not
sustain or reinstate these
programs and what so I'm asking
that you consider giving more
funding to this vital need for
the state thank you thank you
very much so.
Thank you.
So that's court Services program
we also request for hundred
thousand dollars for behavioral
health training and equipment
and I know we're not getting any
training a request funded
because we're putting all that
into the judicial education
movement to the AOC hoping that
bill passes this is a little
different because it's a new
initiative at Scott persons here
you can talk about this but if
you could fund.
Fifty thousand of the hundred
thousand that would really help
us.
Get those things underway and
going with regard to behavioral
health which is a huge issue for
the courts as it is across the
state across many.
whether talking criminal justice
or otherwise unfit for around
the state so with that it is
true that overall the LFC
recommendations for a reduction
in her budget
and the we we have the
recommendation from the
executive is a little higher and
as an actual increase of five
point nine percent but
I appreciate that the the LFC
has put the conversation into
the budget so the courts where
they needed in order for us to
see through on our highest need
which is to fund the pay
compensation for employees and
for the.
Judges it is true and I know Mr
Abbey and I have a disagreement
about how to look at this I feel
that there's a real reduction of
what I'm going to spend next
year of five point two seven
seven point four million dollars
we're taking that out of the
budget the fact that you're
probably invest that much and
and probably more into the
office of Family representation
is a great thing but it's not
money that the judiciary will
have to spend that we are
spending this year and I would I
hope that you can consider that
when you determined not to
accept the lowest recommendation
but to accept the LFC
recommendation which something
like.
About it's not that much higher.
And it does involve the
compensation increases that I
hope you find work and we
certainly think there are a
significant priority and let me
do that in my budget as as well
as in the budgets of the Courts
here from tomorrow so with that
Sorry.
thank you Mr chair there was
some interest in that pricing
too much time but.
We also have the two folks who
promised me there they would
speak very briefly
from our treatment courts when
you think about how the question
track for the public sometimes
it's just out there in the news
or hear about prime okay yes we
do have four will have less than
half the caseload is criminal
but there are lots and lots of
ways in which the courts to more
than just educate people guilty
and sentenced to jail one of
those ways is through treatment
courts.
And Carlos is here he's at you
graduated from a treatment for
twenty two years.
Thank you at the I think he
would like to introduce one of
our brand new graduates to talk
to you about the value of
treatment courts which you fund
through our budget to the tune
of more than ten million dollars
I don't want to hear it from the
Mr chair thank you very much Mr
president we we do have public
comment following and improve
the relatively soon I think we
very much want to hear from them
if if they can if they can stay
for just a few more minutes okay
terrific with that I would be
happy to try to answer any
questions that the committee
has.
Great thank you very much Mr
economic first Representative
Lujan than vice chair Dixon and
representative of how to meal
that's a great segue because I'm
actually going to question you
on the treatment
Courts that you have and as I'm
going through this and I'm
looking at your at the budget
You're looking for private
universal screening for
treatment course but.
What I'm gonna go with to ask
you about is under the
magistrates courts in your
budget for your there is an
correct me if I'm wrong it's not
the type of treatment court we
do have a wellness court it's
been piloted in been in and then
act for many years now and it's
something Mr chair that I've
I've helped with some my junior
signing making sure we continue
the work in that in that to.
That treatment court if that's
what it is but it's called the
wellness court what where here
is that
expanding for supported in your
budget Mr chair as we have
ongoing funding for the existing
programs and we don't we didn't
put in a request for increased
funding for that we do have
requests that are recommended
for someone Senator special
funding that relate to the
treatment courts this four
million dollars
to go into interventions pre
trial pre adjudication of the
language and that is pretty
broad I I believe whatever page
you is responsible for
overseeing those programs would
like me to try to work with
getting the language modified a
little bit
to make it broader
but we do have there is a
recommendation for four million
dollars for
spoke for peer support pre trial
services and treatment courts
grants for pilot programs to
improve pre trial services on
tribal courts and evaluate the
effectiveness of funded programs
such a special.
Appreciate that thank you Mr
okay and I'm gonna go back again
two years the special court
services and you have here
posted online forty seven and
and we one fifty three I think
we heard a little bit about the
behavioral health.
Aspect of what you're asking for
the budget how are those two
related and why they two
separate line items Mr chair.
His.
Of the of the position verses
the training funds yes Sir okay.
well if I could talk about that
but if I make more sense first
got to talk about the fees well.
This cap has that behavioral
health statewide for returning
your call Mr Pratt.
Thank you chairman the
Representative Lujan I think the
questions about the two hundred
to three and three of the four
hundred the positions themselves
would be to expand behavioral
health to provide kind of
internal expertise to point and
crosses some collaboration
partners throughout the state
that differs somewhat from
treatment point in that we're
looking at should of course is a
really specific intervention for
a specific for the population
that expanding access to
behavioral health throughout the
system for just a symbol for
folks allows us to potentially
meet the needs of people earlier
intercepts so folks who could be
available for selection and not
be engaged in the system.
Thank you Mr chair really
appreciate that and it's it's
new to us it's it's good
information and thank you for
having thank you Mr thank you
very much on next we're gonna go
to Representative how to meal
by tradition actually Mr chair
that.
Great accent thank you the next
device to Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair
Thank you for The presentation
it's always interesting to me
that many
aspects involved in the
judiciary system and the
different components so thank
you
This question I think is a
concert with Brandon I am
interested in the pre trial
services metrics can you just
walk us through how we are
Monitoring the pre trial
services.
Mr Mr chair thank you madam vice
chair currently primarily pre
trial services are monitored
from the district attorney's so
we are primarily interested in
the number of motions the right
emotions are successful in the
pre trial period for the courts.
I don't believe currently there
any performance measures
targeting those but I believe
that there are some that are
proposed and are going to be
implemented moving forward thank
you Mr chair and Mr Pippen.
Mr Representative Dixon yes
they're not part of our
performance measures you
requires report on but.
We we report a great deal of
data on the performance of that
pre trial services programs and
what we're looking at is the
success or failure of the people
in the program right do they do
that they get arrested for new
crimes do they make all the
court appearances
Then at thank I don't think you
want to hear all about that but
what we and it's been examined
by the legislative finance
committee by independent
entities at the UNM at the
institute for Social Research
for the Santa Fe institute
rather and
there.
There are things we can do to
improve and we will improve them
but this is all self self done
to us we we had the
the of pre trial the assessment
tool that we use in Albuquerque
that it by the University of New
Mexico to make sure it wasn't
biased for instance against by
race or gender or ethnicity or
anything like that and that was
at a helpful in helping judges
make decisions pre trial and
they said that it was anyway you
want to talk very long about all
this but we do that ourselves
even though we don't report for
more measures to you.
And Mr chair and Mr happen
Are you is the AOC are you guys
also working on a standardized
pre trials program statewide.
Mr Chairman Representative Dixon
absolutely you have funded a
robust pre trial services
programs statewide and we are
two thirds of the way through
the week we have covered about
two thirds of prime I guess
based on the districts we've
implemented Albuquerque gets all
the attention and they were
first and we learned a lot from
Albuquerque we didn't implement
in Albuquerque and see that but
we have implemented and all the
other districts where pre trial
services are now available it's
a standard program we do a lot
of training takes a long time we
work with detention centers the
prosecutors the defense
attorneys and everybody in the
whole system and we will finish.
We will certainly finish next
year of oil we're making a lot
of price right now we're
implementing in the first
district which is the Santa Fe
Los Alamos and we really
counties in in the fourth
district which is more a semi
Gallup and.
And one more.
Anyway I'm sorry anyway we are
implementing.
All all the time just because
you funded a pre trial services
program it's standardized.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr have
been following up on that one of
the other things that was noted
and one of our volumes from the
LFC is the need to integrate the
assessment of the needs of the
defendants in the pride for pre
trial services and so I'm just
wondering if you're able to
speak to that at all degree.
Brendan do you know.
Mr
Mister chair madam vice chair
that that recommendation that
part of the LFC and narratives
is getting at a at risk
responsivity framework of that
national best practice to
evaluate the needs of folks as
they enter the judicial system
and then make sure that they're
receiving the services that they
most need
I'll have Mr Pippen twenty one
right so Mr chairman of I should
have a little broader than the
the teachers itself but
caliber actors here she's runs
their professors programs
statewide she could address that
but yes we're very much
interested in an appropriate
assessment of the defendants
needs remembering that pre
trials a limited.
Phase right we're we're not we
can tell someone they have to go
to a drug treatment program or
things that you can do posted
you to K. and as part of you
know I'm not going to present
really all we're doing well
we're doing our efforts in pre
trial or to make sure people
don't get arrested for new
crimes and that they show up to
court but I'm sure Kelly would
love to talk about the risks and
the needs assessment for
we're not accepting.
Thank you Mr chair and and I
think that it if you have
Matias speak briefly as a
writer.
Very briefly there will be we're
gonna have some members to
follow up on a few of these
items but pre trial services are
incredibly important.
Chair members of the committee
art is right it connecting
defendants to community
resources some priority for pre
trial on someone and someone
supervision defining those needs
of course is a best practice I
think what RT was trying to
explain pre trial it's gonna be
a little bit different than in
the same trip reports
appropriations we don't want to
tie liberty to someone's needs
but it's definitely something
that we're looking at the
National Institute corrections
put out a publication just a few
months ago they're really talks
about how pre trial in
behavioral health integrate with
each other and there's some
really good models that we're
very interested in using here in
New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
that
I think I'd like to just
conclude by saying that I really
appreciate the emphasis that the
legislature and the judiciary
are putting on reducing
recidivism and helping folks
that have different
different needs you know and
maybe or struggling with
different things so that we can
put them on a better path.
For the legislative finance
committee I'd be interested in
continuing to look at how we can
measure the success of different
programs and what the
performance metrics are that we
have
And actually one other thing to
highlight it it's not a question
is the data integration
and.
I was able to participate in
some of the Bernalillo county
Criminal justice coordinating
council I think and one of the
recurring themes was a lack of
data integration between all of
our partners in the
criminal legal system and so I'd
really like to make sure that
that stays as a high priority
for everyone
so with that thank you Mr chair
thank you very much but.
Thanks for some Montoya than
Representative.
For someone to thank you Mr
chairman
Mr pep and I'm just a little
curious about one position that
we're looking to fund here and
that is the.
Director of equity and inclusion
this
Mr Chairman and Mr
Papp is that and is that an HR
position.
Is so it's not human resources
position
and so if you could please
explain to me Mr Chairman
Representative Montoya at the
Chief Justice would love to talk
about that's in such a result of
her commission.
Thank you Mr chair I would love
to have.
We're finished okay when you
get.
This way yes the.
But you so the New Mexico
Supreme Court established
inequity injustice Commission in
twenty twenty and it's to look
across the board at how we're
providing equitable access to
justice to all New Mexicans and
that comes in a variety of
different ways some of that is
making sure that we have a
judiciary that reflects the
population of New Mexico which
we don't currently have
and it's also making sure that
our employees are adequately
representative of the state of
New Mexico inter inter treated
with the respect and dignity
that they deserve.
so it's focusing on very various
different aspects of what gets
brought more broadly called
diversity which I know can be a
trigger word for for some people
but this is really about
professionalism of the judiciary
in everyone that interacts with
G. the judiciary to be sure that
we are providing the best
services to everyone who walks
in the in the door regardless of
what their name is what they
look like what there may or may
not be charged with and doing
the work of this commission
without an employee to help
foster it is really really
challenging I where about
fifteen different hats as the
Chief Justice and I am largely
doing the work of this
commission and so we we really
need a staff person to help
assure this forward it's
national best practices most
Judiciary have such a position
this is not the first time we've
asked for funding for this
position so as we navigated our
way through discussions about
our budget with staff it became
clear that this was a priority
in the need for the judiciary
thank you Mr chairman and Chief
Justice bacon I guess diversity
is less of a trigger word for me
than equity.
Equity.
Just looking at the definition
is more of an outcome.
And I don't know how in dealing
with for just dealing with
justice of what we're dealing
with.
with that equal outcome is is
harder than equal treatment and
so I I think.
I have a hard time with the word
equity because it it seems to
creep presume getting the same
outcome for everyone Mr chair
representative when we talk
about equity in the justice
context it's making sure that
the barriers people have to
accessing the system are removed
it's not about outcomes juries
decide outcomes legislature's
that decide penalties fax decide
outcomes so it's not about
outcomes I want to be clear
about that because I understand
that that can result in those
that kind of thought process
have been different I I want to
thank thank you to to assist
Representative Montoya thank you
you Mr chairman yes I would love
to have a conversation with you
offline because I
like I said I think
Inclusion is fine
and diversity we we have that in
this state regardless whether we
want to minimize or not we're
gonna have diversity.
at the question I have and and
once again dealing.
In terms when you're dealing
with Judiciary and any format is
really more of a concern that of
of the potential
misinterpretation of the agency
giving's
but
I am curious as to.
If if we're talking about this
from the standpoint of the.
Potential person who would be
sitting.
In a position of maybe being
judged.
And going through pre trial
services going through
appropriations or going for the
people who would be seeking
justice.
And Representative Montoya Chief
Justice at ask you guys to take
this offline I think it's
appreciate very much the
question thank you Mr chairman I
I appreciate that I just it's we
are talking about funding a
position and I would like to we
definitely need to have that
discussion thank you Mr chairman
thank you very much for someone
to the next representative.
Thank you chairman and.
Thank you for the presentation.
Chairman I told you I had just
one question so on page one
sixty of volume.
All.
Following three.
Here.
Two thousand twenty one nine
hundred.
No twenty one eight hundred
sorry.
Where it looks like we pull
about one point seven million
dollars out of
person and and budget.
To another call it.
And I'd like Mr chairman and
presenter to understand.
Why we did that and what that
one point seven million dollars
was used for.
What before before looking at
staffing we're looking at all
these things granted this is
fiscal year twenty twenty two
why did we pull one point seven
million out of of person on
budget salaries and benefits.
In that moment Mr Representative
Pettigrew I think I can answer
the question is you said you're
gonna be happy to get with you
and explanation why why there
was the transfer
well anyway the it thank you Mr
Representative and thank you
Representative please provide
that to the whole community
thank you very much I don't
believe this for the last time
we for a within the correct
that there will be opportunities
to catch up clean up and others
but but this will this is the
budget hearing for the session
so very much appreciate the
question and Mr Papp and along
with the analysts please do
follow up with the committee
and thank you for flagging that.
Now representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman
restrictive in you've just is
not to participate in the whole
presentation.
And above that a position the
creating positions I have not
heard one thing about veterans
you have anything for veterans
within the court system that we
can do we can at risk pool
because I have never heard of
that one time today.
Mr Chairman.
Mr Chairman representative
Garcia as you know we do have
veterans treatment courts in in
some parts of New Mexico as part
of the treatment court programs
rob Mitchell could probably
address that I think around here
about where we have been and how
we work with the veterans in
that regard but we we do have
them and that's the main way in
which veterans would be
specifically addressed in the
judicial system.
Mr chairman of RT but but I mean
I know that there's I think four
counties that are trying to get
a better toward the end.
We try to make it let me go out
of the total New.
I know we spoke about it here
and you said that the economy
would have to step up.
And get it going and then the
force would
Following place Mr chairman you
know just thought it would be
nice if the point system would
help some of the counties out
because some of the coverages of
the funding.
Anyone we have a lot of it or
just a couple fifty thousand
veterans in New Mexico Mr
chairman and restrictive in New
no there there veterans special
needs.
It's not of not ordinary people
are veterans and veterans that
go up from eleven to one of make
people aware of it but the two
following produce will get in
trouble and then we did we have
a big problem within the week
disposition that just my thought
if you guys could helpful
economies will long.
Or get the program going could
you know every gun in the state
of New Mexico needs of veterans
court I think and I've asked a
couple of judges in the state
while the number just one match
is not feasible you know to me
one better goes straight but a
lot of lot of people you might
say well just wanted.
Mr chairman but when you're
veteran.
One veteran conformed.
And in all I I hate for somebody
done me well the numbers don't
match Mr Chairman representative
as we kind of rolled away in the
year we don't need veterans just
like if we don't have internet
for some more of kids out there
well there's just a couple of
big deal.
Wonderful to the cracks and and
probably conditional systems
because they don't have no help
it's a big issue they're just
much faster.
Your thank you thank you very
much representative Garcia
I don't see any other questions
briefly describing thank you
thank you and and will be in the
public comment that we have one
more with district
sorry we have one more HSD I I
do want to just briefly though
Mr Feb and the removal of for
the office of family
Representative representations
thank you to you and to the
committee.
There is a substantial increase
proposed through the LFC.
As that program and its
responsibilities are taken out
so so I appreciate very much
sort of the the detail that you
offered but I do think it's ya
of free shifting from the LFC
that for the programs and
responsibilities which are
vitally important there is a
substantial proposed increase
not quite as high as the
executive proposed increase but
still one of the highest
increases we're going to see
percentage wise as we go through
these budget hearings
next I'd like to have
Representative Garrett
Representative Dixon and
Representative Pettigrew maybe
just offline dive in a little
bit deeper there's been some
really good questions raised by
members around the number of
issues and and this is just to
get to know them this incredibly
important agency a little bit
more closely
And with that I turn by projects
and promotion.
Thank you Mr chair I would move
the LFC recommendation with the
technical changes a twenty to do
that in two separate motions.
Same sex okay thank you is there
a second second by
Representative Sarinana a slight
second before you have is there
any opposition to that motion
seeing Representative Montoya
okay
will that motion is adopted Mr
happen thank you very much thank
you Mr.
And now our final agency is our
public defender Department.
Mr gray Mr submitted to us which
positions you guys good.
All right go ahead as we clear
the room we'll go ahead and get
started because we do have
public comment Mr gray kick us
off with a diss agency code to
eighty.
Thank you Mr chair Agency CO two
eighty this will be on page
fifty four in volume two if
you'd like to follow along with
the LFC narrative there.
The executive recommendation
increases general fund revenue
by five percent the LFC
recommendation increases general
fund revenue for this agency by
six point nine percent.
LFC and executive staff have
reached a consensus on
performance measures
and compared to the executive
recommendation the LFC
recommendation includes about
four hundred thousand dollars
more for compensation.
And six hundred and thirty
thousand dollars more for to
increase compensation received
by contracted council
the LFC recognition also
includes additional revenue to
cover operating budget
increases.
I now have Mr cynically make
comments if he has any.
Mr chair committee members
should regard it also I can
introduce the amount of the
chief public defender to
Representative agency thinking.
Thank you with Mr chair members
of the committee my name is a
bit of power and the chief
public defender also here is the
chairman of our public defender
commission Mr Thomas clear the
third.
We also have that the committee
said Nissan says deputy chief of
our operations Jennifer Perella
general counsel reenter
Deputy chief in charge contract
Council Randy Chavez and are
asking resources director Ron
Carrera and Matt Bevington R. I.
T. director here to answer any
particular questions
I I realize the lead time in the
afternoon that we have so for
lawyer I will try to keep it
brief and to the point
just reminding you those of you
who do not know very much about
the operations of the public
defender's office we are a state
funded agency that is required
to Representative under the
constitution the rights to
effective assistance of counsel
for every person charged with a
crime in the state courts of New
Mexico that's across all
judicial districts it is and the
magistrate courts the district
courts the court of appeals and
the state Supreme Court we have
thirteen district offices and we
have of that total of two
hundred thirty three attorneys
and two hundred thirty six
support staff FTE we also have
over a hundred private attorneys
on contract to provide
representation on cases that are
in place where we have offices
where there's a conflict in
representation or in many of the
rural offices they provide the
only representation
Because of our constitutional
obligations we we have to two
ways that we serve the community
persistent each individual
client to whom we owe a duty
in the attorney client
relationship and that's what
we're funded to do we also
understand that we have an
obligation to our communities
and we do that through community
engagement through showing up
here showing up in in localities
to kind of engage with the
community and one of the best
ways really we can represent our
clients is to try and make sure
that your people become our
clients and that's one of the
things we try to focus on what
what's been called holistic
representation and that's not
just Representative we're
representing somebody when they
get charged with the crime and
then leaving them as soon as our
cases over but to try to make
sure that we can.
Do what we can so that they
don't come back and to do that
we have social workers we have
case managers and we have other
folks to engage with our clients
in ways so that it's not just
the legal representation we we
believe that this is not just
and effective but it's also a
cost effective way to do this we
are under the supervision of an
independent commission we used
to be an executive agency we now
the commission overseeing the
operations of the department and
overseeing me as the chief
And so because of our duties to
our clients
I I want to emphasize to you why
our budget request was for an
over nineteen percent increase
if we understand that for many
agencies that's a pretty large
amount to to ask from this
legislature however we believe
that our constitutional
obligations for clients require
that we be extremely assertive
in this that's because this
though this body actually it if
you look at in your materials
had a letter on the letter head
of the legislative finance
committee from October twenty
fourth two thousand seventeen
this pages eleven and twelve
there's a letter that describes
a fifty thousand dollar
appropriation that was given to
help fund the work load study
this came up after we have
workload litigation because we
had in many of our offices
simply too many cases for us to
to effectively handle and so
with some kind of seed money
from the legislature we got a
workload study from American Bar
Association came out just over a
year ago and that workload study
consisted of lawyers talking
with each other getting together
and deciding how much work would
be required on any particular
type of criminal case and so
they looked at what we needed
what the need was and then they
look at what we had in terms of
a resources what they determined
was for effective systems of
council we need almost three
times the number of lawyers
I know that seems like a lot and
it is a lot of it to me as well
but it's this was lawyers in
some ways talking about.
But the need was as a lawyer to
provide effective representation
but I think for many of us it's
also what would you want a
lawyer to be able to do if they
were we're representing your
child your niece your nephew
that was in court and so that's
what we're trying to achieve can
we achieve in one year we
obviously cannot and so the next
supposed got a five year plan
and that was a way to try and
look at how we can achieve
effective representation are
closed to within five years
through a combination of
additional resources from this
legislature and a series of
reforms that would cut down on
the number of people coming in
and it is because of that that
we ask for approximately
nineteen percent now I
understand neither the
legislative finance committee
recommendation or the effort
recommendation are close to our
ask but that is also why I feel
because we're obligations to our
clients were asking you to go
beyond those recommendations and
at the very least to look at at
the LFC recommendation which is
for a larger amount in terms of
slightly more FTE and a little
more in the recurring funds and
also the special and
supplemental appropriations
which DFA did recommended LFC
did not and very briefly those
are for.
Those are for a a special
treatment retention
to reduce our attorney vacancies
because frankly the market for
lawyers is pretty tight right
now so especially in rural areas
we give we give supplements
to them to attract and retain
attorneys in rural areas
secondly
As we've come out of COVID the
number of trials going on his
increased there was there was
some of the backlog of cases
need to be resolved and the
costs of those for instance for
expert witnesses for travel to
pay our our contractors to
travel has gone up and so that
kind of one time money is very
important for us now also
there's a special transcriptions
you heard some of this perhaps
in the course we're trying to
work with them to make sure that
we can find voice to text
transcriptions that would save
especially our appellate
attorneys who often have to
literally sit and listen to
trials and these are attorneys
is so much better for us to
invest in the technology to save
to save their time so that they
can spend more time representing
our clients so.
I think this all these costs are
important
Mr clear is going to talk in
just a minute about our
contractors and again we need to
fund both of those who work
within our department and the
contractors it's hard to explain
to you how we pay and how we can
attract people to do this
incredibly important work we
used to pay a very low flat fees
we know what we now pass frankly
very what we pay a very low base
rates as we call them and you'll
see what those are in just a
second it we are losing
contractors around the state and
so we need to be able to fund
and paid attorneys in some way
that makes sense just want to
reference to you those of you
who know about the rest case the
prosecution the recently filed
here the district attorney's
office and I'm not arguing
against the funding for this
kind of thing but the turns in
that case for fourth degree
felonies those are people who
are probably not going to prison
the maximum penalties eighteen
months in jail five thousand
dollar fine the special
prosecutor's my information's
being paid a hundred twenty five
dollars an hour and they ask for
I think six hundred about six
hundred thousand dollars from
the legislature and that's to
fund the addition to the local
prosecutor and best are complex
case compensation pays eighty
five dollars an hour.
and that is only for those who
us who have done significant
additional work on a case so we
pay less than civil attorneys on
contract with the state we paid
less than the special prosecutor
in a prosecution it's really we
feel is extremely important that
we Fund representation of
indigent people around the state
and if I could then pass this on
to you chairman Tom clear.
Mr chairman members of the
appropriations and finance
committee it's not to be here
today the chairman of the New
Mexico public defender
commission this is the sixth
time appeared before you first
time was in two thousand
eighteen and in two thousand
eighteen I told you that
someday soon we were not gonna
have enough contractors to
handle your case.
Also in two thousand eighteen my
commission I hope public
hearings we passed a K. refusal
protocol that was in response to
us refusing cases of back in two
thousand fifteen and sixteen in
the Supreme Court said no we
have to represent the people but
we needed to get a protocol in
place protocols in place now
it's part of the state
regulations that was done in two
thousand eight.
I came back before you in two
thousand nineteen and I told you
the same thing within five to
ten years we're not gonna have
enough contractors.
Most of the state is served by
contract council you have a.
Will pull that up I came back in
two thousand twenty.
Okay thank you please continue
Mr Kirk I'm not sure that folks
on the webcast will be able to
see it.
And I'm not yeah go please go
ahead and look at that the blue
counties are served.
My contractors there are no
public defenders offices in
those areas.
And Representative Montoya I
know you talked about the
unified budget statewide well
this agency has a unified budget
statewide we have to deal with
all the problems statewide I
came back to Representative for
the pandemic in twenty twenty
and I told you the same thing
the storm clouds are starting to
rise on the horizon most of our
contractors have been doing it
since before I became a lawyer.
That's the truth I've now been a
lawyer for forty years and three
months I was sworn in as an
attorney with the New Mexico
border Association October
twenty first nineteen eighty
two.
And we have contractors that
have been doing it for longer
than me.
In twenty twenty one I came
before you on video and again I
told you the storehouses to be
getting stronger over the
mountain.
I will tell you in twenty twenty
two last year said the same
thing.
Last night I was watching Apollo
thirteen it's one of my favorite
movies to watch I love it.
I love Tom Hanks I love Gary
Sinise a love the actors and and
I love the story and the most
famous line in that movie
without any hesitation is
commander Jim Lovell saying
Houston we have a problem after
his space ship blew up.
Well Santa Fe.
We have a problem.
I'm telling you this right now.
And it's scary to think about it
but right now.
We have lost twenty five percent
of our contractors.
In Bernalillo county.
In two thousand nineteen we had
sixteen.
In two thousand twenty we have
fifteen and a half one and a
half load.
Two thousand twenty one sixteen
and a half two thousand twenty
two sixteen and a half two
thousand twenty three twelve.
Okay and it's not because there
were fifty people applying and
we gave out twelve contracts we
have twelve people apply for
twelve contracts that.
Statewide the numbers of gone
from a hundred and fourteen two
hundred and nineteen and two
thousand nineteen and now we're
at ninety eight.
And I will tell you the phone
calls that I've that I get from
contractors.
Is telling me that we're gonna
have another.
Twenty percent decrease within
the next year or two.
And that case refusal protocol
that I I talked about that's in
place.
I will be very surprised if
we're not implementing that the
next year now you've heard today
from the courts that's one prong
of this three legged stool.
Thank you have to fund to make
criminal justice work the other
prong.
That we haven't met you haven't
met with the others the police
and the dust and I include the
police on it because they're the
investigative arm for the dust
so when you fund district
attorney's office
the police they don't have to
have as many investigators
because the previous to that.
And then there's us okay.
And if there isn't an attorney
available to represent a
criminal defendant guess what.
We're gonna have to decline to
represent them now I'm talking
about the contract council and
where we're at and when I joined
this commission in two thousand
fourteen I remember I was called
by the chairman he said what
your agenda for getting on the
commission and I said.
Want to help.
But a lawyer at that time for
thirty two years I've been in
the courtroom nonstop I want to
help.
Is a noble what your gender and
I said I'm serious All I Want to
do is I want to help because
I've seen a lot I'm still doing
the same work I'm still going
around the state I'm still
appearing a lot of ritual
programs and in plate and
person a lot of places and I
will tell you I'm seeing a
shortage of young attorneys in
the system either as district
attorneys or as public defenders
I'm saying that the vacancy rate
is high and it's going to get
higher we don't have people to
replace twelve people apply for
contracts Bernalillo county last
year it's going to go down next
year and I don't see anybody
replacing not at the rates that
we're paying and at the level of
work they have to do and that
the stress they go through.
And I'm sitting here telling you
that I've been telling you those
storm clouds have been building
on the mountains well I hate to
say it but I really believe
they're going to be in the
valley and it's going to be a
really bad storm the next year.
And I think a year from now
you're going to go out one leg
of the stool broke.
And now we have this problem
with all these cases are being
able to be handled because
there's nobody Representative
criminal defendants this is an
acute problem.
And I'm passionate about it
because I see it I see it that's
my responsibility my vice
chairman wanted me to tell you
all high it's Ramon Sanchez he's
been my vice chairman since I
started in this commission is
the chairman and he.
He told me to tell them they
need to hear it Michael Sanchez
retired Chief Justice Richard
Boston runner Commission.
It is a problem that is a cute
and I will tell you cheap power
talked about that New Mexico
report the workload study that
says in riding state owned by
the American Bar Association
commission by the New Mexico
legislature and it says that we
need an additional six hundred
attorneys we have three hundred
we need additional six hundred
to pay to minimally
Representative the criminal
indigent in the state thank you
very much Mr clear if you could
so and I know we have a few
questions I believe I'll be done
in thirty seconds please thank
you Mr chairman
Somebody's going to sue the
state.
Because somebody's going to get
left in a jail that should be
left in the jail somebody's
going to get not represented on
a case they should have got
Representative and that report.
Is all the evidence that they
really need that the state know
about it and didn't do anything
about it we stand for questions
Mr chair thank you for listening
thank you very much clearer okay
we're gonna go to committee
questions first Representative
Sanchez de LA Cruz Montoya we
think people just to start the
census thank you Mr chair I
decide to questions on here the
answer to what I was gonna ask
what's the liability because I
think of the Yazzie Martinez
case for education I could see
something like that happening is
that what we're looking at.
Mr chair and representative
senses I I think that's very
much the kind of style of of
action that could be brought to
that's correct thank you Mr
chair so I know when I was here
the last time this was a.
A huge issue I think we
seriously need to look at our.
There additional request because
on there
Need to do on attorneys from
that reporter that's what it's
telling us obviously
The twenty percent asked doesn't
seem unreasonable thank you Mr
chair thank you the census next
Representative thank you Mr
chairman.
We have a constitutional mandate
to defend.
Stocks.
My question is how do well let
me back up Mr Chairman.
You talk about the public
defender's office any talk about
contractor attorneys.
I'm not sure that I'm
understanding or their.
Are there attorneys that work
all the time as public defenders
or is a combination.
So we have as the the map
reminder Mr Mr Chairman thank
you thank you sorry about that
I'm not I'm like you I'm a
volunteer I'm not a state
employee and so I'm here doing
my best I think I apologize
because
that the colors in the blue our
service by contractors and they
take us cases and their rate we
have to pay right.
their pay per case with some
extra case goes to trial.
Those are the pay range okay so
if you look at a misdemeanor
others it's being paid a hundred
eighty dollars for the case not
an hour for the case three
hundred dollars for DWI or
domestic violence.
Three hundred dollars for
juvenile case that's all they're
being paid to do interviews to
watch videos to do a trial
that's it it goes up to seven
hundred and fifty dollars for
first degree felony.
Now I find filing suit against
the state and saying my client
wasn't represented very well.
All I have to do is go to this.
I guess what I got a pretty good
losses I got a really good
losses.
Those counties all have
contractors they don't have an
office so they're all
independently employed pursuant
to a of the public defender
contract all of their offices
expenses have been going up with
the inflation rate and our rates
because we don't have the money
to give them more money have not
gone up I know one contractor
who said to pay is one assistant
because more money because she
now is has three hundred dollar
a month increase in rent along
with the other increases and he
said I'm not gonna be able to
afford a contract next year he's
not available for.
another contractor his insurance
rates yes the same kind of
practice I do is insurance rates
are nine thousand dollars a year
more than money for his
malpractice insurance because of
the five complaints that he's
had made against him by his
contract public defender clients
were sitting in prison filing.
so it's this thing is so ripe
for us to be sued as a state
that's not funny thank
Representative Mr Chairman so.
What is the average age of your.
Attorneys that elect to be
public defenders now I I just a
question is I think it matters
Annika multiple levels one
experience another is.
Just survival so we could.
Sure a little bit I don't know
if we've ever done a study I can
just another reminder settlement
for this order and I I apologize
source
I didn't eat lunch one moment
Leger right I apologize have
snacks and
But at.
Mr Chairman representative
the average age of the
contractors is much older than
the average age of the line
attorneys we have a more of an
influx of young attorneys
becoming line attorneys but the
contractors in many parts of the
state are as I said older than I
am and I just it chair this
month I have now sixty five I
will tell you that there is a
contractor former contractor in
rat tone Senator late fifties
who about a contractor for
twenty five years and that she
loved that was her passion but
she said I cannot survive
anymore she became a district
attorney assistant district
attorney so she can get our
retirement and should you get
our medical insurance and she's
I can't do it anymore.
At and that's what we're facing.
Thank you Mr just to stay with
it it's a little bit troublesome
to me only in so much that.
This is been this is a problem
that has plagued New Mexico I'm
managing nationally where we
fail to compensate our public
defenders and they're usually
viewed as low on the totem pole
and I don't think that's fair to
the public thank you Mr chair
thank you very much
Representative a cruise next
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman.
I just you know the dust
association
is very much a proponent of
making sure that your budget
gets pushed through the dust are
gonna be facing they're facing
similar issues
and so Mr Chairman this is one
of the two budgets that I was
came in planning to support
however I believe this one is
still in the you to have a hard
time nobody have a heart attack
on this one here but I don't
believe the request is nearly
enough for this
one department.
The the dust will be are are are
facing the same thing it's just
in a in particular we just we
passed a
some legislation in the last
couple of years at make it very
very lucrative be in private
practice as a lawyer
as long as it's not involved in
that public defense or public
per per prosecution and I think
we need to make sure that we
look both at this budget and the
and the dust budget and make
sure that were able to compete
for new young lawyers I was I
think that maybe the perception
might have been young lawyers
are the ones who were
public defenders and I and it
was my understanding coming into
this that it's not the case it's
the older folks who maybe have
made their money and now are
just trying to do something good
and they just can't do it so Mr
chairman I if if I get a chance
I'd like to at the appropriate
time able to second.
the the.
The motion to accept this budget
however I do believe that this
is one of the one of the budgets
that probably needs a little bit
more attention because I don't
think a small influx is going to
do even what's needed
to to avert this crisis and and
he talks dust across the state
they see this as a crisis
as well thank you very much for
so Montoya NextEra
Representative round the
Representative Trujillo then
refer them here.
Thank you Mr chairman.
thank you to the panelists Mr
Carter this year again Mr Bauer
I think Mr chair Representative
Trujillo might need some oxygen
because of the echo what
Representative Montoya just said
we watch this problem fester for
years and years now and it is
time with a three point five
billion dollar surplus
essentially to get this fixed
our state constitution Mr chair
does not contemplate a lot of
the state agencies that we have
right now operating in state
government but it does
contemplate this we have to get
this done correctly and I look
at the charts here and how much
of contract attorneys paid for
first degree felony murder base
rate is fifty four hundred
dollars in Mr chair someone's
wife is on the line their
freedom their liberty and that's
that's not much to what to pay
an attorney to.
To be involved in a case like
that so hi I would just like to
see us actually exceeds any
requests that we have either
from the executive order of C..
hi to Mister chair due to fear
we're going to have a Yazzie
Martinez Martinez like lawsuit
we can either pay now we could
pay later thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Brown next
Representative Trujillo the.
Thank.
Will not be as dramatic as I've
been but I have supported your
budget many times in the past
and the twenty seventeen letter
you have in your in your
presentation here clearly shows
that we were heading in this
direction for many years and we
have a net here to it I will not
speak give me further Sir I will
simply vote.
A yes to move this forward and
that's my.
Thank you very much of the trail
networks of your then on thank
you Mr chairman my question is
are there any incentives to I
know ten law students in the
twenty five to thirty two age
bracket none of them have become
public defenders are there any
incentives to motivate our
younger law school graduates
whether it's paying off law
school loans or whatever to
incentivize them to become
public defenders where you get
this broad experience before you
go into private practice or
something more lucrative.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative your it's a great
question I can go on at length
at some point if you want to
what I will merely say is we
have a program in UNM law school
where we bring people in to work
the club program it's called of
we there's all kinds of things
we do with younger lawyers
frankly there's fewer coming out
of you and I'm law and so we
have a pretty aggressive
recruiting program nationwide
for instance many of the.
Our offices in the southeastern
part of the state recruit
heavily from Texas law schools
we recruit from Arizona law
schools for instance in our
Gallup opt so there are things
that we can do in there there
are things we are doing be happy
talk about those in more detail
in loan forgiveness is a very
important part of this there's
some funny mechanisms that I
know these gentleman are are
very familiar with Mr chair
representative also included in
the LFC rack and I I apologize
for not mentioning this in my
questions presentation there is
a two two million dollar
approach special appropriation
recommended by LFC for
recruitment and retention
specifically at the the
intention is to target those out
of state students and that
matches both in the public
defender department and also for
district attorneys so for public
attorneys insurance thank you.
Thank you very much Senator is
that are you know thank you
Representative figure.
Thank you Mr grey to expand on
that are there are a number of
increase in the LFC proposal
including for contracting
increases for contract attorneys
can you.
Talk about those one more time
please chair certainly the LFC
recommendation includesd
one point nine million dollars
to increase contract council pay
in particular and that is a
ballpark ten fifteen percent
increase according to their
rates
And that it no please continue I
think I finish my thought thank
you and so to Mr Bauer do you
need anything more from us to
increase those contract rates I
think appropriately the
committee sees those rates is
very low for including more
funding do you need anything to
raise those rates are can you do
that internally
no we we are Mr chair we can
raise those rates internally and
we will if we have the money to
fund it both raising the base
rates also being able to provide
better complex case compensation
which goes to those lawyers who
show us three time keeping that
you know the the work done
effectively on behalf of the
point I can tell you that
eventually we I think we need
the resources to move towards
paying hourly rates like almost
every other costs the state
agencies and even private
institutions.
Thank you thank you Mr about our
for that and it's a I think it's
a an important point for us to
sort of consider as we
Is
Mister gray can you tell us what
the the funded vacancy rate for
this agency is at budget
initiatives on the issue that
you all have the funded vacancy
rate is about twelve percent
the HSD in this reflecting the
narratives maybe closer to
fourteen percent based on
numbers but it's quite high and.
Thank you Mr gray and and what
was the.
Yes sorry that was my next
question can you yes so so how
much unfunded PS any V. that's
personal services employee
benefits how much money
essentially was left over at the
time of submission no this is a
snapshot in time it's not
today's number snapshot in time
how much was unspent that number
was five million five million
okay thank you very much for
that Mr gray and I Mr about our
why is that unspent.
Well there's a few things for
you first of all Mr chair
The vacancy rate which at the
beginning of COVID was the
lowest in our agency's history
part just over four percent of
that I think it was very there's
something like that
The vacancy rate went up because
people you know after being
everybody's in the same place
during COVID people left
it went up I believe over twenty
percent we've been driving that
back down and so I I think what
we're continuing to reduce our
vacancy rate
when necessary we can put that
into contracts overflow do
things to get the best we can to
get to defective representation
where we are because of course
when we lose people you know
there's that unspent money we're
piling it back into effective
ways to continue representation
thank you for that and and the
sort of the Act mystery are the
the economic pressures I think
if you and then the very tight
labor market certainly makes
sense.
Was there any consideration for
raising contract rates with this
unspent dollars did.
So I million unspent was there
any consideration at raising
contract rates.
Mr chair.
The public reason contract
reaches of course it goes
forward ended into the next
years what we have done was it
again that in certain places we
paid sometimes double payments
or we increased the the a
complex case compensation.
Thank you very much Mr Mr Bauer
that's that's super helpful
I think you there is there
strong feedback from the
committee and commitment to this
agency I know during LFC later
lane spoke eloquently about and
I think we've heard members
really across the board speak to
it that said if we see twelve
plus percent vacancy
funded vacancy levels and five
million approaching five million
in unspent balances we have to
ask ourselves what needs to
change in order to spend because
you know it is multi multiple
issues it's not just the there's
not enough money there is
actually more money than was
able to the use the past year
and that's a shared
responsibility it includes
higher at it includes many of
the loan repayment options but
just so that we're all on the
same page and no one eight this
meeting thinking that that every
penny has been spent up until
this point even as we all I
think your call for for
additional investment
Okay I will then turn it over I
think that we see the LFC
recommendations being slightly
higher that is part of the
framework and so that keeps us
within our budget framework that
we came into the session with so
so we're in a strong place if we
want to to to that
recommendation Senator Chris Mr
Chairman you're ready to accept
the motion yes German I move
that we accept the LFC
recommendation right.
Okay it's been moved in second
by Representative Garrett
although I would note that
Representative Montoya gets a an
honorary second to that he
called the second earlier.
No just thanks very much
committee for the discussion
thanks presenters very much with
that is there any opposition to
adopting LESC recommendations
seeing none.
We've adopted that okay now
we're going to go straight in
the public comment we reserved
up to twenty minutes I try to
keep a timer here on the phone a
reminder to keep the comments
regarding the agenda items that
we've had here today and Mr Papp
and we know that there there's
some folks from the treatment
point and others who were
excited to hear
so.
As we clear out.
Well.
Please come on up to the diets
if you wish to make public
comment.
Over here.
Okay I apologize thank you Mr
pep and we've if they want to
submit if there's written or
other anything else that they'd
like to share would love to see.
Thank you Mr okay saying nine
we're gonna during this meeting
committee thank you for a great
hearing today appreciate.
