Representative Castellano.
President.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Dixon.
Here.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Garcia.
Representative headed up.
Representative headed off.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Lane.
Here.
Representative a lot up here.
Saudi data here.
Representative Swetser here.
Representative Trujillo.
Representative Trujillo.
I'm getting an echo.
Representative.
All.
Here's.
Madam
chair.
All right I think we've got a
quorum from what I can count in
my in my head here so we're
going to go ahead and start.
I want to remind the committee
that it got six agencies today
around twelve through all of
these and our first agency as
taxation and revenue that's
agency called three three right
we're going to start with the
analyst I'd like to introduce
themselves and then we'll go to
the HSD rat so with that being
said let's go ahead and listen
let's fire up.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Allison Nichols I'm the LFC
analyst for TRD and I see the
name and last year the DFA
analyst right.
I'll.
I'll go ahead and find a priest
overview of the main differences
between that the recommendations
and then send you and I will go
into more detail about program
differences.
Overall frontier the the
executive recommendation
provides a flat general fund
budget of just over sixty four
million
what LFC recommendation provides
a six hundred thousand dollar
increase that's in about a one
percent increase over FY twenty
one.
And the L. schen is primarily
intended to offset a decrease is
the revenue sorry say six
million in fee revenue that was
budgeted for FY twenty one
but was not available.
It was that general aviation Act
years ago of the forty seven
right it for federal revenue
those recommendations include
twelve thousand dollar decreased
and also five point six million
decrease in other news about FSP
revenue that was two thousand
I'm gonna ask everybody to
please mute your computers were
taken up all kinds of background
information that we don't need
to hear today so please enter
your called on specifically
thank you could keep the muted
would be a long way go ahead
Allison sorry thank thank you
let's see what was a and then
the LFC recommendation has a
five hundred thousand dollar
fine balance increase and
executive recommendation right
executive recommendation of the
five hundred thousand dollar
fund balance increased now see
recommendation has a one million
dollar increase.
Both recommendations include a
decrease in person spending from
FY twenty one operating budget
in FY twenty one agency enacted
a budget adjustment to decrease
that person budget by almost
five million that was in the
city revenues not materialize so
if you take into account that
fee reduction that budget
adjustment request for the
agency and act LFC
recommendation represents about
seven hundred and forty thousand
dollars higher on that adjusted
but budget and the executive
recommendation represents about
six hundred eighty thousand
dollars while our
those recommendations call for
reductions in contracts
primarily and I. T. services and
also increases it some increases
in other spending and that's
primarily shifting spending
categories and.
LC recommendation also includes
two hundred thousand dollars for
tax expenditure analysis that
still out agency to better
analyze the impact of some of
the state's tax expenditures and
that two hundred thousand could
include person spending
software.
Consultants just HSD most
effective.
one no LFC recommendation it
mistakenly has some FTE
categorized as permanent when
they should be categorized as
term are temp that's been P.
five seven three so just noting
that the LFC recommendation
should near the executive
recommendation the executive
recommendation F. T. should be
is that accurate one
And we have reached consensus on
performance measures and targets
asal at Cindy ord telemarketer
all about first program.
Thank you Allison thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee we are going to start
with P. five seventy two which
is the administrative services
division I'm regards to revenue
the executive recommendation in
the last general fund
recommendation well the LFC
recommendation Representative
about it six hundred nine
thousand or three percent
decrease from the FY twenty one
operating budget.
Both recommendations also
provide three hundred and fifty
two thousand and other revenue
and that that seven hundred
thousand dollar decrease from
the FY twenty one operating
budget in the bait the LFC
recommendation includes a
decrease of five hundred and ten
thousand per person services and
employee benefit.
All recommendations reduce
funding for contracts and I. T.
expenditures
also both the executive the on
the recommendation reduce the
FTE count in this program by
three which is removing and that
an active position and will be
LFC and exec have come to
confront those in regards to
performance measures.
Do you want me to do the next
program Allison.
That.
Need to share the difference she
on screen
Sure I have everything up okay
so all Representative to to P.
five seven three.
Three if tax administration the
LFC recommendation increases the
general fund budget two point
nine million and again as I
mentioned earlier that's mostly
to offset reductions in few
Representative into program the
executive recommendation
includes increases general fund
revenue by four hundred sixty
six thousand dollars at some
almost two percent.
Nations have a flat budget for
federal revenues of one point
five million in both
recommendations have a decrease
of five point plan other avenues
and that's to that loss in the
revenue.
At the budget but.
As.
C.
so the executive recommendation
decreases person spending by
four point eight million
I'm LFC recommendation reduces
personal spending.
Million however as I mentioned
there was a four point nine
million budget adjustment
request acted in FY one
Count
recommendations actually
Representative increase.
LFC and exec racks both have
reduce thank you spend on tax
she is a professional services
and.
Before the LFC recommendation
has a two hundred thousand
dollars for the tax expenditure
now.
I'm and this is this program is
where recommendation has
what advice do is permanent the
recommendation should more
executive recommendation for F.
T..
There.
On the next program which is the
motor vehicle division P. five
seventy four the executive
recommendation provide
approximately one point three
million dollars more in general
fund and the LESC recommendation
I'm the on the recommendation
Representative about eleven
percent reduction in general
fund and the executive reduce it
by two point five percent.
All recommendations also include
three hundred thousand dollar
reduction in federal revenue and
four hundred almost five hundred
thousand dollar increase in
other Representative.
In regards to the base the LFC
recommendation reduces personal
spending by one point seven
million dollars to align the
budget with actual cost of
building condition.
The executive recommendation
reduces personal funding by
seven hundred and ninety eight
thousand dollars
and the motor vehicle division
has approximately one point
seven million dollars thank you
if they do for FY twenty one.
Recommendations include
decreasing
contractual services category
shifting some costs to the other
category and increasing spending
for I. T. purpose.
In regards to language both of
the recommendations include
language to transfer where the
transfer of the weight distance
Act funding approximately six
point one million dollars to the
department of transportation and
ninety four point five to the
department of public safety for
the agency's law enforcement
program and again both analysts
have come to content that
regards to performance measures.
Out for P. five seventy five
that's the property tax division
this division does not receive
any general fund revenue
that both recommendations
provide flat funding in other
revenues and LFC recommendation
has one million in fund balances
well the executive
recommendation includes five
hundred and
else recommendation has an
additional five hundred forty
two point five thousand
personale recommendations
increase spending contracts
contract in place to assist with
protests and hearing.
US idea and maintenance
recommendations reduce the
number of FTE by two and that
reflects the shins of in it for
over two years
again we reached consensus on
performance measures and
targets.
Thank then at the last program
is gonna be your tax fraud
investigations division P. five
seventy nine both the LFC and
exec near each other in this
recommendation which
Provide about one point six
million dollars in general fund
revenue which is exactly a five
percent decrease from the FY
twenty one operating budget and
full recommendation reduce the
other category by eighty five
point one thousand
with reduction for building
these cost and trouble.
In the performance measures
again Hallisey and executive
analyst have come taken.
Or that.
I will now turn it over to
cabinet secretary at definition
are in part.
There are no question.
You madam secretary going.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee it's
such a pleasure to be here with
you I'm going to share my screen
for a moment and I want to also
take a second to introduce a
couple staff members that are on
On the call with you and they
will be available and to help me
present as well as to answer
your questions so joining me
today are W. secretary Emily
Oster are HSD director Denise
area are at I. T. division
director Mike Baca our director
of audit and compliance I
Shimoda and let's see around in
the telco who's the deputy
director of R. HSD division and
finally our budget bureau chief
my nose shut they're here in the
event you have questions and add
to the Syrian will be helping
you present in a moment so
without further ado I'll get
into the slides here I'm I'm
just so proud to share with you
are organizational chart of tier
eighties executive management
team all the positions that are
in white text are filled and we
only at this executive
management level have two vacant
positions right now which is is
pretty remarkable given where we
started two years ago we have a
deputy director of audit and
compliance currently vacant due
to a recent retirement and the
motor vehicle division position
is currently vacant director
position.
Next I'm just very briefly I
want overview with you we went
through a significant strategic
planning process that concluded
in July twenty twenty with a new
mission statement a new three
year vision new values and
guiding principles for the
department and and a new
strategic plan that has very
detailed objectives and action
steps will take but the new
mission of the tax and
Representative department is to
serve the state of New Mexico by
providing fair and efficient tax
and motor vehicle services and I
like that this mission is short
enough that our employees have a
chance to potentially memorize
it which is is good but also it
emphasizes service we exist to
serve the state and we are
regulatory oversight agency and
we do need to make sure that we
enforce the laws and and collect
all the revenue but we're trying
to change the culture to
emphasize yes we need to do that
but also do so in a way that
also emphasizes customer service
the three year vision statement
for the taxation and revenue
this is sort of an aspirational
vision of where will be three
years out if we achieve our
mission we will promote a
cultural culture of integrity
respect innovation we will earn
the trust of our customers
through our actions will empower
customers through outreach
education and ease of compliance
will offer flexible and secure
solutions to improve customer
experience.
Will administer tax and motor
vehicle as efficiently and
transparently and maintain a
skilled knowledgeable and
service oriented workforce.
Next I I have a few slides I
want to cover with you that give
you it just sort of a taste of
the accomplishments we've been
working towards over the last
year the first flights really
have to do with our goal of
cultivating our workforce
retaining employees training
them all that kind of stuff I
first want to say that about
seven hundred of our eight
hundred plus employees are
either fully or partially
teleworking and they have been
since about two weeks into that
on the set of the pandemic we're
really proud of the innovations
we've been able to put in place
to keep them as safe as possible
working from home as much as
possible over the year we've had
emphasize training and we've
been moving our trainings online
so that teleworking employees
can take full advantage of those
we added seventeen new training
store online training platform
some of the ones they want to
highlight with you are
emphasizing customer service
management skills and stability
in the workplace just towards
not only at each other but our
customers we also launched a
mentorship program in October
twenty twenty and in the first
six months a phase of that
program we have nine mentorship
pairs on going so it's eighteen
employees across the department
that are working together as
pairs to do things like identify
career ladders works through in
securities develop interview
skills things like that
let's see we've also been
working hard to document our
procedures and we see that as a
way that we can ensure more
consistent processing of
customer transactions so the
last year we have finalized
twenty two distinct process sees
that are out and in use now
amongst the staff across the
agency.
FY twenty two executive budget
funds
funds basically the investment
that the legislature made last
year in the motor vehicle
department or division basically
we have a very flat
organizational structure there
were there are very there's a
very wide base of entry level
positions and very few
supervisory one so it's hard to
climb that career ladder the
executive director last year and
this year emphasize that funding
to help us create career ladder
and frankly it would be done by
now except that we have needed
to kind of wait through this
budget situation and and and the
unknowns that we've been facing
since the onset of the pandemic
to process that paperwork but it
is under way.
another big accomplishment we've
made over the last year was
moving our flagship Albuquerque
location from the bank of the
west building where we had been
located for over forty years and
now we're located at copper
point which is a much nicer
facility and offers much better
safety at situation for our
employees and our customers and
for those of the that at the end
you who don't know it's it's
located near I. forty and you
bank in the location at brown
Mackie college used to occupy.
turnover does remain a problem
for us especially where in
person work is required during
the pandemic so the motor
vehicle field offices in
particular are seeing quite a
bit of turnover and and we are
struggling to keep the vacancy
rate from rising in that program
over about the last year we
decreased a net of twenty four
employees statewide but despite
decreasing twenty four employees
are vacancy rate has stayed
stayed fairly stable because we
had about thirty five vacant
positions de activated.
Next turning to her
accomplishments and initiatives
we've been working towards over
the last year related to
customer experience and customer
service the property tax
modernization project is under
way and it will be complete
fairly soon this is that a large
multi year infrastructure
project that modernizes and just
completely transforms the way
that property taxes administered
statewide it it takes everything
from a paper based system to an
online platform all the county
treasurers and county assessors
are fully integrated into it
there's going to be more
recording more data that it
visibility more tools than ever
available and that project is
complete we also have a huge
project under way that was
funded last year by an eight
point four million dollars C. to
project and that's the C. R. S.
redesign and and basically if
you think about the combined
reporting systems TRS for for
many many years and decades
we've been requiring business
taxes to be filed on a combined
reported form and because
they're all combined on one form
the form is very long and
complex for separating them out
so that each form and each
program is tailored just to the
needs of that program and that
should prevent a lot of re work
and manual intervention to
properly process tax returns
because those returns were filed
combined it we also often
experienced that for example tax
payer payments would be applied
in a different way they than
they intended we would have to
go in and do a lot of men manual
intervention and require a lot
of supple supplemental
information to be submitted by
the tax payer and with this
upgrade that should smooth
itself out to be much more
efficient along with that we're
upgrading Vertiv version ten of
the Gentex system as well as the
tapestry system that's meant not
mentioned on the sides but
that's also under way and along
with version twelve of Gen tax
will come in New more user
friendly version of the taxpayer
access point or.
Tap that's the online system
where taxpayers can can file
electronically directly through
us.
in terms of customer outreach
we've also just launched in
recent months a YouTube channel
where we're providing a lot of
useful outreach to taxpayers and
practitioners a lot of training
materials we transitioned our
workshops for new businesses and
new employers to an online web
based
Our platform so that we can keep
them going during the pandemic
we finished improvements to both
of our call centers we have a
tax call center as well as an
MPD call center and they're both
cloud based and they both now
take on automatic payments
through an IDR system wait times
are down pretty significantly as
are abandoned call rate and
we're you know we're still
working through
to just make constant
improvement especially to the
MVD call center but the tax one
I'm proud to say there are there
are weeks and months right now
where the average wait time to
reach an agent is less than four
minutes and we're really proud
of that.
we've also been working hard to
move and we do services online
to the greatest extent possible
because our field operations are
limited by the pandemic we've
lunch to self service kiosks in
the Albuquerque market area in
the last month those are both
located in Albertsons in
Albuquerque and customers can go
up pay and print read
registration stickers in about
two minutes and we're hoping
that really catches on is that
convenient new way for customers
to do business with us we've
also for the first time in the
last year we made it possible to
renew a commercial driver's
license online also if your
driver seventy nine or over you
can now renew that license
online you submit your medical
paperwork to us electronically
you pay online and the whole
thing is is done without need of
that field office visit same
thing for interlock licenses
they can now be renewed or or
requested online as work to save
people a field office visit and
then the the newest innovation
the just launched in the last
couple weeks as a curbside drop
off of title packets so if you
have a vehicle that's new to you
and it's never been registered
to you and I in the past now you
can drop off your packet you
spend just a couple minutes
within MPD agent at the door
checking to make sure your
packet is complete and we take
your packet and we process it
without you present and mail you
the document so the all of this
is helping us serve more
customers and complete more
transactions without increasing
the foot traffic in our offices
last I just want to mention on
the site that the real lady
deadline set by the federal
government was pushed back
during the pandemic the deadline
for real ID if you need one is
now October first twenty twenty
one and as of December thirty
first seventy three percent of
New Mexicos credentials were
real ID compliant before the
pandemic that number was
creeping up by about three
percent per quarter it has kind
of leveled off during the
pandemic.
Because not as many people are
coming in but once things can
open up a little bit more we do
plan on doing a push around real
ID.
Last I just want to update you a
little bit on legislative
information and rulemaking that
we have under way of course
twenty nineteen was a major year
as as far as I'm tax legislation
house bill six that was enacted
that year was the most
significant tax bill that had
been enacted in probably twenty
or fifteen years so taxpayers in
the department are undergoing a
lot of change and and to this
point I'm very proud to say
though that we have so far
implemented everything on time
and on budget.
the state has been collecting
the state share of internet
sales G. R. T. since July first
twenty nineteen and then as of
July first twenty twenty one we
will begin collecting the local
option G. R. T. as well and also
and I can't stress enough how
big a deal as as we're moving
from origin based sourcing to
destination based sourcing and
so that's how it will affect a
lot of G. R. T. filers on the
location code that they use to
report their their tax and so it
used to be with their there's a
lot of exceptions to this and
and but the general rule used to
be that the sellers place of
business origin of the sale with
where the location was now in
general we're moving to the
destination the place where the
goods or services were delivered
and there are exceptions having
to do with some professional
services and construction
services and real estate
commissions but that's that's
the change that's under way and
it'll take effect July first.
we also have the local option
compensating tax going into
place for the first time on July
first twenty twenty one and
we're we have some pretty large
rulemaking hearings coming up
the first one is going to be on
corporate income tax rules
related to at market based or
saying and mandatory combined
reporting that were passed
during house in House Bill six
of twenty nineteen and then our
very soon after that about about
a month later will have
rulemaking hearing related to
internet sales and destination
based forcing.
And just to update you TRD was
very pleased to collaborate with
the Human Services Department
following your most recent
special session to help
distribute out the public
assistance funding from the
cares Act that went to
individuals who weren't eligible
for federal stimulus payment
we're able to innovate and find
a way to get those payments out
verify data and prevent any
fraudulent claims and we really
enjoy the opportunity to work
with HSD on that.
I'm we're gonna move on to our
budget next and and the slide
the mostly be covered by Denise
area and but to start with I
guess I just want to paint sort
of a big picture of of what's
been going on in our budget
because they I think it's really
important you heard both the
analysts talk about this fee
revenue that didn't materialize
and what if there was about a
ten year period I believe that
was FY ten to nineteen something
like that where TRD was being
partially funded by higher
we we were retaining a higher
percentage of the local gross
receipts tax revenue that we're
taking an in distributing to
locals and part of our budget
was funded by that those
administrative fees that we're
capturing from local governments
it was coming to us in the
budget as other state funds.
And so in FY twenty we were
still budgeted correctly but in
twenty one there was an error
propagated in our budget where
are other state funds were
budgeted as if we were going to
receive that additional
administrative fee level of
revenue but there was no
language in house bill two so
the money isn't coming to us and
the and our budget was not back
filled with General Fund and so
this.
There's a lot of numbers we can
look at but to boil it down to
the clearest picture I can and
this current fiscal year TRD
because of that error had about
a two point two five million
dollar shortfall and that after
making all the cuts that we
could to solve that shortfall in
FY twenty one we
we were able to transfer one
million dollars from N. B. D.
fund balance and we're
requesting a one point two five
million dollars supplemental
that's included in both the
executive and LFC rex but the
main concern I have for budget
at the moment is just making
sure that that error is not
propagated into FY twenty two if
at all possible I'd love for the
department not to be back
one year from now seeking a
supplemental you again and so
that's the best way I can kind
of put it in a nut shell what's
going on right now with their
budget and why it's tie in with
that I'd love to turn it over to
did needs here in our CFO and
administrative services division
director.
Thank you Secretary madam chair
and members of the committee as
the secretary just mentioned
regarding our two point two five
million dollars shortfall that
is our.
Second bullet point under the
key budget highlights that she
just reviewed in which executive
in LFC recommendations included
the one point two five million
dollars supplemental request for
FY twenty one.
Other items that we have with in
our budget that we are
requesting is we have the FY
twenty two executive
recommendation that includes a
five million dollar contingent
nonrecurring appropriation to
implement future legislative
changes this will enable the
taxation and revenue department
to implement any new and change
legislation that is not
currently funded by the
legislature and within our
current budget.
The next item that we have which
is what number three is that our
national taxation and revenue
department FY twenty two request
did not include program to
program transfer authority
language and we are requesting
consideration of this program
transfer authority to FY twenty
two ask discussed previously by
our secretary we did exercise
that program to program transfer
language when we moved to
million dollars from and the
need to the auditing compliance
division and consideration for
the budget shortfall this fiscal
year.
And lastly we have in FY twenty
two executive recommendation
which includes a hundred and
fifty thousand dollars for
statewide tax preparation
assistance for low income and
elderly persons.
Next slide.
Have a total taxation and
revenue overview budget for FY
twenty two both of our analyst
had reviewed each of those
sources in detail by each of the
P. codes and therefore this
light is here just for your
information and therefore we
welcome any questions that you
may have.
All right thank you very much
Let's go ahead and go to the
committee for questions we're
gonna start with Representative
Dixon go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you secretary Clark I was
wondering regarding the audit
and compliance division
if
Your department is going to
implement a detailed
improvement plan for meeting the
collectible targets.
Thank you madam chair and
representative and I wonder if
ACT director I chamada would
like to start with that.
Madam chair members of the
committee cabinet secretary
started correct thank you for
having us today yes we are we
have basically focused on our
other side of the division for
the past ten years and
advancements an audit and during
that ten year period we have not
focused on the collection and
compliance side.
For the last year and a half as
secretary stated we've
implemented quite a few
different changes including the
call center Inc including new
technology to help us work
through some of those issues so
a lot of those have been
detailed out in the performance
measures as we've been
submitting them but we do have
the a long term vision of all
the different items that need to
change on the collection side to
modernize the outside as well.
And madam chair if I can add to
that thank you I said you know I
want to add it's been
interesting kind of digging into
this data and getting familiar
with it but if you have a
performance measure that you
know that percent of collectible
balances that you collect you've
got your numerator or
denominator and for years the
department not through any kind
of malicious action anything but
they were drumming up
assessments I making that
denominator bigger bottom half
of the fraction bigger so by
increasing the assessments of
tax do that the department was
issuing without kind of
considering whether they were
collectible or not it's kind of
driven up our accounts
receivable balance over many
many years and are now looking
at how we can bring that back
down into conformance and I
shouldn't mention it but but her
Division finished a couple years
ago it's been about a year and a
half and I think that we finish
this data analytics project and
now for the G. R. T. program are
using an algorithm work done
together with the contractor
status where we're using ten
years of G. R. T. audit data to
pick returns for audit based on
whether they're likely to
generate assessment and whether
the assessment is expected to be
collectible so we we are working
on it but we were not happy with
where we are just yet.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
All right thank you let's go to
representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for the presentation I was
curious if you could talk a
little bit about your four point
one million dollars in
revisions.
To start with I I'll start this
but then I I'm interested in
looking W. secretary sturgeon
needs to add to that
part of the issues we've been
dealing with are working down
our vacancy rate two years ago
when I started my time with the
taxation and revenue department
we were nearly thirty percent
vacant and we're obviously
because of that reverting a
considerable amount each year.
The pandemic you're bringing
that they can see right down by
almost a percent per month
gradually and we had worked it
down to about twenty percent
with the goal of continuing to
get it down to closer to fifteen
but but since the pandemic on
set and everything we have not
been able to just keep up with
all the hiring with that we were
doing before that and we've had
more people leaving with you
know having to juggle so much on
their plates but I think that I
I know part of our reversion was
a nonrecurring thing from a
previous fiscal year and I
wonder if any certainly could
talk more in detail about that.
Thank you Secretary yes we we
did have some reversion of
related to nonrecurring items as
we were going to reversion
balances within our audit and so
we had cleared up all of those
reversion balances previously
that we're not stipulated
correctly within our fiscal year
audit and so those are now being
collected actually calculated
correctly compared to what they
were in previous years and so
now we have worked with our
auditors to make sure that we
have a reversion calculation
that is correct and it was
primarily due to the in the GDP
code in which that happened
because we have restricted and
non restricted items within that
key code and so we needed to
correct on how we're calculating
those items.
Secretary mention was primarily
the vacancy rates that we have.
Okay thank you very much.
All right thank you I'll just go
to Representative Hochman Vigil
place.
Madam chair can you hear me.
Yes we can hear you thank you
madam chair and thank you
director of Clark first I want
to commend you for the efforts
your department has put into
making X. accessibility to the
public
as a priority I want you to know
that I've had several
constituents reach out to me and
compliment TRD for all the work
you've been doing on that so
thank you very much and I just
have one quick question and your
special appropriation request
you you it's quite a large
appropriation and and you said
it was for future legislation
our future legislative
priorities can you tell me what
those are please.
Thank you madam chairman and and
Representative Hochman Vigil
like be happy to explain that I
know it's a little
unconventional my ad kind of
part of my trial by fire is the
secretary of taxed Rav was at
the end of the twenty nineteen
session
we ended up with tax bills
passing that if you if you
totaled up all that
administrative impact and
implementation costs that we had
scored in FY ours for all the
bills that actually passed we
said that the bills that passed
would have cost us twenty seven
million dollars to implement
because house bill six was huge
and there were other things too
and we ended up with cobbling
together from all these
different sources we ended up
with seven million dollars to do
it and so it's it's not a small
thing for me to say that thus
far we've implemented everything
on time and on budget and so
what we're trying to prevent
that request is attempting to be
proactive we're trying to
prevent the passage of big tax
legislation in the last days of
the session after the budget has
already been done with no
funding nonrecurring funding for
charity to be able to implement
for example if cannabis were to
pass during this session and we
had a tight deadline to
implement it we would need an
entirely new tax module engine
tax and we would need to get to
work right away with our
contract services and our staff
and so we're trying to be
proactive that's why to
contingent appropriation were
saying we would only gain access
to it if needed and so that's
the kind of thing or trying to
prevent and I have I'm here if
you have other questions about
that.
Thank you very much madam chair
and I director Clarke I
appreciate your answer and I
just have one other question
over the intermittent it was the
first official session the issue
was brought to our attention
about gross receipts tax being
charged for grocery delivery
services I know there's of an
impending at bill to say to
address that issue can just give
me a quick update on that are
like we can take it offline
either way be happy to Madam
chairman and Representative
Hochman Vigil the bill you're
thinking of is house bill ninety
eight which is an omnibus Tax
administrative code cleanup bill
that TRD are put forward and is
being sponsored by
Representative Martínez and
Representative Harper and it we
would issue we would fix the
issue of so that there's no
question of whether G. R. T. on
delivering groceries that you
know that would G. R. T. would
not be there and deliver
groceries just like
traditionally bought groceries
from the store
in that bill I believe it's it's
next step is the house floor and
so far it's enjoyed unanimous
bipartisan support thank you
very much for answers Dr Clarke
thank you madam chair.
Thank you very much just go to
Representative Crowder.
Your your muted.
You madam chair.
Just a quick question about four
to five million supplemental
it is that coming.
Strategy is.
Representative Crowder and madam
chair that's correct general
fund thank you.
Madam secretary
decision made.
To ask for support from general
funds is.
But forty one million dollar
fund balance your operating fund
wired for supplemental transfer.
Your operations.
This.
Okay madam chair Denise's is
that something that you can
speak to.
I apologize just trying to and
you.
And so the question if I
understand it correctly is that
our with our forty one million
dollar fund balance you're
requesting why we're asking for
the general fund.
instead is.
The process for the how that
decision got made okay
Representative Crowder madam
chair I we have restricted fund
balances in which were unable to
use those dollar amounts and so
we do have some restrictions
regarding the fund balance
that's currently within our make
up.
Of our agency.
Hi Sir I think I hear you say
you didn't use a transfer out of
phone balance
it's restricted it that we have
some restrictions yes we have
restricted fund balances and the
Representative Crowder that what
is made up with the auditing
compliance division it is funded
through the general fund and we
do have some small amount of
federal funds and the other
portion that funds that division
is our others a state revenues
in which does did not
materialize so that department
lost about five point six
million dollars when that
legislative language was changed
and those fees were not going to
be materialized so those are the
funding sources for auditing
compliance division.
Okay just a songwriter operating
funded forty one million and I
thought there's some freedom or
mobility with that fund it seems
logical to me that would just
transfer fund transfer instead
of asking for general fund.
Cialis afterwards maybe this
Nichols if you would give me a
call after.
No.
I'm trying to.
The decision making process so.
Thank you madam chair question.
All right thank you very much
and I want to remind the
committee that the specials and
supplementals are taken out at a
different time generally we
don't even get into this much
detail but the whole last a
portion of the presentation is
taken up by different
subcommittee Representative
Garcia thank you madam chair
will be brief well on the on the
basis of five seventy three says
Alfie recommendations
mistakenly.
Recommended if you dis
authorizing permanent four
hundred forty seven and if this
says also that twenty two runner
German six point eight well
we're under temporary my
question is how many vacant
positions you have right now
also I'm I think I have a one
ninety nine point four that are
vacant right now the correct.
You mentioned twenty percent.
sorry in for me or for secretary
will refer the secretary would
be but it can answer the
question before and we will look
at them our number of currently
vacant positions right now and I
would defer to Alison about the
F. T. issue and LFC wrecked.
Madam chair representative yes
the the F. T. issue that was
that's a mistake that I maybe I
accidentally entered S. T. E.
all under permanent so the total
number is correct
It was in that program summer
miscategorized so it emendation
LFC recommendation should more
the executive recommendation and
not have all of them under a
man's makes sense thank you
madam chair I guess the question
and then madam chair
Representative but.
I I have an answer for you madam
chair and and Representative
Garcia we have a total of one
thousand and forty positions on
organizational listing and as of
the start of February back to
see two hundred thirty were
vacant.
Thank you madam secretary madam
chair just one question eligible
a lot of the the two hundred
thirty that are vacant how many
are paid positions.
Secretary.
Madam chair I'm sorry I think my
internet for as for second I I
mentioned to representative
Garcia that we have one thousand
and forty positions on
organizational listing and that
as of the beginning of February
two hundred and thirty one were
vacant.
The madam chair that I
understand that what I'm asking
is of these two hundred thirty
positions how many of them are
funded positions right now.
I'm I believe madam chair and
Representative Garcia at we have
about fifteen percent funded
vacancy rate but that might
that's worse in the audit and
compliance division program
given this budget air and I
would like to Dini Sir or anyone
on the HSD staff if they can be
more specific than that I thank
you Secretary and so our overall
actual vacancy rate that we
currently have right now is
twenty two percent and we have
about a funded a rate of about
fifteen percent as a secretary
can mention our auditing
compliance division is higher
and it's running closer to
twenty five percent.
Oh one more last question madam
chair of the of the funded
positions that are vacant right
now where is that money going
to.
Madam chair and representative.
I might be missing your question
but basically if if we have
vacancies that are funded that
would either end up as a
reversion point for me maybe in
the process of hiring.
Thank you madam chair of but
that's the only question I have
thanks signature.
Thank you representative Garcia
Representative Cerdanya.
Thank you madam chair I'm I just
have thank your presentation
first I'm I just have a question
on real ID's so you said there
is seventy or seventy three
percent I can remember but
that's my biggest complaint I
have a lot of military people in
my district and you actually in
my district now
and are you are they able to use
their DD two fourteen for that
or is it getting easier because
that process seems to be really
difficult for a lot of military.
Well thank you madam chair and
Representative Sariñana
you're correct the current
percentage of real ladies out of
all of New Mexico credentials is
about seventy three percent and
that's rising little by little
and the federal real ID deadline
of course is October first one
thing to clarify is that the
requirements for a real ID are
set federally and so to the
extent we have rules or
regulations around what's
required is that federally and
not by us and so we do need to
make sure that we
you know live by the federal
requirements the role we play is
and making sure that we have
materials out to people in both
English and Spanish and
everywhere they can look for
them that described the people
here's what you need to have
ready for your real ID
appointment so that when they
come in they can actually
complete the transaction.
All right thank you I guess I
mostly here they have to go back
three or four times because they
can't get the right information
but thank you.
Yeah I thank you madam chair I
think it's particularly hard for
people who change their names
several times in their life it
can be really hard to track
down.
Okay thank you let's go to are
you are you finished
Representative.
Okay thank you madam also
Representative Herrera.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Secretary Clark another one of
the first things you did and I'm
so grateful for this when you
first came into office as you
raise the wages of for all of
your work is twelve dollars an
hour so I'm I'm just curious
the.
If the you know there is federal
legislation calling for a
minimum wage of fifteen dollars
an hour how many employees do
you have right now and all your
different departments that make
under fifteen dollars an hour
and you might not be able to
that.
Answer this off the top of your
head I can get this information
later but I'm just curious I
know we have a lot that entry
level workers that come in at
lower wage and then they have to
pay a pair which is you know
another hit to them so so even
at twelve dollars an hour
probably be around twenty five
thousand dollars year pair would
be reduced that by two thousand
and the and that with twenty
three thousand so if we if that
federal mandate or if that
federal minimum wage passed you
know how many people in your
department would be affected by
that.
Madam chair and representative
at ira I don't know off the top
of my that it would be
considerable and if I can just
staff to see if they can come up
with that number during the
hearing will provided to you if
not we'll follow up very soon
probably by end of day we could
provide that to you.
That's fine thank you madam
chair appreciate.
Right let's go to Representative
Anderson and I asked the staff
to resume the link to him.
Representative Anderson thank
you madam chairman of then
chairman I'm I'm.
I'm I'm operating under a
different name for the purpose
of this these questions madam
chairman I'll be short to the
point I want to congratulate
secretary Clark because it
sounds like she's making of real
in a in a troubled Department
that the I believe she inherited
and of twenty two first vacancy
rate certainly points to a great
deal of work remaining but none
the less our it was great to see
her bring her upper management
and a full staffing madam
chairman I will head I think two
questions one was relative to
our internet gross receipts tax
sales.
If I could have just a bit of
clarification on that today the
state of New Mexico is
collecting five point one two
five percent of gross receipts
does any of that get shared two
of local governments and will
that only then start on July
first of this year I'm a problem
three pronged question for
secretary court.
Thank you madam chair and
representative Anderson you're
correct that currently work
collecting five point one two
five percent the flat statewide
right on everything we're not
collecting the variable local
option taxes that vary in each
locality and County however the
legislature in house bill six
and and and then again in the
June special session provided
for distributions to local
governments to sort of try to
approximate the amount that they
would have received if they were
getting that tax so in FY twenty
all local governments split on a
pro rata basis twenty four
million and then during the June
special session that we just had
that amount is distributed
amongst the locals was increased
to forty eight million for FY
twenty one.
Thank you very much for
reminding me of that secretary
lasted just a quick comment on
your progress in the in the do
it's very.
Reassuring to hear you continue
to make private grant on a user
friendly online renewals of for
now including CDL and I just
think of the
The success of that program
cannot be understated thank you
madam chair.
Okay let's go to Representative
small all thank you very much
madam chair madam secretary
thank you I ago the the
sentiments of other committee
members in appreciate deeply the
job you and your team we're
doing madam chair madam
secretary.
one of the areas that that
you've noted is the program
transfer authority going back to
a question and Representative
Crowder raised would the
authority your seeking allow
better access to some of these
higher
funds that you all have that are
that are close to some of the
areas of need right now.
Chair and representative small
the program transfer authority
would give us budget flexibility
to for example to take vacancy
savings that may occur in one
program versus another and and
just move that our budget but if
the revenue in a fund balance
restricted it would remain
restricted from.
Okay thank you thank you madam
secretary I guess offline it
would be interesting to learn
more on some of the restrictions
that exist around these funding
balances to see if there's
looking towards opening some of
that up
Secondly madam chair madam
secretary in the LFC budget
there is the study for the tax
expenditure.
piece that seems particularly
important as we consider
economic recovery and what tax
expenditures make sense what tax
expenditures don't make sense
are you in a position if that
funding is provided to carry
that study out of renewable to
come back with those but the the
these brought good information
that will inform the policy
making in that area.
Thank you for that question and
madam chair representative small
if we were to receive that
funding we would certainly make
every effort to use that to the
fullest extent possible for us I
do want to say that the staff
that would be in charge of
procuring those schools are
software whatever they are also
the same limited number staff
who work on the consensus
revenue estimates and you all
are bill scoring and so they're
they're hello it is pretty tight
you know they they have a lot on
their plate to begin with and I
am a little concerned that if we
receive that funding they are.
You get the money us that.
In a way and not let their other
duties like the revenue
estimates in the bill scoring at
all to someone at.
But potentially we could hire a
temporary employee or something
like that to try to make it
work.
But I like the I like the
sentiment of better and better
evaluation all the time of our
tax expenditures.
Okay.
Thank you madam secretary there
be an area it's an area that the
folks have talked about for
awhile significant amount of
time I think it's great that the
LFC is included in the proposed
budget and making sure that you
all are in a position to
adequate lutein and grant of the
move in that direction given its
by partisan polished instances
standard portanto.
Thank you very much more
hindered him secretary.
Representative Lara.
Thank you madam chair I'll be
readable question I was I was
very intrigued with the
presentation madam secretary
regarding the kiosks that you've
set up at the at the stores and
I'm wondering madam chair how
cost effective are the as so you
know verses you know how old you
do especially because I'm really
curious about statewide
implementation so how much these
kiosks gonna cost and will be up
you know will they bring enough
revenue into to also that costs
Madam at thank you madam chair
thank you so much for that
question Representative Lara
they are being provided by a
vendor on a convenience fee
model so actually we don't pay
anything out of pocket when the
customer goes to use the kiosk
or if they renew something
online just just because they
are doing it online and it's
helping us you know in our field
offices we offer I believe a
five percent discount and then
they're paying a convenience fee
to the credit card processor so
if if you were to go to one of
those Albuquerque kiosks we give
you a five percent discount and
then they would charge a two
point four percent fee and you
come out somewhere where you
would just started and so
there's actually no money out of
pocket for the state to use
those kiosks and because it's a
convenience fee model the vendor
I believe they're called I. TI
they're piloting these ones in
Albuquerque to see how much our
population picks them up and the
more that we use them the more
that they'll be willing to
expand them statewide with us
and they have a contract with
Kroger so when we expand then
they'll end up and Kroger and
Albertson's store statewide and
that's our hope.
Thank you thank you madam
secretary thank you madam chair
I really intrigued by this and
you know but offers a more
convenient options to our to our
state to our citizens and if
they don't have to go to the NBC
offices and when line and doing
our duty to do all that so they
have to do I think that would
better thank thank you madam
chair thank you Secretary.
Right do we have any other
members that would like to ask a
question.
I do I have a couple of
questions I wanted to ask the
tax secretary and I appreciate
the The presentation today.
But I'm looking at the and and I
think it's great that we fill
that vacancy as well as we have
but I'm still looking at the
full time equivalent
calculation.
and I'm looking at the FY
current funded vacancy rate
now what capital Judiciary what
else okay yes somebody that does
not have a muted well of.
Thanks.
All right and I'm looking at the
current funded vacancy rate and
so when we're talking about
compliance enforcement.
And there's a negative number
that it is that because we're
going to be moving that out is
that the weight distance tax
issue or what is that.
Can you put that can you put
that chart up LFC staff you
could put the.
Person services and employee
benefits calc sheet out.
If we could look at call of E.
FY twenty one current funded
vacancy rate.
Look across that compliance and
Ms compliance enforcement.
Madam chair right this is an LFC
table so if I got this wrong
please correct me but I believe
what that means is that with the
budget as recommended a negative
number there means that we
couldn't afford to pay the
salaries that we currently have
on staff let alone continue to
chip away at our vacancy rate
well that does that doesn't make
sense to me so LFC staff what
does that mean to you.
madam chair that that yes that's
correct so that's for FY twenty
one but a negative number
implies that the division is
under funded and and I'm not
sure about
wait tax.
Issue.
Okay.
All right is there a way with
program support.
And and that would make sense
because program support madam
chair is there vacancy rate is
the lowest I believe in the
department so that they might be
down.
Senator close to fifteen percent
so there.
Great money getting type.
Okay and then we're looking at
Motor vehicle I thought we had
some problems on that last year
but it doesn't look like it now
do you have a comment on that
Adam secretary.
I'm madam chair I guess I I
would just comment that you know
last year the legislature is
very supportive and and giving a
large increase to the motor
vehicle division because they
were supportive of this
reorganization we wanted to do
to create our career ladder
there
is kind of been put on hold
because of the pandemic in the
downturn in revenues we would
still like to do that the main
difference in MVD between the
executive and LFC rex is that
the eggs the executive maintains
more of that funding for the MVD
reorg whether the LFC wreck I
would say shifts that money away
from NBC and into tax
administration to try to back
fill this shortfall we act.
You feel like madam secretary do
you feel like you've got this
the staffing that you need to
have I know at one time we were
very very concerned about this
department staffing levels and I
know you brought them up to
where they need to be but.
You know at the end of the day
this is incredibly important are
meant to collects the revenues
that we found and.
Make sure that everybody's in
compliance and that kind of
thing I I'm just curious because
what we generally do is we take
the low as you know and then
we'll stick a pin in at four
catch up clean up but I need to
have a you know tell me do you
feel like you've got the people
you need to have well madam
chair if I can answer that in
two parts I I appreciate your
question and before I do I want
to say to Representative Herrera
we have ninety nine employees
right now out of eight hundred
and some are making fifteen
dollars an hour last ninety
nine.
About one eighth of.
so okay back to question madam
chair thank you
with the motor vehicle division
I do think that we have a real
problem in that we will never I
don't think begin to retain and
retain staff to the point where
they're building skills and
building competency without a
career ladder I I've heard just
as one anecdote is one example
we have employees at MPD or
excellent field agents and they
can't they get second jobs at
like fast food places because
without that they can't gain
supervisory skills to qualify
for it and promotion and be do
we need to change that so that
they can start to build their
resume and qualify for internal
promotions and we don't have
that right now I would I would
say to that for the pay band in
that building entry level pay
that and B. D. agents are out in
the field keep in mind that
we're expecting them to deal
with really difficult customer
issues to be able to do escalate
things when sometimes they need
to tell people no expecting them
to be conversant in state and
federal law and customer service
skills so I think they're under
place now on the tax side what
you had on madam chair is right
that you know that every every
dollar that you spend in the
audit and compliance division is
going to result in about maybe
at eleven dollars in collections
that's one of our performance
strips and so it one could make
the argument that it could be
pendant penny wise pound foolish
to cut the tax the revenue
collecting agency in a time of
revenue downfall
we don't have as much problem
with retaining staff once they
get there they tend to have a
career ladder and we appreciate
that.
All right well let's go back to
the committee is or any other
questions before I ask for
motion.
All right I don't see anybody
else with their hand up so I'm
gonna go to Representative small
for the motion.
Thank you madam chair given the
focus on.
And madam chair I would move the
executive recommendation.
All right we have a motion for
the executive to have a second.
We did if we could take the they
are still services chart down
please I.
There you go.
Thank you madam chair okay we
have a motion and a second is
there any opposition to this
motion.
I don't see any opposition but I
want this one brought back up in
catch up clean up Representative
small and Sweetser don't let me
forget that so when we get into
that will we'll take another
peek at this thank you madam
secretary for the report today.
The committee we appreciate your
time.
Right let's go to the tourism
department agency code for
eighteen we'll start with the
analysts and then the cabinet
secretary.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Jacqueline
Martinez the LFC analyst.
For the prism Department.
We also have Jeremy today
joining us he is the executive
budget analyst after it started
with their different cheeks.
Secretary if you don't mind
taking your slides down just for
a few minutes I'll be quick.
Thank you.
Okay look at the different she's
the LFC recommendation this is
the high level for the entire
agency so the LFC recommendation
decreased general fund revenue.
To tourism department by five
hundred and fifty seven thousand
about three point three percent
the executive recommendation
maintain general fund revenue
flat at the FY twenty one
operating budget level.
you'll see me the differences
will mainly be in the marketing
and promotion program and the
program support program so we'll
get to those details in a few
slides.
The New Mexico magazine there
are no differences between the
recommendations that both
include three point two million
and other revenue this is a self
funded program within the
agency.
Program support program the LFC
recommendation maintain general
fund revenue flat at the FY
twenty one operating budget
level well the executive
increased general fund revenue
by two hundred thousand mainly
for personal services employee
benefits.
LFC rack maintained expenditures
at the FY twenty one operating
budget level.
And the executive increased
personal services by two hundred
forty four thousand this was
mainly to realign for FTP from a
marketing and promotion program.
From marketing and promotion
program to program support.
I'll now turn it over to Jeremy
Ford.
Tourism development program
chairman thank you very much
again what to do five four eight
which checkpoint and mention of
tourism development.
What recommendations do maintain
a revenue flat to the FY twenty
one offer operating budgets
recommendation increase personal
service what budget by sixty
three thousand by reducing other
costs to fully fund the current
staff which look at he and
that's pretty much it for P.
five four eight one two five
four nine which is the major
differences just marking motion
the LFC recommendation.
Reduces general fund revenue by
five hundred fifty two thousand
seven percent.
FY twenty one operating budget
the executive recommendation.
Well fund revenue by one hundred
ninety nine thousand.
The LFC recommendation increase
allegory by three seventy two of
the FY twenty one operating
budget increased supports the
agency's request for a contract
to provide marketing for local
festivals.
Affected by the COVID.
As well as the increased cost.
You true advertising guide
across the state.
Search in the other categories.
The LFC recommendation decreased
by nine hundred twenty four
point six thousand FY twenty one
operating budget.
Closer to FY twenty actuals.
Second recommendation increase
personal services what.
Thousand positions
in split and fully funded well.
Our our staff.
The executive recommendation.
Services by eight hundred eighty
one thousand is the department
entered into a.
Governments assisting increases
to current.
Recommendation are.
I want the same thing.
Because the marketing promotion
program is the only program that
could sustain such an agency
wide reduction without cutting
personal services and contracts
the overall reduction in other
services came from advertising
budget the analyst consensus
with this key code on all
performance measures I would
like to give.
The floor now teaching madam
secretary for the presentations.
But
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee I'm John Paul
Schrier secretary of New Mexicos
tourism department.
Also joining us today is the
department's research director
Victoria Greg or marketing
director Aaron lad in HSD
director thank you Lopez.
I like to first to begin by
thanking the legislative body
for recognizing the need to
increase tourism investment and
it's five million dollar special
appropriation.
Why the five million dollars is
a significant increase it is not
enough.
While relief efforts are
critical you must also look at
how to bring back demands.
Today I'm going to explain what
has happened to the tourism
economy the marketing funnel and
future business why a
significant investment is needed
and how we intend to use the
proposed twenty five million
dollars special appropriation in
the executive budget.
Well there is pent up travel
demand across the globe tourism
is a competitive industry and
people are dreaming of their
post pandemic vacation I know I
am.
But while they choose what will
they choose New Mexico that's
the real question will they
remember New Mexico or will they
go to Utah Colorado or Arizona
my job is to make sure they do
not choose our competitors but I
cannot reveal New Mexico's
marketing funnel without the
twenty five million dollars
special appropriation.
Tourism is an export industry
each visitor from our state that
that is from out of state that
spends money in New Mexico
creates jobs it's an economic
based industry.
Put a spotlight on the fact the
absence of visitors and their
money is felt throughout the
state.
Tourism brings customers in
sales to local businesses brings
local and state tax revenue to
support communities subsidizes
community amenities like our
museums and direct flights.
It's.
Jobs and career advancement
opportunities and gives
communities the opportunity to
share inner preserve their
culture.
Your constituents know this to
be true.
The tourism department
commissioned a survey to
understand how New Mexicans felt
about tourism.
We have concerns that the
pandemic might have shifted some
sentiment however we found that
New Mexicans felt overwhelmingly
positive about inviting tourists
to their communities.
The participants out of the
participants that checked
survey ninety six percent of
them agreed that the money
visitors spend in community is
important to the economy.
Ninety five percent of the
participants agreed that tourism
helps the small businesses in
their community and eighty nine
percent agree that tourism
provides jobs in their
community.
In talking with some of our New
Mexico more so recently they
were clear there cities need
tourism not only to diversify
their economies but also to
subsidize amenities that are
critical to workforce and talent
attraction keeping New Mexicans
from leaving our state
especially the young people
stabilizing commercial aviation
and attracting new businesses to
our state.
I already mentioned the
marketing funnel I'm going to
take a couple minutes just to
explain how we do what we do we
get people to choose New Mexico
this is called marketing funnel
and it is specifically a tourism
marketing funnel I will be
referring this to this
throughout my entire
presentation think of the style
of the fire hose the tourism
department through advertising
gets thousands of people
interested in New Mexico and
then we pull them through the
marketing funnel to conversion.
The tourism department local
communities and private sector
all play a role in attracting
customers.
New Mexico has low brand
awareness across the nation
people still call our office
asking if they need a passport
us about our beaches and asking
if they can drink the water well
this is kind of funny it's also
a problem because of low brand
awareness much of the tourism
department efforts have been
historically been feeling the
top of this marketing funnel I
think like look how amazing New
Mexico as.
Our local communities typically
focus on consideration this is
Silver City we are New Mexico
true.
Private sector hotels or at the
bottom of the funnel converting
bucking saying stay here in New
Mexico at my hotel.
But we turn this fire hose off
for a year is more like a leaky
garden hose now we are losing
brand awareness leisure travel
group business.
We take a quick moment and thank
the tourism industry it's been a
difficult year but our
collective work over several
years has really paid off for
New Mexico I also want to thank
the legislative body for
continuing to invest in tourism
as we have demonstrated results
diversifying our economy is
critical and tourism was doing
it this industry will come back
but we need significant
investment to feel that
marketing funnel again.
We've been successfully filling
it for nine years and we'll do
it again.
Each September the city of
Farmington hosts the four
corners four by four week multi
day city wide festival for all
things off roading.
At the center of this event is
the rock grand nationals which
is a national championship
series for extreme rock crawling
vehicles due to COVID nineteen
the organiser **** to Utah but
this usually brings in around
six thousand people to form ten.
tourists around the world is in
the street strategic nightmare
and this picture actually really
captured how I felt this past
year we are encountering new
problems I know before we can
effectively move for we must
really understand the new
predicament we are in.
And like I said this picture
captured the strategic
predicament the tourism industry
faces and the tourism department
did a significant amount of
research to best understand how
this pandemic impacted our
communities or businesses are
destinations and how best to
plan for economic recovery.
I'd like to invite Victoria
greater research director to
review some of the critical
research she championed this
past year.
The Tory are you there.
I am I apologize have been on
mute.
Thank you Secretary and madam
chair members of the committee.
First recovery as we know he is
not just essential for short
short term economic health of
New Mexico but also for the long
term survival of rural
communities which are built on
tourism a lack of demand means
that some businesses are making
the difficult decision to reduce
excess or closed entirely
leading to temporary and
permanent staff layoffs.
In small communities this can
lead to foreclosures of tourism
infrastructure workforce
migration and abandoned tourism
development projects without
intervention economic stability
may not return to rural areas
heavily dependent on tourism.
The New Mexico tourism
department understands that not
every community in the state has
the same leisure and hospitality
landscape nor do they have the
same challenges with that in
mind the tourism department has
created a tourism injury index
which incorporates a number of
factors that we believe will
most affect recovery these
factors include year over year
revenue loss in the leisure and
hospitality sector the
percentage of short term rentals
compared to traditional lodging
in every market County
dependence on visitor spending
some counties like what would be
county for example Ruland
visitor spending for nearly
fifty percent of their workforce
so you can imagine COVID
nineteen has been devastating we
also looked at county reliance
on meetings and conventions
which we know will be slower to
return that leisure travel this
allows us to focus on the areas
of most need as we work for the
difficult process of recovery.
The tourism industry has seen
disproportionate injury during
the COVID nineteen pandemic even
compared to overall negative
effects on small businesses
within the state in this are
spending alone New Mexico has
lost over three point one five
billion dollars which translates
into a hundred and sixty million
in lost state and local taxes in
December approximately thirty
eight thousand leisure and
hospitality as well without a
job the legislature has tried
workers out of jobs the US
travel association estimates
that forty percent of all
unemployment within the U. S. is
within the leisure and
hospitality sector.
Small businesses make up the
overwhelming majority of tourism
businesses in New Mexico and
they have hurt the most with
revenues down nearly seventy
eight percent compared to
January of two thousand
nineteen.
While small businesses are
hurting in New Mexico online and
out of state retail businesses
are faring very well during the
pandemic in July two thousand
nineteen eighty six when to
affect allowing for state G. R.
T. collection on online
marketplaces which makes some of
the tourism G. R. T. losses
harder to see at the macro level
however we know that out of
state retail continues to rise
well our local small businesses
continue to suffer according to
the New Mexico tax research
institute out of state sales may
make up to sixteen percent of
all G. R. T. through June of
twenty twenty.
Because of the shift in consumer
behavior and online shopping
local governments realized a
significant decrease in local G.
R. T..
Because tourism was down for
most of twenty twenty local
governments realize a
significant decrease in lodgers
tax as well this means that
local communities will not have
enough funding to properly
promote themselves like they've
done in past years if you
remember the marketing funnel
the secretary described from the
beginning of this presentation
local communities rules are very
important to continue to drive
come conversion.
Because the liquidity crisis for
both local communities and
private sector so they won't
have the funds to promote
themselves so the state will
need to expand its effort to
include the entire marketing
funnel which justifies the need
for the twenty five million
dollars appropriation.
New Mexico however is well
positioned to take advantage of
a return to travel consumer
research during the COVID
nineteen pandemic suggested
short and long haul drive
traffic will be the first to
return as travelers planned road
trips to visit friends and
family for their first pandemic
vacation.
New Mexico's visitor mixes
overwhelmingly from bright
markets representing eighty
percent of our total visitors in
an average year this is higher
than any state in our
competitive set.
Likewise we know that domestic
flight travel will be next
return a much smaller but still
valuable part of New Mexicos
visitor next last return will be
international travel the lack of
international travel has proved
devastating for some states such
as Arizona which gets thirteen
percent of its visitation from
international markets New Mexico
however relies very little on
international visitation these
factors make us well positioned
for return to visitation.
What are tourism product mix is
very attractive to visitors
looking for an opportunity to
get away from crowds and avoid
avoid close spaces after COVID
nineteen consumer research
indicates that travelers are
most interested in wide open
outdoor spaces and new cultural
experiences when it is safe to
travel again New Mexico has both
of these attributes in abundance
even more so than our
competitive set and certainly
more so than United States as a
whole historically our visitors
have sought out our art
galleries museums.
And other cultural attractions
at double the rate of those who
visit our competitive so states
and this our national and state
parks and more than double the
US average visitors who are made
aware of New Mexico's unique
offerings will provide our state
aligns very well with their
clothes pandemic vacation needs.
So now that you know what we
have going for us after the end
of the pandemic we took a look
to the past in planning for
recovery from COVID nineteen in
New Mexico the tourism
department has look to the
recent past to study how the
industry recovered from the two
thousand eight financial crisis
and recession it took the
tourism sector in New Mexico
proximally for years to fully
recover the graph on this page
shows the accommodation sector
specifically and the hit it took
in gross receipts tax from two
thousand nine to two thousand
thirteen when growth in the
sector finally surpassed its pre
two thousand nine levels it took
a full five years to see the
equivalent size of annual growth
if there had not been a
recession since then this person
industry has seen a growth of
over twenty two percent in
visitor spending.
The good news is that when we
begin to recover we know the
truth the tourism industry
capable of leading the pack when
it comes to job growth both in
right and wrong numbers since
two thousand ten jobs in the
tourism industry have grown at
the rate of two point nine times
the rate of other industry since
two thousand fifteen this growth
has been even more impressive
outpacing other job sectors
within the state tourism
employment help to pull New
Mexico out of the last recession
and given the opportunity to
increased demand we know we can
propel New Mexico to greater
success coming out of this
crisis.
Sh thank you Victoria.
So we took a lot of this
research did a good old
fashioned swot analysis.
And what really stuck out to me
is that we have some really
strong assets some straits that
other states don't have one we
have an amazing Brandt The New
Mexico true brand that provides
a seven to one marketing R. O.
Y. that does not even use a
multiplier destination
uniqueness adventure steeped in
culture we do have some
weaknesses like we've been we
are advertising went dark for a
year.
Our historic low destination
awareness we just historically
have not been as well known as
other states.
Private sector liquidity
liquidity crisis is going to be
a challenge.
Some of the opportunities that
of Victoria touched on was our
beautiful outdoor recreation
wide open spaces we can
capitalize on our strong drive
market.
Some of the threats that we face
is the lack of state tourism
investment.
Workforce migration the deep
concern of many many of our
managers and business owners
throughout the state vaccine
supply limitations and other
states increased tourism
investment has remember.
Industry and our marketing
funnel firehose is ending.
And we need to refill the
marketing funnel and get people
to choose New Mexico over
Colorado over Utah in Arizona.
We briefly went over the budgets
for the tourism department the
executive budget does have a
twenty five million dollars
special appropriation which is
included
it's an appropriate amount of
investment to address the
complexity and the severity of
the new tourism economy the
primary goal of the twenty five
million dollars is to drive
demand relief is great.
But it is a temporary solution.
The strategy shifts but I'm
gonna be presented today this
strategies I'm gonna present
shift depending on on the
timeline to re open.
Within the next two months we
know we will know how the
vaccine rollout will influence
the ability to loosen
restrictions and this twenty
five million dollars is the
minimum investment to reveal the
marketing funnel with tourism
business both leisure and group.
And we've been closed and
telling tourists not to come to
New Mexico.
We made the tough call we put
people first.
And so we have not been
advertising for nearly a year
causing brand awareness to slip.
I've been asked how in the world
is your little agency going to
be able to protrusion during
this pandemic what does that
look like moving forward.
We did and are you planning and
strategic forecasting and came
up with three different
scenarios these are all three
are coordinated twenty five
million dollar tourism recovery
strategies to generate demands
but then just looks a little
different whether it's more
leisure or more group.
Funds will shifted based upon
when New Mexico starts to open
an advertising is appropriate.
Tourism recovery looks different
as more time goes on strategies
will be reassessed in June of
twenty twenty one as a reminder
these funds do not come
available until July so this
gives us another five months for
things to be able.
The tourism department will
commission a dedicated marketing
are I study and economic impact
study after the strategies
implemented to measure
effectiveness these are public
funds and we are stewards of
those funds.
You can see these three
different scenarios there is Lee
leisure travel which is like a
family vacation
Has a short planning cycle this
is really important that when
people plan their vacation it's
usually six to eight weeks out
so we know we can infer
influence this group quickly
through working media I'm out of
in our out of state markets.
Group travel.
Has a longer planning cycle six
to twelve months and group
travels critical to building the
destinations based it fluctuates
by destination but a twenty to
thirty percent group travel
based is healthy.
Meeting that twenty to thirty
percent of the destinations
hotel rooms are booked in
advance with group business and
this could be anything from the
the four by four competition a
spoke to spoke about earlier or
it could be a trade show and
convention.
Both leisure group are good for
urban and rural group just looks
a little different
people you typically think a
trade just expansions but that
group business like outdoor
competitions drone racing
competitions motorcycle clubs
are great for our rural
communities as well for example
eagle riders come through
Gallup two to four times a year
and contracts a block of hotel
rooms at western plus this type
of group can con contract sixty
months six to twelve months out
which is really helpful for us
in planning for the future.
Sorry oh eight is preferred as
it has it is more leisure focus
with the higher our allies
because the cost of customer
acquisition costs less for
leisure.
However each scenario will
greatly help the industry
recover and find a long term are
away okay madam secretary I'm
gonna stop here I want to.
that the committee understands
that this is a special.
And that there's going to be a
committee that's going to hear.
All the explanation around it so
I'm gonna have you wrap this
piece of because we're going to
hear a little bit later and
let's let's start rolling
through here.
Yes madam chair so we're in
wrapping up I will go through
the detail the scenarios but I'm
just going to ask Miss body to
give New Mexico a shot to
compete.
And if you look at what is some
of the other states have done
and this significant increase
other states have done to to
encourage tourism and promote we
want to make sure that New
Mexico's position to succeed as
well.
And finally.
I think looking at the Colorado
example just a cautionary tale
of when they cut their funding
for marketing and promotion and
what happened to that state
within one year they went from
the top resort destination down
to number seventeen.
We don't want this to happen for
New Mexico so that madam chair I
will stand for questions thank
you.
Right if we could take the
slide show down please.
Okay.
For questions about the budget
let's see if we have any I
don't.
The hands yet but that's.
Okay.
Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman madam
chairman I was just going to
follow up the I'm.
I'm.
When it comes to New Mexico
tourism we have pursued a policy
of say.
Stay away don't come.
I hear a of a hopeful for
eviction for loosened.
Our restrictions I hear you Utah
getting.
Sure some of them and think I'll
bet you they didn't tell him did
not come and all this really
just adds up to a point madam
chairman and that is I think
tourism suffers from
Differing of goals order
ordering the shutdown of outdoor
recreation state parks golf
courses and on and on and on now
we have curtailed outdoor
recreation opportunities but it
it as we head into the US I
think it's yeah the timing issue
why first we're out of the woods
why change green I think I I
question whether or not we
should go forward in our
decision making based on that.
Promised thank you madam chair.
Okay just got a Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam secretary one of the
things it's in my district is
you lake state park.
A lot of out of state people own
homes there.
They go there in the fish at the
lake.
And the during this crisis some
of the most angry calls that
I've received were from people
who own a home at the lake they
were banned from fishing in the
lake they couldn't go on the
late.
by themselves in their own boat
in the if they went to their
home that they own they were
supposed to quarantine now I
know that you're not responsible
for those policies but my
question is you to you is what
can we do.
To welcome them back to the
state of New Mexico.
And bring them back into the
fold.
Madam chair members of the
committee representative thank
you for that question what we
can do is up appropriate twenty
five million dollars of for the
tourism department to do some
advertising
I appreciate that that comment
yes we this administration has
made some some very tough calls
but we appropriate people first
in this industry in particular
has realized severe economic
injury and so I would like to
see an of an increased
investment so we can pull this
industry out of this experience
thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Garcia thank you
madam chair of madam secretary
of.
Well my a deal is it's concern
we need to well keep rural New
Mexico in mind you know a lot of
tourism because folks are on
Santa Fe is full for you know in
my district I share of.
how do German Armstrong which is
Gallup we have the item is our
morals are every year we have a
remote based national monument
we have a more national monument
monument and in my district we
need to see if we could Roy
more tourism to rural New Mexico
not just my County or my
district but all rural New
Mexico thank you madam secretary
thank you madam chair.
Okay let's go to Representative
small thank you madam chair
thank you Secretary knowing that
the supplemental request will be
taken up at that time madam
secretary
the in terms of the
Current budget in the LFC and
the executive recommendation
I guess really quick madam chair
from the LESC perspective was
this the recommendation based as
many were on the of previous
executive rimac recommended
position of a five percent
decrease that that the the
agency handed in.
Allison are but let's get that
from the analysts.
Madam chair representative small
yes this the LFC recommendation
was basically matched exactly to
what the original executive
director of a five percent
reduction was and then we added
a little bit back in for certain
programs.
Understood okay thank you very
much this Martinez
it seems like there is not a
great deal of difference within
this budget much of the
discussion is coming at this
later point
and those are all my those are
all my questions on my questions
thank you.
Representative Allison.
Thank you madam chair.
Question for the secretary the
in the LFC report in states that
the mission of the tourism
department is to market New
Mexico to the world as in
chanting visitor destination
does that mean that you would
assist with some potential
tourist attractions especially
in my area the four corners area
we have been trying to get
people to the Shiprock pinnacle
but because of financial
Difficulties we are still unable
to do it so does that of.
The twenty five million stimulus
and then use saying that you are
the steward of funds with that
assists my initiatives and
ambitions.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative thank
you for that question our role
is to grow the economy through
tourism and we do that partially
by marketing New Mexico to
target destinations throughout
the nation and attract them to
come and experience all parts of
New Mexico whether that's rural
New Mexico or a bigger city that
is our role is to help promote
attractions throughout the state
so it sounds like that is
something that we can
collaborate on together
Representative thank you.
Thank you madam secretary thank
you madam chair.
Representative Herrera hand up
earlier president.
Thank you madam chair I guess.
One of my jobs during a life was
being an event planner you know
bringing ten thousand people
into a city holding a convention
and and saying goodbye to them
five days later so.
Just curious on your market and
how much time how much of this
money to devote to
reaching out to you know
organizations all over the
country to come into New Mexico
and then how much of your time
to our money is planned for
putting you know advertisements
in major markets and what are
your major markets and also be
curious about that thank you
madam chair.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative thank
you for that question.
So you know that there is
leisure and then there is group
business and in regards to
leisure that's historically been
the role of the tourism
department because it provides
the the strongest R. O. Y.
because of that customer
acquisition cost is less
expensive
so in the last nine years that
is been that sharp focus of the
tourism department
we have been in seven different
markets including San Diego
Phoenix Denver Austin Houston
Dallas and Chicago.
And so the presentation that I
will I will be holding until
appropriate time to talk about
the twenty five million dollars
special does have a budget
included specifically for group
business and how we're going to
target meeting planners just
like your past a role in so I'd
love to get into those details
when madam chair feels it's
appropriate thank you.
Thank you.
All right
let's go back to the committee
is or anybody else has a
question here for the department
of tourism.
All right I need a motion or
thank the department of tourism
for the presentation and
certainly because this is been
such a high profile issue I got
lots of coverage in the press
we're going to give it a full
hearing when we get into the sub
committee so we have a better
understanding exactly how those
dollars are going to be used I
can assure everyone of that
let's go ahead and I turn to
Representative small for the
motion thank you madam chair I
would move the LFC
recommendation for the tourism
department okay we have a motion
and we have a second a certain
amount.
Okay have a motion and a second
representative Garcia was the
second is there any opposition
to that motion.
Saying that it has been approved
and I want to thank the tourism
secretary for the presentation
and I suggest that the part that
you with your power point if you
send it to the whole committee
so they have a chance to review
it that would be very good and
again thank you very much thank
you madam chair thank you so
already bye everyone.
Okay let's go to the next agency
which is the Economic
Development Department HSD code
for nineteen we'll start with
the two analysts and then we'll
go to the Department.
Madam chair committee who have
the same to analyst for the
Economic Development Department
ahead and share my screen so we
can review different she.
This is overall agency
differentiate the LFC
recommendation reduce general
fund revenue by three hundred
and forty thousand or two point
five percent the executive
recommendation maintain general
fund revenue flat.
You'll see primary differences
when we get to the economic
development program office of
the secretary and the outdoor
recreation.
For
economic development division.
The LFC recommendation reduce
general fund revenue by one
hundred and seventy two thousand
four one point nine percent when
compared to the FY twenty one
operating budget.
The executive recommendation
maintain general fund revenue
flat with FY twenty one.
The LFC recommendation reduced
all expenditure categories
however mac recommended
maintaining contracts for the
eight program as well as a solo
worker program at the FY twenty
one operating budget level the
executive recommendation reduced
personal services employee
benefits by forty three thousand
to eliminate vacancy savings and
re prioritized funding.
For programs and contractual
services like eight.
As well.
I will turn it over to Jeremy
not to discuss the film program.
Madam secretary madam secretary
members of the chair.
Members of the committee sorry I
will move on to P. five fourteen
which is failing.
In regards revenue the LFC
recommendation reduced general
fund revenue by twenty five
thousand or three percent when
compared to the FY twenty one
operating budget the executive
recommendation maintaining
general fund revenue which was
flat to FY twenty one budget
both recommendations support
increase in the two hundred
category to fully support
current staff the LFC
recommendation reduced
contractual services by one
hundred twenty nine thousand.
By reducing the amount spent on
website maintenance and also
canceling media conference
hosted by the office the
executive recommendation reduced
contractual services contractual
services by one hundred four
thousand to move the funding
from a contract EDD decided to
eliminate to go instead into
personal services to cover the
cost of current staff members.
I will now move on to P. five
twenty six which is the office
of the secretary.
The LFC recommendation reduced.
General fund revenue by one
hundred seventy thousand or five
point six percent.
The executive recommendation
maintain general fund revenue
slash FY twenty one budget in
regards to the base.
The LFC recommendation produced
personal services employee
benefits by fifty thousand this
will cover the cost of current
field positions are only two
vacancies within this program
the LFC recommendation reduced
instructional services by one
hundred nineteen point four
thousand reducing the contract
for the New Mexico partnership
which currently does not have an
executive director the executive
recommendation reduce personal
services.
By fifty thousand to
reprioritize vacancy savings to
increase in crack to increase
contractual services.
For a crucial efforts in
marketing and collaboration
between the department economic
developers the LFC
recommendation in regards to
language includes the following
language the general fund
appropriation to the program
supports the economic
development department in the
contractual services category
includes nine hundred thousand
dollars for the New Mexico
economic development.
Corporations.
And in regards to outdoor
recreation which is P. seven
zero eight.
The LFC recommendation increase
general fund revenue by twenty
seven point four thousand the
executive recommendation
maintained over general fund
revenue slapped FY twenty one
operating budget the LFC
recommendation slightly reduced
the two hundred category to
align with the FY twenty actual
spending.
The LFC recommendation increase
contractual services by twenty
five thousand for web design and
an audit expenses the executive
recommendation maintain all
expenses flat.
Across the key code according to
the FY twenty one operating
budget.
The LFC recommendation includes
the following language the
general fund appropriation to
the outdoor recreation division
of the economic developments in
the other category includes one
hundred thousand dollars for the
outdoor equity fund and also
reach consensus on all measures
I will now allow secretary keys
to read by the presentation
thank you.
Secretary this year up.
Wonderful thank you madam chair
I'm just going to share my
screen let me know if you can
see this.
We we can see that okay
wonderful thank you so much so
joining me today is deputy
secretary John Clark the
director of the economic
development division mark Roper
I see none of us from our
outdoor recreation she's our
director and amber Dotson also
are director from the film
office and develop will Malina
who is our director HSD so our
mission at EDD is to improve the
lives of New Mexico families by
creating economic opportunities
and providing a place for
businesses to thrive.
Despite the pandemic we have had
eighteen announcements in terms
of leader this year in twenty
communities fifteen of those are
rural our economists project
that our economic impact for
those deals over the next ten
years will be eleven point eight
billion dollars.
Just a few of these and I will
highlight the obviously been in
the process that so we'll just
kind of jammed through them this
is a quantum computing company
that was founded in Wyoming that
moved to Santa Fe this year
bringing a hundred sixteen new
jobs with an average salary of a
hundred and seven thousand
dollars.
Ascent aviation services a
wonderful deal we did and
Roswell bringing three hundred
and sixty jobs at this is at the
Roswell international air center
and this is for planes that need
to be serviced and maintenance
especially due to the COVID
pandemic because they're not
flying so we project this will
have an economic impact of eight
hundred and seventy seven
million dollars over the next
ten years.
Let's send this is a company
that specializes in aerial
inspection and mapping in Los
crucis and they expanded to add
seventy nine new jobs with an
average salary of sixty four
thousand dollars and economic
impact of six million six
hundred twenty nine million over
the next ten years we did a lead
investment of seven hundred
fifty thousand.
Sprint corporation this company
is a Wisconsin based company
that moved into to Santa Theresa
we'll be bringing eighty five
jobs with an average salary of
forty nine thousand dollars our
leader and best man here was
half million dollars.
Spend much really exciting
company that's at the spaceport
that is building a catapult to
kind of pull satellites into low
earth orbit with fifty nine new
jobs with an average salary of a
hundred and seventy three
thousand dollars and a lead
investment of four million.
Netflix of the expansion
bringing another billion dollars
into the state of New Mexico so
that is two billion dollars of
money that would not be here
otherwise they're adding ten
stages in addition to three back
lots a training facility for our
students here in New Mexico also
additional effects components
very exciting to have that
expands on mesa del sol in
Albuquerque.
This is nature's toolbox which
is a company that came from the
scientists at Los Alamos and
they're incubating vaccines they
will be moving to Rio Rancho
this is a hundred and sixteen
stem jobs with an average salary
of over seventy four thousand
dollars.
In terms of our FDI successes
there is a movement to on shore
and reassurance the United
States especially from Asia we
were we have been able to close
three Taiwanese companies and
the Santa Teresa area and they
just keep on building on each
other we've actually hired a
consultant in Taipei to help us
with the amount of Asian
companies that are potentially
moving to this for our region.
I'm going to head over to W.
secretary John Clark to talk a
little bit about our legislative
priorities economic recovery
John.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and members of the committee so
you're about to have an
opportunity to make some choices
on how we want to fund economic
development moving forward your
in a severe financial economic
crisis we've been in a situation
kind of similar to this before
not as dire but the Great
Recession was certainly very
severe and we have an
opportunity now to learn from
the choices that we made at that
time and what happened as a
result.
After the Great Recession we're
New Mexico up to then had been
following the track of the rest
of the country in job growth and
wage growth New Mexico decided
to slash funding for Lee to cut
way back on funding for need to
and significantly cut funding
enough to you from the Economic
Development Department.
Partly as a result of that in
the following ten years after
the Great Recession New Mexico
had a lost decade of job growth
and wage growth New Mexicans
always made less per hour than
people in the rest of the
country but we at least to the
scene our wages growing at the
same rate we didn't see that
over the next ten years we
sought significantly lower wage
growth and now we have a larger
gap to make up now in twenty
nineteen we were starting to see
some significant improvements in
our starting to not just catch
up but surpassed those national
average growth statistics so we
have some good momentum going
into the pandemic now obviously
is a critical time for economic
development funding and we can
learn from our choices of the
past and make different ones
going full.
Just quickly going over the
budget I knew the animals went
over this in detail but
important note is that ten years
ago before our budget and FTE
were cut significantly the
Economic Development Department
had seventy authorized FTE now
we have fifty two and not all of
those positions are funded we
have funding for forty eight of
this now one thing that to your
committee has asked at each time
would come forward is how many
of those are filled and we've
made tremendous advances in
filling those vacancies are
total vacancy right now is
eleven percent which is a half
to a third of what it was in
past years but once you take out
the positions that are funded
are funded vacancy rate is just
four percent and we anticipate
being able to take care of that
very rapidly so we're asking
that you go with the executive
executive budget recommendations
which keeps our funding flat
instead of the LFC
recommendation which provides
for the cuts and is one last
quick New I would just add that
the the Economic Development
Department was one of just a
couple of major agencies it took
a total budget cuts going from
FY twenty FY twenty one.
So you're all very familiar with
leader will discover this
briefly but we are requesting a
special appropriation of thirty
minimally dollars to maintain
the fund balance you can see
here some of the great
statistics that the leaders
invested nineteen companies
creating twenty five hundred
jobs Justin in the last a couple
of years these companies are
investing seven hundred fifty
six million dollars and our
economic analysis shows that the
impact over the next ten years
will be almost twelve billion
dollars you can see as well that
these of impacted a variety of
communities it's not just
Albuquerque Rio Rancho Santa Fe.
R. J. W. as well is one of our
most useful successful incentive
programs well we're asking for
twelve million dollars five
million is in our base budget
and seven million a special
appropriation and again here you
can see the great results and I
want to highlight the rural jobs
component this helped create
eight hundred sixty five rural
jobs which is really critical
this is one of the best ways we
have to help economic
development in rural New Mexico.
Then ask more pro for our
director of economic
developments talk a little bit
about main street.
Thank you Secretary of Madam
chairman members of the
committee New Mexico mainstreet
is been one of our most
successful programs in rural New
Mexico as they age they help
revitalize downtown areas and
help bring necessary assistance
to those people are trying to
rehabilitate and get their
downtowns back up and going as
you can see here we are pushing
percent capital outlay funds
here at to help with our
investment in public
infrastructure and it does
leverage our public to private
investment quite substantially
over the years and this also
demonstrates a very visible
improvements when you see the
areas that have been approved
you can see that there is been
very very great increases in
those in those areas like sixty
percent increase in pedestrian
traffic sixty percent increase
in business
Expectations the ninety five
percent increase.
In business and and business
openings so as you can see this
is been a very successful
program for a for the department
for the state of New Mexico and
it most definitely highlights
the needs in the rural area.
And before before you one to the
next slide there's one other
program that I want to highlight
the there's that is not on the
slide it is our eight program is
a program that we have that
helps our local economic
development organizations up
market and promote and do the
things necessary to do on a
local basis at some matching
program that allows them to have
resources that would normally be
available to help them on their
local efforts and the we last
year budgeted two hundred and
forty thousand dollars for this
program and being able to
maintain that program at this
level or greater would be
greatly appreciated.
I'm going to ask us all of us
are director about more wrecked
walked through the slides.
Thank you Secretary thank you
madam chair thank you members of
the committee good afternoon.
I want to start with just a
brief story about a young woman
I met last fall her name is a
stray at and she is a high
school student in okay and that
she grew up gardening growing
crops other family she grew up
with their under her fingernails
and that's part of what drew her
to river source which is a
nonprofit that promotes water
stewardship and it's a group
that received one of the
inaugural outdoor equity fund
grants Eversource you learn
about water quality monitoring
watershed conservation a lot
more the national suicide to
Mexico and worked as a
hydrologist and that is a
microcosm of why the after
equity fund is so essential its
workforce development it's
economic development it advances
community and environmental
health.
If the grant program which uses
outdoor recreation as a vehicle
to promote equity and climate
justice it was the first of its
kind in the country now I
regularly get calls from
California to Colorado means
they're all following our lead
the country as a whole is
following New Mexico's lead and
I think that's something we
should all be enormously proud
of.
We also can't let that momentum
flag which is why requesting one
million in a special
appropriation for the after act
fund grant.
This first round of grants is
enormously successful we only
provide about a quarter of the
request we saw with this special
appropriation we can fully fund
that demand and help get about
thirty eight thousand kids like
a stray outside.
Course being able to access New
Mexico's rivers mountains
forests deserts the key part of
the vision which is why we're
also requesting the special
appropriation to develop shovel
ready outdoor recreation
infrastructure throughout the
state we're talking about trails
public shooting ranges program
sporting facilities and more
these projects have a direct
benefit on the surrounding
businesses communities and
residents and perhaps most
importantly would happen like
this New Mexico risks leaving
many hundreds of thousands of
federal dollars unused on the
table we also just went over the
main street side we are putting
forth the pretty innovative
program in partnership with the
awesome main street team to make
sure that all that outdoor
recreation infrastructure the
benefits are downtown so people
who are going to element of male
parties they're then going to
the downtown area and spending
their money at shops and hotels
and restaurants and we're seeing
that economic development
percolate in our rural
communities.
So the data you see on the
screen that illustrate they
illustrate that outdoor
recreation is a powerful force
today versifi the economy in New
Mexico in order to keep it
growing and I think we're very
much on the right track of New
Mexico adding ten times more of
direct jobs since two thousand
and eighteen the country as a
whole we need to invest
holistically and that means in
our lands our waters and our
young people thank you.
Thanks legislative members also
director well Representative the
slide.
Thank you Secretary thank you
madam chair hello members of the
committee.
The film industry here in sit in
New Mexico today supports over
nine thousand jobs in twenty
nineteen the average annual wage
in New Mexico was fifty six
thousand dollars one hundred and
seventy five jobs in the film
industry not only provide a high
annual wage but typically also
include health care retirement
and other benefits.
Let's look at the direct spend
over the past seven years you
can see healthy numbers
climbing up to FY seventeen at
five hundred and five nine point
nine million and then just in
fiscal year nineteen we had a
record breaking year of five
hundred and twenty five million
FY twenty we actually topped out
at two hundred and seventy four
point nine million in and do
that decreases due to comment
but illustrates the growth
trajectory that we were on.
Over the course of the past
seven years we have seen two
point four billion indirect sent
in New Mexico.
To give back program which is a
really special program in twenty
twenty to give back program
which is part of our film
incentive generated three
hundred and thirty three
thousand dollars in donations to
twenty schools across the state
including UNM requests San Juan
college for NMSU in Alamogordo
Ian and E. N. M. U. import talus
and Navajo tech in Crown Point
and many more in fact since
twenty sixteen to get back
program in total has donated
over one point three million to
New Mexico schools with film and
media programs there are
hundreds of jobs in the film
industry and just to name a few
there's accounting construction
costuming recollect trick
transportation hair and make up
welding and the list goes on
let's take a look at the next
slide.
For FY twenty one and looking to
FY twenty five estimated direct
spend is forecast to have steady
healthy growth an estimated tax
credit credit tax credit payouts
for FY twenty one is forecast at
eighty three million and payouts
obviously tracked the growth in
estimated production spend
through FY twenty five.
This forecasted growth really
comes as no surprise let's look
at some of the rural locations
on the next slide used since
January first of twenty nineteen
this is an incomplete list but
Alamogordo cares those Rio
Arriba county of Roswell Rideau
so these young Pueblo and
there's many more and with an
enormous content start with an
enormous demand for content
locally decision makers are
looking for and competing for
fresh unique locations a season
workforce local businesses and
in fact very safe places to
produce content New Mexico tax
all of these boxes and just last
month movie maker named
Albuquerque the number one and
Santa Fe number two for small
cities as some of the best
places to live and work as a
movie maker deadline Hollywood
also named New Mexico as the hot
spot of twenty twenty.
So in regard to New Mexico being
a safe place to produce the film
industry must operate under
really stringent protocols some
of these particles or sixty
pages long.
And since September there been
approximately fifty thousand
COVID nineteen tests
administered by our productions
in the film industry here in New
Mexico is averaging at a
positivity rate of point two
four percent productions are
also spending significant money
on COVID expenses and are
sourcing from businesses here
for safety supplies equipment
disinfection services and
security services and of course
tests.
I want to touch on marketing and
then we'll get to the minority
filmmakers one of our new and
keep priorities at the Film
Office is marketing and
marketing the entirety of New
Mexico to decision makers and
one of the most powerful ways to
do this.
Is by improving and better
utilizing our families on
program we have sixty liaison
statewide and we are onboarding
more and one of the most
effective ways we are working
with these are these amazing
families on is obtaining photos
of every nook and cranny of the
state and getting that those
photos into our locations
database.
In regard to the minority
filmmaker and film project
funding.
As I'm sure many of you are well
aware minorities are not only
misrepresented but vastly under
represented in the film industry
both on camera and behind the
camera and we really believe New
Mexico can be the leader in
directly addressing the systemic
issue and helping to foster more
diverse and inclusive industry
we're requesting four hundred
and fifty thousand to support
black the Tenix and native
American filmmakers and film
projects.
And that would actually be three
separate hundred fifty thousand
special hundred fifty thousand
dollars special appropriations.
we not get into the specials
I mentioned this last couple of
agencies specials and
supplementals that kind of thing
I'll be taken up at a special
subcommittee meeting right now
we're talking about the core
operational budget thank you.
Thank you madam chair we can go
ahead and and send around the
committee the level video that
was that together by the Senator
Pinto memorial fund.
So just wrapping up going
forward we are very optimistic
for COVID happens we had quite a
bit of momentum in New Mexico we
were terrified this and stop
because of it actually to be
honest with you people want to
comes New Mexico even more than
they did before they want
quality of life we don't
necessarily want to be stuck in
the big cities on top of each
other in New York Senator Cisco
LA so we have been busier than
we have ever been and now is the
time to double down we have an
opportunity to really bring
economic development incentives
for parking diversifying our
economy so thank you for letting
us present today and here is all
of our information if anyone
would like to reach out we have
been speaking more companies on
a daily basis trying to help
them individually working
through the pandemic with
federal and state assistance so
please don't hesitate to reach
out and tell your your company's
and your areas to reach taxless
thank you very much ma'am chair
thank you madam secretary.
Appreciate the presentation was
built to the committee questions
for us start with Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair with just
one quick question has to do
with the the PSEB calques I
notice in the.
Funded vacancies there a hundred
and seventy one point eight.
A thousand dollars.
In the whole but I also noticed
that there are two hundred and
six thousand dollar was
transferred out of personal
service deployed budget so I
guess the two questions I have
over two hundred six thousand
was transferred out how was that
money used.
And were there any other cycle
pay raises given during the past
six or eight months thank you
madam chair.
Madam chair representative
Crowder I'm happy to answer that
question for you know there were
no other cycle P. races given
that money was taken out it
needed to be used to make up
holes in other programs because
we got the budget cut going from
FY twenty FY twenty one we did
maybe didn't make a lot of
progress in filling our vacant
positions as I mentioned we only
have two funded vacancies right
now but that did take us a
little while as a result we did
have some vacancy savings
earlier on and did use that
funding to make a poll
elsewhere.
Thank you for that well get the
details on that later thank you
madam chair.
Representative Dixon place.
I thank you madam chair and
secretary keys I'm fortunate
that I got to see part of the
presentation earlier this
morning and and ask about The
New Mexico partnership which is
also what I wanted to ask you a
little bit more about and this
may be a question for the
analyst I'm trying to understand
exactly what the budgeted amount
is for the New Mexico
partnership for this year.
I'm if I could get that answer
first.
We look at the different sheets.
Madam chair representative if it
helps in FY twenty The New
Mexico partnership was funded at
one point four million dollars
and for FY twenty one that was
cut by five hundred thousand
dollars to nine hundred thousand
dollars.
I'm and it was that the amount
that in past years had it been
significantly higher sorry madam
chair and to.
W. Clark.
Madam chair and Representative
Dixon it had been at about one
point two million dollars for a
while it had been bumped up to
one point four million dollars a
year a year or two before the
cut occurred.
Thank you madam chair and is am
I correct in understanding that
the partnership though is really
the only marketing tool that we
use within the Economic
Development Department to to
reach out to other sort of
conventions and things like that
or do we have other programs
that are doing similar things
what I'm getting at is I'm
concerned about the reduction
that we're spending on this at a
time when you know we really
need to be bringing more
companies into New Mexico and so
I'm just trying to get a better
sense thank you.
Madam chair representative Dixon
thank you for the question as we
talked earlier today The New
Mexico partnership is our
marketing arm and the former
director did step down we have
an acting director of we do have
a proposal out for a new
director so hopefully that will
happen in the next few weeks but
yes they do they are in charge
of marketing New Mexico for the
Economic Development Department
extending out to conferences and
seminars we recently did a seven
are virtually with the counsel
general of India as I mentioned
earlier today in which the
governor did participate and we
have three substantial eight
just from that marketing
initiatives so yes we are fully
supportive of the funding that
is being requested for the
partnership and we are working
very much in collaboration with
them now to market New Mexico
and to bring outside businesses
into the state.
Thank you madam chair and
secretary so would you say that
the nine hundred thousand
dollars a sufficient.
Madam chair representative we
would love more funding for that
we are going to start an
initiative in which we is a
marketing initiative with the
EDS throughout New Mexico in
order to get us all on the same
page because right now when you
look up economic developments if
you're an outside company it's
really quite confusing us to to
go to the partnership to go to
each different media whether
that is EDD and we're finding
the EDD gets quite a few quite a
few hits from out of state
companies so how do we then
transfer those hits out to our
rural areas is what we're going
to focus on because often times
these companies that are looking
in New Mexico don't understand
the other communities outside of
Albuquerque or Santa Fe are less
crucis so that will be
initiative we would love more
funding for that and it's
really.
We have been pared back for so
long and there hasn't been a
whole ton of collaboration in
the past with the New Mexico
partnership the so we really
feel like funding this
initiative would have huge gains
the state.
Thank you madam chair and
secretary that's I really like
to hear that there's going to be
an emphasis on collaboration
thank you for that and I suspect
that representative Garcia is
going to be asking my other
question so I will defer to him
thank you madam chair.
Representative small.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam secretary
first madam secretary
thank you you detailed many of
the efforts some of which that
on and sunset the less specially
have been very fruitful and
promise more in that area.
Was that through the New Mexico
partnership or was that through
another approach because that
is been a seemingly particularly
successful venture that
continues to bear fruit.
Madam chair representative small
it initially started with Jerry
protect at the PIAA who helped
bring in Averell cable and right
when we came in in the
administration he said as I
think we have an opportunity
here and so we took that
opportunity to travel over to
Taiwan to close the additional
deal that came right after that
and and since then it's we
realize that there is a real
opportunity there so we always
working collaboration and
partnership with our E. as with
some of the legislators don't
realize is were fed a lot of our
deals from our EDS and we are
able to come in and assist with
the lead and the need to but a
lot of those really fantastic
deals like listen or like prince
they come from the EDS around
the state.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam secretary I appreciate
that answer very much I think
being ready to look at things
with fresh and innovative eyes
and frankly to partner with
groups like the border
industrial association which
frequently.
seemingly can be kind of left
behind or not perhaps given the
appropriate leadership roles
that I think are warranted and
I'm sure that applies in many
other parts of the state as well
when folks know their
communities and are vested in
those local communities they are
excellent
but folks to go out and market
and bring folks into those
communities the second question
madam chair
and madam secretary.
In broadly appreciating the work
that you and your team are doing
within the film space would you
all be open to looking at a
performance to to working to
build a performance metric that
looks at what infrastructure the
state helps to locate Inc and is
outside of Bernalillo in Santa
Fe it's great to see the filming
we don't know how long those
that is you know the the visits
to other locations the excellent
work on the five percent
additional credit but for the
recurring value that's closely
connected to infrastructure and
workforce the film you know sits
back what's it cetera do you
think that's an area that we
should be looking at as a state
as we look to both grow but also
broaden the impact for film in
New Mexico.
Madam chair representative small
absolutely one of the governor's
priorities actually is to
increase the amount of certified
production facilities that we
have they can be used to stages
and this can be anything from
the Alamogordo cookie factory
which is absolutely gorgeous and
beautiful and ready to go for
any production and we need to
get that certified to facilities
down in Los crucis and we have
been working with the family a
thumbs down there so that is a
priority for the coming year is
to identify those production
facilities and also really to
identify locations that can be
used because that can bring in
quite a bit of money in terms of
for restaurants and hotels and
also for lumber companies and
last.
This.
Thank thank you very much Madam
chairman and secretary I
appreciate that I look for the
we're going into that no more
time limited today but there's a
broad array that you're working
on and I deeply appreciate it
thank you madam chair.
Radios go to representative
Garcia thank you madam chair one
quick question now
Representative Disturbia
directed to of W. secretary
department of director product.
Representative Eli you mentioned
that you I'm sorry Crowder
mention on funded I mean funded
vacancies and you said you had
to overcome.
My question is what do you do
what you do with the money for
these funded vacancies in the
and how much is that amounted to
a year that you guys are Eugene
for other projects in your
organization and is that a
common practice.
Madam chair and representative
so with that you funded
vacancies one of them just
became vacant a week ago and
we're working to immediately
reveal that there will be
essentially no savings from that
of the other one is we're
working to of the.
Revamped international trade
office our international trade
director left and if you have
any more detailed questions
about that position have to turn
it over to my secretary keys to
talk about international trade.
Madam chair and R. W..
In the hole in two thousand
twenty or twenty one how many
funded because it did you have.
And what happened to that money
the interest rate on the
vacancies I guess I'll be the
question.
Madam chair representative it
just a where are you asking for
FY twenty FY twenty one.
FY twenty one.
Three four Madam chair
representative for FY twenty one
because we took a significant
budget cuts going from FY twenty
to FY twenty one but also have
some statutory language carving
out part of our our budget
for for a program we had to find
places to cut and we were able
to use the vacancy savings to
backfill some of these programs
like eight which and and
director mark Roper mentioned
eight as a critical program for
economic development
organizations across the state
we wouldn't have been able to
make those grants available at
that level without using some of
the vacancy savings.
Thank you madam chair of the I
mean Mr Clarke but that is not a
common practice.
Fire fire twenty one day and
twenty twenty is that the same
practice.
Madam chair representative
Garcia we were this
administration hasn't been in
place for much longer than that
but historically the Economic
Development Department did have
higher vacancy rates we have now
I finally managed to bring them
down to extremely low levels.
Thank you thank you madam the.
Treatment madam chair.
Thank you representative Garcia
also Representative Lara.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you madam secretary it's it's a
good to see you and I know
there's all there's a lot of
work that you and your team have
been doing at the a at your
office and I want to
congratulate you for all the
successes by have a question
though madam chair is you know
as we know my in my legislative
districts of this is in line to
legislative district and we are
always competing with all passed
so always competing with Texas
so my question to you madam
secretary madam chair is how
were we able or how were you
able to get those the interest
from those Taiwanese companies
to conspecific wages are that S.
R. and not with the US not
losing pool Paso in in does that
factor into the to the efforts
in recruiting more these
Taiwanese companies to invest in
southern New Mexico madam chair.
Madam chair representative Lott
I thank you for the question I
think a lot of the credit goes
to the I. eight and R. EDS down
there and our team down there
quite honestly I'm also the
chairperson of the border
Authority border is a huge asset
for us it's a huge priority for
the governor and I will have to
say.
That.
When dealing with Asia
specifically Taiwan if you make
the effort to go there and to
speak with these companies and
individually and to get
relationships with them it
really pays off and we're going
to continue to do that because
we feel like that there is an
opportunity and I do look at el
Paso and I look at Santa Theresa
and I think it's all of the
opportunities we have
I'm also going to ask director
of more programs yes anything
additional to add to that
Santa Theresa verses all Paso.
Thank you thank you madam
secretary madam chairman
Representative are members of
the committee as a secretary so
that the direct one on one
approach the visit that we were
able to make Taiwan pre pandemic
is is definitely paid off in
solidifying those opportunities
specifically to your question
how do we compete with the
doctor so and and help we've
been able to do it beyond the
relationship.
Because of the fact that we have
had sufficient resources
available and Lita and we have
been able to use activity such
as the industrial revenue bonds
J. tip rural jobs actually and
the highways job tax credit that
the legislature as generously
made available we're able to
compete with Texas straight up
one on one of the advantages we
offer and lower property taxes.
then highlighted by our
incentive packages that offset
some of their advantages they
have with no personal income tax
no corporate income tax so we've
been able to be straight up with
them
and our proximity in our border
crossing there as proved to be
more valuable because it takes
less time and it's pretty
dedicated to commercial traffic
as you're well aware
Representative so you can get
across it Senator race and about
one eight the time that you can
cross and more as a so.
Great thank you thank you for
for that and thank you madam
chair and and I just I I'm
really excited what's happening
is something that is on line and
I know it's going to continue to
grow into so one of the few
bright spots that we have in New
Mexico especially during this
pandemic you know the cross
border trade continue to happen
despite the all the all the
emergency procedures that work
taking place and I think that
course cross border traffic was
very was essential to to our
economy as as in our state
economy and in our local economy
as well thank you thank you for
that thank you madam chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much madam chair
and secretary cues and and
everyone for that great
presentation I have one quick
question related to the lead up
project at the Roswell airpark
I'm really happy to see a focus
on that project it's one of the
few industries I think we heard
about that had a two thousand
percent increase and and
Job availability when the
pandemic hit for those of you
who don't know the Roswell area
park is one of three places
basically on earth where our
planes can be stored
and either put away to be
reinstated later on when the
demand picks up or they are
actually recycled and turned
into other things so thank you
very much that focus the
question I have is do you know
of any federal funding was also
leveraged on that project either
US department transportation
funds or Federal Aviation
Administration airport
infrastructure funding.
Madam chair of Representative
Hochman Vigil I'm gonna let mark
answer this question mark Roper.
Thank you Secretary keys madam
chair representative Hochman
members of the committee.
Well the infrastructure that
some made available to Roswell
international air center has
been greatly enhanced by Federal
Aviation dollars this particular
project specifically is not the
benefactor directly then the FAA
funds there are in addition to
lead a bump us from New Mexico
capital outlay funds that was
appropriated by the New Mexico
legislature that will help
offset some of the
infrastructure costs in the
development of that but there
are no direct federal funds
involved in this project
project.
Thank you very much Madam chair
I director he's in Mr Roper for
that response I appreciate it I
hope this is something that we
continue to invest in our New
Mexico has the opportunity to
really put itself on the map
globally for aircraft recycling
and and more falling the only
other place that can compete
with us is in Victorville
California they are full right
now and if we take it then
advantage of the moment this is
really in a tremendous economic
development opportunity so thank
you for your focus on that thank
you madam chair.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair just real
quick I I was trying to find the
the solo work force in here and
I didn't know if that's part of
this budget.
Madam secretary D. Wonda
responded that I.
Madam chair I'll actually eight
the director of a response.
So the workers what was not a
portion of the administrative
recommendation.
Okay.
The first two of W. secretary
Clark I don't believe it's also
part of the LFC recommendation
and the reason behind it
well solo worker was
provisionally adopted as law in
an on for internet funded matter
it has been funded through
various mechanisms including a
direct appropriation last year.
From the Representative Garcia
specific institutional
accounting.
In FY eighteen of we were
allocated a hundred and five
thousand of which we we heard
seventy two percent in FY
nineteen specifically to the
projects in Seattle the county
we we appropriated thirty eight
thousand five hundred and
reverted to early in FY twenty
we were appropriated hundred
seventy five thousand and we
only expended seventy eight
thousand five hundred for again
for reversion rate of about
fifty five percent no well FY
twenty one we did have a hundred
percent utilization part of that
was because we increased the
number of the value on a per job
is basically to get the money
out the door in the pandemic
situation so it really funded
twenty twenty positions is at a
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars.
Okay thank you for that so and
my hearing that it's a something
that's not really working or is
it not being advertised well our
companies not utilizing it.
Madam chair of Representative
Armstrong we have also try to
collaborate with the department
of workforce solutions and and
and utilizing some of their
programs to help with this it is
really a job placement and job
training program more than a
typical incentive program that
we would deal with with the
Economic Development Department
what we have found is that the
types of being found and located
here but would not meet the
waste actuals the department of
labor and we of funding or would
it affects our souls we would
typically put in place for JHM.
What I do think that there are
some there's some successes that
have been made to individuals it
doesn't meet the wage thresholds
we typically see of other
efforts through we and the need
to program so at the we decided
that with the funds that we
thought we were going to have
available it was best not to
include that as part of the
budget this year.
Thank you for your answers.
All right do we have anyone else
Questions for this department.
Scanning here I I don't see any
other hands up so I'm gonna go
turned to Representative small.
Or the motion but I do want to
make sure that we that we stick
a pin in this conversation
around the partnership when we
get to the catch up clean up our
discussion Representative small
thank you madam chair I will
move the LFC recommendation for
the economic development
department.
Okay we have a motion to have a
second.
Representative Crowder raised
his hand for the second is there
any opposition to this motion.
I don't see any opposition so
it's it's been approved but if
you want to.
Thirty eight the new staff know
that this does not include your
special or supplemental for our
discussion that's a different
process we're just going through
the general operations budget
right now so thank you very much
and thank you madam secretary
thank you madam chair for the
opportunity.
All right let's go to the next
department which is a cultural
affairs department agency I I.
Chair members of the committee
Jacqueline Martinez the LFC
analyst.
And executive budget analyst for
cultural affairs joining us is
Andrew Miner.
Thank you at the agency as a
whole different sheets.
The LFC recommendation decreased
general fund revenue by nine
hundred and forty thousand or
two point eight percent when
compared to the FY twenty one
operating budget the executive
recommendation maintain general
fund revenue flat with FY twenty
one.
Both recommendations include the
same amount and all other
revenue sources.
Main differences in the
expenditure categories will be
seen and museum and historic
sites program.
First two new museum historic
sites the LFC recommendation
reduce general fund revenue by
seven hundred and forty one
thousand four three point two
percent the executive
recommendation maintain general
fund revenue for FY twenty one
operating budget level.
Approximately three hundred
thousand of the executive
director is being used to offset
declining other revenues.
The LFC recommendation reduced
personal services employee
benefits by one hundred and
seventy thousand also reduce
contractual services by one
hundred and sixty seven sixty
seven thousand this will reduce
landscaping veterinarian
services professional services
and promotional brochures.
The other category was reduced
by four hundred and seventy
thousand this will reduce travel
transportation fuel grounds
maintenance supplies utilities
rent and equipment advertising
eccentric.
Recommendation increase the
personal services employee
benefits category by one hundred
thousand to reduce they can see
rates.
The executive recommendation
also reduce contractual services
by one hundred and sixty seven
thousand partially to restore
funding to FY twenty actual of
levels and decrease the other
category by about three hundred
thousand to restore facility
maintenance funding packed FY
twenty one operating budget
levels.
In the preservation program both
recommendations maintain general
fund revenue for the FY twenty
one operating budget level.
Both recommendations increase
federal fund revenue by ninety
nine point five thousand and
decrease other revenues.
Both recommendations reduce
personal services employee
benefits.
To do eight three vacant
positions that have been vacant
for over two years.
Both recommendations also
include the same language.
For other state funds in the
preservation program.
Now for library services I'll go
ahead and turn it over to
Andrew.
Thank you Jacqueline good
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee just general
notice Jacqueline explained the
differences between the two
recommendations here basically
the executive captain General
Fund flat where is the executive
the excuse me the LFC had eighty
two point eight percent decrease
and the majority of that
difference is seen as Jacqueline
said in and P. five thirty six
where the executive had a bit of
a general fund subsidy to offset
some of those declining other
revenues and also restored some
funding for personnel facility
maintenance and advertising so
then moving on to P. five thirty
nine library services.
Revenue the LFC recommendation
reduced in general fund
transfers by twenty two thousand
or six percent point six percent
compared to the FY twenty one
operating budget the executive
recommendation maintain general
fund left revenue in FY twenty
one operating budget and both
recommendations decreased our
federal fund revenue by two
hundred eleven thousand and
other revenues by forty seven
thousand due to HSD projections.
In the base LFC recommendation
increased personal services
employee benefits by forty
thousand executive increased
them by sixty two thousand to
fully fund current staff.
Both recommendations reduced
contractual services by two
hundred thousand and reduce that
other category by one hundred
twenty thousand and that's in
line with that.
HSD projections however in not
taking quite that for five
percent cut to both
recommendations then did put
back in two hundred thousand
dollars for a library grants in
aid in the that's the other
categories.
Moving on to P. five forty
programs support.
The LFC recommendation reduced
in general fund revenue by
seventy five thousand or one
point eight percent compared to
the FY twenty one OpBud.
The executive recommendation
maintain general fund again
revenue flat in FY twenty with
FY twenty one.
And both recommendations reduced
use of fund balance five hundred
sixty four thousand because this
is the the departments
enterprise enterprise Fund and
it is largely being depleted
during FY twenty and twenty one
due to some of those facility
closures.
On the basis LFC recommendation
reduced personal services and
employee benefits by two hundred
nine thousand to really two FTE
the executive recommendation
reduced personal services by a
hundred and thirty four thousand
deleted three FTE
the executive still does apply a
sixty percent vacancy rates just
a bit of a clarification there
both recommendations have
increasing contractual services
by sixty three thousand due to
the culture collaborative being
moved to this program from the
museum at our work sites program
and then both recommendations
reduce the other costs category
by ninety three thousand to one
closer to FY twenty actuals.
In the final program is P. seven
six one the arts program.
The Aussie recommendation
reduced general fund revenue by
a hundred and one thousand or
six point eight percent well the
executive recommendation again
maintained general fund revenue
flat with FY twenty one.
The base the LFC recommendation
reduced personal services
employee benefits by eighty four
thousand to reduce FTE by one
point five the executive
recommendation increased
personal services by sixteen
point nine thousand.
Both recommendations include
twenty thousand to restore the
military in the arts program
again that's a part of that
General Fund restoration and
it's the difference of
categories there as to where it
is in all programs I analyst
reached a consensus on
performance measures as so that
concludes my presentation and so
I will turn it over to secretary
Garcia Griego.
Thank you Secretary Garcia you
today go please.
Take it from there.
Thank you Representative it is a
pleasure to be here today
present nine to the committee I
have with the W. secretary next
Iago CFO Greg Geisler and budget
officer wrongly ferro cancer
questions as well as state
librarian You Like NA.
I will do my best to keep my
presentation brief as I know the
committee has lots of work
before at the briefly cultural
affairs include eight new the M.
than eight historic site the
represented by the red dot
across the state and then we
also provide provide a variety
of statewide services especially
to our historic preservation
division our office of
archaeological studies the state
library New Mexico arts and the
New Mexico music commission.
Very quickly an overview of our
FY twenty one revenue and
expense by category and you can
the general fund it is an
important part of our revenue
pitch a picture but other state
funds which we generate from in
the end but mission as well as
rental is another key piece and
obviously now during the closure
period we do have not been
collected not revenue I was with
the looted to in our DFA analyst
presentation we have been using
fund balance to
continue to pay out for expenses
that would normally be paid by
other state funds expense of our
our biggest except category by
far as personal benefits and
then others other services along
with contractual services it
should be noted that private
foundations that about seven
percent your revenue those use
strictly for exhibitions and
education programs and
occasionally for very little to
capital projects so we're very
much reliant upon general fund
revenues to support our base
operations.
Sh when we were faced with
delivering the general fund
reversion at the end of FY
twenty as well as admitting that
the general fund reduction for
FY twenty two I'm sorry FY
twenty one in FY twenty two
without the priorities about
what we needed to do to maintain
operations and while it may
sound strange but budget
priorities and a time of
restriction or flat of budget it
felt important to really put a
pen and those things that were
critical for Amanda
appropriate staffing providing
those mission critical service
services that our courts are
statutory mandate while trying
to level our leverage addition
to improve effectiveness in
doing targeted three or
extricate official the the
things like taking three
separate financial position and
threw telework efficiencies and
other efficiencies combining
them into one position to save a
little bit of cost your accept
we are statutorily mandated to
protect the state cultural
resources without coming
The increase increases for fixed
costs attention services the we
are dedicated to continuing to
keep Stewart in our cultural
resources in appropriate way
what services very quickly when
the pandemic came on we pivoted
to digital approaches and what
we have found that the digital
approaches have helped maintain
our programs but also broaden
our reach and we are
collaborating more internally
and externally so how can we
really focus on serving as much
of the state as possible federal
matches we rely on our matches
have believe for historic
preservation as well as for our
division and the state library
so we always want to make sure
that we have the general fund
match and person to continue to
get those
Joe matches and then of course
facilities replacement and
renewal this is been a long
standing issue for the
department we work very hard in
recent years to rectify that it
is very easy and I'm about
thirty to start cutting corners
but really we need to keep up
with the basic repairs and
maintenance and void keeping in
our backlog.
General Fund recommendation by
okay this is the executive
director
you can see a broken down by
program area this is incredibly
the executive racked is
incredibly important to DCA in
terms of being able to maintain
the services we're currently
offering and rebuild the
department from the pandemic and
from the pandemic closures.
In terms of our museum and
historic sites which is the
largest portion of our operation
some of our accomplishments we
did serve two million people
through our museum and historic
site program that includes over
three hundred thousand children
I'm even during the a portion
the closure in person the
pandemic we have continued to
leverage an incredible number of
volunteer hours to give their
Department the museums and
historic sites the equivalent of
twenty six point I have to eat.
pandemic programming really
shifted towards outreach
services obviously with it being
the Ms closed week very quickly
put up ECA educate which is find
virtual posturing that to the
public school private school
charter schools home schools any
group that wants to have it you
see a educator visit their group
we do those for free again we've
been two hundred and thirty
eight to date and we offer a
total of a hundred and nine
program sh we also created a
virtual summer camp we're we had
fifty eight thousand people join
and to participate in virtual
summer class camps especially
with in person plant closed
provided a great way for kids to
get some extra judicial content
during the summer we also
produced a virtual contra a
concert series partnering with
New Mexico musicians that our
facilities we produced fourteen
virtual concert and not reached
a hundred and seventy thousand
viewers.
For the general fund
recommendation here twenty two
point nine million with some
highlights of why that's
important is four hundred and
seventy thousand for critical
hires we have held off on re re
hiring things like security
guards cashiers Committee and
fearing the pandemic and we
really need the general fund
allocation to hard re higher up
our museums open as we expand
operation
there's also money for contract
support which goes to the to
programs and a hundred seventy
five for portion of our
facilities maintenance that they
said we really are anxious to
continue to take good care of
our facilities the funds are
critical and a hundred thousand
dollars for advertising of this
will be primarily and say moving
to out of state.
Public health hello.
In historic preservation
they did sixteen point four
million dollars construction
using historic tax preservation
product
two hundred and nine thousand
and start drugs places like the
villages Santa Clara Las Vegas
Columbus Santa Fe and
Albuquerque and they reached
over nine thousand adults and
children with educational
programs I'm here the executive
recommendation of seven hundred
and eighty four thousand.
Very critical to keeping not
federal match of that comes in
to support the department and
also maintaining that thirty
seven point five FTEs that are
needed to keep that Division
running.
Library services
A wide there were six point
eight million visits to law I
very.
for the pandemic we very quickly
switched the summer reading
program through an online
program and serves more than
four thousand families through
that program through the state
library part health program we
did forty six thousand session
of online homework help and
tutoring we all know how
essential data and this kid has
shifted to remark learning and
every parent has become part
time teacher the state library
also headed up a statewide
collaboration to distribute
hands on activity kept we
distributed eight thousand six
hundred seventy six of those
cats they started as part of the
school year distributing them at
lunch distribution site and then
later we moved them to the
summer cats some were bilingual
and we offer those around the
state use the in our
Eight library book mobile to
help with those kids around
we leverage seven hundred and
sixty thousand dollars in
federal broadband match two
hundred fifty thousand dollar
commitment from the state and we
have completed twenty five
broadband projects that library
statewide here the executive
recommendation of three point
seven million in general fund
restores two hundred thousand
dollars for state in requests
this is vitally important for
your local libraries of go
directly to their library
support their needs and then to
also not one point four million
in federal funds.
Sh and I really quickly wanted
to show these two maps which
show the impact of the state
library on the left are the
twenty five broadband
communities around the state and
on the right is all of those
stocks that are book mobile make
up throughout the state this is
in addition to the books that
are distributed through the
library for the blind and
visually impaired as well as
books by mail and our online
services.
For our there were one point
nearly one point four million
participants and event funded by
New Mexico art we reached two
hundred and seventy four
children your programs and
grants.
To organizations statewide the
general fund direct here is one
point four million there's a
hundred thousand dollar
for critical staffing and again
the twenty thousand dollar for
our to the military which is a
small program that has a huge
impact using art therapy to help
our veterans and again this is
one of those divisions that has
a matching fund grant
requirement for their federal
funds sh and then last programs
support eight launcher
transition to a statewide
ticketing system the full
improve data collection as well
as revenue tracking currently
DCA hot the real different
systems that run across the
state so this will be the first
statewide one we started a
statewide social media group
which has dramatically increased
the reach of our rich virtual
program and digital out that
during the pandemic we
restructured our website in in
culture dot org at to become an
online gateway to the but
program educational resources
the more these are things that
you can get without having to
visit a museum lesson plans for
teachers and students and
parents we also completed the
creation of our facilities
bureau of the department did not
have one at the but three years
ago and we awarded construction
contracts led to major projects
as well as initiated a major
water system replacement drive
out Fort Stanton and so the
executive director for four
point two million and again it
really provide that hundreds of
the five thousand for critical
staffing.
And then this has to do with
ICAP request the chair has been
clear that you would prefer to
stick to operating budget so I
will spend any time on this but
hi with that I stand for
questions and thank you for your
time.
Thank you very much madam
secretary for the excellent
presentation we're gonna go to
the committee for questions
starting with Representative
Anderson first Representative
Anderson thank you Mr chairman
of madam secretary I had a
question on the slide you showed
on the arts.
And in the arts slide you were
showing total budget I think of
one point nine.
Million four hundred.
arts arts and you were shipped
one point four eight two total
of one point four eight two
million dollars general fund
then we talk about a six hundred
and fourteen thousand dollar
federal.
A grant or match six hundred
fourteen on one point four eight
two is about a forty percent
match.
In my case is accurate madam
secretary to compare that to the
total general fund budget for
arch or is it a lesser amount
there for being an even higher
federal match of funds.
I believe you are muted.
Mr chair representative members
of the committee thank you
Representative for pointing out
that I was needed I do apologize
for that a portion of the arts
budget includes operation of the
art in public places program
which is funded through a
percentage of the capital outlay
so there is a portion of that
which is not applicable to the
grant from the national
endowment for the arts.
Thank you for that explanation
and and I think there for it's
not necessarily accurate to say
six hundred and fourteen
thousand dollars in federal
funding against a total of one
point four eight million is
forty percent and it's really
that's not an apples to apples
comparison and I believe your
answer confirm that thank you Mr
chairman thank you madam
secretary good luck in your
work.
Thank you very much
Representative Anderson next
we're gonna go to representative
Allison.
Thank you Mr chair madam
secretary I'm gonna refer to
your slide on libraries.
What do I need to do to get
someone to dots in the northwest
section of the state.
Mr Chairman representative
Allison members of the committee
I'm going to turn that question
over to the library and you like
it may have been working very
hard with libraries in that area
to move broadband into those
communities elect.
Chairman and members of the
committee representative thank
you for the question
yes we're working hard in that
northwest part of the state to
get as many libraries as
possible and
where I was just having emails
today about how to set up set up
websites for some developing
libraries the chapter houses on
the Navajo Nation about if ever
you have any questions on how to
start a library please do not
hesitate to reach out to me we
love starting libraries thank
you.
Thank you very much Mr ally
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative Allison
next we're gonna Representative
Trujillo.
Yes I'm thank you all very much
and I'd like to ask of a
question regarding the training
of your our teachers who.
You I may have missed it but did
you choose the coordinate with
PED.
Mr chair Representative Trujillo
members of the Committee we we
do not provide credentialed art
education training we provide
resources in what is called
informal education so we will
find lesson plans we do to the
best of our ability well I
should say we do to the best of
our ability we are moving toward
aligning our lesson plans with
the standards and benchmarks
that PED but right now
not all of our divisions are
compliant with that so we do
coordinate with PED we certainly
work with on the summer kit
distribution as well as another
other initiatives within the
department.
And Mr chair of the summer kids
contain what specifically.
Mr chair representative Trujillo
members of the community
Committee into the into the
summer kids with different each
division created as separate a
different summer cat they all
included eight a lesson plan and
a project that a child could go
through on their own or with
limited help from an adult they
can included all of the supplies
that the child would need to
complete that lesson plan and
then for those who have access
to internet service they had
additional resources that the
child to take care advantage of
for that maybe video instruction
additional places to find more
information about each one with
different and they were
specifically have gone with all
of the all of the materials
required.
And Mr chair those are K.
twelve.
Mr chair representative chair
members of the committee I they
were I would say that generally
they were more cater six but
there were some aim that higher
grades as well.
Okay and and these Mr Chairman
last comment or question these
kids are simply augmenting it
current
the school district kinds of of
things but this is for the
summer this this is just a
continuation what's going on so
the kids aren't being assessed.
Mr chair representative chair
members of the committee that is
correct.
In all these items are
consumables.
Mr chair representative to have
members of the committee yes
they are consumable.
Thank you very much have more
questions of our call about
offline thank you miss Deborah
Garcia.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
very much Representative next
we're gonna go to Representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman are.
Representative Allison asked the
question about libraries in his
part of the woods and I
Right just south of in my
Representative for most of the
country after two in a matter of
fact I have a ten Navajo chapter
regent and you mention chair of
all of.
Getting wifi out through we'll
go to the library how do you
propose on doing this and the
reason I'm born this route
because a lot of the my
constituents and my district you
have running water and you know
concerning.
That these people are being left
cultural much and we do need to
address the issue but what what
plan do you have to address
those issues.
Mr chair representative members
of the committee it's an
incredibly important issue mmhm
we've been working with that
education department out of
window rock and there E. right
consultants to get to that
chapter houses certified as
libraries so that they can tap
into the federal E. rate
funding.
our broadband for libraries
program can provide some some
support for that including
financial and to.
Logistical but we're we're
currently playing a supportive
role
it is true that given the
dramatic amount of leveraging of
federal funding that that you
can have through E. rates up to
ninety of the ninety five
percent in some cases a little
bit of money could go a long way
but we certainly will do
whatever we can on our ends to
to support that.
Thank you madam.
Mr chairman and all.
We'll shoot generous.
Thank you for that answer but
you know
The reality of it is the people
up there.
I'm gonna be lived out most of
the time and you know in the not
putting a finger to anybody but
the.
You need to maybe get a hold of
these chapter houses.
To see how.
We know what you're doing and
what they need maybe to work
some offer that just my COVID
saw because you know all of
these people if you go out there
it's virtually heart wrenching
to see little kids.
Well Sen on the sidewalk when
you get internet through to do
anything with their lives and
all and if we don't address
these issues now we're gonna
lose all these kids Madam no
that Mr chair we're gonna going
to more all drug problems
alcohol Lujan we need to educate
them need to keep them as just
like we are right now and we
need to work on it really hard
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Sir thank you very much
Representative Garcia for
bringing some of your districts
incredible needs next we're
going to go to Representative
Brown.
Thank you Mr chairman
and I very much appreciated The
presentation today at the
pandemic very informative I do
have one question regarding the
it's in the language for the
preservation program it's P.
code five thirty seven and it
says that there's an other state
funds appropriation to the
preservation program in current
cultural affairs and it includes
one million dollars from the
department of transportation for
archaeological studies is needed
for highway projects my question
is is this something is this
arrangement something newer
items seem to seven to recall
that this is something we see
from year to year is that
correct.
However like the answer.
Sh Mr chair representative brown
members of the committee that is
correct it has been a long
longstanding arrangement
Starkly have not trodden down
anywhere near the full million
from DOT for projects.
Thank you Mr chairman and
secretary and and that was
really going to be my next
question that if the full one
million is not spent what
happens to those unspent funds
do they revert.
Mr chair representative from
members of the committee I'm I'm
afraid I don't know what the OAG
does the fund state DOT I don't
know what they do if they're not
expended we are working however
with DOT we've been an active
conversation especially over the
recent months about PC increase
in the volume of work that we do
do for them so we're hoping to
ratchet up the amount of funds
that we.
Okay thank you and and Mr chair
just observe that we have the
legislature's given additional
funding to the department of
transportation and I would think
that would increase the demand
for these are to procure legible
study services so.
Appreciate the work that you do
on that because we certainly do
need to invest in our roads
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative Brown
great questions are there any
other questions from committee
members.
I don't see any I just have a
couple of quick brief questions
Madam
secretary and analysts again
this seems like a situation
where the LFC racked tracks the
what what happened in twenty
twenty or is based off of
earlier in twenty twenty where
there were these five percent
Executive reductions is that
correct miss Martinez.
Mr chair you're right LFC rex
started with but the agency
originally requested which was a
five percent reduction and then
we built in funds from their.
Thank you very much Mr Martinez
I think we'll go to the
recommendation the
The.
Before I do that want to know
that Mr Abbey has clarified.
And respond Representative
brown's question that unused
archaeology funding reverts to
the road Fund thank you very
much Mr Abbey
Secretary I heard you say that
within the difference that there
is a particularly important
person Services PSC be with a
hundred seventy five thousand
was that actor that I hear that
correctly.
Mr chair members of the
committee yes that was accurate
or.
Programs and services
there is an additional
immunity and historic but it
that is equally critical in
terms of bringing those sites
back online.
Okay thank you very much you
similar.
And we don't exactly know how
the re opening is going but
appreciate your very much bring
in those.
To the committee hearing today
and look forward to continue
conversations in this area.
With that I would turn to
Representative Sweetser for
today's motion.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
secretary Garcia you Griego at
this time I would recommend the
LFC.
Recommendation.
Thank you for is there a second
I'll second that.
Great spend move by
Representative Sweetser second
by Representative Garcia is
there
Any objection to that motion.
Okay
seeing no objection to that
motion madam secretary thank you
very much again on behalf of the
committee and we look forward to
continuing the conversation and
some of these key areas.
Next we're going to go to agency
code three four one which is the
department of finance and
administration and ask miss
Nichols to start us off and then
we'll go to Mr Misia's before we
go to the secretary.
Thank you Mr chairman afternoon
again Allison Nichols the LFC
analyst for DFA and comments yes
and I the executive analyst for
DFA well am present the LFC and
executive recommendation agency
let me just share my screens you
can see the different sheets.
So overall and the executive
recommendation provides a flat
budget my general fund budget
for DFA and the LESC
recommendation provides two
percent decrease in general fund
revenues the HSD the LFC
recommendation also provides
five million last in transfers
and that's to account for eight
projected decrease and access
the settlement revenues due to
some ongoing litigation this
projections from the New Mexico
attorney general's office
she recommendations provided
flight general fund budget
federal revenues and eight point
eight point nine million
decrease in other revenues and I
think my mind nine million
decrease is primarily to reflect
a decrease in revenues for the
county supported.
This.
something to the next page the
LFC recommendation decreases a
person budget by about three
hundred thousand dollars more
than the executive
recommendation and as of
November twenty twenty DFA had
about one million dollars
vacancy savings in its twenty
one operating budgets.
the LFC recommendation includes
about seventy thousand more
general fund revenues for the
civil legal services program
it and in do not operating
appropriations with and yet Fe
executive recommendation
includes two hundred thirty five
thousand more than LFC
recommendation and that
increases the budget for the
leasehold community assistance
program and the lingering
Council and recommendations
reduce the number of FTEs by six
add to account for positions
that have been inactive for over
two years
language both recommendations
that budget the same for the
enhancement of one fund which is
about twelve point four million
dollars I'm includes five
hundred eighty three thousand
from one balances out however
the LFC language only references
the budget other revenues Selsey
language should be updated to
also reference houses and we
have reached consensus on
performance measures and targets
and all Turner but for the first
program.
Thank you Allison
Mr chairman members of the
committee I would like to kind
of cracked the statement made by
LFC as of February twenty twenty
one DFA has approximately six
hundred and thirty two thousand
seven hundred dollars and
vacancy savings and that's FY
twenty one operating budget of
the hundred and fifty three
positions one hundred and twenty
four currently filled with
twenty nine positions are vacant
the and then I would also like
to correct the statement related
to the civil legal services
contracts there's actually
approximately a difference of
about seventy two thousand one
hundred dollars between the
exact the executive and the LESC
I will now move over to she I
for one the policy development
fiscal analysis budget oversight
and education accountability
this includes for the finance
office of the secretary in the
state budget division the LFC
recommends a flat general fund
budget the executive provides an
additional increase of about a
hundred and seventy two thousand
seven hundred dollars
It's a flat budget by the LFC
across all categories the LFC
the executive actually provides
a hundred and seventy one
thousand eight hundred dollars
for person now to ensure
adequate staffing levels for
state budget division and then
both executive both excuse me
both recommendations reduce FTEs
by one to remove one inactive
position and I will turn it over
to Allison to continue with P.
five for you.
Thanks so within the program
support the LFC recommendation
decreases the general fund
revenues by sixty one thousand
dollars and the executive
recommendation decreases general
fund revenues by ten thousand
dollars
the LFC recommendation includes
a decrease if for I. T. printing
costs and then both
recommendations include small
decreases for personnel and
contracts.
Nicole.
Thanks I Matt Mr chair members
of the committee I will continue
with P. five four three for
revenues the LFC recommendation
decreases general fund by about
a hundred and fifty four
thousand two hundred and the
executive recommendation
decreases general fund by about.
A hundred and eighty eight
thousand one hundred dollars
plus recommendations decrease
other revenues by six hundred
and four thousand dollars
Both recommendations reduce the
person budget the LFC had a
higher decrease by about a
hundred and eighty four thousand
four hundred and the executive
recommendation by about one
hundred and seventy three
thousand eight hundred the
executive provides a vacancy
rate of about fifty five
percent.
Both recommendations include
creating reductions for
contracts partially reflecting a
lower budget for the civil legal
services contract
as previously mentioned there's
a gap of about.
US seventy two thousand one
hundred four between the
executive and the LESC for the
civil legal services contracts
and both recommendations reduce
FTEs by to within P. five four
three.
as as it relates to language
both recommendations provide
twenty point two million and
appropriations from the local D.
W. Y. grant and one point six
million from the civil legal
services fund the LFC language
currently references a budget of
eleven point eighty six million
from that the nine one one fund
and should include the five
hundred and eighty three point
two thousand from fund balance.
thank you I will switch it over
to Allison P. five four four.
within P. five forty four
financial management both
recommendations decreased
general fund revenues
every plus also recommendation
decreases general fund revenues
by about eleven thousand more
and then within other transfers
LFC recommendations five million
dollars last and that's the
projections for the tobacco
settlement revenue that I
mentioned earlier the LFC
recommendation budgets twelve
million and that
the executive recommendation
seventeen million and then also
as I mentioned earlier both
recommendations decrease other
revenues for lower projections
from the county supported.
Funds
The executive recommendation
decreases spending five hundred
twenty one thousand and the LESC
recommendation decreases
personal spending two hundred
forty six thousand and then both
recommendations reduce FTEs I
read to remove an active
positions I'm and then in
language again the LESC language
budgets twelve million in tax
revenues however
The LFC language directs a
hundred percent of that budget
tobacco settlement revenues to
the program funds typically half
is directed to the program
funded half instructed to the
tobacco settlement permanent
fund and in LFC recommendation
the hundred percent of the
program fund is contingent on
legislation that would allow
that for FY twenty.
Emendations include language
transferring funding about
thirty five million for the
counties in fund.
Finally piece I'm forty five an
option but.
Mr chair members of the
committee I like to address P.
five four four again as it
relates the executive
recommendation about seventeen
million
the executive recommends twelve
million in the tobacco
settlement revenues and use it
utilizing an additional five
million from the tobacco
settlement permanent fund which
will equal a total of seventeen
million to ensure level
The same levels as FY twenty one
operating budget.
Now going on to P. five four
five which is our membership and
dues these are also flow through
programs that DFA has within its
budget.
And I will provide a brief
overview on the executive
recommendation includes two
hundred and twenty six thousand
three hundred dollar increase in
general fund while the LFC
recommendation includes a nine
point four thousand decrease
both recommendations include a
flat budget for other revenues
the executive recommendation
includes a two hundred and two
thousand dollar increase for
leasehold Communities systems
program and a twenty four
thousand seven hundred dollar
increase for the land grant
council the LFC includes a nine
thousand decrease for the.
County detention of prisoners
both recommendations include a
four hundred dollar increase or
decrease excuse me for
memberships and dues.
And then both recommendations
include boilerplate information
for these programs.
That.
is not current in its audit or
financial reporting was
recommendations include language
indicating that the secretaries
authorized to transfer up to two
point five million dollars from
the general fund
operating reserve to the board
of finance emergency fund if a
critical emergency exists that
cannot be addressed by.
Another source
I will now turn it over to
Allison.
Thank you Mr chairman thank all
I think that I don't have any
more comments at this time but
I'm billable professionals X..
Excellent thank you very much
miss the CS thank you miss
Nichols now we'll go to
secretary Romero.
Mr chairman thank you very much
members of the committee
appreciate your time and I know
it's late in the day it's been a
long day for you all so I'm
gonna try to keep this as short
as possible
one a couple things that I'd
like a I've had the pleasure of
sitting and and listening to all
the other agencies and so couple
things for Representative out
your question to one of the
agencies was how many employees
do they have that are making
fifteen dollars an hour and I
know with specific to HSD but
just
I found out that we have about
fifteen hundred employees that
make less than fifteen dollars
an hour so if you know if we if
we have to do something for
those employees were looking at
about six million dollars plus
benefits to try to bring
everybody up to fifteen dollars
an hour so just some just some
information that I thought I'd
find and then also I heard you
talk about reversion to
questions about reversion to
come up a couple of times and I
think I feel it's important that
I know that you may see hiring
versions in FY twenty and
there's a couple reasons for
that one is agencies were asked
because of the pandemic and
because of the oil and and gas
market that that declined so
quickly we asked agencies to
slow down their spending and so
not only with the we ask the
slow down or spending we put
into place things like of a
hiring freeze plus in addition
to that we were starting to
review contracts and and other
services a lot more closely one
of the things we were able to do
with we were able to use some of
the federal money that came in
the C. R. F. money to pay for
public health and and safety
employee salaries so we we
basically reimbursed ourselves
the state New Mexico for those
support for those salaries
didn't have to providing
justification that the that the
guidance is really clear that we
could it was just general.
All public health and safety the
the interpreted that to mean
they were dealing with COVID and
so that reverse number may be a
lot harder higher than we would
have expected for those two
reasons.
so now they're going to my
presentation you know what they
need to see is only as good as
its employees and I couldn't do
my job without these key
employees of that all the
employees of DFA but I'd like to
take time just to introduce some
of our our employees that maybe
helping with that answer didn't
answer some of the questions and
so I've got with me Renee ward
who's one of their deputy
secretaries I've got Synthia
Martinez to is just recently
appointed as acting deputy
secretary for budget division
got direction a who is R. A. S.
D. director some of you may
recognize Erica's from previous
our job that the help lots of
you and I think it's important
that you know dunking taunted
because he deals directly with
your local governments and could
provide assistance to you is the
local government division
director.
Our Donna true hue is our state
controller she's the director of
financial control and we have
actually lied to you may have
worked with in one way or
another she supported finance
director and also our chief
economist who is a key member of
the crag
he works with LESC and T. R. D.
and D. O. T. and are coming up
with our revenue projections so
Leo is our chief economist for
DFA.
Our vision statement outlines
what we want to see in the
future
our vision is is that public
entities throughout New Mexico
are fiscally responsible
effective and accountable you
know our mission statement is or
why it's a reason why we existed
drives us with tribes are day to
day work we believe that the
base mission is to guide service
and support public entities to
ensure fiscal accountability and
effective government that is
responsive to all New Mexicans.
Our guiding values establish a
framework for expected behavior
decision making and these
behaviors accountability
collaboration communication
efficiency effectiveness fiscal
responsibility service and
quality work.
We have five major objectives on
the next slide you'll see that
by the way I'm not driving I
have ever tried because I can't
talk and drive at the same time
so
we are objectives are focusing
on strengthening state finances
long term financial budget
planning.
We by delivering high
performance financial
administrative services with a
commitment to operational
excellence and continuous
improvements and we want to
improve communication to build a
network of support and
collaboration and we also
support want to support and
invest in our work force.
Our fiscal strength and
stability you know are the FY
twenty two executive budget
recommendations recognize this
current and projected economic
constraints while prioritizing
fiscal strength and stability
debate has to set the example we
do this by ensuring we have
staff with experience and
expertise and we've had several
and just to mention a couple
things that we've been able to
do is we had several attempts
have booked under crop which
reported because of the staff
that we have going because that
Mr vendor relations bureau.
I'm really proud of the fact
that we've been able to say that
you've stable bond ratings and
we continue to focus on
consistent consistent financial
management.
What is the other thing that I'm
happy to report is that the
state has reached compliance PCI
compliance and what is PCI
compliance this is an audit
that's done on our payment card
industry
we work with financial control
it's the work of financial
control staff RiskSense and
twenty seven agencies that
accept credit card payments all
agencies have to need all the
minimum requirements just one
agency doesn't meet that we are
not compliant and they have to
remain compliant throughout the
year so it's a major
accomplishment to know that we
are meeting this and it's it's
the the ultimate goal is we
reduce the risk of diabetic
credit card data loss so that's
why this is so important to say
more make sure that we can
accept those credit card
payments but we've got a lot of
requirements that are placed on
this to ensure that we are
accountable.
We've streamline processes to
get federal money out the door I
think that's one of the things
that I can with that if they
does well of course small agency
we were able to administer one
point six billion dollars a
cares Act in addition to the
gear money that's coming to DFA
that we've applied for we're
managing we're we don't actually
get the money to school
districts but we have to report
on the money and we have to do
the draw request and we're so
we're responsible for all the
reporting and housing assistance
grants
DFA did take on the
responsibility of administering
a hundred seventy eight million
dollars of local government and
tribal government grants early
on in the year we used in house
employees to do that so in
addition to their regular
responsibilities staff to gonna
dish no responsibilities and and
then administering this I'm
happy to report that about
ninety eight point six percent
of the hundred seventy eight
million dollars has been
reimbursed to the local and
tribal governments in sub I
think that's a major
accomplishment it's our it's DFA
staff working with local
governments that got the money
out the door got the agreements
in place and got the
reimbursements process and help
local governments through this
one of the big pieces of it was
a small business loan component
that was a little bit
challenging because it's new to
DFA and to local government
division but have report that it
was very successful.
All I'm what we're doing right
now would be a big is a you
know.
Without the cares Act is going
to be a one time thing nobody
envisioned that that this virus
was going to last as long as it
has and so we know now that
we're going to see more federal
money coming to the state of New
Mexico we were able to manage
one graft or three grant pretty
easily licensees we we were able
to manage the three tracks and
I'm very proud of this the the
staff to manage those grants but
the fact that we're getting more
money means that we need to get
in more stable and more robust
program in place and so we are
in the process right now
standing up the unit within DFA
to do federal tracking and
administration and and so
there's a lot of components of
this but one is making sure that
we have a system that can
capture all that mission that
information to that we're
providing the reporting that we
need to find three that we're
getting the money out the door
quickly and efficiently and for
that we can not duplicate
services so it I'm hoping that
we can find a system that's
going to be able to identify
similar type of federal money so
that we can maximize those
monies.
The other.
Things that we're working on is
with the with the LFC we are
working on the new B. R. S.
system a budget our system and
we're hopeful that the plan
right now is that it it should
be ready for the FY twenty three
request cycle it's both the new
and improved system which and
make it a lot easier there's
going to be a lot of processes
that are going to be streamlined
a person is probably one of the
biggest things most time
consuming things that we have to
do in the B. R. S. system and so
rebuilding that into it and
there's gonna be a lot of of
addition sees it with this new
system.
I mentioned again that nothing
challenges more than the public
health emergency and so we
learned what worked well and
what didn't and so we're all
we're we're structuring our
office our department to need
all of those needs we want to be
able to so I I'm again I'm proud
that we were able to react
quickly when we started getting
federal money sent we help David
agencies get emergency
procurements in place we got
better set up in record time we
provided food and for kids and
seniors we help them acquire PPE
for health care workers testing
alternative housing so we work
long hours but I think it was I
don't I'm I feel like they were
really rewarding hours because
week Scott got to see the
benefits that we're providing to
the agency sent to the citizens
of the state.
if they are one of our goals in
this thriving communities this
includes state agencies higher
education institutions courts
dust counties municipalities and
tribal governments I tell people
that I think DFA is one of the
eight the vote only agencies
that I know that touches almost
every single piece or entity in
the state of New Mexico one way
shape or form I can't think of
another agency that does this
and we do this by making sure we
can find oversight training
access and that we share best
practices with all of these
entities.
what we do if they is improving
our support to local governments
is a new local government budget
management system.
we've had improved navigation
based on local government
surveys and feedback so we reach
out to these local government to
try to get their input
one of the things that I thought
was really interesting about
four five years ago as we found
out that we have lots of special
districts in the state of New
Mexico but there was no one
place to capture all of those
special districts and so I'm
happy to say that local
government division now house of
a system that can do that just
so you know there's three
hundred thirty five special
districts that receive different
type of funding through the
department of finance
administration and so it was a
try to capture that information
but I'm happy to report that we
have
we have the ability to attract
outstanding debt and bond
information
tracking waters taxes and then
so the new system that we're
working on right now is face
three important I just heard to
date that we might be able to
consolidate those two bases into
one and there's gonna be a
savings if we do that so that
the course of rate so this B. R.
a system improvement was for
tracking property taxes not sure
how many of you realize that
that the property track if the
property tax process was a
manual process we had
spreadsheet so we get
information from taxation
revenue department on the
spreadsheet we have to popular
we've used so that spreadsheet
to do the calculations that left
a lot of room for error so
we're.
I'm excited to say that that
should not be happening it's in
the very near future.
So workforce development
Firm believer that communication
is the key that drives in the
organization and and because we
touch on many organizations it's
not just internal organ exit
communication if the externalism
out you know what I have died
weekly meetings with directors
they have meetings with their
staff we have new employee
meetings I want the employees to
know who we are with management
just I want them to know that
we're approachable that we're
there for them that we're
supporting them and they were
looking for their ideas are we
want them to know they are part
of the team
and we also want to make sure
that we provide them with all
training opportunities because
if we can we're trained well if
we are are confident in our
abilities that means that
trickles down to everybody else
that we serve.
So the next slide basically is
the recap of what was already
discussed by our budget on this
but miss Nichols and Miss Suazo
COS I'd like to point out that a
quarter of our budget includes
dollars that are actually blow
through dollars that could that
that don't that go to special
district are not special
district for special programs
so.
The other thing I'd like to to
point out is that
Some of the big the biggest
difference one of the biggest
difference is that you'll see is
in the two hundred and that has
to do with some restored
funding.
During the twenty twenty regular
session the legislature are
provided additional funding so
that state budget division could
hire program analyst well during
the special session that money
was basically taken away and so
we don't have any program
analyst in the state of the
state budget division right now
and that responsibility falls on
DFA so we need to get these two
positions to help get that back
on track
just for for your information
DFA three versions fourteen
million the of the reversion for
FY twenty was from the law
enforcement protection fund and
that's really typical
it that the law enforcement
protection fund is based on a on
statute and and there are it's
it's there's calculation for how
that money needs to be
distributed and so if if local
governments don't reach that
particularly those caps then
that money stays there and then
it's reverted at the end of the
year so it's it's not this is
something that happens year
after year the other thing is
that the other reversing that we
have large immigration we had
was five million dollars and in
the into your bill
appropriations that didn't get
spent on which is unfortunate
and then for our general
operating overall there was
about a million dollars in three
versions.
The next one is the second
recommendations for the special
programs again I think that I'm
gonna go to slide thirteen
please I think the biggest
differences again were the least
hold a community that has to do
again with its dictated to us by
statute it's a calculation that
where we have to route.
It's based on the amount of
funds these whole communities
are tied to that are based on
similar sized entities and so
that's the calculation we have
to requests and so it's been fun
to the lower level and in the
last few years but it's our
responsibility on legal
responsibility make sure that we
asked for it based on that
calculation the other thing I'd
like to point out the civil
legal services
we adjusted our recommendation
we we heard loud and clear from
some of the advocates that
they're seeing a lot of cases
increase because of COVID
because of the pandemic in one
way shape or form and so they
felt like there was an and and
need for some additional funding
we had left general fund flap
and we didn't want to use all of
their fund balance and so we
didn't recommend in our
recommendation we don't have any
additional we only use the
portion the fund balance but
we're asking that you consider
using additional three hundred
thousand from a fund balance and
then we are going to match that
with some cares Act money that
we have available so that we can
get them up to their FY twenty
one levels.
And then are both miss Misia's
and miss also touched on the
tobacco revenue differences at
the only thing I didn't hear the
mention and I'm sorry I missed
this is that there's an
arbitration hearing scheduled
for April and we're it's
estimated that tax tobacco
revenues are going to be reduced
by about ten to twelve million
dollars and so that's part of
some of the that's one of the
reasons you're seeing these
adjustments are to the tobacco
and that the agencies that
usually get tobacco settlement
revenues is R. D. O. H. HSD and
UNM.
Slide fourteen is just the list
of the memberships in this just
highlights the pew the special
another appropriations that low
through DFA so national
governors association western
governors association and
national association budget
officers
can be supported Medicaid and
that that is all that I have Mr
chair so I am available to
answer any questions.
Thank you very much madam
secretary we do have questions
we're gonna go ahead and start
with Representative Trujillo.
Yes thank you I'm.
I don't know if I heard this in
your presentation in the
previous one but did you address
the issue of land grant money in
your presentation.
So madam chair I missed Mr
Chairman sorry Representative
Trujillo I didn't specifically
say anything about land grant
miss miss Misia Mr Kitana do
want to talk about Land Grant.
Good afternoon
Mr Chairman Representative
Trujillo yeah land grants to the
right now in the executive
budget as the secretary did
mention the executive
recommendation is an increase of
twenty four point seven to the
Land Grant council which would
basically be a reestablishing
the amounts that
were reduced as a result of the
potential five percent decline
in the overall department budget
but with this infusion on the
executive side it should restore
the funding I will definitely
divert to budget analyst to pay
analyst and former C. as to
correct me or give me and give
any other figures that may be
helpful.
I madam chair and or Mr chair
might my concern is that it's
such a very small amount and I
know I have I think LFC you left
a flat rate.
Yes madam chair Mr chair that's
correct
I hope that the Representative
the chairwoman Lundstrom will
consider two of when we discuss
all this later on.
She I hope that you'll allow the
committee to re discuss this and
talk about the exit the taking
the executive recommendation
because this is such a small
program and they do so much work
so Representative Lundstrom I
did want to make a big to do out
of it right now but hopefully we
can go back and discuss it.
And it twelve thousand dollars
is a drop in the bucket compared
to.
What we usually deal with so
thank you thank you all Mrs
Romero and Mister king thought
not and analysts and
Representative Lundstrom and
Representative Representative.
Thank you very much
Representative Trujillo next
we're going to go to
Representative Lotta.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
Miller for the for the
presentation are that are
one of the things that really
stood out to me miss Romero Mr
chair was the
The the number that you gave
that was five million in junior
bill money that was that wasn't
spent of that really concerns me
and out but what I would like to
know Mr Miller Mr chair is what
was the main reason.
Overall why that money wasn't
spent Mr chair.
Mr chair representative I can
tell you is my experience and I
don't know I don't have the
specifics and I'm happy to get
the specifics of the five
million inch and junior fund
money or can you additional
money that didn't refer but my
experience has been that
sometimes these they're not
always planned
into do may not be aware of that
the funding is coming their way
and so it may not be if they're
not quite sure what to use the
money for and so typically
that's the reason that we see
reversion and and and that
applies to capital outlay as
well.
Thank you for that thank you Mr
chair because it was my also my
personal experience that up I
had allocated some money to one
of my local school districts and
that you know they were running
around like you know what are we
gonna do with this and one of
the things that they were afraid
of it especially the school
districts is that the the money
from that junior bill was gonna
count against their there
There are not the not taking
their their capital outlay for
the you know you know what I'm
talking about and they were
afraid that that was going to
count against them with with
with their with their state
match and that's when I I
believe that some of that money
wasn't spent so I I agree that
was a lot of chaos there was a
lot of confusion and if and when
this were to happen again I
think we we need really need to
look at it and act out and maybe
have some guidance especially
from you and your team as to how
to best utilize this money in
and out what process we need to
go through what we need to do
this.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
thank you very much president
Lotta great questions next we're
gonna go to Representative
Garcia thank you Mr chairman of.
The secretary role metal on what
Representative lot adjusted.
When people apply for this money
to make them aware of it's
coming to one before you just
one more just we can get into a
wall what we do with this that
seems to be the problem would
have been a lot of people not
knowing they were going to get
apparently and then they do get
it and what Representative lata
said what we do with the where
we spend that so that it will
help you answer mom.
Mr chair representative Garcia
I'm we don't know what's going
to come until the bill is passed
and so we review once the bill
is passed and signed we tried we
do our best to reach out to all
the local where we got the
probation and to let them know
that that money is available to
them
there's a process for grant
agreements and those type of
things so there may be some some
paperwork that needs to be done
but all in all we are dependent
on them to reach back out to us
to let us know that they are
ready to spend the money and I
just think sometimes they're not
clear on what that money should
be used for so I think it's it's
there some communication that
needs to happen but I think it
needs to happen before to put
into the bill and before the
bill is passed to the folks that
these these organizations
understand that that bonding is
available to them.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative the secretary of
the middle of I'm glad you said
that because you are you should
earlier wouldn't get mortars Act
money Mr chair.
And so forth and I hate for them
to get back in the same old deal
of not knowing what to do with
the we do need to educate people
a little bit before it happens
Mr chair I guess the question I
have is a.
here a second remember you
should the you had extra cures
Act money.
You know in those districts out
there that didn't get enough
money so how could you have
extra money and some people
don't get enough.
So Mr chair so so when there was
a hundred seventy eight million
dollars that was set aside for
local governments and small
businesses and tribal
governments and so they were
awarded in August everybody got
you know they think they
submitted applications we
couldn't
Fund everybody the full
applications because we got
probably three times the
applications than the money that
we have available and so they
were it was pro rated the that
everything was pro rated so that
everybody got a share
We do have some money available
but Mr chair I've got to tell
you Representative Garcia we
still have a lot of needs out
there I was just talking to the
Department health it said they
have a million dollar a month
bill to come stand for providing
housing for COVID.
Positive individuals these are
hotels that are set out to
across the state that they
before we house people we don't
have any money set aside to fund
that million dollar need every
month and so that we even though
we that we've we've allocated
all of the cares Act money I can
say that we probably have very
little coming back in I have
there was seven hundred thousand
dollars that hadn't been spent
by one of the agencies that we
work that's happened that is
what I was going to use for
civil legal services so it's
very limited I I can tell you
that I wish we have a lot more
and a lot more right now did you
cares Act money has not come in
yet the one that was passed in
in December and so looking
forward to seeing that money
come in and what we can use it
for.
Thank you Mr a report J. durable
metal you said that there's a
hundred seventy eight million
dollars in the care that you
said there was like three
hundred million in mass.
How do we come up with almost a
million back from from the
church Act money and it was not
distributed to people that were
short begin with.
So Mr chair.
Mr chair representative so the
money that that that was
allocated to the local
governments if they submit the
reimbursement they were
reimbursed a hundred percent.
We I'm not sure you know.
We're still trying to reconcile
how much is going to come back
to the state that wasn't spent I
don't expect it to be a lot we
and I had her five hundred
thousand dollars is what I'd
heard by from staff last week
there they still have a couple
of payments that are pending
once those are finalize then
we'll know exactly how much
money has not been spent about a
hundred seventy eight million
and then we can make decisions
on.
How we can use that additional
money it's not going to be a lot
though Mr chair thank you Mr
chairman of Senator middle well
you know how.
Appreciated if you would keep
rural New Mexico in mind because
you know like my community there
didn't ask for anything they got
what they asked what it was a
very much because there was a.
Errors on the ask you know what
they were doing to begin with so
last week very little and I'll
tell you how much it was for the
county is it a grant incident
would not be after seven hundred
thousand dollars that's not to
become better and communities
full well maybe we need to
educate people the more on
what's going on with this thank
you Mr chairman thank chairman
thank you very much for P.
Garcia next we're gonna go to
Representative and.
Our purpose.
Sh thank you Mr chairman you
were really slow talking there
so I'm not sure I think it maybe
your video it kind of does that
sometimes but anyway thank you
Mr chairman I am may have missed
it and I apologize if I did but
the emergency water supply fund
what was the request.
Mr chair
I'm gonna defer to
Chart analysts Nicole Misia's.
I'm looking for right now I
can't see it on here.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative for the.
Board of finance water emergency
water supply fund it was
requested that fifty thousand
dollars however they wrecked the
executive recommended a hundred
and nine thousand dollars nine
hundred.
I DO and madam chair Mr chair
and and then why would they only
request fifty thousand.
With the funded it looks like in
the past for over a hundred so I
was just curious and especially
in a time of a pandemic.
So Mr chair Representative
Armstrong I see that they do
that both the executive
recommendation and the LESC
recommendation is a hundred and
nine point nine but I think and
and nationally can correct me if
I'm wrong I believe that there's
also some state border financing
virgin C. will money that's
outside of this is actually can
you help me out.
Yes Mr chair members of the
committee
the the board of finance has to
emergency funds emergency
operating fund which is provided
to all different types of
emergencies not just water
emergency water fund is is
restricted to just water
emergencies in small communities
of populations of five thousand
or less the the FY twenty
an amount was a hundred and
seventy five thousand the one
hundred and nine thousand drops
back down to what I think we're
some historical numbers prior to
FY twenty I I can't speak to the
impetus of of that as to why LFC
is dropping it but that is the
those are the two funds at the
board of finance overseas okay
thank you so much for your
answers.
Thank you very much
Representative Armstrong next
we're going to Representative at
a.
Thank you Mr vice chair thank
you Secretary Romero.
I think maybe I just want to the
committee I think some of that
money that emergency water many
went to the village of trauma
there well drop down there Water
System drop down I and they had
no water really for about a
month so I know that some of
that money was sent there and I
want to thank all of you for
having some money in that fund
to help them out it's not easy
when a community of less than
two thousand.
No running water so thanks for
all the people who helped and
then.
Into M..
Yeah I'm struggling to remember
what my question was for yes it.
So we've had we've had we're
gonna have like three pots of
cares money we have in one back
in June as I recall and then
we're gonna have this other one
that was passed in December by
Congress that's going to bring
another four point seven or four
point eight billion into the
state is that right.
So then Mr chair of
Representative
I am I'm not I believe that's
correct I believe that's
correct.
Mr chair and secretary Romero
what I want to know is when and
I I've seen that have the parts
that money out I I did get that
that
the spreadsheet on that what I'm
curious about is do you as a
state or do we just say we get
administrative funding in each
one of those accounts so that we
can put people to work in design
I mean if all that money comes
in but you can't use any for
administration it's going to be
a nightmare so that's what I'm
curious about is their
ministrations
money built into each one of
those funds.
So Mr chair representative at
about
We didn't take advantage of any
of the administrative money the
first time around well we did a
little bit I I should say we can
do with it but we wanted more of
that money to get out the door
we needed it for the emergencies
we needed it for
you know testing contact raising
all those things and so we were
really frugal and what we were
using for administrative
services I think that now we're
going to have to look at using
some of that money for
administrative services because
we need to build systems to be
able to manage all of this
funding but it's still again I
can tell you my commitment is it
is we're going to do the best we
can with not spending a lot of
money on ministration because we
want the money to go out with
the needs are the communities
are where the needs are your
areas are where the needs are so
that's our goal is to make sure
most of money gets out the door.
Mr vice chair and secretary
Romero I I appreciate that goal
I respect that go but I'm gonna
tell you it takes money to hand
out money I mean it's it's.
Is a complex formula and you
have like as I recall there were
like twenty five different.
Agencies are areas where this
money was going somewhere to
individual somewhere to kind of
systems within the state
agencies I I just.
I just wouldn't hesitate to take
an indirect costs right to
devoted to administration and
that because I just don't see
for but I think was closed four
point eight billion as matter of
fact and.
This is hard yes you know what
two thirds of our annual budget.
I'm just so I yes can you take
some administrative.
And I would just encourage you
to yes we want as much go out to
the people the agencies as we
can possibly get out but I think
you have to be respectful of the
fact that even though our state
agency people are wonderful it
does take time to managed to
into get enough to so I would
say give yourself an
administrative overhead.
And probably across the agencies
that that's for you guys to
decide and I'm just making that
implementation that's all I have
Mr chair Mister vice chair
start.
Thank you very much represented
at a next we have Representative
Castellano.
Thank you Mr chair.
Romero good afternoon is this
money that
was talking about this what we
eight billion I believe do we
do you how do we as a state know
how we're gonna disbursed isin.
We're going to use it for or we
have no clue at this time.
So Mr chair Representative
Castellano I think that we're
the guidelines tell us how the
money can be spent so it's
disbursed based on the
guidelines that are provided by
the feds
We are right now in the process
we've spoken to several vendors
about being able to track and
set up system so that
introduce or
one of the requests that we just
recently became aware of and
that we've applied for because
there was a really short
deadline was the housing
assistance grants we are just
looking very closely at
administering that in the I from
DFA so that we can make sure
that most of that money gets out
to we thought we saw during the
special session when they
appropriated money that we
missed a lot of people there
were gaps in the way we need to
do that so I guess back to your
question we're doing everything
we can to identify what the
money can be used for and how we
get that money out in the most
efficient way possible.
Thank you thank you Mr well
maybe give up if we get a chance
this week the community a call
and I can discuss it with you
just I just I would like to see
what thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much
Representative Castellano and
we're going late today apologize
to everybody do you want to go
back to Representative Garcia
for a second time and maybe
Representative small let's let's
be quick about this four way
behind schedule so go ahead
representative Garcia I'll make
it real quick madam chair Mr
chair of I'm not care that money
we got the last time open get
divided a little bit better what
did the first time because there
was a lot of happy people I know
we've got divided thank you.
Representative small.
It is thank you madam chair
I will take some questions up
offline with secretary Romero.
Thank you madam chair.
Is there anybody else that has
any questions this department
then there's a lot that we can
go through here and this isn't
anywhere spoke I'd like you to
focus on the operating budget
there's a lot of questions it
can happen here and certainly.
Representative are
Our cabinet secretary has
offered to meet with us
separately and I would encourage
the members to do that so I need
a motion for this department
please thank you madam chair of
the LFC recommendation for the
part funded.
Thank you the motion.
The motion and the second is
there any opposition to that
motion.
We don't see any opposition so I
want to thank Mr Meryl and her
team for being here today
and listening in on all the
other departments has been a we
have a list today and we will be
looking forward to more
information about care is a
comes forward obviously for
obvious reasons we'll look
forward to getting that
information from you as soon as
we know what's going on.
So thank you again let's go to
the next stage in State General
Services Department three fifty
want this quick analysts
analytics and the department
grant.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Connor Jorgensen I'm LFC analyst
for the General Services
Department again that's agency
code three five zero with me is
I believe Mr Simon Miller of the
department of finance and
administration and Mr can Ortiz
secretary of the General
Services Department and in the
spirit of keeping a quick I'm
just gonna go over
A couple of points on the
summary Mr Miller Nile alternate
and when will we'll move quickly
through this.
So.
First off I think it's important
point out General Services
Department receives a very small
amount of general fund revenue
it's about three percent of the
total operating budget you can
see up on that top line of
there's only a thirteen thousand
dollar difference between the
general fund recommendations
from the LFC and DFA.
The vast majority of that
difference and you can see it's
twenty eight point nine or
twenty one point nine million
dollars that is basically
entirely made up in two programs
it's the employee
benefits program that provides
health insurance to state
employees and the risk
management program which
provides risk management
services that's like property
liability insurance workers comp
unemployment at center.
And once you remove those two
programs the those are the
health benefits and risk
management program the overall
budget
difference is.
It's off five hundred ninety six
thousand dollars or about a one
point four percent reduction
that's what the agency requests.
Moving into programs support
this is P. five ninety eight
programs support there's a
seventy one thousand dollar five
hundred difference there
That is revenue that was
normally transferred over as an
administrative fee from the.
Facilities management division
and the executive recommended
alas or transfer which resulted
in FM the being able to maintain
more of their general fund
appropriation in the agency.
I'd like to turn it over to Mr
Miller to go through six oh
four.
Good evening madam chair members
of the committee.
Again my name is Simon Miller
and I'm an analyst with DFA the
federal can turn to to P. six so
for the part procurement
services program
the perfect procurement services
program also known as the state
purchasing division is
responsible for purchasing goods
and services for executive
stating.
Using competitive bidding
processes and administering the
procurement code.
Program receives a portion of
the value of purchases off of
certain state pricing agreements
which funds the majority of
program operations for FY twenty
two both the DFA and LFC
recommendations are the same
reflecting a general fund
decrease of five percent and an
overall budget decrease of seven
point nine percent nearly the
entirety of this decreases in
person category is both
recommendations increase the
unfunded vacancy rate from about
this that in this current fiscal
year to twenty one percent for
fiscal year twenty twenty two
and I'll turn it back to Connor
for the next program state
printing.
Okay so for state printing this
is on page four of the packets
there are no differences
In either recommendation of both
recommendations will be part of
the request LFC and executive
staff to reach consensus on
performance measures and targets
for the program.
Of Simon you want to respond
Representative.
Yeah madam chair members of the
committee moving to P. six of
six the risk management program
this program oversees the state
health and risk insurance
programs
the program is largely supported
by the insurance funds that it
manages the only difference
between the two recommendations
is that the executive
recommendation provides two
hundred eighty thousand dollars
in general fund for the inter
agency pharmaceuticals
purchasing Council column was
created by Senate bill one
thirty one of twenty nineteen to
review and coordinate
pharmaceutical cost containment
strategies for public sector
health insurance providers in
New Mexico rather than providing
general fund to support the
council the LFC recommends that
council expenses be absorbed by
the state health benefits fund.
So with that I'll turn it back
on for the next program.
Thank you and and one last note
on risk management
We see like with the I. P. P. C.
the prescription drug purchasing
Council we've seen other
organizations such as the
inter agency budget advisory
committee or I backed has been
built into the agency operating
budgets and doesn't have a
dedicated.
appropriation for G. S. B.
retiree health care or Nancy or
those are the participants.
Okay so P. six oh seven this is
employee group health benefits
and this is where one of the
really large chunks of that
about overall difference is the
overall differences the LFC
recommendation is nine point
nine million dollars last from
the DFA recommendations.
It's also important to
understand here that what we're
talking about really is
expenditure already this is not
an appropriation GSD has the
authority to set rates for state
employee health benefits and
this budget is essentially
providing them already to pay
for the cost of providing.
Those benefits.
GSD is September presentation
LFC the agency reported at
anticipating three hundred sixty
three point nine million dollars
in revenue to the health
benefits farm and had
anticipated expenditures of
three hundred ninety seven point
you will.
The HSD is in a deficit position
no premium increases passed on
to agencies FY twenty two
similarly no premium increases
passed on FY twenty one.
At the September LESC meeting J.
as the noted anticipated the
nineteen million dollar
reduction in expenditures
related to a COVID nineteen
vaccine due to delayed or
canceled health care as a result
of a providers.
Curtailing services during the
pandemic.
However GSD is not able to
determine how those costs might
increase and in the future as
those providers reschedule Care.
I'd like to also note that last
session GSD received a ten
million dollars special
appropriation for the group
health benefits on and that was
done to keep the find out of the
deficit at the time
And also it's good to point out.
You're gonna see later there's a
special appropriation for
thirteen and a half million
dollars requests for this
funds again keep it out of the
office
two thirds of the membership of
this program state employees
while another third is local
government please.
For FY twenty two the agency
requests and the executive
recommended seven point two
percent increase for the help
for health benefits
expenditures.
That's a twenty seven point five
million dollar increase from the
FY twenty one operating budget
fifty million for thirteen point
nine percent increase over FY
twenty actual expenditures the
LFC recommends.
An increase of seventeen point
eight million dollars or four
point six percent over the
twenty one OpBud and forty
million dollars for China half
percent over FY twenty actual
expenditures again LFC and
executive staff response on
system performance measures and
targets.
I'm.
All right madam chair members of
the committee moving to P. six
oh eight the facility's
Management Division of the
facility manager facilities
management division overseas
state owned buildings and
manages capital projects for
most state agencies this program
is funded exclusively by the
general fund overall the
executive recommendation is
forty thousand or zero point
three percent greater than the
current fiscal year budget well
the LFC recommendation is three
hundred thirty four thousand
four two point two percent
greater than of the current
fiscal year the majority of the
difference between the two
recommendations here is within
the person category the
executive recommendation holds
the person category flat to the
current fiscal year while the
LFC recommendation includes an
increase of a hundred seventy
five thousand to reduce the
unfunded vacancy rate from about
ten percent this year down to
seven percent for the next
fiscal year.
And I will turn it back on for
the next program.
Thank you and this is six zero
nine its transportation services
you'll see once again both
recommendations are identical
both recommendations what we
Fund the agency requests and the
LFC and executive staff reached
consensus on performance
measures and targets Simon.
All right madam chair members of
the committee moving to the last
program P. seven nine nine the
risk management funds program
this program is where the state
pays out its property liability
unemployment and workers
compensation claims claims
expenditures are self funded by
premiums assessed on state
agencies overall there's an
eleven million dollar difference
between the two recommendations
the executive recommendation
assumes a higher growth rate in
risk claim risk claims than the
LESC however claims expenditures
are fairly volatile and
unpredictable from year to year
so both recommendations are are
within a realistic projected
range of expenditures for a.
My name's.
And
with that I will turn it over to
secretary Ortiz thank you.
Okay and we're all ears go
ahead.
Committed.
Secretary.
Sorry about that madam chair.
Okay let's try it this trying
again I'm sure my screen I'm a
real presentation.
I apologize for that Madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to
present before you today I also
want to start by introducing my
team as I'm pulling up the
presentation I have with me
today W. guess who's a deputy
secretary of GST Mr Michael Hahn
whose are HSD director.
Mr market in who's our state
purchasing director.
Are we also have mark Tyndall
with our risk management and a
silver director of facilities
management in James Chavis with
our transportation to.
Division also on our leadership
team is Mr Randall Cherry as a
general counsel Mr Robert Newman
who is our state printing
director and our public
information officer Thom Cole.
Madam chair can you see my my
screen.
Madam chair to see my screen.
We can see the screen go ahead
can okay I'm sorry about that
anyway just want to thank you
for the opportunity to present
our FY twenty two recommendation
I want to start off by thank you
Mr Conner Jorgensen and Simon
Miller for preparing what I feel
is very responsible budget as
Connor and Simon both noted the
differences are pretty small I
want to start madam chair
members of the committee to go
over some highlights of some
initiatives and some good
accomplishments with GST by
program level I'll try to make
it as brief as possible and I
appreciate the actual time spent
with us today so moving on to
our first program which is
program support which consist of
the office of the secretary are
I. T. division are HSD division
we've basically been working on
improving online applications
within the department so for
example we developed an online
web application for state of New
Mexico agencies and local public
bodies to self report
construction contracts this is
in response to House Bill three
nineteen to twenty twenty
session we've developed a public
web page that publishes
government building third party
leases by county for public
viewing and transparency we've
been handsome some of our I. T.
application such as we
implemented a web based case
management system within our
risk management legal bureau to
better track outside counsel
cases Simon's billions etcetera
we've provided online
capabilities for vendors to
submit invoices electronically
contract their payment status
we've implemented an online
exposure surveys for agencies to
report the risk exposure
directly to risk management and
something new are related to our
S. co project is were publishing
dashboards for Mitchell
reporting such as our solar and
building notifications at the
bottom of the slide is of.
Report from our dashboard as of
December thirty first where we
stayed as far as our energy
efficiency we saved in a global
into a hundred and forty four
thousand gas consumed and over
to the right we've saved about
three point one million as an
equivalent of miles driven by
passenger vehicles.
Moving on to our state
purchasing division last year
working with the department of
information technology we
implemented an E. signature
process for all agencies the
better choices DocuSign and
what's that has saved us time
and and efficiency basically
we've gone from full contract
signature in an afternoon if you
will compared to several days or
even weeks work contracts have
to be routed to each specific
agency for signatures we've also
implemented within state
purchasing electronic submission
proposals for all procurements
missions including video
conferencing for bid openings
we've implemented online portal
four agencies to report in state
versus out of state contracts in
response to Senate bill eighty
eight in the twenty nineteen
session session for the first
time ever the state in Mexico is
able to report the total of the
total number of in state versus
out of state contracts at the
end of.
Fiscal year twenty I'm pleased
to report that sixty five
percent of the contracts
reported by agencies working in
state New Mexico companies we're
also working this session on
Senate bill fifty three to
promote New Mexico businesses
through government contracting
and we've been coordinating with
several chamber of commerce
commerce's commerce and
businesses to encourage New
Mexico businesses to register on
our State purchasing website and
apply for any type of R. F. P.
invitation to BID and hopefully
a contract with a New Mexico
agency.
During the interim were planning
to modernize and streamline our
procurement code through a
comprehensive redraft that will
be presented to the legislature
next session.
Within state printing with
provided promotional materials
to encourage New Mexicans to
complete the twenty twenty
census we've assisted the
secretary of state's office of
printing postcards to encourage
voter registrations we printed
over ninety thousand voter
guides for all counties we also
provided various COVID related
signage is for state facilities
airports ports of entry around
the state we've implemented for
the digital presses to improve
technology and we also continued
his support Legislative Council
Service on printing all bills
amendments as well as
legislators stationary moving on
for risk management division
last year in response to Senate
bill sixty four we eliminated we
eliminated the hundred and
eighty eight confidential
requirement in state settlements
and a recording those
settlements on assigned
passionate portal to increase
transparency we're implementing
a new risk management
information system and is
scheduled to go live by April of
twenty twenty one we're working
with various councils such as
the interagency pharmaceutical
purchasing council as well as
Department help on reducing the
costs for prescription drugs in
response to several bills that
are outlined we've got a new
choices for employee benefit
coverage to include a new
medical carrier cigna in
addition to our remaining two
carriers Presbyterian health
services as well as Blue Cross
blue shield we're all also
operate multiple voluntary
coverages such as whole life
insurance financial assistance
for cancer accidents and other
critical illness and we're we're
working really closely with the
risk management advisory board
to bring oversight and
transparency to what we do.
Moving on to facilities
management currently we provide
custodial services to over one
point seven million square feet
of state owned buildings in
Santa Fe in Albuquerque or
managing over two hundred
capital projects with a total
value of a hundred and eighty
one million some of these
projects are the phase two trial
wellness center in Albuquerque
is scheduled to be completed in
June of twenty twenty one the
new vital records building in
Santa Fe it is complete we're
working on the DPS crime lab in
Santa Fe also based three of the
New Mexico behavioral health
institute in Las Vegas as well
as we've completed a new
veterans cemetery in angel fire.
Next will it is I I first want
to start and thank the
legislature for the
appropriation in the twenty
nineteen session GSD received a
twenty million dollars
appropriation in addition to a
twelve million bond loan to
improve our energy efficiency in
state buildings were focusing on
solar water utility conservation
measures at the end of this
project we're guaranteed to save
one point two million in utility
savings estimated completion
date is November twenty twenty
one and we're on target to meet
that we're also completed a
master plan for state facilities
including security
recommendations and we've been
providing decontamination
efforts and deep cleaning in our
state facilities when there is
been a COVID nineteen exposure.
Some of the photos here are some
of our projects related to
capital projects we have a soul
hard working three different
campuses in Santa Fe that is
estimated to produce four point
six million in kilowatt hours
and project its utility savings
of four hundred fifty thousand
per year
top middle is our the phase
three behavioral health
institute in Las Vegas it's
schedule forces substantial
completion in April of this year
it includes a thirty six bed
facility consisting of two wings
and the total price tag is
twenty seven million our top
right is some solar roof panels
interstate facilities we have
five campuses in fourteen
buildings that are going to have
solar rooftop which is going to
produce one point four seven
million and chill what hours and
projected annual savings of a
hundred and twenty seven
thousand per year some of our
other esco upgrades including it
includes restroom fixtures H.
fax systems lighting
transformers and building
envelopes.
Bottom left hand corner is a
picture of the new engine fire
cemetery it was it was completed
in July twenty twenty and it'll
serve over fifteen thousand
seven hundred veterans and their
family.
A lot of middle bottom row is
the new vinyl records building
it is completed and Amanda
health is currently moving in
five point three million dollar
project and it's estimated to
serve over two hundred and ten
thousand customers per year
alright is a new rendition of
our DPS forensic lab with the
tentative date in August of
twenty two at a cost of twenty
two million.
Moving on to our transportation
services.
First of all want to also thank
the legislature for special
appropriations for vehicle
replacements we have a fleet of
nineteen hundred and eighty
three vehicles currently with
five hundred and sixty eight
calls over one hundred thousand
miles with some of these
appropriations we've been able
to purchase thirty three
electric vehicles for an
appropriation one million
dollars hundred and eighty nine
electric fuel efficient vehicles
with the special appropriation
in two and a half million and
another forty five hybrid of low
and low emission vehicles I
received with the one million
dollars appropriation off to the
right is a picture of some of
our lectures vehicle charging
stations this pictures rather in
front of the baton building just
west of the capital and we've
included a total of thirty
electric vehicle charging
stations on state campuses in
Santa Fe also within our
transportation services we have
one airplane and we've continued
aviation services for children
medical services as well as
flying children home on weekends
from the New Mexico school for
the blind and visually impaired.
Our transportation staff is also
provided additional driver and
vehicle services to state
agencies by delivering food and
other COVID supplies across the
state and working on could
transitioning to zero and low
emission vehicles.
Madam chair as Connor and Simon
both said this is a pie chart of
what our procreation typically
looks like a general fund
accounts for about three percent
of the total appropriation or
sixteen point six million
dollars other transfers account
for two percent which is
basically our M. D. and program
support.
And the bulk of it is our other
revenue accounts for ninety five
percent of the appropriation
equity to five hundred and
twenty two million with health
benefits equity to four hundred
and thirteen million and risk
funds at about ninety seven
point ninety seven million.
As another view of this as far
as appropriation and this is the
executive recommendation that
we're reflecting here are
program operating budget is at
forty two point four million or
seven point seven percent a
response are close to ninety
seven million or seventeen point
five percent and again our
employee health benefits are at
four hundred and thirteen
million or seventy five percent.
This is a high level breakdown
of the differences very close
it's approximately twenty two
million dollar difference in
overall recommendations between
that DFA and the LESC
go our vacancy rate currently is
fourteen point seven percent.
And going to the different
programs I'm just going to
scroll through them very quickly
they're very close as you can
see state purchasing is the same
program supporters a slight
increase in the LFC
recommendation going on to
facilities management it's it's
close with the LFC having a
slightly higher recommendation.
Transportation division it's the
same at nine point three for
both the DFA as well as the
exact.
I may madam chairman I know
we're not speaking on specials
and supplementals but there's a
couple of that I want to applaud
produce a discussion that we
have a special for some vehicle
acquisitions.
In our health benefits is the
other big difference where we
have about a nine million
dollar.
Difference between the DFA and
the LESC Representative for the
LFC is a little bit lower couple
things related to our health
benefits is not a general fund
recommendation the revenue
received is coming from
employers and employees we have
twenty four out of thirty three
county governments belonging to
our health benefit program and a
hundred and ten local public
bodies currently are our deficit
is at ten million dollars to pay
health benefits claims.
Our last slide is a risk fund
and we have an eleven million
dollar difference once again
this is not in general fund
appropriation is paid by the L.
agencies and with the LFC
recommend an.
At eleven million dollars lower
this may have an impact for GST
to pay our claims as they
materialize.
Madam chairman that's my
presentation we stand for
questions.
Thank you Mr taste thank you for
a good presentation if we can
take the share screen down that
I can see everybody that might
want to ask a question let's
start with Representative
Crowder.
Your original question.
Opportunity to houses of.
Senator.
That is.
You know Representative Crowder
I can't hear a word you said
maybe the others did but.
Madam chair maybe I can repeat
it just to make sure I have okay
Madam chair representative
Crowder I believe your question
was has have we had a chance to
analyze house bill four which is
a civil rights bill and how we
feel about the proposed
legislation okay I could more of
go ahead again the server
so it is.
Okay madam chair sure Madam
chair representative Crowder
short answers we estimate based
on the committee the house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill for as it was
introduced today we estimated
thirty five percent increase in
cost in claims or no quibble and
about four and a half million
fiscal impact that it will cost
us.
Okay thank you thank you madam
chair.
All right let's go to the other
committee members.
We have anybody else.
Representative small and one of.
Go to you for the motion.
But this agency was mentioned by
both Connor and
the DFA Rav is it
analyst this is not typically a
general fund agency.
There's not.
Difference here between the
general fund transfers.
Less than thirteen thousand
dollars which is unheard of in
most of these budgets.
Where we see the difference of
course is with other revenues
which is the agency's funds are
that we're talking about here.
So I want some consideration
here on the agency on the agency
funds.
So what my recommendation I
mean.
Gosh I want to ask Connor downed
wires are a little bit more in
general fund from the LESC side.
Yes madam chair I.
The majority of that you'll see
and facilities management.
You're exactly right that there
is a twelve thousand nine
hundred dollar difference the
other differences essentially
that the LFC rack.
Reduces the the budget for the
prescription purchasing Council
but also increases the budget
for facilities management so
that's that's really the only
general fund differences you're
seeing there okay.
Okay also gonna go to
Representative small for the
motion
I think we can
What I'd like to say is giving
them more flexibility at the end
of day with their other revenues
Is it just that they they've
asked their but
So why don't we go ahead on this
want to go ahead and take the
LFC Representative small and
then when we get into catch up
clean up I can have more time to
look at this other revenues
space because what it doesn't
make any sense we don't give
them what they need and then
they come in with a special to
cover what they need and that's
what my concern is because we
had to do that last year I think
in but that was in the risk
management if I'm if remember
correctly can wasn't it we had
to do an increase in that so
let's so we can really dig into
that a little bit so I'm going
to ask Representative small for
the motion I'm gonna ask
Representative small to work
with me and look at this little
bit more carefully so just be
the two of us to look at this
agency so go ahead.
Thank you madam chair I move the
LFC.
With that act the focus.
That one that that computers
cutting out also but I think
everybody knows what the motion
is is there a second.
Say a representative Allison
giving the second.
I was good the so
just lie.
Representative small.
Okay we have a second from
Representative Allison eight he
got there before you do
Representative Trujillo so let's
go ahead and is there any
opposition to that motion I
don't see any but let's have
Representative small and I take
another look at that other
revenues category there and
let's take it let's take a
deeper look at that you're nine
bill work on that.
Okay.
Thank you representative small
okay I think we have thank you
and Ortiz and your staff thank
you so much for the
recommendation and look forward
to working with you
Representative small yeah all
righty and I I just want to
thank the committee for the work
today but also to remind you
that we've got a heavy left
cause our schedule's been
tweaked a lot so I want to ask
that we continue to focus on the
operational budgets and not go
