You've heard about that
we were there the day before.
OK. All right.
Well, I, uh, definitely lost a
bet today about how long this
this hearing was going to last,
so, um, I'll try to keep this
quick and brief and then
I will feel, we will all feel
questions, uh, that this work
group has on the scenario, so
you should have a handout that
says key hearing issues, public
school support and public
education, um, work group.
The
The committee has adopted the
LFC recommendation, but
OK.
Um, Michael, could you?
Uh, get Representative Herndon,
the scenario. So this is a staff
scenario building off of the LFC
recommendation is incorporates a
lot of the feedback and looks at
the discussion that has been
occurring across both HFC and
Health education, uh, in the
first section, you'll note a lot
of the big differences between
the two recommendations between
the recommendations and what the
discussions were primarily
relating to the funding formula.
Universal school meals, Indian
education, by legal
multicultural, Hispanic and
black education, school safety
and wellness, educated fellows,
CTE, and of course the Perfro
pilots. Um,
The main changes in the agency
scenario before each day for
consideration is a $10 million
increase from the LFC
recommendation for recurring
NSCG. You'll find that online 22
labeled secondary education
reforms.
The larger changes are in the
non-recurring section for the
scenario, it adopts the LFC
recommendation, but.
We're speaking from you're
looking at is this, this is page
3.
But these are the lines he's on.
So your high level is on page 3,
starting on page 3, it's a very
small packet.
And um
I'm just describing the major
differences that you'll see in
the far right column that says
HFC
We're, we're still locating
the budget that you're referring
to.
Yes, OK.
So should I start that?
I have a question.
I have a question. Sure.
Can, can we just authorize
anything we want. I mean, is
there a max? I, I really don't
know how to do this. I, I, I, I
sorry to be so stupid, but I,
can we just, what if we just
approved everything, then what
would happen? I represent her.
This is just a working group. I
don't think you're taking
action, but simply getting an
understanding of the changes
that are being proposed and, and
I think that there will be
further opportunities to make
adjustments after this. So when
do we make a decision? That's, I
guess what
I want to know. I'll let
director Brady. Thank you, thank
you, uh, Representative Herndon.
This is a new process,
obviously, you know, it's a
little hard without a chair, so
we might adjust that for the
work groups tomorrow. Um, in the
past when we've done ketchup
cleanup, it's all kind of been,
you see all of it at one time,
um, and you don't get to see it
before and you don't get a lot
of opportunity to provide
feedback. So you just heard the
public education, uh, budget,
and the LFC recommendation. And
so Sunny.
has, um, taken the feedback from
the work group that met last
Saturday and put it in here and
so we're gonna go through it and
then we'll take more feedback
and then we'll come at you with
something to formally adopt on
Monday.
On Monday, we make a decision.
We will finalize everything on
Monday. Yes, ma'am. So we're
gonna have robust, honest, deep.
And
tonight, now that it's whatever
time it is. OK, I'm ready.
All right.
So I'll go ahead and start
again, from page 3, which is
your high level, um, the HFC
scenario that you see as a
consideration, adds $10 million
online 22 for secondary
education reforms, which is an
increase in the recurring amount
uh from the LFC.
base which you have just um
passed.
Can you explain why you added 10
million.
Um,
representative Garrett, the
The discussions have really
centered on the differences
between the LFC and LAC
recommendation. Um, this
committee has also talked a lot
about a recurring target that
they want to reach, uh, my
understanding is that 10 million
is about the proportion that is
remaining.
From all of the sort of
adjustments you've made from all
the other state agencies, that
would be the public schools
shared and would still help you
remain within a 6% target.
Does that answer your question?
So our goal is to stay at 6% or
below.
And this is the 10 million
wiggle room.
That we're being told exists for
us to wiggle.
Yes, this will keep you at 6%
for all state general funds, my
understanding.
Um, moving on to non-recurring.
First big changes online 83 and
884.
This would
Convert a K-12 plus unit.
Support, appropriation to a
funding formula hold harmless
for two years. So as you heard,
Matt Paul talking about how
those at risk changes would
affect charter schools and also
school districts. This amount
would be used to hold those
harmful entities harmless from
the changes that were enacted,
um, for the at-risk component
for fiscal years 26 and 27.
The next change I want to point
out are we allowed to ask
questions?
Sure, yeah, this is an informal
work group.
Its whole harness for charter
schools. That's what we're
talking about here, right? It's,
it's actually hold harmless for
any school district or charter
school.
That might see a reduction in
funds because of the way that
we're changing the at-risk
factor and the, and the English
learner factor. So,
I'll give you a really concrete
example without naming names,
um, in Albuquerque public
schools, you have a number of
charter schools.
The way that at risk currently
works is that those charter
schools get the at-risk factor
of APS. The law says that a
charter school gets the at-risk
factor of the school district in
which its geographically
located.
So all charter schools in
Albuquerque public schools have
the same at-risk factor right
now.
It doesn't matter what students
they serve, they all get the
same one. Not fair. So the
change to the family income
index allows us to actually
calculate an at-risk factor for
each independent school.
So for a school district that
Maybe their demographics skewed
a little bit wealthier than APS
as a whole.
Up to now they have been getting
essentially a subsidy because
they've been getting an APS is
at risk, and they will lose
funding as we transition to the
new factor.
The opposite is also true. You
may have had an a charter school
that was serving the population
where students were at a lower
socioeconomic status than APS as
a whole.
And they were not receiving
funding for those students.
Or higher, yeah, either one,
either one. So you have charter
schools who are actually going
to gain funding by, by
identifying that school level at
risk, and you have others that
may lose, and in, in depending
on how, how long you want to
extend this, this would offer a
hold harmless for a year or two.
So that they have some time to
transition their programming
because they're, they may lose
funding and that's true for
charters, uh, I'm sorry, for
school districts as well. There
are a few school districts that,
that lose some funding because
of this.
OK, I'll go ahead and continue
and please feel free, this is
supposed to be informal and
please don't call me chairman.
Um, I'll go ahead and go on to
the next change line,
let me just, I'll just ask.
So is there any way that
That schools who have uh more at
risk in this formula. So they
would get more money
potentially. Is there any way we
can
Help them and the schools who
are on the other side or higher,
not help them. So so
representative, the, the, the
policy itself is already going
to direct more funding to school
district to schools that that
are serving that, that we're
serving a population that was
lower.
And APS as a whole, for
instance. Um, so the policy will
already take care of that, and
the money that that is in the
budget.
will flow more funds to those
schools automatically. The whole
harmless is just to cover a year
or two because this is a new
policy, they're used to a
certain amount of funding, if
they get less because of these
changes, this just helps them to
sort of taper off. They will
eventually not get that money.
Well, why don't we just keep it
to one year?
That's, that's up to you. So it
was one year they wanted 3, and
this the same too. The AFC
scenario has 2 years. That's
right.
We have to talk about it, huh?
That's what we gotta talk about.
Oh, OK. The current scenario has
2, but once again, you'll,
you'll have.
If it is some, it is, if it is
the committee's prerogative that
can be adjusted,
I think it's important to
recognize I I think I know where
you're, where you're coming with
this, but
I can be clear there are no,
there are other, there are other
reasons that a school district
or a charter might lose funding,
and it may have to do with the
actual at-risk factor
calculation, and the data that
was used to calculate that at
risk. So we actually have school
districts.
That their demographics haven't
changed, they haven't been
getting a subsidy, nothing like
that.
But because of the data that
we're using in the, and the
differences in that in that
calculation, we actually have
school districts who are also
going to lose funding, even
though they may be serving a
significantly at risk
populations, we wanna make sure
that they also have time to
transition.
And
All right. I'm gonna go ahead
and move on to line 94.
Uh, this 30 million can we stop
can we look at 85 real quick.
Or do you want us to come back?
Oh, thank you, representative,
um, line 85. This is 30 million
for secondary education reforms,
which is, which mirrors the
amount.
Sorry, mirrors the purpose that
is being increased in the SCG.
The difference is that this 30
million would go to PED to
oversee programs and activities
related to secondary ed.
Thank you, uh, on that, because
I, what's the relationship
between line 22 into N85, I
think it's the same kind of
language is that so is one
reoccurring and one is not
reoccurring, is that what it is?
Yes, that's, that's the
difference.
This 30 would be non-recurring,
the 10 would be. And um
Is there, I mean, just what's
the rationale behind that? I
mean, I just want, I just
thought just in those two
places, what, what is the, the
thought behind that, please.
So I'll give another example. So
you currently when structured
literacy first came out. You as
a legislature appropriated 8
million to the SCG so that
schools would actually receive
direct appropriations to do some
of the work and pay for some of
it through their own operations.
Alongside that, you had a below
the line appropriation to PED to
support some of that work and
give direction and guidance on
how it should be used.
This is a similar
Sort of combination where there
is funding that is going to be
flowing through the SCG, albeit
through a unit value increase.
And also funding that has been
given to the department to also
direct um activities that are
related um to that amount.
So just 22 go to schools or does
it go to the PED for the
recurring. So the 10 million on
line 22 would go to schools. The
30 million online 85 would go to
PED.
Representative Chapfield, I
think you had a question.
I think you just answered it, I.
Uh
It it seems
Out of proportion that this cost
that the school gets little and
PD gets more.
For a program, so I, I don't
know.
Representative Chatfield, just,
just to clarify. So this money
would come to the department to
then send to schools, but it
could be done in a more targeted
way. So if we were to say that
this funding for secondary
schools could be used for
targeted.
Supports and efforts which we
could then attach performance
measures to and measure
outcomes. So that again we had
that conversation earlier.
That's, that's something
different with this 30 million.
It would still go out.
To the schools through the
department.
But because it comes to the
department, it could be more
targeted to specific student
groups or efforts for schools,
um, with
With performance measures
attached to it, so that's just a
difference between blowing a
secondary funding through the
SCG versus this.
So, Madam Secretary, can you
just give me one example of what
it might go for.
Um, if we were to identify a
group of students who are not on
track to graduate in 4 years,
The department could utilize
that funding to go to schools to
provide specific supports and
opportunities for those students
to make sure that they graduate
on time.
Um, thank you, I, I, I think one
year funding at that level is it
I, I just don't see one year
funding working. I, I really
don't. I, it takes time to
implement a program, it takes
time to get it out.
It, you know, I, I would much
rather see money going to
recurring money.
for schools to use. I, I, I've
never seen anybody that's able
to do.
A big project in one year. I've
just, I just haven't seen it. I,
I.
I don't think, I don't think it
would work.
Representative Panetta, what I
will say is that there are
existing programs and efforts
that are happening.
I gave you that example because
we're actually doing that.
Right now, this fiscal year with
funding that we have.
In the department, so it it
wouldn't necessarily be like a
whole startup process with a new
concept.
So that it would be something
that could run out, run through
in a fiscal year that would be
focused on a specific effort
like the one I'm interested in
what uh Superintendent Baca has
to say about this.
No, my, my question more is, um,
Is there legislation that is
currently been proposed that may
or may not impact this amount or
basically.
Uh
Allocate funds or something like
that, so I that was that was my
question, is this?
Is there, is there something out
there that may increase,
decrease, or may make it where
that mount.
is now earmarked for certain
programs.
I would just say represent Baca
at this time, there's nothing
specific.
Tied to this, but you could
ostensibly say that.
I spill 63, which is increasing
the secondary weight.
This is related to that in some
ways you could say there's a
bill, I think, to create a CTE
factor of 0.25.
This could ostensibly be
associated with that. It is
generally just a secondary
education reform.
Amount in non-recurring at this
point. Were you going to
elaborate because Representative
Baca, I thought you were also
referring to just the SCG.
Yes, ma'am, I am. I am referring
to the SCG changes and also I, I
did think that there was some
legislation out there that is
going to be taking a look at the
attendance for Success Act, or
looking at some initiatives to
reduce attendance and that so
you're right, it's what it's the
SCG and
I
Legislation that's out there
that is going to be specifically
addressing attendance and
Activities for student
engagement.
So representative, I, I just
want to, I know, clarify like.
The HAFC scenario is, is
something that, you know,
you're, you're seeing for the
first time right now. And so,
and I don't have a whole lot of
information as far as clarity
about what that 30 million pays
for you heard from the secretary
that it could be for a lot of
things, and that it could be
associated with some of the
legislation that's out there,
but the legislation, at least I
can only speak for hospital 63,
specifically tied to the
recommendation to SCG recurring
funding, right? So that doesn't
mean you couldn't that the
department and schools couldn't
use those funds to support other
secondary reforms, but that's
not something that's been in, in
any of the recommendations up
till now.
Thank you and again, and I know
we don't have an answer for
that, so I'm not gonna
definitely, but it will be
something to track and see as,
as bills come through and, and
make their way through the
Through the committees and
legislators is what impact with
and would they actually be tying
up some of these funds or over
the every different pots of
funds to support those bills, so
I'm good at that. Thank you for
your answer. Well, I, I just
wanna say that's very close to
what my bill is for bringing the
minimum wage, which I know is
complicated for all school
employees up to up to 30,000,
which is a, I think the FIR is
about 28 million right now, so
I, I'm saying.
Uh, if, you know, if that were
my choice between that or that,
I'd certainly raise salaries,
just, just to comment. I guess
we're free to make our comments,
right?
And to distinguish
representatives that that the 30
million that we're talking about
is a is a non-recurring. Yeah,
yeah.
OK.
Seeing no further questions, I'm
gonna move on to line 94. This
is a
3-year appropriation.
For
Indian education initiatives.
About 10 million a year for a
total of 30.
Uh, this coincides with a
removal of
Line 145 from the LFC
recommendation. It uses funding
from that growerf.
Indigenous Education initiative
line.
And moves it to just section 5
online.
Uh, line 99, you'll see that the
HFC scenario includes $5 million
appropriation for universal
school meals, potential cost
overruns reflecting the
executive recommendation for
that line.
You also see online 101, an
increase to 20 million for
educator fellows aligning with
the LESC and executive
recommendations.
On line 102, an increase of $5
million for summer enrichment
internships.
Which one? Uh, 102, 102 is a
Internship program.
During the summer for high
school students.
My understanding is that this $5
million went to Las Cruces
public schools. They have a
partnership, um.
I believe with Department of
Workforce Solutions and the
university to provide some of
these opportunities. I think the
secretary could speak more to
that. I can elaborate this is a
this internship program is
something that the department
started with federal relief
money.
It's been uh uh very popular.
It's a great opportunity for
students to receive um to paid
internships and so this is
something that goes through the
counties, um, and they work uh
to establish these internships,
um, I've met with students that
are participating and, and they
all have.
Incredible sort of uh feedback
for us, so is this specific to
Las Cruces?
Or is it spreading around?
Uh, representative Saana, the
language doesn't specify Las
Cruces. It just says for summer
enrichment internships, um, I
just don't know that it was
allocated.
Can I just ask where the
governor's challenge with the
National Guard went to, cause
that was related to summer
internshipspresentative Garrett,
that is through um the uh
National Guard's budget that's
in their budget.
Yeah, I know, we adopted it, but
I'm asking where we adopted it
to.
You have a question? I was just
gonna say, sorry, uh, in terms
of the summer enrichment, I'd
love to learn at some point, you
know, if it's, make sure it's
distributed around the state,
but one of the things we've
learned in LFC is how some uh
internships or internships are
great for youth, for public
safety.
Representative Herrera, did you
have a question or comment?
Well, we kind of skipped over a
couple lines that I want to go
back to and it was um uh both
the uh.
I mean
I think this is great Indian
education, 3 years, so, so
you're, you're building a
program, but you're doing that
over a 3 year period. What we
skipped over was a black
Education Act and the Hispanic
Education Act, and, and both of
those are are not even funded
and um, you know, we've, I mean,
I know we're gonna do a study of
the Hispanic Education Act and
the Black Education Act, I get
why it's not in there right now,
but certainly I think we could,
you know, but at least I think
the Hispanic
Education Act, I think they're
they're current budget.
Is um about 1 million a year.
And I mean, I think we couldn't,
I, you know, just to kind of
give a heads up, maybe you could
do a couple million more there
and then the the black Education
Act, I, I think we need
especially those boys
representative, I do want to
point we haven't gotten there
yet, but um, OK, I'll shut up
then. Um, but it is, uh, being
paid out reform fund.
Um, in this scenario, uh, a
certain amount.
So it's in another place, and we
can get to that one. OK, thank
you, sorry. Yes, Representative
Brown.
Thank you.
I'm gonna go back to 10 102, uh,
the summer enrichment
internships. Uh, my question is,
was Las Cruces the only um
school district that applied or
how did you, did you have others
that applied that
that program provides
internships around the state.
They have to apply for it.
Um, and then there was an
additional appropriation, um,
specifically for uh last.
Came from the legislature,
if I could add a little bit of
clarity, I think. So, we've
talked a lot about CTE and that
$40 million line item. That line
item includes another bucket of
funding that the department has
used for internships to continue
that original federal funding,
um, so last year, total funding,
I think uh awards for this
particular purpose was about $9
million statewide.
5 million of it.
In that one line item that you
will approve for the current
fiscal year went to Las Cruces.
So again, as Sonny said, I'm not
sure that the, the language
reflects that for this current
fiscal year.
But the $40 million remains
flat.
And you're increasing this
particular light item in this
scenario.
buy another $5 million so
depending on who gets it or if
it's open to to the statewide. I
think we all have light bulbs
going off in our heads. There
was a very active woman from Las
Cruces, like my dad, well, very
good, and I, I really would like
to know, um, also, I guess we're
going through the chair, down
here, um.
Do no, OK.
How well is this advertised to
the school districts that this
is an opportunity they might
apply for.
Um,
I mean that we would put it out
to, to, uh, solicit interest,
um.
There's, I, you know, I can't
tell you the exact like steps,
but typically we would um make
it known that this funding is
available, they'd get
information as to how to access
it, um, and so they would, there
would be a process for doing
that. I would say that, you
know, we, we can fund more with
more funding. There uh there is
not a a lack of interest, I
would say in the internship
program. clarify representative
uh Jessica remind
me that uh this actually flows
through municipalities and
tribal entities. So it's your
cities and counties and and
tribal entities that are
actually providing those
internships for students. It
doesn't flow to school
districts. That's right, they
have to apply for.
I said that earlier that it's
counties I left out the tribal
entities. Thank you. Well, thank
you, that's very useful
information. I appreciate it.
All right.
Uh, I believe we are now online,
um,
111, this is an increase, uh,
sorry, 109. This is a
combination of the adopting the
LESC and executive
recommendations here in which 30
million of this is coming from
the general fund and another 10
million is coming from the
career technical education fund,
which you'll find online 159. So
still 40 million overall, just
two buckets of funding that are
available for this purpose.
Quick question.
And um shoot I just lost it.
The, um
Learning management system
canvas, is that coming out of
someplace else now?
Yes, that is on line 133 from
the public education reform
Fund.
OK. Moving on to line 111, uh,
this scenario raises the school
panic button appropriation of
1.5 to match the executive
recommendation for this line
item.
Can I, can I?
Mention for the um.
Canvas is really an a recurring
expense for the department.
And so
Um
I'm not sure that the reform
fund is the best place for that,
being the purpose of the reform
fund, so I'll just mention that
representative.
All right, so, moving on to line
124.
The HFC scenario.
Reduces the transfer to the
public education reform fund
from 150 to 84.5 million.
Your overall non-recurring
spending.
The scenario is still the same
as the LFC recommendation at 343
million.
Um, if you move down to the next
sections, starting online 132.
These are your public education
reform fund scenarios.
Um, you'll see new additions
line 134, 135, and 136, which
are for the Hispanic bilingual,
multicultural and black
education Act.
You'll also see a $1 million
appropriation on online 137 for
wellness rooms pilot.
Um, the scenario adds 6.3
million online 140 or the
supports for students who are
unhoused.
Uh, the
Sonara goes up slightly on line
141 for a secondary literacy.
It goes down on line 142 to be
closer to the LESC
recommendation for innovative
staffing.
The recommendation goes down to
18.6 online 143 to be more in
line with the executive on the
attendance request.
It goes down on line 144 to 1.5,
15.6 million.
Or math achievement to be more
in line with the executive
request.
Once again, the indigenous
education initiative amount went
into section 4 for the 30
million.
Yeah
Um
Representative Saana,
uh,
The there is a stem
recommendation in the LESC
recommendation under Section 4
recurring of about, I think.
8, is that 6 or 8 million?
6 million, um, this scenario
does not include um
Uh, in appropriation for those
STEAM initiatives. Where's the
mass for the mess bill that
Senator Souls is carrying.
Representative ask your question
again. What line is the mass?
I was thinking that was 144, but
it isn't or it is? It is, it is,
it is correct.
OK.
Represent him not under this
scenario.
They have
Representative, we are keeping
track of your comments, and we
will follow up with HTFC staff
well, it was in the um the
public education reform Fund,
which was 150 million with
Senate Bill 201.
It is now recommended 84,000,
which cuts out the 66 million
over three years for the stem
representative, uh, a little bit
of confusion about the two
different things, the STEM
innovation Network, which is the
bill that you all, uh, endorsed
was the $6 million in the reform
fund, but that was to create
that center at a higher ed
institution, those kinds of
things, but Representative
Sainana is referring to is the
steam appropriation that has
been funded in the past.
It's been a couple of years that
went to the department to fund
steam initiatives. So two
different things, and the
innovation network was in the
Perth at one point. This was
always separate, but it's, but
it's not included in the HAFC
scenario currently.
Right. We'll, we'll make a note
of that representative.
Can I ask Representative
Saraana, are you saying that the
steam needs to be in the thing
or the STEM innovation network.
Representative, we've definitely
taken note of it and we will
follow up on that,
I'm, I'm trying to learn this,
the stem network funding too, so
I'm just gonna ask again cause
I'm just thank you.
So the stem network is funding
that would come to the
department and we would then
send it to NMSU.
It was, it would be like a flow
through to NMSU. Is that right?
2 separate things. One is the
network that you just described
where PED would essentially
serve as the flow through to a
higher ed institution.
To do the STEM innovation
network, which is to coordinate
STEM activities all over the
state because we already know
there are a lot of nonprofits
and out of school time folks
that offer STEM professional
development, but there is not a
sort of coordinating entity for
that. That's what the STEM
innovation network could do.
Um, again, steam is, is
different.
And would flow to the apartment
and the department has asked for
it in the past. Um, they have
not received funding for that,
uh, for the last couple of
years, I think, this was to
restore some of that, but it's
not included currently.
Representative Brown, I believe
he had a question. I do, thank
you. Um, I mean, I have a two
birds with one stone question on
line 132. There's a fund to
clean up and it says it pertains
to K3PF RMF, and SLAF which
probably would not easily guess
what those stand for, but it's
only about $15,000 it looks
like. Is this a sweep of funds.
Uh, it looks like it's a, an
expense on the uh oh line 132.
And then the other one, somewhat
related is online 165. It's also
a fun to clean up.
We see some um
Abbreviations and acronyms there
for whatever funds we're
talking, and that's $258,000. So
what, what is a fund clean up is
my question.
Yeah, so, uh, Representative
Brown, I actually want to give
Simon Miller credit for this. He
has noted that PD has
continuously had audit findings
for the K3 plus fund, the
reading materials fund, and the
um
I'm gonna get this.
I'm gonna have to follow up on
SLAF. These funds have negative
balances in their accounts, and
so to sort of zero them out.
There's been a recommendation
from DFA to
Basically net them back to 0.
Of using reversion uh using ste
funds, which you'll see online
165.
Um, there are a bunch of other
funds that have very small, like
$1000 100 dollars balances.
That will be deposited in the
public reform fund and then used
to clean up those negative.
So sunny, can I ask my question?
I'm not sure if we're there.
So I'm looking at um it's
I'm looking at the innovation
zones where we don't have uh any
money at all. We had 45,000 in
LESC but nothing in the HAFC
scenario.
So I'm just wondering what would
happen if we kept the 45,000,
but it was over a 3 year period
as opposed to just in one, in
one year, and then if we go back
and we keep and we go back to uh
line 109, and if we keep the
CTE, the
Career technical education
there, uh.
Leave it as it is with the
30,000 that would be a really
good resolution, don't you
think?
Uh, representative Endon.
The, that is also an option that
you could have 30 million in
section 5, and then 15 million a
year in section 9. However, that
would also mean that you would
need to, um,
Rearrange about 25 million more
in this scenario to do 15
million a year in section 9.
So you would have to essentially
either add
Above what LFC has or rearrange
some of the recommendations that
are in the scenario.
Because paying for it over the
course of 3 years, 15 a year
would.
Uh, be more than what's um
currently on this line item.
193.
The the scenario that you're
looking at, again, it includes a
reduction to, to the transfer to
Perth.
Right
Because you, we all the
scenarios before were at 150,
essentially, 2 perf to fund a
lot of these things, and now the
recommendation is $88 million.
So the, so the, the transfer or
the or the appropriation to
Perth is now less.
But you have put more money in
non-recurring, or in this
scenario, at least, in the case
of that $30 million for
secondary, so you've, in this
scenario, it's, it's a one time
1 year, $30 million dollar
appropriation.
That could be used here for
multi-year appropriations. So
it's, it's really an issue of
where you want to put the money
in and if is it, is it a one
year or a 3 year uh
appropriation, which, you know,
probably has to do with, is it a
program that you want to
evaluate over 3 years, because
that's the intention of Perth.
Representative Chaffield.
Can you hear me?
Could you just say it one more
time.
Sorry, doesn't help to have a
mouthful of burrito
CTE. I see 30 million in one
spot. I see another 10 in
another place that is very
important to our small rural
schools.
Uh, I would like to see it.
One time, love some.
And we'll come back and talk
about it next year.
I believe the only thing left at
this point is line 146. This is
going
From the LFC recommendation down
to 18.6 million, which is more
aligned to the school
improvement and transformation
requests from the executive on
line 173. Um, and that concludes
the um scenario, and I think
we're all here for additional
answering of questions or if you
have feedback that you'd like to
give on this scenario for the
full committee.
Representative Sarana. Yeah, so
the, the one, the last was
school improvement and
transformation. What exactly was
it doing that we didn't matter
if we had that 1000.
Yeah, this funding supports our
school's designated in need of
improvement, so this allows us
at the department to go into
schools, work with staff.
Um, on identifying specific
areas that they need to address,
um, helps them um analyze data,
helps them to set specific
performance goals and to measure
it, they get coaching. It's,
it's very critical funding to
help support those schools. How
many schools are we looking at?
Um, with our latest designation,
do you have the number?
need improvement
this year
it goes to PED, is that what you
were asking or are you asking
designated schools.
We can pull it up really quickly
on on New Mexico this week what
is left, is that enough to cover
the schools you have? Is that
enough to do what we need to do
with the schools that are.
Um,
yeah, more money that we have,
the more schools that we can
support, we can, um, support
schools that are not the at the
lowest performing, the, the MRI
schools, um, or CSI school. So
it allows us cause as they exit,
it doesn't mean that everything
is fixed, cause they can very
easily fall back down to to um.
Uh, uh, higher need.
Um, designation, and so this
allows us to more funding allows
us to continue to work with
those schools. So will this only
leave you the lowest, not, so I,
as far as spending the just the
lowest schools cause I have a
lot and then that next tier.
That's right, if we have more
funding, we can work with
schools in that next tier.
More, more funding allows us to
work with more schools.
Thank you.
But before I go to you,
Representative Brown, I do need
to mention that there is one
language change and that refers
to line 82, which is the other
school time.
A line this does.
change the language to
essentially cut the
appropriation in half for
community providers and public
schools and then a $1 million
earmark for a program for
at-risk students, uh, for
tutoring, but representative
Brown, you had a question.
Thank you. um, Sonny, I
appreciate it. Um, I'm looking
at line 62. I, I know we've
talked about this a little bit,
the New Mexico grown fruits and
vegetables. The executive we see
both recommended 2.3 million of
the HS HAFC scenario has $0
there.
I still would like to somehow
see this happen, um, I, I know
that probably there will be some
Maybe grant opportunities at the
federal level for nutritious
foods.
I applaud that effort, um, when
it lands. Um, is there something
in federal
Meal assistants that could tie
it to New Mexico produce and and
fruit.
fruits and vegetables.
Uh, Representative Brown, uh, I
don't know if there's
Something specific for locally
grown produce, that's part of a
federal program, um, certainly
the schools are not precluded
from using their federal funds
for school meals that are
Created from local produce in in
vegetables, but I do think that
schools typically have
challenges meeting the
nutritional standards and also
keeping costs low, uh, to
Um, to, to leverage that amount
of funding for those purposes.
So
Um, I don't know. I don't know
the secretary or John or of any
other programs federally that
support locally grown produce.
So I was told that there's.
Very small
amount of funding that we
received from USDA that would
support something like this, but
it's very minimal. We really
could not continue to do what
we're doing around locally
sourced uh food products without
this funding. So, so it would be
a, a definitely a a hit to the
program and would not allow us
to continue to do that.
I, you know, I just think we've,
we've got to make sure our
students are getting really
healthy food. And we've done
them no service by
A lot of what I think they're
being served, and I understand
the budgets are what they are,
but I, I really think we need to
make an extra effort here. Thank
you.
Ditto.
We will also make a note of
that.
Um, any other questions or
comments?
Representative
so um
Some, a couple of years ago, we
had uh placed in every school a
defibrillator, at least one.
And, and, and then, uh, last
year or the year before last,
that was Senate Bill 450, which
required the training for those
individuals in every single high
school.
So now there are no
defibrillators because we didn't
keep the batteries up in any of
them. And so my question to you
is,
Uh
How much money do we still have
within our 6% that we could put
these defibrillators back in the
schools and put the training
there.
Um
Representative Herndon.
We would view the batteries for
these defibrillators as part of
your normal operating costs
within school district budgets,
um, so ostensibly if you were to
provide additional funding, it
would.
Need to either go through the
SCG.
Or you would need to be more
directive and
Have an appropriation to the
department for this purpose. I
don't know if.
Um
That is a task that the
department can, I guess, execute
without just flowing the funding
to schools already, so we would
actually recommend if you are
going to increase funding for
that purpose to just include it
in the SCG.
Um, there is a $10 million
increase on online 22 and
recurring.
Um, it is not tied to anything
in particular, but it is
intentionally to address
secondary educational reforms,
because the formula is
discretionary once it makes it
into school budgets.
They could budget it for that
purpose if they.
Saw it as a priority.
This is, this is not a direct
response to your question,
representative, but I, I can't
help myself. You all know I was
a teacher, so I can help but
point some things out. Um.
Speaking about SCG.
And when you, when you all make
decisions about adding about
adding to the SCG and your
intent behind that funding. I
just want to make sure that
you're looking at lines 12 and
14.
You heard, you heard the
secretary talk about this in the
previous presentation.
These are credits that LFC has
traditionally recommended over
the last few years to try to
accommodate drops in enrollment.
I think I mentioned this to you
all when when we were here a few
weeks ago about in the in the
secretary mentioned this earlier
too, that drops in enrollment
could result.
In lower, in lower costs to
school districts.
When you put something in the
formula, whether in or out.
Um, it is not evenly distributed
to all school districts.
And so if your school district
representative Brown did not see
a drop in enrollment, they're
still going to see a decrease in
funding because of these
credits.
Right
Now, there are districts who
might have disproportionate
drops in enrollment, it may not
see that disproportion or that
proportionate share decreased
because of this. But I also
wanted to point out, so
Just that those two equal $35
million that you're actually
removing from the formula.
And me
Impact
May affect the impact that some
of the additions to the formula
have.
As you, as you put them in, if
that makes sense. So you have a
$10 million wreck in the line 22
for the HAFC scenario.
You're pulling 35 out.
And, and you could, you could go
through any one of these lines,
it doesn't affect any one of the
lines in particular. It's just a
net.
Decrease to that, to that, um,
to that appropriation. And
that's certainly your
prerogative to think about how
you account for dropping
enrollment because we have seen
dropping enrollment about 1% a
year over the last 10 years, and
that certainly does result
probably in lower costs, but how
you account for those, those
lower costs year over year,
something that you want to think
about and and how that might
have impacts on your school
districts.
I do also want to add to what
John is saying that if you look
at fiscal year 25 online 14.
That is a $19.9 million
reduction to account for
membership.
But when you look at lines 13
and 14 for the HFC scenario. If
you add those together, you're
actually seeing a net increase
of 14 million, at least for the
fiscal year 26 recommendation.
Um, when a school seasons romic
growth, they actually generate
more funding.
And when a school
Loss in enrollment, they
generate less funding. So the
formula is
I'd like to call it a glorified
voucher system, in fact, that
the money follows the student,
and so when the overall pie
funding is redistributed, it
just goes to the students based
on which school district or
charter school that they enroll
in, um.
When you buy units as you are on
line 11 for K-12 Plus, um, that
were unexpected.
You're also losing units from
enrollment declines at the same
time, and, and the, the cost of
one unit is equivalent to
another unit. So when you want
to buy additional units.
When you're also losing units.
You may be inadvertently
increasing the unit value and
increasing the cost per unit,
and that is certainly a decision
you can make as a committee, um,
but
In previous LLC and former
recommendations, the general
approach has been to replace the
decline in units.
With an increase in units and
using the same.
Essentially net those two
together. Um
The
There is, um, I've been a
historic practice of adjusting
for that enrollment decline, um,
and the unit value continues to
climb regardless um of these
adjustments each year.
Not to, not to beat a dead
horse. I'll just say one last
thing about it.
You might hear from your school
districts.
That we didn't get enough to
fund these raises. You, you may
have heard that in the past.
And that probably varies across
the districts for the reasons
behind that.
We make estimates for what it
costs to fund a particular
salary increase.
And that's the recommendation
that you see.
When you take credits out,
If a school district isn't
adjusting for those enrollment
declines, potentially be either
intentionally or because they
literally just can't hire fewer
teachers because they still have
to teach all their kids.
They still have to provide those
raises.
Even if it means that, that,
that the total amount didn't,
didn't quite make
The two ends didn't meet, if you
will. So again,
We do have to account for
dropping enrollment.
That's not not something we can
ignore, especially as we
continue to see that long term
trend.
How you do that is is something
you probably want to think.
So I can only speak to the LESC
recommendation is that in, in
our mind, the whole harmless
causes that you don't take the
credit.
You, you just leave the unit,
the unit's whole. You don't, you
don't reduce from what's in
there.
Um, I do think over the long
run, you don't want to just
continue to
To keep the same amount of money
in there to what chair Small
said earlier.
You may be serving fewer kids,
and that's gonna cost you less.
So you do have to account for it
at some point, on a year over
year.
It may not be one for one, and,
and the, and the credit is not a
one for one, I should say that
Sunny's credit is the credit
that was in the LFC wreck is an
80%, essentially deduction based
on um enrollment declines. So
it's not a one for one decrease
currently.
Um
On the line 8, 6th grade, so the
new recommendation if we go with
it is that.
We increasing the 6th grade
factor by
I don't even know how to read
this 0.1025.
As we're raising it.
In this model, we would raise it
to 1.1475, which is an increase
of 0.1025.
Right?
Yes, yes, Representative Garre,
that's correct. I had to do a
little math I can still
subtract. Decimals.
I actually thought about um
My 6th grade math teacher who
was very particular about how
you, what type of nomenclature
you use for 10,000.
And I think that uh it actually
came in use. I didn't know it
would ever would when I was in a
6th grade classroom, but here we
are.
Yeah.
This proposal
We're not actually doing any of
the
Well, we're doing the um family
index change.
The change, but we're not doing
the proposed 6th grade or 7th
through 12th grade factor
changes.
Correct.
That is correct.
All right.
Represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know
you like that.
I, I, I just wanna, I just wanna
to make another plug, um, the
innovation zones as far as for
the CTE. I, I think that.
You know, this is, this is a
program.
When we're looking at
Um
Addressing both the tendants
engagement and also work force
training and certificate, I
think that's that's an
opportunity that
You know, if we're able to, to
find a way to to fund that even
if it's through.
for growth funds over the next
couple of years, that would also
be something that I would
respectfully ask that we just
try to take a look at, please.
Thank you.
I do want to clarify that, um,
under the current scenario, the
innovation zones would still
come out of that $40 million
pot. So are you suggesting or.
Asking about.
Taking it out of the 40 million
and then rolling it over 3 or
No, I, I guess I was just really
trying as far as with that with
that amount cause I guess in one
scenario is like 45, but now
we're looking at 40, I just
really want to, to really kind
of advocate. I know that my, uh,
My colleague Represented Duncan
had kind of pointed that out
there. I just want to flag it to
make sure that when we're seeing
that we are in fact just
increasing those funds that
were, you know, I know that
they've been split and I know
they've been kind of in
different areas.
But I, I think that one of the
errors that my colleagues on
this committee have flagged as
CTE, so just please take a look
if you could just we could touch
base regarding that. I'm happy
to, to come at another time and
right.
Thank you.
Alright, so, um, it is 7:30, any
final thoughts before we wrap
up.
Is there a way Amanda for
members if they think of
something later. I mean, I know
this is the main work group
time.
Um, but
Yeah, um,
I, I appreciate that because
this is the first time we're
seeing this version.
Representative Chatfield.
So I will say this.
We have spent time on this.
We've hammered through it.
7 years here, I understand it.
OK. This is my 7th year in, in
uh
Some things I love, some things
I'm not as fond of. I think that
kind of makes for a good, a good
plan, right? Because if
Some people like I might like
something else.
I think this might be a pretty
good
good budget right here.
And I appreciate the time that
y'all spent.
So that we do understand it, and
I think everyone's sitting at
this table understands this
budget and
I've seen a bunch of them go
through here. I know I wasn't
the, I understood pieces of it.
But I can promise you I'm not
the only one that didn't
understand the whole thing.
Representative, not my place to
say necessarily, but
People are better off regardless
of the wreck that you take here.
It, it, it's a, it's a good
budget.
And, and I just want to echo
the, the comments you guys, I
mean, you're the unsung heroes
behind this. I mean, we, we sit
up here, we occupy these chairs.
But the work that you guys do is
really what is important, so you
don't get the thanks, you don't
get the credit. Many of you will
never be on camera up here, but
we do appreciate what you guys
do and uh you guys are very much
uh
You know, the work you guys are
amazing. I just want to thank
you for, for this and also, it
didn't take me 7 years, it took
me 4 years, but actually
but uh I do wanna just, just
tell you just how much that uh
this means to us. And again, you
guys are making a an impact to
kids around the state, so thank
you on behalf of the kids.
Sorry, I have one more quick
question.
It's quick line line 124. This
is the last question. If people
don't have more questions.
And the public education reform
fund was listed as supporting 6
items for 150. So as we walk out
of here. I need someone to tell
me what that 84 million is gonna
go for now.
You don't have to tell me the
second, but I'd like to know
before I leave.
Um, I would just quickly point
that it's lines 132 to 146.
Yes, those are the items that
are being paid out of that
transfer.
Or a row.
I, I want to stay longer
tonight. I'll tell you, um,
we'll stay as long as you need
us. OK. I want to thank you also
for this improved process. I
feel like I have gotten a better
handle on things this year, uh,
and maybe it takes some run time
to, to get things figured out,
but I will not be able to sleep
tonight.
Unless I get an answer to the
question, what do we mean when
we say Senate bill or SB 9 funds
or funding. I don't remember
hearing the answer to that
question.
Yeah
So SB 9 is a reference to a bill
that was passed years ago.
That created that public school
capital improvements Act.
Schools can levy up to 2 mills.
To generate what are referred to
as SB 9 funds for capital
improvements.
State then comes in and says,
We think that per student.
You should be able to generate
this much money.
If you're local property
assessment doesn't get you to
that level. We will fill the
gap.
The mechanism that is being
employed for the this scenario
is using that. All right.
Can I just sing that you all are
welcome to reach out to myself
or anyone at PED if you have
additional questions, so of
course you have the wonderful
LFC and LESC staff, but uh,
you're more than welcome to
reach out to us as well, and we
will quickly answer your
questions and just want to thank
you all for your recognition of
the process that uh.
The 3 of our entities went
through to pull this together
and of course, Amanda.
Um, a lot, a lot of hard work
and so I appreciate the
recognition.
Thank you all for staying with
us on Valentine's Day and for a
fantastic presentation. Thank
you very much.
Thank you.
