Madam chair.
Yes.
Ranking member Crowder said be
about ten minutes.
I think what we'll do is we'll
catch him up when they get here
you know we say we're gonna
start when we say we're going to
start we're going to do that
somebody called the house
appropriations and finance
committee to order and what we
have on the agenda today is the
public education department.
As well as public schools
facility authority.
And with that being said will
have the analysts give their
reports and then we'll go to the
HSD rats so we could analyst.
Sonny are you gonna it offers is
going to do that.
I can't hear you study.
You hear me now I can hear you
now current and very sad about
that okay madam chair.
Go right in my name is Sonny
then the LFC analyst for public
schools and I'm joined today
with.
Cindy Martinez who's the act
acting director of state budget
division at TFA.
I will be starting on HSD nine
twenty four which is the public
Education Department HSD
operating budget.
And just sort of as a level
review the overall
recommendation for LFC is about
three million dollars higher
than the executive
recommendation both
recommendations to increase
funding for personnel and
professional services.
But the largest difference why
in the additional eighteen anti
in the LFC recommendation.
There's also.
Additional.
Funding in the contractual
services category but the
analysts have come to consensus
on performance targets.
Excuse me Sonny Mike and bill I
just got a text from
representative Armstrong she
says she can't get in.
Can we resend that
went to her place.
yes madam chair we will do that
media okay.
Thank you go ahead.
And madam chair yes I'd like to
turn over to setting out for
comments on the executive
recommendation.
Yes thank you sunny and madam
chair members of the committee I
needed a great job just
highlighted the major
differences the executive
recommendation increases of
PED's budget
about thirteen point seven
percent above their current
operating budget in primarily
and not personal services
employee benefits and with that
I will turn it over to the
secretary sectors for any.
All right Mr secretary we need
to have everybody mute while
others are speaking so please Mr
Secretary.
Madam chair representative is
thank you so much for this
opportunity I'll just add a few
extra points that might be
useful in helping you make an
informed decision and then were
happy to answer questions we've
got some data here about person
and also about budget I'm
pleased to report that since
October we have hired forty two
brand new employees I'll say
that number again forty two
employees have joined the public
education department and we have
I offer spending so madam chair
we have worked really hard to
fill the positions that we need
to meet the Indian Education Act
Hispanic Education Act the
attendance for success act the
bilingual multicultural Act all
the really outstanding landmark
bills that you have passed that
we take responsibility for
implementing and so are request
for increased funding and FTE is
to help meet legislative
requirements the second reason
why we're asking for an increase
for next year is to meet the
requirements and Martinez Yazzie
ruling and we're making really
good progress on getting on
action plan out the door and dot
certainly madam chair are
requests for additional staff is
also based on what happened with
House Appropriations last
Saturday it was really good news
the direction you are heading
for extended learning and the
incentives and flexibility that
you have built and that is
exactly what I think will help
us succeed it is complicated
though and it will take extra
staff know what but it'll take a
few extra staff to make sure
that we're holding school
districts accountable and
without madam chair we're happy
to answer any of your questions.
All right I wanted to ask
Representative Sweetser about
she helped us during the interim
with the LFC to ship the service
of the co chair of public
education did you have anything
you'd like to say.
Thank you madam chair for the
opportunity I would just echo
what Secretary Steinhaus that
and that we had a really good
hearing on Saturday and I I
think the best in my six years
here where the departments at
LFC everybody seems to be
growing in the same direction so
I I'm very pleased with with how
things are moving and I greatly
appreciate LFC and DFA working
together on this.
Okay so I'm gonna have I see a
couple more people of just
popped in I'm gonna ask Sonny to
just very briefly explain what
the differences between the two.
Thank you madam chair the had to
do that so just briefly once
again on the PED agency
operating budget the major
differences are a.
Four million dollar increase in
general fund for L. C. in a two
million dollar increase for the
executive that's about a three
million dollar difference
between the recommendations most
of it is going into personal
services employee benefits the
difference being left LFC adding
eighteen additional FTE and
there is additional funding for
contractual services as well.
Why is this consensus
performance targets and a
allocation from special programs
to the budget.
All right thanks honey do we
have any questions from the
committee.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair of just
some notes that are received
earlier this morning.
Is there a mandatory requirement
of for extended learning time
within either one of the two
recommendations.
Madam would you like me to
answer that yes would you please
Madam chair representative
Crowder in the recommendations
from the executives and from the
legislative branch there is a
package of incentives to
encourage every single school in
New Mexico to participate and
extended time with the students
engaged in learning with the
teacher that's what this is all
about and if you're a school
district right now that's not
participating the one of the
incentives would be are that you
would find five additional days
in your school calendar for next
year and add that to your
calendar and then a quick let
five days would be added through
equipment during the days that's
one of the options but the
answer your question is yes.
Okay I was just curious I heard
that there was a couple of.
Different schools called and
asked me and I said I all I can
do is ask the question I'm not
sure what is required and what
is it
Chair out that's my only
question thank you.
Representative Sarinana.
Thank you madam chair I'm
secretary I don't did you I
don't know if you answer the
question is it mandatory for
teachers.
New Amsterdam and others it was
but I is it mandatory.
Madam chair representative
Sarinana thank you for asking
for clarification the way the
current languages drafted it
would be required for every
single school New Mexico a
minimum of an additional five
days and minutes totally another
five days.
Thank you madam chair
Secretary.
Is there.
Any studies that have done that
minutes really make a difference
versus hours or days.
Madam chair representative
Sarnia thank you for for the
question I'm and I'll answer it
in two ways the LFC staff do
have some studies that show that
the extra minutes do you have a
positive impact but for me that
the most powerful data is the
data we have from New Mexico
schools comparing last year
which was mostly remote and we
miss many many minutes with
students engaged with their
teacher and the year before and
so that that's what's compelling
to me that we do need more time
with their teachers engage with
our students and for most school
districts finding five days of
the calendar is not
a real problem it is doable to
provide those stays out of there
and then I'll also add Madam
chair representative that this
school year every every single
school district is being
required to submit beginning of
the year middle of the year end
of the year achievement data in
mathematics and English language
arts so we'll have some and that
will be submitted in June and
then we'll have that analyzed
and ready to present to you in
July.
all right.
Thank you Mr chair and secretary
Mr madam chairman Mr secretary
thank you.
Okay let's go to Representative
Armstrong and then we'll go to
Representative small.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you
I just a little more clarity I
believe that the actual language
says that equipment schools that
can do minutes our high
performance or under two
hundred.
If I believe if if that's
correct is that correct Mr
Secretary chair representative
Armstrong it it is kind of
complicated but what you said is
correct it is also correct that
if you're a school district that
is not participating in the LTP
this year you will have the
option next year I additional
days and then I more a quick
Lente days added equipment and
Representative Armstrong if I am
incorrect sunny and Cindy are
here double checking the and
they will correct me.
I'm glad they're here.
Madam chair secretary you are
correct.
Okay thank you madam chair and
Mr secretary and sunny I just
wanted to people to know that
that for clarification
also I was I I'll I'll bring it
up offline thank you madam chair
that's all.
Representative small.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you Secretary signed house
and Mr Liu madam chair
presenters Secretary Mr Liu
there is no constraints to the
additional time that is there is
a lot of flexibility that when
we add in the additional pay the
substantial pay increases and
others will there be the
flexibility for educators to
choose how to utilize this time
that's something we've heard
again and again and seems really
important.
Madam chair representative small
the answer is yes and I'll add
that this is that would be a
local decision with local school
boards and their superintendents
to decide how that time would be
used there is an expectation
that it be high quality learning
time and that it be contributing
to the growth of the academics
of our children but yes Sir
ready it is a local decision the
end tied your question also add
that the kind of flexibility and
incentives that are built into
the draft language right now is
something we've never seen
before in New Mexico and it's
it's designed to build on the
reserves about public policy if
you want to implement something
and get it done well the worst
way to do it is to buy a big
stick and beat it into somebody
and require them and punish them
the best way to do it according
the research is to incentivize
the behavior change what and
that's the draft language that
stand in the the the work from
last Saturday.
Right okay thank you very much
madam chair thank you so much
Secretary Mr the.
Representative Sweetser the
representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair there were
just a couple of things I was
hoping and secretary Stenhouse
would expand on just for the
committee's information one is
the early literacy initiatives
that there we're looking to take
money from the public education
reform Fund for.
Madam chair yes thank you
Representative Sweetser that
that what you said is exactly
true
it's it's been a focus for many
years in New Mexico as the
Legislature done an incredible
job of expanding the early
literacy options and this year's
proposal was to take it even one
step further and what and what
we're talking about is getting
the science of reading into the
minds and hands and tool kit of
every single elementary teacher
and our our two kids had a
kindergarten teacher here and in
Santa Fe Representative Sweetser
and she was such a good teacher
we stay in contact with their
and even after her decades of
teaching she said this letters
training is what it's called is
the best professional
development she's ever had in
our career and so even though it
is a commitment of time our
teachers are telling us that
this is exactly the kind of
professional development that
they need to teach the science
of reading that they can
implement with practical tools
in their classroom and the the
public schools for
recommendation is to expand from
that very early grades which
we're doing right now to include
the rest of the grades in
elementary school and it's also
designed Representative Sweetser
to build a partnership with
higher ed so that when I teacher
eight one of our New Mexico
universities where the teaching
group degree they've already
gotten that science of reading
training and they can walk in
the classroom ready to go.
Thank you for that secretary
signed house and madam chair I
just thought that was really
important because we're all
getting emails about the early
literacy and how important it is
and so I just thought that that
needed a little bit more
explanation and then my other
question madam chair is for
sunny it's very rare to see the
LFC recommend more positions and
then they executive and I and I
saw that they were for budget
licensure and evaluation
functions could you just kind of
explain where we're LFC is
coming from with that
recommendation.
Madam chair representative the
if you'll recall back in
December we received a request
from the public education
department asking for about.
Six million and budget increase
at thirty three FTE.
So the LCS recommendation serve
looked at all of the requests
increases and determined that
about eighteen of those anti
war.
High priority positions related
to budget which we've had
concerns about award letters
getting out on time
reimbursement getting processed
through the operational needs
the HSD is addressing on a daily
basis there are also a lot of
concerns about licensure.
As far as processing and them
serve over saying the
awarding of licensees and
additionally of course with the
Martinez Yazzie lawsuit case
there's a lot of concerns about
the department's oversight
and ability to provide technical
assistance and evaluation and
analytics to all the school
districts and charter schools
and so given that and also would
be sort of funded vacancy rates
that the department is currently
maintaining I'm the LFC
recommendation tries to address
some of those chronic issues
within the department's
operations thank you for that
Senator thank you madam chair I
just thought it was important to
have everyone understand that
these are really targeted
expansion things to address some
concerns that that we as
lawmakers and the public in the
districts have had so that was
that was all madam chair thank
you.
Right representative Garcia
Representative Trujillo thank
you madam chair Mister
Richard thanks for the
presentation I just got off the
phone was superintendent my
district and you sit on the
extended learning their on board
but they're having a problem.
And doing it in all schools
because the lack of teachers law
I wanted to do it is that going
to be a problem down the road
and then being able to continue
doing what we're doing.
I'm secretary secretary.
Madam chair representative
Garcia what you described is a
real situation and we've got
strategies built into this
recommendation to address that
and all answered in two ways
first I'll answer it as a school
superintendent last year I was
in charge of implementing those
extra days and I did
Representative Garcia I did have
some teachers come to me that
say I'm exhausted I can't do
these extra days and I have a
break in my answer to them was
yes and we went out and asked
other teachers and it was just
wonderful what happened our high
school language teachers
volunteered to participate these
extended days for grades K.
through eight and so in this
extended program that we had in
June everyone of the kids were
given the opportunity to learn
five different languages and so
we worked it out by giving the
teachers that needed a break a
break but we again expanded
curriculum opportunities to the
kids with state really enjoyed
and that kind of flexibility
that I'm talking about that I
did last year as a
superintendent is built into the
flexibility that we have in our
recommendations for you to
consider this session.
Thank you madam chair Mr
Secretary did you know as you
know on in rural New Mexico.
It's harder to regain teachers
as a.
There's nothing there for them
and you know just so you just
came up to the to my attention
and it from turning that our
districts don't get punished for
not being able to do to fulfill
what your expectations are thank
you Sir thank you madam chair.
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Dr Stein house to follow up
with that with Mr guard.
Representative Garcia's comments
those are the same concerns that
I'm hearing and I I really
appreciate the comments he made
regarding flexibility and the
way you particularly addressed
to that Santa Fe I think it was
but
based on on the information I'm
getting from a variety of
different school districts
the issue is is but there are
limitations to that so what is
written in the rule or the
statute this specifically gives
those superintendent of those
high school principals.
The way that's necessary because
not everybody's going to be able
to get our
high school teacher or a mid
school teacher to address the
concerns in those elementary
grades.
Madam chair representative
Giorgio
I again I I am thanking all of
you for these really good
questions because it's helping
us clarify and helps you as a
representative are responding
our constituents so what we're
talking about right now is not
in statute and it's not in rural
it would be an language in house
bill two that would be
associated with this
appropriation and as you know
the legislature does that every
year and that flexibility I
think that sunny would be able
to share that if you haven't
seen it already
could be shared with you and you
can see how that's written
specifically and help you answer
questions because some it's
really hard for us to get the
word out and help our teachers
who are working so hard and we
need to support and do
everything we can to know that
they're being supported
and the other thing that's built
into Representative Trujillo the
language is not only the seven
percent raise but they would
also after the get their
contract they calculated Davey
right and for every day that
they work about that they would
get that daily rate plus an
additional three percent so
there's another incentive in
there if they're willing to
participate in these extended
days it could be either five
days or ten days.
Madam chair and Dr Steinhaus I
appreciate that response because
those financial incentives are
really critical however the
concern to me madam chair is the
fact that it's not in statute
and and I believe that the
that staff is trying to create
legislation without letting it
go through legislative
committees to bet that's a
concern for me with the LTP it
may be a brilliant idea but it
has not been vetted in
committees that's a very strong
concern so the second issue of
concern that I have madam chair
is the LFC recommendation on
page.
To the.
The LFC recommendation includesd
appropriations for PED reforms
for early literacy initiatives
but but they have not included
tenants or drugs or steam
initiatives away it that yeah
the executive has that has that
for Medicaid expansion but what
happened with the LFC.
Thank.
Madam chair representative so
the.
The recommendations for the land
programs most of those for
example the tenant progress was
replaced with general fund since
that was another state funds so
the LFC recommendation and those
cases essentially swapped out
those nonrecurring sources for
recurring revenues.
Okay madam chair again just to
quickly reiterate my very first
point it's a very big concern
and I'm sure it is with you that
staff is creating policy and not
allowing these decisions to go
through committee thank you
madam chair.
Representative Allison.
Thank you madam chair.
the question is directed to Dr
Steinhaus are you made a comment
that the the final decision
rests with the local control.
Okay is there a way to show what
works in one area to be shared
with another area because this
would address of teachers
needing support in other areas
of concern and I totally agree
with the comments and statements
that Representative Garcia made
the rural area it is
It is harder to do the things
that the urban of children
enjoy.
Madam chair.
Madam chair representative
Allison yes you are absolutely
right it is harder to implement
these programs and in the rural
communities and because of that
one the practices that I will be
implementing next year with our
staff is to continue the sharing
among school districts small
school districts sharing with
small school district they're
great ideas about how they're
implementing these programs and
just last week we had one of
those sessions with the family
income index where the the
schools are receiving that money
I shared that with other schools
and as a as a school
superintendent I participated in
those and found on the extremely
valuable because you learn from
each other about what's working
because the the challenges are
similar sometimes they're unique
but sometimes they're similar so
I I appreciate you asking and
that is something that we will
continue to do next year to help
particularly the rural districts
but all of our school districts.
And madam chair
Representative Crowder had his
handout before me I don't know
if you it's an.
Thank you think is taking it
down from the first time yes to
question Representative.
Okay are you're still on
Representative Nelson.
With my question thank you madam
chair all right let's go to
Representative Lara and
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr secretary for for a for
presenting this to us today and
I have a question that that that
I'd like to follow up that
Representative Trujillo had had
mentioned so are you know that
this is this language is built
into into our budget but.
My question to you Mr secretary
of Madam is are these permanent
changes or these only reflecting
for this upcoming fiscal year.
Madam chair representative Lara
my understanding of how it works
and I don't pretend to be the
expert here is that it would be
language that applies to the
appropriation which is an
appropriation for one year.
Thank you Mr secretary that's my
understanding as well so I I I
really wanted to make that point
that you know you know it as we
all know madam chair you know
many of our kids have not been
in school because of COVID of
many school districts have
adopted go remote and there you
know our kids are missing days
and I think this this is
This is the way we have it built
into this is is is a good
measure to make sure the work
that our kids to get the
education that they deserve and
they have a right to so I just
wanted to to be clear madam
chair that this this language
that's built in as vote for this
upcoming fiscal year that we're
working on.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair I would
like to hear that repeated again
the less the language built in
is only for the next year.
Madam chair representative
Chattfield yes it would apply to
the appropriation for the R..
School year FY twenty two twenty
three next school year.
The policy would cease after
that.
that's my understanding yes Sir
madam chair.
No.
The general feedback.
It has been in favor of my
needed teachers or school boards
nor children.
I hope I hope it works maybe
there are some folks out there
that.
Really want to go to school some
action data six and it's not the
quality of what's going on there
is not necessarily about taking
away a few more days for you.
Thank you madam chair.
All righty also Representative
Dixon.
Thank you madam chair I actually
don't have a question I just
wanted to comment that time I
really appreciate the approach
being taken by PED and terms of
analyzing data research and.
Share our communities are to
utilize proven methods and so I
just wanted to acknowledge that
thank you very much madam chair.
Already thank you Representative
Anderson.
Madam chair thank you very much
my question has been answered
thank you.
All righty Representative
Crowder is your hand out from
the last time you just didn't
take it down or do you with
other question no ma'am I I give
our first question from my
memory and and it's not very
good but I did find my notes
many times up put it back up
three very quick questions madam
chair the first one is for Sonny
Sonny on the the language part
of the base it talks about the.
LFC put up one point five
million higher than the
executive the cost of the
judicial employees with the
executive recommendation as to
million and personal service
support benefits so just reading
language my first thought was
that the executive level higher
but when I look at page one on
the general fund.
This three million dollar
approximate three million
dollars difference between the
LFC and the exact can you help
me understand why that
difference is so so strong.
My best madam chair
representative so the executive
did make a recommendation for
two million for person and
employee benefits and then the
LFC recommendation is three
point five so it's one point
five million above the executive
recommendation for a total of
three point five so that's the
difference between that
recommendation and.
Once again the LFC
recommendation also includes the
expansion of eighteen at the.
Because it is the difference
then.
Probably a total is is in the
PSEB category.
Madam chair representative
that's the largest difference
there is some difference in
contractual services as well I
will.
I would like to let Cindy at
jumping issued if you like at
this point to talk more about
the executive Pete send a guy at
yes madam chairman
Representative Crowder at that
is the difference and the the
primary increase for the
executive recommendation is and
the personal services employee
benefits to allow the agency to
have fully funded positions so
they can go ahead and hire
everyone that they need to those
unfunded positions are now find
it and so it fully funds give
them those additional but no no
new FTE.
Okay.
Chair thank you I'm gonna assume
that one point five million that
the LFC is above the exact is in
PSEB and the other one point
five is is likely and not
contractual would would be my
assumption.
Which would make up to three
million dollar difference in
general fund that's that's that
number is just enough to really
catch my attention.
My second question is is I guess
for both analysts are are both
of these proposals recommending
a thirteen dollar fifty cent
minimum wage or is there a
different minimum wage bills and
each of these two
recommendations can you speak to
that a little bit sunny or
whoever thank you madam chair.
Madam chair so.
Referring to the public school
support recommendation the LFC
recommendation does include a
thirteen dollar and fifty cent
per hour minimum wage
recommendation however at in
this specific nine twenty four
business unit with the
department
that would be separate
essentially this is this is just
the agency budget that we're
discussing here.
All right thank you and and the
exact does it have a minimum
wage recommendation baked into
the recommendation yes madam
chair Representative Crowder
eight it does not just referring
back to Chinese COVID for public
school support AGFC data topped
the LFC wrecked which does
include the thirteen point five
anymore but not with there's not
a minimum increase in this space
budget the executive does have a
compensation plan which I think
we have presented a couple of
times and that doesn't come base
of fifteen dollar minimum wage
but that's kind of a larger
scale compensation plan.
Thank you very much for sharing
I'm not on the public school
committee and I've I've missed
those presentation so I do
apologize one final question
managers for a secretary
Steinhaus I was asked.
Is there any language within the
proposals regarding mandatory
PED for all elementary schools
is there any mention of that
whatsoever in either one of the
recommendations.
you madam chair I I think this
answer is correct Representative
Crowder physical education and
the public schools support
that's recommended is fully
funded so that L. at every
elementary school would be
Are able to provide physical
education which is built into
our education standards that's
an expectation that every child
in elementary school received
P..
Thank you Mr Mr sign at you said
is for college is is it fully
funded and both recommendation
are just Representative I'm
gonna ask you here every every
question is your last question
so I'm gonna ask you to wrap up
with this one place.
Of course.
Chair of Secretary on the answer
is yes both both are
recommending funding for P. in
elementary school okay thank you
thank you madam chair.
Okay do we have anybody else
that has any questions or would
like to ask.
I'm gonna go Representative
small for the motion.
Thank you madam chair I would
move the LFC recommendation for
the public education department.
Okay we have a motion to have a
second.
Okay Senator Sweetser do we have
any opposition to that motion.
Saying we have the LFC for this
department thank you very much
Mr Steiner.
R. and next is the public
schools facility authority but
the agency both nine forty one
hundred best.
We could have the analyst go
ahead and start please.
Thank you madam chair once again
my name setting with the LFC
analyst for the public school
facilities for clarity and I
believe in the Martinez from DFA
will also be representing the
executive for PS thank.
HSD nine forty in your packet.
Just the high level high level
overview the both
recommendations are.
Say one more thing I want to
introduce the director of a
market that is off on the line.
Sorry about that moving to the
differences.
Okay executive and LFC
recommendations are making
transfers from the public school
capital outlay fund even though
there's a difference there
you'll see in the base amounts
from other transfers are other
revenues they're both from the
same funding source the
executive recommendation is
slightly lower than the LFC
recommendation for personnel
services due to the higher
vacancy rate.
And the a little bit of context
for the agency they just
reopened their application
process for schools to apply for
construction workers the HSD is
experiencing high levels of
workload at this time there is a
nonrecurring special
appropriation request from the
agency to increase their
staffing levels as well.
Otherwise the analysts have
reached their on performance
measures and targets and I'll
turn it over to the need for
work on.
All righty sandy.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee the executive
recommendation is about a three
percent increase above the
current operating level as Sonny
stated there's really just a
slight difference there one
technical correction I would
like to mention is that on the
receipt for the executive
recommendation for some reason
we we've got a couple in there
that it should be so it really
should model the theme that
you're seeing and the LFC rack
and with that I'll turn it over
to the executive director for
her presentation.
All right welcome executive
director thank you for being
here.
I'm madam chair members thank
you so much madam chair I'm not
sure how my presentation do you
control it so that you can see
it or is it something that I
need to share my screen.
We need to go ahead and share
your screen.
Thank they should allow you to
do that so we can see your
presentation.
She never she goes
good for you to.
Our.
You madam chair members can you
see my presentation.
We can thank you thank you so
much I'm I'd like to start out
with some thank you for having
me here today really
appreciated.
And I want to say when I go to
slide number two that I realize
Our purpose here today is talk
about budget but I wanted you to
see some of the tangible results
of this agency so my first
couple of sites are photos of
PSCS the funded projects the
first one in front of you is the
row alimentary school.
And then the second slide here
we see some internal shot of
throw elementary school with
some children enjoyed their
lunch and enjoying the day
lighting at their school I'm
also showing some schools that
rod and Roscoe and the land I
just wanted to remind you of
what this agency does and what
the KCSE produces.
I'm.
It said.
Madam chair members the as you
heard the executive recommends
five point nine and the just
provided recommend six final
million yes if they would prefer
the legislative recommendation
it additionally.
The legislative recommendations
suggested that a target salary
increase for mission critical
employees we had originally
asked for two percent increase
across the board however we do
agree with the recommendation
from the legislative branch and
we would target yesterday
construction managers to to hire
those those individuals
I do want to say that with those
potential increases I want to
note that we've lost five
regional managers to school
districts over the last couple
of years because school
districts
still the pharmacists or they
just pay a little bit better.
So we would target those
particular staff members as well
as our assessors to gather data
around the state.
And with those increases will
become competitive with school
districts.
I want to note that the PS the
OC has seven different funding
programs that we manage we have
standards based which are new
schools or renovations some of
the pictures that you saw when
we open this presentation we
also do systems based up
projects for just your HVAC
systems or your routine or your
fire alarm we have broadband we
have pre K. facilities we have a
master plan is distance we
assistance and teacher housing
so those are the programs that
that we manage.
Currently.
Right now this FY we have two
hundred and seventy two total
active projects
thirty one standards based and
in those thirty one standard
space we have three separate
teacher housing projects going
on at three separate school
districts forty systems nine pre
K. projects and a hundred and
ninety two security projects.
And we've been looking ahead at
FY twenty three and four looking
at the estimated standard space
projects that might come forward
and right now there's nineteen
with an estimated project
project cost of two hundred
eighty two point eight million.
I'm the next slide on page six
just talks about the current
awards underway for FY twenty
two and we if you look at the FY
twenty two state funding in the
third column and the out here
state bonding together that's
about a hundred and twenty three
million dollars currently
underway for FY twenty two
projects.
And the sheet madam chair
members just is they just
snapshot over time.
Two thousand four to the present
the carefully spent dollars that
has been invested in school
facilities across the state and
it just indicates I would state
which district got how much
money and what's happened in
those communities.
And madam chair members the
final slide yes representative.
What would comprise of the total
six million dollar request if
it's approved today.
I'm with that said madam chair.
Myself and we also I have a new
CFO by the name of Mr Brad
Matthews.
Available for any questions that
you might have about us today.
Right.
Have you take down your slides.
Then I can get everybody on my
screen.
We're going to start
Representative Brown.
Thank you very much madam chair
my question is about page two of
our handout where we see the
performance measures summary.
In the first column we see the
actuals for twenty twenty twenty
one.
And on that line
If you just go over to the last
two headings there the executive
recommended.
An average of three months from
substantial completion to
financial close out and it looks
like the consensus target gene
could could someone explain what
why the big difference.
I'm madam chair members is that
appropriate for me to answer
that question or is it for the
analysts are generally the
panelists will answer that so if
we could get them to jump in
here.
Cindy do want to start.
Madam chair members and I'm
sorry I don't have that stage in
my in my pocket it could because
I'm not the new normal analyst
let me see if I can just find it
and I'd be happy.
Thank you want to go ahead yes
Sir madam chair and
representative and they go
shooting with the Donna Rivera
the analyst for PS a she did
acknowledge that that was that.
Sort of error that was created
from input into the system we
have a new budget management
system and so the consensus was
to remain at the budget target
of eighteen.
Thank you madam chair and and
then sent me just one last
question and regarding the rest
of this performance measures
summary most everything now is
smart not applicables is there a
reason we're not doing any
metrics or at least just setting
some standards for all those
categories and I think you know
and it's a lot of and As and
slash J..
Yes madam chair representative
so the reason why there's no.
Request or targets for that is
because these are all
explanatory measures a few years
ago there was a lot of
negotiations between DFA and
I'll see a lot of proposals to
remove performance measures I
think in lieu of just banning
accountability the LFC agreed
to.
make these performance measures
explanatory meeting there's no
specific target that needs to be
at but so that we can continue
measuring performance in this
area.
Thank you madam chair it.
I'm not sure I fully understand
that explanation as we're at
maybe that's something we could
look at see what we we would
even in need to have this chart
of we're not setting any kind of
but goals for ourselves thank
you madam chair that's all I
have.
It is the executive director one
like comment on that.
I'm madam chair members I don't
have a printout of those goals
but I'd I'd be happy maybe to
visit offline and and respond if
that's appropriate yes if you
would please if you contact
Representative Brown that be
great.
You madam chair thank you very
much.
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you director can see S. Sonny I
thought I heard you say that
they had a nonrecurring special
to increase staffing which isn't
usually a nonrecurring expense
and then I see on this paper
we're adding person so I just
kind of wanted to get my arms
around what was going on with
the person here.
Madam chair representative so
the statutorily PSSAs budget
sort of grows and shrinks based
on how many awards are allocated
by the council and given that
this year there was sort of a re
opening of applications because
there was such low application
to begin with.
There's anticipated need to
staff up to address any growth
in those applications for the
next fiscal year and the interim
as we move into fiscal year
twenty three so if you look at
section five
which is going to be presented
to have believe at separate
hearing there is a request to
use more.
public school capital outlay
funding to help the HSD is
temporarily staff up to meet
that demand I will also
highlight that this is a non
general fund agencies all of
these revenues are coming from
another state funds.
Thank you for that and madam
chair might my question on the
low I have a question I guess on
the low submissions to begin
with is that a reflection of.
Comment and people not being the
officer or do you know why you
had a low number and you have to
re open applications director is
yes.
Madam chair members.
It was a combination of things
in the past year year and a half
one was the COVID one was
the funding sources and so what
we've done this year and and we
had a application cycle that
occurred once a year and so
school districts really had to
gear up and they were so busy
dealing with keeping the kids in
the classroom how does that work
and how does that function that
this year the yes yes he now has
will receive applications
throughout the year with the
potential for out of work cycles
so that school districts can
plan a little bit better madam
chair.
Representative Sweitzer.
Thank you for that and madam
chair and is is that
Continue will application press
is going to be your your
operation in the future we can
districts count on that or do
you think you'll revert back to
the once a year which I agree
was challenging for districts
I'm Madam chair representative
Switzer the.
The council approved it and we
are supposed to study it at the
end of the year and if it's if
the districts feel that has been
beneficial we will continue it
so we're going to revisit it.
December twenty twenty two all
right thank you thank you madam
chair.
Okay Representative small I
don't see any other hands up
thank you very much madam chair
because there's no revenue from
the general fund I would move
the LFC recommendations for the
public school facilities
authority.
Can we have a motion for the LFC
that we have a second second
that manager okay we have a
second Representative Garcia is
there any opposition to that
motion saying none we have the
LESC recommendation for this
agency.
Thank you very much want to meet
with the committee for just a
few minutes here so I'd like to
thank all the presenters today
and madam AT and committee
members thank you so much.
We're ready thank you very much
so bill can you.
And I see here your face so I
know you you're listening.
All right
While you're here muted.
Well there you go there you are.
So we're getting real close to
wrapping up which is good we're
getting close to wrapping up our
work which I'm really happy
about and I'm sure the rest of
the committee is.
So tomorrow will be receiving
the committee reports.
I've got some meetings set up on
Friday.
And then Saturday what time is
it eight thirty bill would come
in on Saturday nine AM chair
okay just wanted to remind
everybody it's nine AM
on Saturday and then what time
on Monday.
Madam chair nothing on Monday
Tuesday is one will depart are
you on house bill two at eight
thirty AM okay I just wanted to
let you all know that because
some of you have morning
meetings but you need to be here
you need to be here on Tuesday
at eight thirty and if you would
just let your chairs from your
other committees know that.
With that I guess round again
Madam.
Yes Representative then just one
quick question of what it what
they will be is it calendar for
taking final action on house
bill two instead of the Tuesday
of that.
Bill chair of the final action
is on Tuesday February first.
Thank you madam chair.
Yeah that will take action will
have a committee report to the
floor and sometime soon after
that will be put in the bill on
the floor but anyway I wanted to
thank all of you and we get out
early again today which is a
good thing so well we'll see you
all tomorrow same time thank you
thank you madam chair bye bye.
Senator by everybody.
Good afternoon all.
