Here we might.
Or.
Thank you Mr chairman.
He might micro creek.
I'm trying to log into I know
this is in my meeting because
this is up trying to log in to
do and is expanding our host is
having a meeting already this on
any log in just real quick.
It has.
Thank you.
Can you.
Representative Castellano is
some.
It's subcommittee be is the one
that's going on now.
Okay.
The yeah this is B. but I'm
supposed to be and do have only
and you sent me a link but it's
not letting me get in it's
saying hosted a meeting or
something.
In a different meeting.
Log in
okay so US subcommittee B. is
Richard Jones so
I will ask him to us.
Re send you the link for that
for the subcommittee B. as in
boy.
What's this one this is A. as in
Alfa for.
Okay Allison okay.
He is an avid all your interim
chairman Alison right on the
right committee yes okay no
wonder sang.
Sorry.
No other.
Okay good.
Thank you guys.
We got seven so far.
I think we're missing Anderson
and.
A lot of.
Allison there somewhere having
fun with others I am sure.
Yeah.
Well what we can live in a cold.
Mr chairman if they are not here
when present would you like me
to Markham excused.
This is mark them tardy right
thank you Sir okay I want to
start speeding the afternoon
session we got five more
presentations and I don't want
to wait any longer so they can
catch up when they come in.
Okay we did all of our
introductions this morning so
right now we'll just go directly
into the presentations and our
first is.
Business unit six oh four the
commission for the deaf and hard
of hearing persons.
And that will be handled by.
Bill is.
C. outcomes.
Anytime you're ready.
Thank you Mr chairman good
afternoon again members of the
committee yeah my name is
ruby and ask you done that
analyst with the legislative
finance committee and we're
going to have I believe to folks
with the department of finance
and administration and miss Lori
siapa who is the we'd like to
welcome she's new with the fan
also miss merry bath and more at
who both I think be working with
us and.
Business unit six oh four is
commission for deaf and hard of
hearing person and we have the
director with this director
anything gone.
And I'll go ahead and start
We.
At the similar issue as minors
hospital that we the committee
just discussed this morning not
too long ago.
You know if you look at the
revenues at the top of your
different sheet you'll see that
the LFC recommendation is two
hundred and seventy five
thousand nine hundred dollars
hello the executive
recommendation and the general
fund support so LFC is two
seventy five point nine thousand
following general fund.
And
That's the major issue here at
the major difference here.
And I want to take a step back
Mr chairman members of the
committee and just for those of
you who are maybe new to this to
budget or were on that
subcommittee last year we've had
an ongoing issue with payment
the commission for deaf and hard
of hearing persons in terms of
revenue generation.
Typically this agency was was
slated to be as independent and
not need general fund revenue
because they're as recipient of
the telecommunications relay
service fund revenue and those
revenues were adjusted are in at
bill went through and twenty
fourteen twenty fifteen last and
I was supposed to generate an
additional one point four
million dollars for this agency
such that they would be self
sustaining and not jeepney
General Fund support.
Unfortunately those revenues
never really materialized for
this agency for multiple reasons
so what you see in the previous
fiscal year in FY twenty two and
also now in FY twenty three is
that last year in FY twenty two
the general fund revenue was
increased by about fifty percent
for this agency and now you see
the same thing as well in FY
twenty three the LFC
recommendation for general fund
revenue again is about a fifty
percent increase the executive
is a little bit higher your
recommendation.
So I'm that's kind of the
background on the revenue issues
in the differences there.
Now if you look down under the
uses piece of the different
sheet you'll see where that
difference of two hundred and
seventy five thousand all there
is a difference of seventy four
thousand with LESC a little bit
lower and personal services
employee benefits so
That's one piece that makes up
the two hundred seventy five LFC
is lower by seventy four in
person and then the second piece
is in contractual services
policy is lower there by two
hundred thousand two hundred and
one.
So
That's the main difference but
then you'll see that little
oddity that we had that we
discussed the minors hospital
the executive recommendation
included the transfer the other
transfer revenue amount in the
other financing uses category so
this wasn't in the request and
this wasn't and the LFC
recommendation either but the
executive.
Requests are included this in
the recommendation to do an
accounting.
Then so that's the PCC that that
the million for sixty two so in
other financing uses of that in
the executive for an accounting
adjustment to get to receive the
revenue from
the.
The telecommunications relay
service fund and then adjust
that back out in the other
revenue piece so that's where we
are in terms of the differences
it's not too different really
for this agency and there were
some differences in the
performance measures but those
have been adjusted and and I
write it consensus there.
We had a slight difference in
the language as well so we've
noted that on your different
seat the LFC include some
additional language I just
stabbed in noting that the fund
and the transfer to.
Your program services for deaf
and deafblind support services
and provider programs so those
are the main differences for
commission for deaf and hard of
hearing percent and I'll turn it
over to you Mr the up and miss
Densmore for any comments they
have before we turn it over to
the executive director gone.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Afternoon Mister chair members
of the committee again I'm very
much and for the TSA analyst
forgotten hard of hearings
percent commission I don't
really have much to add again
remanded it a good job summing
everything up I think it's
probably better if you just hear
from director com you he can
explain that decline in revenues
and the need for increase
general fund better than me I
imagine so I'm gonna turn it
over to him thank you so much.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you and thank
you assess what no does more for
your explanation and additions
to this.
If you look at ten years ago
in terms of how the revenue was
collected is very different than
it is today the
Landline services are very much
the same they're just you make a
phone call you get a phone call
you pay a certain amount of
money so there's not much of a
distinction there but I think if
you look at the LOC
recommendation there's a little
bit of an explanation and also
on the DFA there's a little bit
of an explanation of what we're
starting to see problems the
biggest and best way I can
really elaborate explain this in
a short amount of time to not
get too much time to this issue
is to compare how we used to
collect revenue in cellphones
versus today so if you look ten
years ago a cell phone
collection look very much like
this so you have a phone bill
you pay per minute you have a
set amount of equipment for what
you pay and in those minutes
you pay an X. amount of dollars
and that adds up to a certain
amount of the phone.
And that phone bill there's a
percentage applied to the phone
bill point three three that
looks at just the service alone.
And says okay that that person's
made a lot of phone calls this
month so the amount collected
from there is going to be acts.
Thanks changed dramatically
since then so if you look at
today's phone bill if you have a
rise in eighteen T. T. mobile
etcetera you see what they refer
to as an unlimited number of
minutes so you no longer have
this variance you don't have a
distinction that you would
normally see ten years ago you
don't see a hundred minutes
versus three hundred you all see
five hundred verses of thousand
there's no distinction is is
just on on limited number.
So why did phone companies do
that so a lot of the phone
companies such as the carriers
such as Verizon T. mobile AT&T
etcetera.
Shifted how they collect money
from an individual who lost that
phone bill and so they get an
unlimited amount of minutes
unlimited amount of long
distance calling on the
amendment text messaging and
that's a fixed number.
The where they make the money in
the both of the revenue that
they generate comes from how
much they charge for the device
so if you have a two year
contract for example the device
costs X. amount plus whatever
intereses provided on that
device.
So when you get a phone bill
you're seeing we mostly do
additional costs from the device
not from the service percent so
that means when for example I
get my phone bill I maybe see
three cents.
Going to prepare us that's it.
Next month.
I don't see this the same is a
number one for example fifty one
cent I very.
because of that and because the
the phone companies keep
shifting how they provide
services now you have R. I G.
Ney FIG ultrawide ninety have
all these additional services it
keeps changing how much is
actually collected because it
just keeps going to.
The growth of the seller
Services as actually grown
exponentially so directly the
growth should mean we see an
increase in revenue but because
of how they keep changing the
billing process because of how
they generate their revenue
because this based on for
example B. device that means we
don't apply that percentage to
that number we only apply it to
that fix number that tends to
grow small so a good example of
that I switch my phone plan what
will I do follow I actually saw
a decrease in the amount of
money it paid non increase.
so overall this has a
detrimental effect on revenue
collection so you can see in the
trajectory of the surcharge in
the collection we we keep senior
decrease and this past fiscal
year twenty twenty one was a two
hundred twenty five thousand
dollars decrease and that's been
happening year after year after
year so we keep seeing this
increase
the the solution what we tried
to do was to reach out and work
with purity and there were more
than happy to work with us and
we sent these letters kind of
addressing the issue asking for
resolution trying to address
that in the manner that we were
able to work within the
framework of the legislation as
it stands right now.
There was no resolution nothing
really came up from it and
that's not for lack of trying
it's just the way the the
technology and the language
keeps getting impacted is based
off of how these companies
change year to year the other
issue is how the bill so for
example if you get an IP based
messed internet based phone
service from a provider such as
Xfinity Comcast they bundle into
the entire cost of the service
so really essentially when they
do that they take away how much
is going to cost and there's
actually no revenue generated
from because the phone services
such a minimal component that
entire plan it doesn't have much
of an impact.
So was sent me that means that
the language needs to be changed
what is it need to be changed to
should be addressed the
technical considerations my
recommendation on that is no
because the technology keeps
changing how they keep
addressing the growth of I need
the growth of phone services in
general isn't every balding
system right now we're having a
conversation on zoom which is
technically telecommunications
platform there's no revenue
generated from.
So everything keeps shifting
from the old mindset to the new
money Sir and that my set you
civil so the recommendation that
I would have is that the what
the language be changed from a
percentage to a fix we number
whether that's the number one
number or not this was just
fifty one cents is really up to
the legislature to decide.
The other thing that I want to
address is it in the difference
between the executive
recommendation and the policy
recommendation is that we are in
the middle of
Contracting and for relay
Services which is again
federally mandated services
state has to provide for
interstate communications that
number that we normally bill are
built for the minute right is
a dollar eighty nine for now I'm
sorry two thirty four
traditional religious services
the federal recommendation for
the amount of bill per minute is
now four dollars in nineteen
cents that's a dollar eighty
nine in terms of difference and
if we follow that kind thousand
dollars ten thousand minute
recommendation for averages
that's about eighteen thousand
dollars nine hundred
eighteen thousand nine hundred
increase in cost per month we're
really services if we actually
hit that mark.
I am going to obviously work on
the Goshen and make sure that we
don't see that number but the
possibility of that is highly
likely and also the SEC is also
started considering applying
captioning to devices in
programs such as of so that was
a recent discovery last week
that I found out and I was a
little frustrated at that
information because that changes
a lot if we apply it to zoom
webex cetera that means the
growth of that rate is going to
be are probably unprecedented
because of the amount we're
using zoom and webex starting
this pandemic.
If we do do that.
If that is going to be a
requirement then there is a
concern obviously I have in
making sure that we are have
enough revenue to fulfill that
obligation
that is a concern of mine both
the LFC and do the executive
recommendation of both very much
in line with my thoughts and I
really do appreciate your more
work and consideration put into
us by both members and both of
groups.
But that is a concern of mine as
we move forward.
The other thing is you saw the
need for me to fill my bacon
positions that is critical for
my agency we have one vacancy
and southern New Mexico that are
very much like to they we also
have the ongoing changes in the
FCC that need to be addressed
and I need that position in
order to address that.
with that will stand for any
question because I've taken up
on quite a bit of time.
K. thank you for that Mr Rome.
Are there any questions from the
panel yes Representative
Anderson.
Okay now I see your hand go
ahead Representative.
Thank you
I believe to the LFC my question
goes like this Mr Chairman.
I thought again at lunch time
about this wash we're doing in
the.
For accounting purposes and a
couple further questions I have
I see we're doing it again all
for a million for.
Sixty two I think I don't have
my glasses.
And my question is tell me again
why we're doing it.
Is required by the audit I mean
for the auditors pushing this or
not.
In.
What is the net effect word
assist milk one million four
hundred and seventy two thousand
dollars that's coming.
Out and being put out I just
don't it bothers me what bothers
me Mr Chairman is I don't
understand what we're doing and
why we're doing question.
Thank you.
When we started our RubyAnn
began with that and then also
will be an issue at we explained
that.
Yeah Mr chairman of
Representative Anderson you see
that this is not in the LFC
recommendation this is in the
executive recommendation and I
actually went back during lunch
time as well and checked this
with our deputy director and.
We do not bill that this needs
to be in here
As I indicated that you know
DFA.
This is an accounting adjustment
but we don't we would see this
across all agencies you're not
seeing this across all agencies
so we need you know we have
other transfers that come in
from multiple other.
Other funds across all of state
agencies right so we don't see
this everywhere
So I I guess I don't think we
have to have it to answer your
question I think you know as I
don't think it's critical we can
do these adjustments in the
system via the operating budget
so no I think to answer your
question this isn't critical and
that's why you don't see it in
every agency and
I'll leave it there and then
thank you very much for that
answer RubyAnn and out of I
think with that answer I have
sufficient information to of a
preferred the LFC recommendation
this afternoon on this budget Mr
chairman thank you.
Thank you I think we got a
question from Meredith.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee I'm I I don't
have a question I just wanted to
comment a little bit more on I'm
review and explanation for the
transfer so what you don't see
it in every agency the ones that
you may see this in are ones
where agencies have to transfer
the money to a different fund
within their own agency so this
agency in particular has to
receive this money into the to a
specific funding it's in statute
but that's not their operating
fund so they bring it in as
other revenue they transfer it
to themselves goes out through
that other financing uses and
stop in transfers so I do agree
this this is a technicality I
don't think it has to be in
there this will happen
regardless of whether it shows
up in the budget they will
budget this way anyway they've
been doing it this way for years
just previously are olds our
system just didn't show you this
that's all that's the difference
so on the executive side we had
worked in but rest assured it's
the same budgets thank you
you're welcome thank you Mr
chairman if I could out of for
that explanation
and the.
It leaves me of committed up.
Therefore I like the LFC thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr Abbey have closing
comment.
Thank you Mr chairman I only
want to make that point if we
don't need to do it it's
desirable not to because it cost
us to state the same spending
twice and we always want to look
at total spending and if we
cannot something twice that's
not desirable thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Mr Abbey are there any
other questions from the panel
I'm trying to scan my board and
I don't see any hands raised.
So I guess that means there's no
questions so we'd like to
recommendation from madam vice
chair thank you Mr chairman I
move the LFC recommendation.
Second by Christine.
Okay I see Christine's.
Okay let's vote on it and the.
Minimized.
His.
Mr Castiel.
Mr.
You must be away from his desk.
Here again is a major or before
we say that hi is there any
opposition.
I don't see any opposition so
the majority eight zero.
I will yes Mr chairman I just
got my screen it's not that
good.
Okay thank you Ambrose and that
would be a major approval for
the LFC recommendation.
Mr go we we you got the LFC
recommendation.
Thank you for your presentation.
Mr chairman members committee
thank you.
Thanks go to business you six of
six.
What what.
Again this is could well lead us
off.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
Six six commission for the blind
this one is pretty easy there's
no differences and the revenues
or expenditures between the LFC
and the executive recommendation
however there is a difference in
the language so the LFC
recommendation for language is a
little more comprehensive and it
aligns with typically how we
structured the house bill two
general appropriation act
language so I just wanted to
make that for the committee and
we reached consensus on the
performance measures thank you
and I don't know if them at miss
more Michy Act that wish to add
anything further and we also
have director great trap with
that.
Thank you Mrs Capell no I don't
have anything additional to
COVID us so director trap if you
would like.
It
I have.
Mr chairman members of the
commission really want to take
this opportunity here since we
really have I think agreement on
the budget to give a little bit
more background about what our
agency does and how we do it
then we might normally be able
to so first I want to give you
greetings summer commissioners
commissioner our Treiber
commissioner Lansing and
commissioner Dr Robert we do our
state rebel Tatian council
members present with me here
also is Kevin Romero are deputy
director for finance and
administration join us on the
web cast as Jim solace or get
the director for the path living
Kelly Burma whose are still
center coordinator.
We are a title for HSD under the
workforce innovation opportunity
act that's the job training act
the commission for the blind is
a federally funded vocational
rehabilitation agency that is we
deadline people to become
employed under federal law the
vocation ability shin system is
required to have a separate
system of delivering services
for blind persons that's why
there are two vocational
rehabilitation agencies here in
New Mexico you'll hear from the
division's location bill Tatian
here later we are the blind
agency here in New Mexico.
Our location rehabilitation
program we have counselors
across the state to help blind
individuals to become employed
our most recent starting average
wage was twenty eight dollars
and twenty three cents yes Apley
critical that we give people
here in New Mexico for a blind
the opportunity to achieve
employment standards and
opportunities they're really
consistent with their own
abilities and capabilities and
interests so really empower
blind persons to become
employed.
if you were to yourself lose
your vision and we're to wake up
tomorrow lined it would be a
live transfer me experience you
would likely not be able to get
up and perform any of your
normal morning activities.
Getting ready for work getting
dressed shaving all of those
things might become very very
difficult even impossible
getting the car getting to work
once at work to being able to
turn on your computer read
what's on your computer.
The ability to send an email the
ability to travel at work all of
those things are skills that we
teach at our orientation center
in Alamogordo that is a
residential blindness skills
program for blind individuals go
and receive intensive training
in the skills of blindness.
That typically takes six to nine
months our training center
Alamogordo is twelve it's
accredited by the commission on
accreditation of rehabilitation
facilities we're also certified
by the national line is
professional certification.
Professionals national finest
fast professional certification
board sorry that's a tough one
we have a lot of acronyms here
we're the only.
Training center in the country
that has both cars accreditation
and in B. P. C. B. certification
we're very proud of staff here
that helps us to make sure that
we're providing training that
safe effective and appropriate.
We have also are.
I'm.
Transition program.
We are governed by a provision
of state workforce innovation
opportunity act that requires
that we reserve and spend
fifteen percent of our federal
V. are requests on the provision
of transition services to use
age fourteen to twenty one.
That's actually a
miscalculation on the part of
Congress state overestimated the
amount and that's been a real
concern for vocational bill
cation agencies across the
country it's because many
agencies to have to implement
waiting lists for services
fortunately the commission for
the blind does not have a
waiting list we're serving all
eligible individuals across the
state.
We have as part of our
employment pre employment
transition services are step
program where we deadline
individuals get summer jobs
really it's a very very
difficult to have a summer job
if you're going for so we put
them in businesses and help them
to get that experience.
We have our technology for
children program and that
program which we run and
corporations Department of
Health that's the eighty
thousand dollar item you'll see
we provide assistive technology
for blind children who are
younger than eighteen that they
can use in their homes.
during this pandemic that's
really been critical we've been
able to find the technology that
those children need to be able
to study and participate in
their schools lessons remotely
we also have our Randolph
Sheppard program that program is
a federal vending law we have a
blind gender at Kirtland
airforce base it provides all of
the food services for
the enlisted personnel Bill
under for space we also run to
food Jennings has facility in
Artesia at the federal law
enforcement training center.
Shifting a little bit that's our
employment program we have our
independent living program or
older blind requests we help
individuals who are seniors
we're losing vision dues to age
related conditions such as
macular degeneration glaucoma
diabetic retinopathy we help
them to live independently in
their homes and communities we
recently did a consumer
satisfaction survey of our
independent living consumers and
sixty eight percent said that
our services help them to avoid
or delay moving into a nursing
home we consider that an
incredibly important statistic
because that's money that is
saved by the state of New Mexico
when we can deadline people stay
out of a nursing home instead
really be part of their family
they are individuals to as
seniors might find babysitting
services might help another
family member to live and work
and be more productive so
they're huge number of ways in
which our program is really an
economic multiplier so Mister
chairman members the committee
I'd certainly be happy to take
any questions you might have.
Thank you for that Mr.
Are there any questions from the
panel the committee.
Mr trap I think you did such a
very good presentation there's
no questions Hey might have put
it all to sleep that staff
create this opportunity present.
As I scanned my screen
everybody is wide awake.
At.
With that madam vice chair.
Thank you Mr chairman I move
that LFC recommendation.
There's.
Thank you okay now for the go.
Eight I sure.
Okay that is good because of Mr
Castellano was excuse for a few
minutes.
So with that.
Mr chair.
The HSA or the LFC approval a
recommendation thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you very thanks for the
patience of the.
Vocational rehabilitation again
belvita soft.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee at we have six
forty for the division of
vocational rehabilitation.
And we have with us from that
department of finance
administration again miss
Densmore and miss the Afghan and
we have a brand new director as
of yesterday miss them Casey
still Romero is the brand new
director and she'll be joining
us as well and I'm you will see
here just.
As in the previous agency.
There's not a difference in the
revenues or the expenditures.
Four between the executive and
the LESC on this one however
there is a difference in the
language the legislative finance
committee again has dancing more
language in its recommendation
and that the executive just
again in compliance with what we
do every year and that general
appropriation act to lay out all
of the different revenue pieces
somewhere their transfer to so
you see a little bit more at
language that executive as one
paragraph LFC have like work
paragraph and consensus was
achieved that targets in the
performance measures.
And that that's where we are
with this one and I can turn it
over if the executive has any
comments or if not will welcome
the new director don't Romero.
Thank you Mr develop chair
members of the committee I do
not have any comments
I'm going to hand it over to
miss stone Romero welcome and
you have the floor thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Casey
stoner Meryl yes today is my
second official day on the job
as a DVR director my past
experience however includes
eighteen years of working with
vocational rehab
all the way from the secretary
to location we have tacked to a
vocational rehab counselor so
I'm very excited to be back
working with the division to
help you know get back to the R.
and I've brought some team
members with me today in the
event that there are any
questions we have Tina TI Water
who is the director of HR Terry
Trujillo who is the deputy
director for admin Services
Michelle about in who is our
chief legal counsel and also
Kathy Konkol from that the
governor's office.
Thank you.
Thank you for that first of all.
Any other comments from the rest
of your staff that you
mentioned.
Okay no additional comments well
we're gonna open up for
questions from the panel.
Meeting.
The first hand going up.
Representative Lara.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
thank you for for for the
presentation and the welcome to
do to your secondary you get to
present to us our second day.
Mr chair one of the things that
I I really one of the things I
really want to mention is I have
recently had experience with the
opposite with project search.
Of the DVR and it's been it's
been a very positive positive
program a very positive
experience for me and and my
staff for or I work because we
had some a young people come
through and and help us out and
and and be out a very important
part of the of all of our team
and and and in our department.
So one of the things that I
wanted to ask Mr chair is is
there any plans or any
things coming up for you know to
have an extra two expanded or to
offer the services to more young
people that think they could use
this type of work experience.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee at Mr Lara yes
there are
Plans to expand projects search
the most current site that's
just been added to the project
is in Alamogordo and they're
working with the base down in
Alamogordo that's been very
successful there's also a site
in Santa Fe that works at the
Pueblo of Pojoaque yet they have
been on hold fiscal year because
of the pandemic that they plan
to you know we engage next year
I believe in the coming fiscal
year they are I need to branch
up to another small community
with in New Mexico and I'm not
sure that that termination has
been made yet but there is
plans.
Okay thank thank you for that Mr
Mr Mitterrand Mr chair is you
know I've done in the southern
part of the state and with that
we had quite a few a young
people come down with the
students and schools and
I I believe that the that the
young people really really
benefited from from having this
type of experience and to
working with us in the different
aspects of our of our school
district and so I was.
Leadership I was very happy with
the folks in Los crucis you
everything just came together
beautifully and and I and I
think this program is a huge
benefit for young people and if
there's any way that I can
supported maybe we you know
hopefully we can look at do you
some more money to do what the
and I would love to do something
like that because I really do
see the benefits of this
program.
Thank you very much for your
support thank you thank you
thank you Mr also are.
Thank you Representative Lara
next we have Representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman all.
Romero thank you for being on
board I wish you all the luck in
the world.
I don't know none of your staff
except one person that I have
had the honor and pleasure of
working with is a Kathleen
Konkol.
She's been helping me with other
issues of the state issue one
big asset to your committed to
your a.
Staffing there I appreciate her
being there and I appreciate you
all coming on board thank
Kathleen thank needs a little
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you for that
Representative next we have the
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you Mr chair and welcome
Mrs stone amero I.
Give me just a quick
explanation what do you what DVR
does.
Mr chair and members of the
committee at DVR is an
employment program here in New
Mexico and what we do is we have
about seventy eight percent
federal funding with that twenty
three or twenty one percent
state match give or take a few
percentage points and what we do
is we assist individuals with
disabilities to obtain or
maintain employment and those
services that are related to
that so that can range anywhere
from career counseling to job
development job placements
interviewing skills assistance
with transportation
work clothing work tools and ray
is very huge training it's very
individualized based on the
individual's needs and involves
a whole lot of counseling
services that go along with
what disability means not just
to employment but to a person's
entire likelihood.
I appreciate that.
My can you hear me yes.
Thank I appreciate that
explanation I know that we had
gone through a variety of
different ranges in terms of
service recently and I know that
you're under the PED oversight
now.
And the but but they don't have
your budget is that correct.
I'm gonna turn that question
over to miss Terry Trujillo.
Mr chair and representative I
thank you for your question I
also served as of the division
of vocational rehabilitation
chief financial officer so I
want to make sure that you all
know that we are of making short
all of these federal funds that
we received
we manage the risk and you are
correct Representative we are
made of public education
department does not have our
budget we maintain it and we
have the fifty five million
budget for and and manage that
budget for DVR.
We do.
Excuse me we do fall under
public education as far as the
audit pros so whenever you want
to see our audit because we'll
go through a major program
federal program audits.
our body it falls under Public
Education Department.
Okay I wanted that clarification
because I thought I heard that
it had an LTSE PED presentation
the couple weeks back the that
concern for me is that it's not
a concern it's of a question I
would like to see.
D. V. our work with PED in terms
of getting CTE training.
and that's our career technical
education training I know that
the building trades and several
labor unions are lacking.
The.
People who are necessary to move
their programs forward and I've
seen and in many labor
statistics recently that there
aren't enough folks filling
those gaps and I would like to
see or or maybe you can respond
how are you gonna work with PED
to ensure that.
That folks with even with the
disabilities that you're talking
about the things that your
specific
Folks need how can they get
involved and get training
because it isn't about physical
labor as well it's about you
know a variety of other aspects
how would you work with your
constituents I guess to ensure
that they're getting career
technical education.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee you know.
DVR provides what are called pre
at services pre employment
transition services and that
requires the are to be in the
schools providing those pre at
services to students between the
ages of fourteen and twenty one
it's great mentioned what that
does is that allows us to create
that connection with students
much earlier so that we can help
them determine you know what
career path they want to take
whether that be a trade sept
postsecondary education or if
they want to go straight into
work I do I am familiar with the
CTE training I I attended a
presentation about that at PED I
don't before the pandemic and so
I will talk to cabinet secretary
state house and ensure that we
start to connect on those two
levels.
I appreciate that because you
know we have teachers rising and
we have a variety of different
programs that I think your
students and
get a lot of education from and
that will help move their
careers forward so I appreciate
the responses thank you Mr
chairman thank you ladies.
Thank you for that.
Mexico Representative Anderson.
Thank you Mr chairman of and I
appreciate the.
Presentation of.
Our next up budget we're going
to hear and they may be
listening is a question I'd ask
them the same but sort of one of
those rare opportunities to just
ask a question that.
Of is.
Evident to me and it is two of.
What is the difference.
Between the.
Governor's commission on
disability and the development
disabilities council.
And and we're on DVR right now
so that my question is from a
DVR perspective do you have any
sense that there is any
duplication overlap of the of
the various entities in serving
this population in New Mexico
question.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee coming from a very
background working in several
state agencies with various
types of disabilities I do not
think there is overlap
between developmental
disabilities council and between
governor's commission I think
that we all have the opportunity
to collaborate to strengthen
services but I think we all
serve a very specific needs to
the community.
Thank you for that answer of I
others will get it a little
later this afternoon and it's
really of a question and I guess
I would leave it this way Mr
chairman of particularly up
really all three and that is I
hope in the next year you will
give some thought to whether or
not of a consolidated effort
might prove to better serve
these New Mexicans up that's my
point thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative.
Again I don't see any is going
up on the board so.
Madam vice chair.
Thank you Mr chairman I again
moved the LFC recommendation.
Second.
Both of those the
recommendations are the same but
for the record years although.
In the late.
Thank you for the presentation
and you you have the LFC
recommendation which is
identical to the executive thank
you for your presentation thank
you Mr checked thank you Mr
chair.
Mexico.
This
is.
Again the Cisco bell.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee as you
indicated business unit six
forty five is the governor's
commission on disability.
And.
The governor's commission on
disability is composed of two
programs the first is called the
governor's commission on
disability and that second is
called that brain injury
Advisory Council.
And for brain injury Advisory
Council program we don't have
any differences in the revenues
or expenditures between the LFC
and exec so really our only
differences are on the
governor's commission on
disability program and there we
have a difference of ninety one
thousand five hundred dollars
LFC is lower in general fund
buying ninety one thousand.
And that is the revenue piece if
you look down at the expenditure
piece of your differentiate the
use you'll see that that falls
in two areas one is within
personal services employee
benefits the LFC recommendation
is seventy three thousand
dollars lower than the executive
and the second piece is in
contractual services LFC is at
seventeen thousand lowered more
than the executive.
And for this our department the
governor's commission on
disability this agency we don't
include any language that we
don't have any issues with
language and regarding
performance we are okay come to
consensus on those and those are
included in your packet so
that's really the main
difference LFC did include.
For that general fund number I
six point five percent increase
for this agency so it's not flat
there is a six point five
percent increase so just wanted
to note that in terms of general
fund we are a little lower but
we did increase the revenue for
this agency and for LFC with
that I will turn it over to Mr
Burciaga and and more and we
have with us from the agency is
crystal Ben every that you is
that the budget director Gary
CFO for that the HSD so Missy
alchemist and more.
Thank you Mr
Mr chair members of the
committee I would like to note
that of the governor's
commission on disability did
sustain a five percent cut cut
in general fund in FY twenty two
the executive recommendation
supports restoring that five
percent and provides a little
bit extra to allow for modest
growth within the agency.
the executive recommendation
also reflects a funded vacancy
rate of approximately eighty two
percent to ensure the HSD is
able to succeed in its purpose
and as far as the contracts
category is concerned the
executive supports the agency's
request of an eight point nine
percent increase in contracts
for shared services for eight a
public information officer slash
communications support as well
as additional federal funding
for the aggregate lady grants
which assists farmers with
disabilities that is all I have
to add so at this time I will
late I would like to pass it to
miss Bennet yes.
Thank you.
Thank you for these siapa of.
Sorry Mr chair to introduce.
Yes go ahead.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee
as they said I my name is Mr
going to be this and I am the
chief financial officer for the
governor's commission on
disability and to address
Representative Anderson's
question earlier about the
difference between us and the
disabilities planning council.
The governor's commission on
disability won't mainly focuses
on physical accessibility so
just so you know the mission of
all of our agency is to improve
the quality of life of all New
Mexicans with disabilities by
addressing social integration
economic selfsufficiency
political resolve physical and
program accessibility and full
participation in the benefits of
life and rights of all
individuals so we have some
architects we have a.
A program that will deals with
the training different entities
on the building codes and
accessibility we have
We we focus on answering
questions about the accessible
animals
Different things like that where
as far as I know the
disabilities planning council
deals more with
developmental disabilities
instead of physical
accessibility.
So just so you know about that a
little bit more about our agency
is we have four main purpose
what the first program is the
disability awareness and
advocacy program this program
provides training and advocacy
on a range of issues impacting
people with disabilities and
advocates for greater inclusion
and access to employment health
care settings recreation areas
and cultural sites the second
part of our agency is we have
the physical physical
accessibility program.
This program promotes compliance
with the two thousand and ten
Americans with disability
standards for accessible design
and improves physical access to
government offices in places of
public accommodation through
advocacy site visits and
architectural plan reviews this
program also manages the
residential accessibility
modification program known as
ram ramp provides home
modifications to help people
with disabilities stay within
their home and it continues to
grow in FY nineteen we completed
thirty five projects in FY
twenty we completed sixty two
pro projects in FY twenty one
even been with COVID closures
and are reduce staff we were
able to complete forty two
projects and now this year we're
we have that we have twenty
active projects and we have
applications pending for
approval which hopefully we're
hoping to get forty or more
projects done again this year
another the brain injury
Advisory Council another entity
of our program
is statutorily required to
conduct studies on the impact of
brain injury improve
coordination in the state and
advise the governor legislature
legislature agencies and private
organizations on the services
supports needed by individuals
with brain injuries and their
families the buyback also
manages the bicycle helmet
distribution program which
provides free how much an
education to children in New
Mexico an effort to reduce brain
injuries and to raise awareness
about New Mexico's helmet law is
it is a law which most people
don't know under the age under
age eighteen if you are in a
public.
I'm sending you are supposed to
be wearing a helmet whether you
are on a on a scooter or
skateboard or bike.
the fourth part of our agency is
The New Mexico technology
assistance program this is a
federally funded program which
supports individuals with
disabilities to access education
employment civic participation
through assistive technology the
technology assistance program
also does have a system devices
to New Mexicans with
disabilities so that they can
test out the equipment this way
the individual knows whether the
device is compatible to their
needs before they spend what can
sometimes be thousands of
dollars on purchasing that one
single device.
I stand for questions if anybody
has any questions.
Okay thank you for that and the.
Mr Anderson.
Thank you Mr chairman up.
Yes of Benavides thank you very
much I believe I got your name
correct yes crystal
Mr Chairman.
And to any who are listening who
are advocates of this important.
Community physical or of
developmental.
Everything I here today.
Reminds me that it's in
government sometimes we can
become so fractured so many
entities working on different
components of.
Problem that of we could do
better with with some kind of
consolidating idea undoubtably
which will be resisted by all
the constituents.
But none the less this afternoon
as I listen to these excellent
presentations and the good work
being done it is simply as clear
as the sun rises to me that
someone somewhere should give
consideration to a more
collaborative effort of because
I think it could be more
productive we.
A bigger bang for our Buck thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you for that
Representative.
Are there any more questions
from the panel the committee.
Okay you say no madam vice
chair.
Thank you Mr chairman I move the
LFC recommendation.
There's Christine St second.
Okay now
think about helping hands.
Thank you for that you've got
the LFC recommendation.
Our illustrious center for the
afternoon with the business
units six forty seven
developmental disabilities
planning council.
And Miss cloned.
Afternoon Mister chair members
the committee Kelly client
legislative finance committee
agency code six forty seven at
six forty seven it's I know this
is the development disabilities
planning council is actually
change in statute last year in
the agenda wasn't updated so
agencies new name is just
developmental disabilities
council we've dropped the
planning out of it just for
everyone's background
information we have the director
of the DDC with us Allison McCoy
and my counterpart with the
executive GFA MaryBeth tons per
with this as well and we're
going to toggle back and forth
on this presentation so all over
the overview of it but there's
more information on the LFC
recommendation which can be
found on volume two pages three
oh two on page three of five
three of five.
So overall both recommendations
increase general fund revenue
however the executive
recommendation was five hundred
and seventy nine point nine
thousand above the LFC bill C.
recommendation increase general
fund eight point one percent
well the executive increased
sixteen point six percent.
The executive recommendation for
personal was higher than the LFC
to fund to additional FTE about
the LFC.
The executive recommendation for
contractual services was also
higher than the LFC mostly as a
result of rate increases that
were requested by the department
and we have made a difference of
performance measures with that
I'll turn it over to MaryBeth
for the first program.
Hello hello can Mr chair and
members of the committee I'm
just going over key code P.
seven two seven with you it's
the main developmental
disabilities council program
in terms of revenue the
executive recommendation
increase the general fund
revenues a hundred and ninety
five point five thousand above
the LFC recommendation in this
program are in the base both
recommendations increases person
for special education ombudsman
I'm sure that director Luke
place going to talk about this
but they have a new office of
special education but which is I
know very exciting for them
in addition to that the
executive recommendation
increases person for policy
communications FTE support
agency and in those efforts
Lastly the executive increases
contractual services for
actually contract excuse me
advocacy contracts while the LFC
recommendation remains a bit
closer to the twenty two
operating budget in this program
performance measures are
reconciled as well so I'll get
back to Kelly for the next
program and the last program
thank you merry bath is P. seven
three seven which is office of
guardianship.
Well both the it recommendations
increase general fund revenue
significantly for this program
the executive recommendation
list three hundred and eighty
four point four thousand above
the LFC executive recommendation
increase personnel for an
initial staff attorney resulting
in the difference in the person
expenditures both
recommendations include funding
for commissions IT system which
is electrical services category
the recommendation also includes
the executive recommendation
also included two hundred and
sixty seven point nine thousand
for guardianship rate increases
which were requests by the
agency I will note that the
agency requests for the range is
a phased approach and so you'll
probably be seeing requests for
rates up probably for the next
few years coming from DDC as
they try and scale of those
rates over the next few years
this is not the full amount that
they're a recent study showed.
With that I will turn over very
best for any final comments in
fact the director for her
discussion.
Kelly Mr chair members of the
committee I'm just real quickly
I wanted to to share a little
bit about the rate increases the
executive put in
that I believe that they are the
same with the it up with LESC
with the exception the fact that
the agency requests
Twenty five percent of the full
amount for the guardianship rate
increases which is really the
bulk of their of the contracts
that they do any executive bump
that up to fifty percent so
that's the that's probably the
biggest difference is there was
an increase on that side so I
just wanted to clarify that for
you all and with that I will
turn over to the executive
director thank you.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee their bath and
Kelly really appreciate the
Representative recommendation
and also Act outside want to say
that we very much appreciate the
support that we've received from
both the executive and LFC for
programs we're doing a lot and
I'd like to give you a very
quick update on what we're doing
and why are why we're requesting
increases for FY twenty three.
DDC respectfully request that
the legislature Adam anymore
approve the executive
recommendation the HSD
recommendation was slightly
lower than executive we
submitted back in August when we
weren't quite sure what the
revenues were going to be we
were trying to be as
As careful and incautious with
Increase will losses possible
I'm but we do now our with more
information fully support the
executive recommendation.
and in fact As You here's more
information we do believe that
the executive recommendation is
really about.
Last I'm so in the twenty twenty
one regular session the
legislature passed house bill
two twenty two which established
the office of the special
education combined this the on
that office arms can call as CEO
assist students with
disabilities and their families
I'm as they navigate the complex
special education system.
it's our understanding that over
on the course of one year PED
only receives about thirteen
complaints a year I'm and I
think that was last year we
launched our program and on
December first twenty twenty one
we have already received thirty
open cases across the state and
west in two months so it is
clear that our office will
require even more than we've
requested.
I'm based on the needs were
encountering currently and again
you know as we update the
legislature throughout the year
on during the interim I'm you'll
get updated information about
that and how the programs going
on we did request two hundred
eighty five thousand our when we
launched that to launch the
program back in FY I am back in
the last legislative session we
did only received two fifty so
we were not able to fully higher
all of our FTE I believe both
the LFC and if a recommendation
recommends that we do I'm go
ahead make up that difference so
we can hired three theme.
And because we see the screen
we've also requested additional
contractual funds to support
this program.
I'm also guardianship is the
bulk of our general fund
increase request we provide
legal in guardianship services
to adults I'm off to
guardianship currently provides
service guardianship services to
about I'm a thousand protected
people and legal services I'm
currently to I believe we have a
at two one hundred twenty act
cases guardianship cases
individuals in guardianship
proceedings I'm for contacts
The current wait list and the
legislature has been very
interesting our wait list
numbers are current wait list is
fifty five applicants on that is
a huge deal.
This time last year we had over
two hundred our wait list and I
want to note that we receive I'm
over the last year on average
fifteen to twenty five new cases
per month so not only have we
reduced the wait list I'm from
the as the past numbers were
also staying on top of the
screen new applicants
applications coming in with
COVID.
and other Act issues across the
state we are seen significantly
increased numbers of cases and
we are doing our very very best
to stay on top of them and
reduce and reduce it as much as
possible we received a really
big General Fund increase last
fiscal year and we are projected
to spend down every penny this
that the fiscal year as we work
through all of these cases I'm.
The Legislature provided a
special appropriation in FY
twenty one to provide a rate
study for Office guardianship
As are both merry bass and Kelly
have discussed we have
requested to fully fund the
legal services increase which is
only fifteen thousand at to
fully funded the treatment
carding ship rate increase which
is a hundred and fifty eight
thousand I and and in August
back in August we did only
submit a twenty five percent
increase I'm an executive.
In the last week and has
increased that to fifty percent
we did our request executive
directly actually find a hundred
percent in the reason we're
doing that is as we are quickly
quickly pushing out these cases
in the last year we have found
that our guardians especially
our quality Koreans are not able
to keep up with their caseloads
with the current funding I'm
sorry the current rates I'm is
very difficult to say business
some of our bigger contractors
are able to leverage that by
providing other kinds of
services as you know many
services across the state for
folks living with disabilities
are increasing their rates and
so
as we see it.
It's rates and other services
serving this population the fact
that we're not be able to keep
up with our rates I need that
either a smaller contractors are
not able to do this work anymore
and are going to have both stop
taking cases and some are
discussing completely pulling
out a partnership all together
because they're not able to make
ends meet for their small
businesses or what we're looking
at bigger guardianship our
contractors who are again either
going to stop taking you can
partition basis or
it themselves to taking on more
cases and other services so we
are really seeing a desperate
need now as our need for
guardianship increases that
ability to just find out those
cases tend to contractors is
rapidly decreasing because we're
not able to keep up the range so
we did ask executive depending
I'm a hundred percent eight
they put in fifty and so
At fifty percent we're looking
at five hundred fifty thousand
dollars I'm which is really not
very much at all if you think
about how how great the need is
and and and how important
services are in the state.
In the twenty twenty one regular
session the legislature
additionally passed house bill
two thirty four thank you very
much for that legislators which
is tremendously increased and
strengthened guardianship
oversight across the state and
it did did that and primarily to
places yeah at the office of
guardianship in the judiciary
the DDC are requests two hundred
ninety five thousand dollars to
support also guardianship
additional duties under the
statutory changes and the
judiciary requested three
hundred thirty thousand to
support their duties
due to some kind of mix up
during the session the
legislature appropriated three
hundred thousand dollars for the
judiciary's duties and
appropriated to office
guardianship so at this point
where I pastor lower seating
three hundred thousand a year
which we're for this year which
were holding will be faxed in
next year's budget which we are
I'm immediately I'm transferring
to the judiciary so that they
can Fund they are are at their
new program that they're putting
in place for guardianship so we
are how did not receive a single
dollar for that are increased
UT's and G. has significantly
increase students under the
statute so we have requested I'm
tired an additional staff
attorney and paralegal to
fulfill those duties as well as
Funding to increase that the
compliance portion of the work
that we're doing.
And that's why you're seeing are
much higher.
Request through the executive in
New York to the LFC.
I'm and finally for program
support that DC does really need
a communications and policy
director I've you know we've
tried to strategize to looking
I'm combine those two functions
our primary purpose or statutory
purpose in both state and
federal law is to perform
advocacy systems change and
capacity building across the
state this is a crucial role to
be effective in the work that we
do I'm especially with those
with developmental and
intellectual disabilities to
support them until the end to
leading self determining a lax
and so and that's included in
our agency requests as well I'm
and I want to speak specifically
to Representative Anderson's
point
that I he's made a couple times
this afternoon I'm the council
the state developmental
disabilities council we do
include a broad range of
agencies I'm honor council
including the Human Services
department of health I'm
children youth and families
department I'm.
And the public education
department DVR also sits under
council so we do see.
What happens in different
agencies and one of the things
that we do see is that the
current administration has done
a stellar job working
collaborative collaborative
cooperatively many of us have
mandates that are federal or
other statutory mandates to do
the work that we're doing and
what we are working on is
making sure that we're working
collaborative way and that we're
providing services across the
state agency this claim
responsible way so there's a lot
of communication a lot of
working together a lot of
collaboration to ensure that we
there's not repetition of
services and ten ensure that our
services are supporting each
other so there's a lot of
referrals back and forth from
agency to agency and there's a
lot of communication and data
sharing about how we can best
support these communities I'm so
I do want to share
Representative Anderson that
this collaboration is happening
and it's happening on a daily
basis and and we're really I'm
encouraged to see how much we're
doing together and I'm all the
work that we need.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for this point.
It looks like we only have one
question one hand raised and
then the.
Mistranslations will we'll go
with Christine first then.
Follow up with Mr Anderson great
Christine thank you Mr chairman
thank you doctor McCoy Kelly and
Kelly by the way you look
beautiful and then
everyone else Kelly Ms you're
standing but that's neither here
nor there.
I I wanted to double check
doctor McCoy that that this was
the you know I chaired the
interim health and Human
Services Committee the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee and this is a
big discussion as Representative
Anderson might be aware of
regarding the issues of concern
that you raised.
And when we when we voted to
support legislation this was
part of the legislation that we
felt needed significant support
and I was just curious to to
know if you if you spoken to any
of the committee members about
the about the concerns that they
had as well and then later
I think it was RubyAnn that
might have been sitting in the
meetings I don't recall the
Kelly was but that
We were hoping that the PED's
recommendations we're going to
be able to be the the
recommendations that the PED the
LFC is recommendations were
going to be.
Enough to support your needs.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Trujillo in thank
you madam chair for your work on
LHS and pain so close attention
to the work that we're doing
together and so.
Just so folks now I think it
gets confusing sometimes here
folks wonder what is that
developmental disabilities
council and has a different from
the department health and
developmental disabilities
support division which provides
the waiver services and those
kinds of support address support
services and so we are separate
agencies and we do provide
separate services there's a lot
of collaboration I work very
very closely with director
Cornwell Jason Cornwell agree
DST all of the work that he does
we do in conjunction together I
support his work he supports my.
And so Act we are very much
support all of the
recommendations moving for for
DDS di and for the department of
health and the services that
we're providing my agency are
separate and apart from the
waiver services we're providing
you know special education
support services ridge at
providing I'm going I don't
guardianship services and those
are they are general fund.
Services that we find out we
also have a federally funded
activities that support DSD and
other agencies I'm our council
activities are primarily
federally funded as well and so
those I don't usually talk to
I'm our legislature about those
activities so much because
they're not general general fund
I'm funded and so there's not as
much interested in hearing about
those activities and where we
are but we do you know all of
our council activities and or
the vast majority of them are
funded by our federal funds of
course there is required general
fund match I'm to receive those
federal dollars.
I hope that answers your
question Representative Trujillo
Mr chair do.
I just wanted clarification
because that was not quite sure.
If that was the same discussion
we had had in committee.
And I think you clarify that
thank you.
Understand your muted.
Representative Anderson your
muted.
Representative Anderson you're
still muted.
Representative Anderson you are
muted.
I think he's going to get is I.
T. person.
He didn't understand my Indian
sign language.
With well he's gone.
Let's go to representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll miss
you mentioned that you work
along the DVD waiver and my
question is we're trying to the
I lose a big waiting list of the
DD waiver and we're gonna cut
that down hopefully you rural
schools and you know that's
thousands of people are on the
list I think I was I going to
fit your budget.
If we cut it down on our side of
the the the waiver they come out
trickle into your side how we
can address that issue.
Thank you for the question Mr
chair representative Garcia I'm
so because they are separate
programs it is not going to
directly affect my a program of
the year the programs that have
R. J. at your funded by general
fund our guardianship services
they're not to put their not
duplicative with the duty waiver
services are completely separate
set of services and the special
education as I'm bad services
are again separate from the TV
way percent I'm I. programs are
not covered by the GST waiver.
Issue thank you Mr chairman
that's all requests I had Mr
chairman I have Mister
Representative Dalton here with
me I understand I mean and you
love to address.
And you wonder some.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chairman I'll have two points
one is I appreciate the.
Dr voice presentation.
Mr Chairman.
I continue to.
I appreciate Dr requires
comments about the collaboration
that exists under this
executive.
However it was not.
Want to go.
And I believe we heard we didn't
hear that same.
Feeling under a different
executive.
So all I'm leaving the advocates
with this afternoon.
Is simply.
This collaborative silo
approach.
May be best for these New
Mexicans today.
What executives do change and
therefore I wonder if we could
not create a synergistic
collaborative results in the
future perhaps through
consolidation.
Mr chairman I listened to date
of in yes I suspect we prepare
for the LFC recommendation I
would ask the committee to
consider I'm here mark on the
expansion items described in the
executive recommendation for
further consideration and
discussion with the analyst so
I'm hoping Mr chairman when our
vote is taken other members can
her this budget is for the of
and earmarked for the final
session.
Thank you Representative for the
moment important.
In the past several sessions
that I have been on this
committee we have made such
accommodations.
We're just so that we don't.
Given false promises
Representative for free we
usually approved the HFC our
recommendation and then they go
CA when we come before the full
committee so my recommendation
is to have the.
Madam vice chair makes the
motion to adopt the HSA or the
LFC recommendation and then
continue working together of.
To see what we can work out at
the end.
Thank you Mr chairman I do
recommend LFC recommendation.
If you move the LFC regulations.
We were both okay.
We got a second settlement fund
for about.
Christine.
I'm trying to vote yes but I
don't know how to fix it.
I vote yes okay.
Okay.
Okay doctor McCoy will be of
speaking with you again when we
come back to the full committee
of we have done what we just
stepped we've done that before
we approach the
information you know I tried to
offer you and I'm not myself
completely all Mr to level two
no okay with the that concludes.
Presentation for this afternoon
folks team and the.
I am still waiting the word from
the other members need to see
what we're supposed to do if
we're going to meet as a full
committee after we're done or or
not and I believe they're still
on their second presenter at a
six so.
Thank you for a very very good
speedy afternoon and.
Well I'm I'm going to hang out
here for just a little bit until
we hear otherwise other than
that we're done for the day
folks so our schedule says that
we reconvene as a full committee
at nine o'clock in the morning.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you team.
