I.
Representative have.
Representative.
It is here you got it for.
You.
Wonderful thank you Sandra we're
gonna start this afternoon with
the committee substitute for
House Bill five twenty seven and
our own Representative Herndon
is going to present thank you
madam chair and good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee this is absolutely
great to be in front of you
presenting this wonderful meal
so I am visiting the committee
substitute for House Bill five
twenty seven and this is a the
the the health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill five twenty seven
creates to funds one is called
the opioid settlement restricted
fund which will house all opioid
settlement revenues and we see
future earnings on those
revenues and the second fund is
the opal Mr crisis recovery fund
which will receive distributions
from the opioid settlement of
restricted Fund.
From which the legislature will
appropriate remediation uses in
subsequent years so the bill
provides for twenty million
dollars appropriation from the
restricted fund to the recovery
fund in FY twenty three and this
supports the appropriations made
in the general appropriations
act for twenty twenty three and
with that madam chair I will
stand for questions.
Right thank you Representative
heard and do we have anyone in
the audience that would like to
speak in opposition to this
bill.
Or in favor of this bill.
Seeing none
I don't believe our anyone
online wanting to speak in
support or opposition.
No.
So we'll go to members of the
committee and Representative
Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair of
Medicare I think I'm suffering
from a lack of information about
the if you if the wherever I go
if it's locally funded project I
see counties of the pledge their
opioid funds to that project I
see municipalities it of.
Hedge their opioid funds to that
project and I think that's
that's awesome did I come back
here and I see opioid funds go
on this way and that
Where do the land and who has
the authority to appropriate
them and what are the side
boards on their appropriation
what are they able to be used
for so thank you madam chair
members of the committee
Representative Chatfield you
always ask inspiring insightful
questions and we have responses
for you today so I have my I
have a expert with me would you
introduce yourself and he's
going to help us answer those
questions madam chair committee
my name is Brandon gray LFC
analyst
Representative Chatfield madam
chair if you turn to page six of
the F. I. R..
on I twenty seven.
There's an estimate of the on
the last page you can just turn
around.
So on this last page this is the
most recent estimate of.
local governments share of the
funds and so each local
government has appropriation
discretion over those funds and
the one.
Confusing mechanism is that this
money's been paid out over time
so some of the money's already
been paid out.
Some of it hasn't been paid out
but will be and so when you're
hearing about counties spending
money some that might be old
money and their expecting new
money to come through but this
table should give us a snapshot
at this point time about how
much each local government
should expect.
And.
Mr gray I might also suggest
that you drive folks attention
to the
chart on the second page of the
FIR which is also extremely
helpful and we might also be
useful in responding to
Representative Chatfield to
maybe walk through
The funds that way.
Madam chair I'm certainly so
page two that breaks down in
general five twenty sevenths
approach to use one time dollars
for recurring uses at the state
level.
Table in the back.
It says the total opioid
settlement revenues to local
governments and thousands so
Albuquerque city is going to
get.
Sixty four thousand.
Six four million.
good because I was looking at
Harding County chair and I think
that only save twenty dollars.
Yeah so Madam chair
representative how kirke the
estimate over the lifetime of
the fund is sixty four million
and Harding.
And Harding County is twenty
nine thousand that's right okay.
Thank you madam chair
LFC guy Representative Chatfield
your.
So madam chair these funds would
provide a place for that funding
to land.
When it comes in.
Madam chair representative five
twenty seven contemplates
providing a fund for state
revenues right so state is
receiving forty five percent of
all opioid revenues these local
governments those receiving an a
different process and those
dollars are not subject to state
appropriation okay now you have
answered my question thank.
Next Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr madam chair.
Representative I'll be kind as
you passed
Madam Representative.
These funds are coming from the
opioid.
Fund currently is that correct
are these twenty million dollars
coming out of the opioid opioid
settlement fund report is this a
new a new source of money for
this I'm I'm confused as to
where is the the twenty million
dollars coming from is it coming
from the general fund or is it
coming from the opioid
settlement fund.
Madam chair representative.
All of the dollars touched by
five twenty seven come from
opioid funds no general fund
stretched
Some
So madam chair and and
Representative.
We had
We had Representative Garcia in
here earlier this year.
And he was actually very
exercise over the fact that the
opioid settlement fund money.
Was being.
For.
obviously those dollars were in
the in the.
House Bill to.
Going somewhere.
Without being spent for.
a specific purpose for people
who are suffering suffering.
Who are addicted to opioids and
and.
I I'm just curious are we able
to take.
The money from that fund.
To create a fund.
To.
Apparently grow a funds for more
money I'm just wondering are we
even able to do that.
Madam chair representative I'm
not sure if you know that that
might be a question I see
I see director Avid back there
that are I'm just trying to
figure out are we able to use
those dollars for this.
Purpose.
Madam chair.
Madam chair.
Is able to answer question yes
please thank you Mr Abbey.
This bill.
Creates a sustainable funding
source with those dollars what
will use some in the same way
whether you use them directly
issue haven't house bill two or
indirectly through this long
term sustainable funding
mechanism is not different than
think about when the state got a
couple billion dollars of
tobacco revenue on us read out
over actually for perpetuity so
they get forty million a year
they put it all in a fun day
save half spend half of this is
similar a similar approach I
think it is consistent with the
settlement agreements with the
tobacco companies okay thank you
madam chair that that's really
what I've been trying to figure
out is it I think I understand
what the purposes take the funds
that are in the opioid
settlement fund and try to find
a way to increase the funds for.
Rader use.
That.
Would you say that's a fair
synopsis.
Madam chair members of the
committee representative Montoya
yes.
Wells well we're creating this
fund and putting moneys in the
fund will we be.
Potentially keeping.
People in the short term.
From being able to access the
phone.
The purpose of the fund.
Currently.
Madam chair representative.
The while the fund is restricted
Fund so makes annual
distributions of five percent
it's not it's still subject to
legislative preparation so this
time next year if there's a
particularly important need for
in the short term the
legislature can choose to
appropriate out of the district
to fund for uses that you all
deem necessary.
Thank you so so madam chair.
The fund.
Is housed for some authority is
given.
To the attorney general's
office.
Over the fund it is this now
we're taking this fund outside
of his jurisdiction or the
jurisdiction of the.
District attorney to some
degree.
Atlanta and once again are we
allowed to do that so I'm going
to ask Mr Abbey to come back up
thank you madam chair
representative.
Receive these wanting to settle
for the agreements and positive.
Just
like any other public forums
the.
So please don't wander off Mr.
So madam chair and
representative.
If there's if if the state
treasurer is already investing
the dollars from that fund what
is the purpose of the new fund I
I might need some help but
engine.
The state.
And madam chair and and
Representative once again I'm
I'm just trying to make sure
we're able to do this just
doesn't run fell anything in the
constitution this doesn't run
afoul of anything in the
settlement we are able to do
this and we stand on firm ground
is that correct Mr.
Okay thank you I'm gonna listen
to the rest of the debate
because.
I have my own questions confused
me.
And I'm I'm trying just to
determine if we're able to do
this and we're able to get a
better return.
That sounds good I I was just
concerned about the legality of
it all thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Montoya
a next wave Representative Baca
and then representative Garcia
thank you madam chairman are
madam chair and also
Representative my questions
really straightforward and
simple this bill is actually
creating an emergency clause
right in section four says
My question is really.
This is created number two
because what powers will that
provide and how may those powers
manual utilized in the support
of your bill madam chair.
I'm gonna ask my experts Mr
Abbey to help with enforcement.
You madam chair.
Madam chair representative the
emergency clause is provided so
that the state investment
council can immediately
implement the create a new fund
in conjunction with the
treasurer's office and the
attorney attorney general's
office and so that they can
begin to on those anticipated
revenues.
I was just wonder if Mr Abbey
had any I just want to add
because the staff.
just perhaps clarify think of
this as a restricted sub fund of
the consumer settlement fund.
There some settlements which
given the state discretion.
To spend the money wherever they
want one more settlements are
restricted in the settlement
agreement so here's a restricted
sub account of the consumer
settlement fund only to be used
for the purposes of addressing
the harms of.
Just find some.
Thank you so madam chair and I
do appreciate that just
clarifying so really emergency
classes can be out of the money
flows in and out of this fund
it's not going to be directed is
out to the communities or
otherwise and so I just want to
be very clear about what the
emergency clause means in this
bill madam chair if it means
effective date is on signing
that's what emergency clause
means the day the governor
signed the bill.
It goes into effect thank you
madam chair of no more
questions.
Thank you Representative back up
now two of Representative Garcia
than Representative Graham.
Thank you for your of presenters
on how do you come up with these
percentages on the on the back
page.
Madam chair Representative those
are taken from the New Mexico
hope you read Madam allocation
agreement so it's the terms of
the settlement.
Of.
Question another question I have
madam chair is a I'm looking to
do not County is four zero eight
percent.
And what county is that point
zero eight percent it not only
has a hundred eighty six
thousand dollars more the symbol
of what why is that.
Madam chair representative
that's rounding the rounding
issues probably point eight
seven first twenty five well
that's madam chair at around a
hundred eighty six thousand
dollar difference how worry rom
enough to that that that makes
sense to me at one County the
has full year we percent both
phones have the same percentage
get one comes you know hundred
eighty six thousand dollars more
six.
Mr Chairman.
Randall follow through and
determine at why in the what
appears to be the same decimal
point difference results in
different number I think I agree
with rounding and will follow up
and confirm that the AG
negotiated these amounts with
the local governments and the he
representative of course the
state the state got a
significant chunk of the
payments.
The state of New Mexico going
into the consumer settlement
fund along with these amount to
the government's that he
negotiated on the states we have
thank you madam chair and David
you know I I understand what
you're saying of my constituents
or say how come we are getting
shorted on the six thousand
dollars I I think when we get
the detailed fractional decimal
amount we're going to provide
its linear and not unfair what
we will follow up Mr chair once
person on your.
Of these numbers based on and
population of magic.
Madam chair that's right
population and I believe
the estimate for that harms done
to the communities of thank you
madam chair.
Of the populations based on
everything that the round
because the in table County
we're surrounded by reservation
a rural reservation taken into
account of the numbers.
Madam chair Representative I.
I'm I'm not a hundred percent
certain I believe that there is
on going discussions about
incorporating reservations and
then I can check on that if you
will get back to me and madam
chair of David officiated thank
you Madam.
Thank you Representative next
will have Representative Brown
is that Garrett than Pettigrew.
Chair and thank you
Representative I.
I just confess I'm a little bit
confused this bill also so just
a few questions I I hope to help
me out a bit of Madam chair
representative so this creates
the opioid crisis recovery fund
and it like it is a provision
here for distributions of I
think it's up to five percent
people the five percent at
various of.
Various July first of several
years to come is is that correct
Madam chair representative.
Yes okay so madam chair and
representative what problem is
this bill designed to fix.
Madam chair representative I
mean you madam chair members of
the committee Representative
Brown I'm going to ask my
experts to explain and madam
chair and representative just to
clarify I understand with your
treatment I that's not the part
in questioning it's
What are we not able to shake
loose when we need to is it
somehow trapped in that other
funding that's what I'm getting
at madam chair representative
Madam chair representative I
would I would say there's two
problems this that this fixes
the first is that it puts the
the opioid revenues into a fund
for restricted uses in
accordance with the settlement
so the in perpetuity we can be
sure that were.
Following the terms of the
settlement that's the first from
the second problem is that these
period revenues are one time
revenues they were getting a
lump sum the fact that we the
legislature may wish to spend
those on a recurring basis and
so that's why
those annual distributions are
provided so that the income on.
From the opioid revenues can
support referring uses.
Okay.
you very much madam chair so.
Are there any distributions that
could happen under this bill
that are not within that equal
to five percent
restriction madam chair.
Representative.
The madam chair members of the
committee Representative Brown
dances no but I'm gonna let my
experts for the explained.
Madam chair and representative I
may ask you to.
Clarified just wanted not.
Centering you madam chair thank
you Representative and and.
I I appreciate Mr great that
question because I would rather
just get to the point of what
I'm thinking my first thought
was this must be a fix for a
bill that Representative Miguel
Garcia brought to the committee
not too long ago for a much
needed treatment center in his
part of the state and I don't
madam chair members actually.
Hi my memories a little foggy
right now I don't know if we
passed the bill there's
procreation somewhere for it and
that Representative is is this
that money that might have been
lacking that's really what I'm
getting at chair representative.
I'm gonna ask my expert to
answer yes that was person
million and a half.
And it's the same revenues.
Okay.
Okay so Madam chair
representative and director Avid
so does this solve
Representative Garcia is
problem.
Potentially.
Center.
I
mean he he desired to achieve
this funding.
This bill is kind of setting up
a framework for the legislature
and orderly way rather than in
kind of individual members and
orderly way to get this in the
General Appropration Act on a
sustainable basis because again
I and I think read to make the
point the state is getting big
non recurring payments and if we
have art a lot of now money into
a sustainable revenue streams
that's what this bill solves.
Representative Garcia's problem
was the one to help San Miguel
County at one of many counties
and you all want to help your
areas so here's a framework to
take that nonrecurring revenue
and find a work stable recurring
revenue streams to budget every
year.
Chair representative I think
this is a good bill thank you
appreciate the clarification.
Thank you Representative
Representative Garrett please.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for this process oriented
explanation don't go away.
So I understand technically
speaking there's a circle before
it which is the consumer
settlement fund.
one recommendation is that money
goes directly to the recovery
fund but what I understand is
because there are restricted
uses of the opium Fund we're
making up for the consumer
settlement for doing that opioid
opioid settlement restricted
fund so that it's very clear
what is that nonrecurring about
that we're making into a
sustainable framework correct
letter stand that all right.
Okay.
Exactly right great for
something that and madam chair
my other question then in the
consumer settlement fund or
their other restricted areas
like the tobacco funded they
operate the same way do they
have their restricted pot Center
separately invested also.
Madam chair representative the
consumer settlement fund does
have other restricted monies
those are substantially smaller
ten twenty million dollars
and those are held in the
consumer settlement fund and
invested by the treasury okay so
madam chair not all of them have
the structure you need to the
public transit opioid
supplement.
Chair representative that's
correct okay thank you that's
present and future understanding
I appreciate it madam chair
thank you Representative
Pettigrew and then we'll go to
representative Garcia for a
quick follow up.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative
Bill.
Madam chair many of my questions
have been answered.
I guess my first one would be
the chair
for the
what made to carry with this
legislation.
Mr chair madam chair agency of
members of the committee
Representative Pettigrew I think
it's a great piece of
legislation and it's a way to
make sure that we are keeping
funding available for hire
stated for items that are
needed.
Madam chair and representative
of a I hear.
Would you would you say with
respect to that but I was
wondering if there is no there's
an igniter that created you to
to take either one right to
legislation or to decide to
carry the load.
Mr chair members of the
committee representative had.
Someone had to to Kerry this
legislation to make sure that we
can put these funds in place and
why not.
Good effort thank you
Chair and thank you
Representative.
Chairman I believe I heard that
what this would to.
Would put it into the fund that
that.
Would further restrict the uses
of this and I'm curious.
Madam chair representative if
there's.
Potentially some things in the
past that we spent this money
on.
That we now look back and say
Hey we shouldn't have done that
so we should we make sure
there's more restrictive.
Madam chair representative
The The appropriation that are
made up to this point I will
evaluated in consultation with
the settlement agreement and
this bill is in line with the
settlement agreement.
Madam chair representative I
appreciate the answer I just I
just go back to some terms that
were used earlier and just.
Made me question whether or not
for something that we've done in
the past that made us want to do
this other than create a
sustainable long term fund.
Madam chair representative
pedigree.
The legislature has used the
consumer settlement fund for us
broad range of purposes and
sometimes pretty much unrelated
to the reasons money came into
the fund you know I'd I'd I know
you know that.
Folks need money and I just
staff where we fund money and
sometimes look to this fund is I
know where there's.
And and this and I think first
of all federal laws really
change to make make it more
necessary to use court
settlements in our for tax
reasons to be related to the
purpose for which the firm was
authorized by the court so this
is consistent with that worsen
the past the state would put the
money in that consumer
settlement fund in the
legislature was.
That led the AG brought it in
but it didn't always relate to
the settlement purpose so I
think that's some of the
thinking that that
Representative permanent I'm
sure had and bring this bill
for.
Chair and.
Representative director thank
you for that answer and and so
with respect to that.
With money received to date.
All of that money would go into
this new fund that hasn't been
expended already specifically
for four yield opioids.
Madam chair representative
that's correct.
I I.
Thank you madam.
Thank you Representative
Representative Garcia thank you
for your one quick questions
probably for David maybe madam
chair under a physical effect
for.
It says FY twenty four is
between five million and eleven
million dollar estimate that the
six million dollar difference is
that normal procedure for
setting this picture.
Madam chair representative that
that that ranges provided to
give the most conservative
estimate for that revenues
anticipated the state is
anticipating future revenues
coming in that we don't have a
dollar figure for because
litigation still pending so the
high end of that estimate is and
asked is an estimate for that
additional revenue we're
expecting
thank you madam chair thank but
after the number that I'm
looking at just a few to me
either you get it all you don't
get anything at all it's a fifty
fifty match.
You know this might that does
not have a six million dollar
difference an estimate that a
lot of.
To elaborate on what Brenda said
we have received about a hundred
million we expect another
hundred million so five percent
of two hundred million is ten
million that's there's a lot of
money coming that's why there is
considerable upside on this as
of the thank you madam chair
that will just verify for myself
done on that difficult a lot of
different Sir thank you madam
chair.
Any other questions from the
committee.
we do have an amendment yes
madam chair I propose to move an
amendment for House
appropriations and finance
committee house health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill to five twenty
seven and it's striking the
appropriation
I'd like to move that amendment.
So of motion made by
Representative ranking member
Armstrong seconded by
Representative Montoya so this
amendment simply strikes the
appropriation
we don't need an appropriation
in this bill there's you know
we're setting up the long term
framework
Any objections to adopting the
amendment.
Right.
Your
health house hello the house
health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill five twenty seven is now
amended
Representative Trujillo.
So moved by Representative
Trujillo seconded by
Representative Sanchez
Sandra would you take the role.
Yeah.
The box yes.
Around.
This.
Yes.
Yes.
Their purpose yes.
Representative.
Representative yes.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you.
Underfoot okay
we are going to move on I don't
know that it was announced
earlier but House Bill.
Five hundred in consultation
with the sponsor is being moved
to a subsequent day so we'll
move on to House Bill for sixty
one.
And.
Do we have of this.
we have a substitute.
Right do we have a presenter yes
December okay okay.
So we'll get the substitute
passed out.
Okay so.
The substitute has been
distributed everyone should have
a copy if you want to take a
look at that you're welcome to
do that right now while we wait
for.
A presenter.
Madam chair I don't thank you
for joining us I did taxes chair
tell those right away there.
Thank you well this give
everyone an opportunity to
locate the substitute to make
sure we have the correct
materials
Wonderful so members we're
hearing of the house bill the
substitute for house bill four
sixty one to
Madam leader would you like to
have us.
Do you want to.
Have us move the committee
substitute I think it would
probably be efficient if you
move the substitute for
discussion and then I can
explained it to because the
reason we have a substitute is
in response to our hearing
health trying to address some of
the issues that arose in trying
to make some improvements along
the way is that okay that sound
okay so I do have a motion of.
The the motion to adopt the to
discuss the committee substitute
move.
So the motion was made by
Representative Sanchez seconded
by Representative Trujillo.
okay so we're going to discuss
the committee substitute.
Okay.
Thank you madam later if you'd
like to discuss the substance
you madam chair and members of
the committee good to see you
again the Committee sub for
House Bill sixty one is
addressing the need for a robust
and durable Avenue for children
and families who come into
contact with the New Mexico
children youth and families
department
to give them an opportunity to
launch grievances to have them
independently independently and
effectively investigated and
addressed it
Also addresses the need for an
entity to collect information
related to the needs related to
the grievances of children and
families who are in CYFD spear
as well as critical incidents
and Patala these and report to
the legislature and the governor
for the purpose of meaningful
and comprehensive policy
development the bill also
addresses the need for an outlet
for providers to communicate
their concerns and needs and to
receive support for the services
they provide and the services
they need in the needs the
server so just the reason
providers are in here just in
case you don't.
I really didn't know that much
about the system.
And the way it operated in the
way it's depends on what's
available in the community of
select until I started
practicing law in this area but
families whose children are in
custody are court ordered to
receive certain to work a
program to receive counseling to
receive drug treatment to apply
for better housing too you know
there under the court order to
do all these things and
sometimes the services aren't
there for them to comply and I
know that when I first started
doing this in twenty thirteen.
I have clients and sometimes my
clients where the parents
sometimes are only one parent at
a time you did Representative
the mother and the father each
person on internet but sometimes
I have children who wanted to go
home and we're waiting for their
parents to complete their plans
but they couldn't get their
counseling they couldn't they
had no transportation to their
drug tests that sort of thing so
the probe the community provider
system although it's informal
it's a really important part of
the system and so the idea here
is to have actually a provider
council that can look to what
our needs are throughout the
state and make sure that
families have equal access to
these kinds of services because
that's the only way they have
equal asks access to justice.
So
the governor issued an executive
order in the middle of February.
To essentially.
Begin the work on the parts of
this bill and it what the bill
does is it codifies the work
that the governor has put into
place in addition to this time.
It codifies the office of
children's rights and expands
its role in addressing
grievances it creates a provider
Advisory Council to address
issues and concerns raised by
providers.
And this is the part that I
found kind of exciting increase
the child welfare innovation
center which will focus on
building system capacity of
CYFD.
By advising the department
conducting data driven research
analysis and providing to us the
legislature and the governor
and the administrative office of
courts annual reports.
It we have now the substitute
care advisory councils those in
this legislation are
contemplated as being
Will the re envisioned as child
and family advocacy boards to
examine specific cases and
determine if CYFD is effectively
achieving his child protection
responsibilities including one
board this develop dedicated to
reviewing critical incidents and
want to reduce CYFD is
compliance with the Indian
family protection act.
And
The committee sub response to
issues raised and Legislative
Health and Human Services it
provides greater autonomy to the
office of children's and family
rights into the providers by
your counsel it gets more
independence to the office of
children and families rights by
changing it from being.
Within the department to attach
to the Department.
And
We define what administratively
attached needs in it it provides
greater independence to the
provider Advisory Council by
creating it within the new child
welfare innovation center and
the center then administers it
rather than attaching it to the
office of children's rights and
this was
This because that was initially
in the department rather than
than if Representative was
initially in the department this
contemplates it being attached
to the child welfare innovation
center and rather than the
governor appointed member of the
council the child welfare
innovation center is responsible
for appointing members and
hiring staff.
And
In response to another concern
raised in health and Human
Services is that.
It's very clear that the
perspectives of youth and
families with lived experience
are included in the make up of
the providers by re council and
finally the committee substrates
the appropriation.
That that's how simple it is
just.
Wonderful thank you somebody so
what we've been doing is going
to public comment
and so will do in person as well
as online
And if we want to do you want we
can do comments in support did
you want.
The secretaries to also make
comments Madam leader did you
want to invite
that is she's happy to do that
but I don't this isn't the
departments bill I just want to
be.
Clear the secretary just been
extremely cooperative and very
helpful and.
And actually you know
our former secretary before she
was a Supreme Court justice was
a District Court judge in the
first two is a children's court
judge before that to practice
law just like I'm describing how
high did it so I'm she's been
frustrated with the system
herself for a long time and it's
our herculean effort on her part
to try to
Change.
Change one has been entrenched
so happy to have her okay B. or
answer questions two hundred for
internet time wonderful so let's
go ahead and start with public
in support and so what we've
been doing is we've got a
microphone if you can be sure to
speak into the microphone so
everyone online can here thank
you madam chair members of the
committee my name is Barbara the
hello I'm the cabinet secretary
of children youth and families
department as of the Madam
leader has mentioned this bill
incorporates a lot of different
aspects of our public child
welfare system to improve it to
strengthen it but more
importantly to really be more
accountable to those that we
serve I stand in strong support
of this bill I've worked
diligently in understanding our
existing system and it ways in
which we can improve it and I
believe that this bill provides
that mechanism in which to hear
the voices of those we serve but
also one thing that that wasn't
mention is the report back to
the legislature to the governor
to the Department of the work of
the child welfare innovation
center that's an important
aspect of this this particular
bill thank you very much.
Hi good afternoon madam chair
and members of the House
Appropriations finance committee
my name's Elizabeth Groginsky
and the cabinet secretary for
New Mexico's early childhood
education and care department
and I want to thank madam leader
for bringing this bill forward
and for really codifying so many
important aspects of what we all
know needs to happen in order to
prove outcomes for our most
vulnerable children and families
the innovation center is
critical that is also part of
the governor's executive order
as well as the changes in
codifying the office of
children's rights making sure
that whether it's a child the
family anybody who's engaged
with the child welfare system
has a direct Avenue in a way to
make their grievance and have
that support and then also to
have the innovation center
getting good information and
data and then improving our
practice improving our business
process sees improving our
facilitation with our provider
community so I just want to
thank all of you for this time
and think again Madam leader for
bringing forward this bill I
stand in strong support and urge
all of you to support house bill
four sixty one.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Alice Lee a Korean executive
director of the developmental
disabilities council are
council's mission and mandate
federal mandate is to do systems
change activities as well as
promote advocacy this bill does
both of those things and make
sure that we are really looking
at a best best practices and
ways to move forward improve the
systems it also ensures that
people who are directly impacted
by our systems their voices are
heard thank you very much.
You madam chair and members of
the representative my name is
Lisa McNiven and with the
governor's commission on
disability the deputy director
and and Representative people
with disabilities statewide I'm
in support of house bill four
six one to have the opportunity
for people with disabilities and
their agencies and
Representative and family
members to be able to work with
CYFD in improving the system for
people when and children with
disabilities thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Dr you life
just because I have been working
in social work for the last
forty years in New Mexico I am
from New Mexico and I strongly
support this bill why one it
provides for data to it provides
for results three as a member of
a very large group of social
workers of those five thousand
in the last few years we've made
majority of moves towards trying
to improve social work and also
communicate with CYFD lately
CYFD has been extremely helpful
and inclusive of all our issues
or concerns and this bill will
have it into the future for New
Mexico for our children and for
CYFD thank you madam chairman
members of the committee.
I think we have one more person
in the audience and then we'll
go to supporters online will be
out in the US and get some good
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee my name's Philip
press on the former governor of
the public then be and currently
the special projects coordinator
with the children to the fence
Department.
Of house bill four sixty one was
also a product of the many many
months of work and feedback that
we have received from tribal
representatives to tribal social
workers and tribal equal workers
with a twenty three public
presentations of New Mexico.
we also held a tribal
consultation that took place
last week to sessions is what I
facilitated with tribal leaders
asked to again provide feedback
on the house bill and those
tribal governors that did attend
the session were in full support
of house bill four sixty one so
thank you.
Thank you so now we're going to
go online and see if we have
anyone if you'd like to speak in
support of the bill if you would
raise your hand.
I don't see any hands raised so
I think we'll
go ahead with people in the
audience that would like to
speak in opposition to the bill
could go ahead and come to the
center and and will use the
microphone as well thank you.
The committee.
Thank you is that correct.
Thank you committee chairmen and
representatives hi my name is
Maryland Act and the founder and
executive director of child
first network we think the
committee sponsors for making
all of these changes as it was
originally structured it was
inside of the department and we
passed the but still today in
the house we want to thank you
all for voting in support of
that I just wanted to say one
additional issue that we
continue to have in the office
of children right as it exists
today that's going to be
administratively attached to the
office within CYFD once again is
that I received an email
yesterday from a birth parent
whose children are in custody
she has tried to work with the
office of the children rights
but she's afraid to go to the
office of the children right
because they single handedly
inside the department I received
this email yesterday so she
emailed it to me I don't have
confidentiality privileges and
happy to share it fits she
doesn't name any children's
names it's not there but what
she said is that she continues
to be afraid to work with the
department because the
department single handedly to
make the decision to terminate
her parental rights so once
again we're continuing to keep
this inside the department it's
it's administratively attached
which I'm very thankful for but
we really have to figure out how
we can solve these problems of
people being afraid to work with
the department because the
department can terminate
parental rights and until we
figure that out this this
outside office really needs to
be outside so thank you very
much.
We get that now there we go.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Alice in Endicott communis I
am the legal director of
advocacy Inc we are The New
Mexico's largest provider of
legal representation for
children in foster care and I am
here today I'm asking that you
oppose this bill in its current
form
I just want to say I I know
you've all heard we before CYFD
can't police itself and whether
it's if it's part of CYFD
administratively attached CYFD
it is still part of CYFD we have
seen the department claim on
that it will and can year after
year change things but nothing
has changed concerns and
complaints fall into fears and
result in negative consequences
for complainants I appreciate
the CYFD appears to be stepping
up their efforts to prepare part
of the solution but after years
of broken promises and failed
internal oversight it leaves a
skeptical oversight must be
truly independent this bill not
only continues to allow CYFD to
provide its own oversight it
also removes the federally
required substitute care
advisory committee counsel
ultimately decreasing oversight
of this agency in crisis this
bill is premature let's see if
CYFD can improve its
accountability and
responsiveness before giving the
agency more power less oversight
without a culture change it
doesn't matter how much money or
statutory authority they're
given it simply will be more of
the same and that is
unacceptable thank you.
Thank you
anyone online wishing to speak
in opposition okay
we have the I believe it's
Shelly Richard.
Shelly if you want to go ahead
and speak.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee you all should
have received an email from me
to the party concerns about this
that moment in time today I want
to I just review quickly with
you that is the legislature in
nineteen eighty five the
sandwich article eight of the
children's code which provides a
permanent the system for
independent and objective
monitoring of children placed in
the custody of the fire he
that's working house over sixty
one repeals this critical part
of the children of
misli passed house eleven issue
believe we needed and the office
of child advocate to monitor
CYFD.
The sorry for legislation to
create an office of child
advocate we must not repeal
article eight of the children's
code as a result in our most
vulnerable children and youth
without independent monitoring
in the interim hi also built for
six Mr present for the purpose
of this article in the role of
the those have to prepared by
recounts all I encourage you to
protect our children by removing
section fifteen from house bill
four sixty one thank you.
Thank you I don't see any other
hands that are raised on the
zoom so leader Chasey did you
want to
yes I'm sure if I appreciate
responding because I think that
we.
Covers some of the objections
when
There is a.
And I I can appreciate that
there are I did Representative
parents who were fearful of
talking to their case worker
complain to their case worker so
it's not uncommon I mean we're
talking about people who are
pretty desperate and may not
have much Representative Hotmail
would would also have experience
with this and and try to trying
to deal with the bureaucracy is
pretty frightening especially if
you think that you might.
Lose your children as a result
so I I'm not entirely sure that
there's going to be a way to
reassure folks I as far as the
office of child and family
rights when I first had the bill
what meant something to me was.
As an attorney I did not have a
place to go I could file motions
with the court which I did on it
is a discretion against the CYFD
office the worker.
But it took a long time to get a
court hearing meanwhile nothing
changes and
If I had been able to call
someone other than the county
office manager who would have
listened to me is in one of the
cases that I had it's a very
simple CYFD has a lot of rules
and usually they try the workers
try to follow them one of the
things one of the rules they
have is that biological parents
are to be invited to school
conferences so that they don't
lose touch with their kids and
their progress and school and so
forth there also to be invited
to well child.
Doctor visits emergency is not
you don't have to worry about
that that foster family could
just take the kid to an
emergency.
But I had a client who had not
once in.
Over a period of years ever ever
been told of the school meeting.
Had never gone to a well child
appointment and I could not get
the county to deal with I really
think if I had called.
If I have someone in Santa Fe
that I is an attorney it would
have been able to call I think
the county office manager would
have gotten it so for me I
wasn't.
I just saw I see this whole
bill.
Not as the solution to
everything but beginning to try
to involved all of this people
who were in who are dedicated to
their own work that's going to
improve the system working
together talking together saying
how do we get these kinds of
services in this part of the
state and so forth I.
We're this is not the police
itself bill I'm this bill is not
designed to state police
yourself and so I think the
criticism that CYFD can't police
itself doesn't belong with this
bill we did pass a bill on an
independent oversight
entity in in the house today I.
I'm not opposed to that concept
I think it might be very helpful
for the department of changing
the culture which is very hard
very very hard to do when you've
got a state the size and and
differing opportunities for
folks but
This is not the oversight bill
this is the dialogue the
improvement this strengthening
the accountability trying to get
the experts together and work
together instead of this is to
beat up on CYFD it is not to
beat up on anybody else any
other player in the system not
the parents not the foster
parents nobody we just want to
get working together thank you
I'm sorry it's taken too long to
respond but.
Thank you madam leader so we're
going to go now to committee
questions and we're gonna start
with Representative Chatfield
and then go to Representative
deluxe Cruz.
If you if if he's back thank
you.
So madam chair for gunning gonna
take too long on something this
might be the thing to take too
long on because it's an
important thing it deals with
people's lives when I was a
little bit younger I had a bad
habit of every child that had
the.
Drifted away from their parents
wound up living at my house and
they Committee and maybe to
arrive pictures of large groups
of kids hanging out with my kids
and pretty quickly got their
life straightened out and they
moved on my wife eventually told
me if you're gonna take in every
street child that comes around
you're going to go to school get
trained and ideas and I begin to
take in the treatment foster
children and so one of the
things that I would like to
speak to here is the idea that
CYFD want your children I could
issues use that is not true.
I've said in the court room so
many times and listen to.
a mother that locked herself in
the bathroom because she did
drugs because she got nervous
the on her one chance to
reconnect with her children when
she was given custody for a day
or whatever and just locked
herself away because she
couldn't deal with the stress of
having them to those children.
It is a sad thing the Senator
thing is each and every one of
those children believe in their
mind that they are the single
most important thing in that
mother slide no matter how long
the.
Are in foster care they for ever
believe that they are the most
important thing in that parents
life so CYFD doesn't want your
children they want to reconnect
these families it's a broken
system it was hard the end and
that's been a while back
it's harder now I I
I really
Respect the secretary for
stepping into that job because
it's a hard job my gosh we just
we have been through the through
the.
Grinder over this thing you know
how do you fix it I'm looking
here I see one two three four
five bills that relate to this
bill that in trying to fix the
system that CYFD
works under I don't you know if
I knew that a fix it man live
with this I'd be the motion.
Best guy around with the.
I don't know how to fix of.
This bill contains one point six
million dollars to
recurring and we stripped at
all.
So how do we pay for one point
six million dollars worth of
things that we were going to
that we're working what the the
the how do we pay for those
things we were going to pay for
with the one point six million
dollars ago stripped.
Madam chair representative what
you've done.
I really appreciated.
I represented some of those
children maybe not the ones that
were your house but.
Who really believe that about
the parents.
The secretary explain how we get
by without the money this time.
Secretary thank you.
Have fun.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Michael Reagan for budgeting
requests for director for Swifty
these initiatives are so
important to us that we're going
to find a way to fund this we're
really doing a lot with our
federal funding for adoption
assistance foster care in
guardianship through our title
forty grant and so we're gonna
find ways to fund this and we're
grateful to the legislature on
the current version of the HFC
house bill two there's an
appropriation for three million
section five and that's item one
forty three and section five and
so we're going to tap into that
we're gonna depend on that for a
workforce development plan for
this addition if the legislative
Advisory Council the innovation
center and the office of
children's rights so that
funding we're grateful for that
will help us Madam chair of
that.
How much was it three million
that's three million is
appropriated to the purpose of
this bill it's really not
through the it there's language
cited as as for the workforce
development plan a CYFD so this
is part of our workforce
development plan and so it's in
section five currently with an
appropriation amount of three
million I don't want forty three
and house bill two so madam
chair that is my you know that's
what we look at here is a fund
it that's what the our job is
here my my second the.
My second thought is this.
house bill one eighty seven CYFD
policies of state rules that
House Bill three twenty six
abuse and neglect support
services one fifty
Plan of care failure assessments
eleven office of child advocate
for fifty four childhood
Department collaboration.
How do I know which one of which
one of these is going to fix the
system and and if we just make a
little jump start in in we see
old no maybe this other way
or should it go through the
enrollment to be more well
understood I think you can look
at me and understand what I just
told you that I do care.
I'm concerned that I'm not sure
I don't know if this is the
correct fiction or not yet.
Thank you madam chair I think
this is.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative.
We'll go to
Representative Trujillo.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you
Majority Leader.
Chasey I appreciate that you
brought this bill forward you
know I've worked with you on
Judiciary over the summer and a
lot of this.
Discussion was part of the
discussions we had in Judiciary
we also had the similar
discussions in house health and
Human Services Committee in the
or regarding child care and how
do we best address their needs
and so
I get really concerned that as
you as we move forward to try to
rectify some really difficult
situations and that there was a
good faith effort to make them
that there will always be
something.
That is just not right.
But I don't believe that this
bill is one of them I believe
that this bill has been re done
practically to address the
concerns that people who had
issues earlier.
Would feel better about it and
and clearly nothing is perfect
but it is a with all due
respect.
Madam chair a damn good job a
damn good effort at moving this
bill forward and making sure
that parents rights are
considered and that the
children's rights are considered
I am.
I agree with Representative
Chatfield and we're starting to
it's like bonding or something
that of.
Representative Chatfield and I
are starting to agree on a lot
of things I really respect that
he has worked with with children
my current husband and his first
wife before she died adopted
kids and or were.
A foster parents and they said
that the similar things some
things were really good and some
things were good but I've seen
to the process that I've been
through in the ten years that
I've been here.
That there is a lot of work and
I can't say that it existed of
probably six years ago oh my god
that was not a good thing.
I believe that the current
system.
In the current efforts are being
made in good faith to change.
The wait CYFD is structured the
way we address the concerns that
we have for kids and I only see
this bill as a win win for all
of us and in the future will
always take a little bit more to
improve it and tweak it but this
is the bill I think that we need
to support today because it is
the right thing to do thank you
madam chair.
Here Representative next we'll
go to Representative Garrett
then Representative Garcia and
Representative Baca.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for bringing this bill forward
Representative I just have a few
practical questions on page
eight section ten the trial
where for welfare innovation
center designation this is a
fund a the department shall
establish a center through a
request for proposals process
what sorts of organizations or
institutions or whatever can you
give me some examples of
potential people presenters that
might respond to that request
Madam chair representative
Garrett.
When we first with this idea
first.
Begin to.
The discussed Representative
Marian Matthews was saying.
That she used to work she was
the development officer for P.
B. NJ family services
It it just you know brought to
mind the fact that as an
attorney I had such good results
when PED NJ family services were
involved.
With my clients whether I was
representing a child.
a toddler and I had
Indian children who were in
treatment foster care.
Who actually benefited from PED
is J. when their family was
being reunified almost every
time PBJ was involved I could
count on a good outcome.
Now sometimes that outcome was a
guardianship.
It wasn't always.
reunification to I have to
wonder Europe sorry I this
mangoes working.
Thank you.
I have allergies not something
else's juniper outside.
So I'm that's how we got to the
provider network part.
But that kind of led us to the
idea of we've got the
universities with social work
programs maybe one of those
universities would be that
In addition Senators maybe
Pegasus legal services for
children which is legal
nonprofit entity that
Representative.
Primarily children and youth
maybe something like that which
is a
It it's got a statewide
reputation for excellent legal
representation of children maybe
Pegasus maybe one of the schools
for social work maybe rotating
eventually we're just really
looking to try to bring the
greatest expertise and.
And just ways to.
I am the repetitive but ways to
innovate so those were some some
thoughts we had.
Thank you for that clarification
madam chair representative.
I see they appoint the members
of the legislative Advisory
Council the child and family
advocacy boards and actually
choose the director and then my
only other question is.
on page.
Eleven section twelve child and
family advocacy boards.
it's state.
On page twelve.
Okay.
It let's.
I believe state.
On the page twelve.
That there will be three child
and family advocacy board shall
be established with five members
each one board shall review the
department's compliance with the
Indian family protection act a
second board shall review
critical incidents what does the
thirty four to.
So I'm madam chair and
representative Gareth so I
believe the weight I'm and I'm
and I'm like to my chief of
staff here say I got this right
because she was working on the
amendment is a minimum of three
point.
Anymore so you could have more
boards but these are the ones
that are envisioned to replace a
substitute Care advisory
panels that that quite frankly
have not been meeting regularly
over recent years but
So the third one would be kind
of up to or fourth or fifth up
to the entity to decide how to
constitution but the
The thing that.
Resonates with me is to have a
board.
That focuses on the critical
incident because I was in the
legislature when we had the
first
I mean they're been tragedies
over the decades this is not I
mean long before there was a
CYFD and Charles to lead who's a
deputy director of the LFC
it is actually a trained social
worker and Charles and I worked
together on the
alternative response and the
Differential response
legislation so that we can try
to help CYFD hire more
NSW's and prevent to removal of
children if possible and Charles
said to me.
What no matter how perfect the
system is there's always going
to be some tragedy that.
Happens we're not going to
prevent everything it's just
like you know we have mass
shootings that
really.
You can't explain what happened
to the individual who did it so
it's not like we can figure
everything out but what really
broke my heart because I was in
the legislature I was at by that
time and eternity I served on
Judiciary was the only referral
and pace and it seems that
something had broken down badly
because we have the schools we
have the police we had CYFD all
be notified of this child and
what I.
What bothered me greatly.
Really just struck me as a
legislator was that.
The inquiry into the incident
was capped.
Confidential and and their
confidentiality requirements but
we just a policy making body got
absolutely no direction
whatsoever about what we needed
to do to change it the only
response we had at that time was
to say let's have tougher laws
on sentencing people who abuse
children that didn't tell us
what where we broke down it
didn't tell us where there might
have been intervention that
wasn't that didn't occur so
that's are we resonates with me
is the critical incident board
because I sort of see that is
like either you know nine eleven
commission or the challenger on
investigation something like
that.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I.
If somebody is working on
amendments it's just that there
is kind of like a dangling
modifier.
I
think the future economy
it's just it's like we're third
one even if it's like third
shall be determined by the yes
that's all thank you
experts.
Thank you Representative next.
Garcia and Baca we'll go back to
Representative dela Cruz and
continue on.
Thank you madam chair
Representative.
You know we all love kids you
know we want our kids to be safe
and sound you know in the event
of Representative years now if
see what we had is problem all
along but you know well there's
I hope I mean I those bills one
Senate bill tried to address the
same issue that you plan to do
on these
that the three are different
committees to oversee if you all
very much Chris.
On the bottom right uses create
three new entities.
I'm I'm so sorry madam chair not
following you of the bottom on
under summary sheet of are we
looking at and.
I'm sorry okay of course of the
four sixty one what create we
went to tease.
And basically what's going to do
is to oversee to wave your
magic.
you madam chair and
representative Garcia actually
it's it's not to oversee CYFD
it's to try to
Build a better system although
the on that the office of check
children's rights.
Does allow for people to make.
Raise concerns grievances
whether it's a biological parent
a foster parent at an internet
anybody can call in and do that
but it's not too.
Police.
The HSD.
And I'm sorry and then the and
provided by the council.
Is to build to work on building
that informal network of
behavioral health service
providers drug treatment
providers visitation centers
ways to figure out
transportation closing
opportunities.
Everything that these families
need but are so not readily
available in the state and the
the innovation center is to
really try to bring new ideas
and try them out bring find out
I know in in Santa Fe County and
then eventually Valencia County
and and for Leon county
the folks in Sandoval county.
Actually visited another state
to learn about how they were
doing these cases in court as a
result Sandoval County came back
the the folks there the judge
the lawyers the CYFD people and
they started of the Courts
started hiring social workers so
their court appointed social
workers not CYFD and they were
augmented the other workers on
the case.
It made a huge difference in the
success of the case they would
resolve quicker not necessarily
always in reunification but they
all resolved faster and they
were it was just too so there's
no into the good ideas and we
just need to find them and see
if they'll work.
And
And then the last was the the
the the boards that are like the
review boards that are called
substituted carried by three
council now but to review the
cases thank you madam chair you
know.
I thought all along with the
opportunity to call in anyway to
see when we get there.
And you know if the problem and
my concern is we're creating
more boards more entities to
oversee what's already there and
what we should do.
I would have to honor what you
will secretaries are sitting
right there.
We need to do is give them a
better opportunity to fix what's
wrong we've got three madam
chair to deal for secretaries
been here the superspeedway of
the and they come down to a
point Mr.
The venture you hit the right
doctor take care of you and
we're doing here we're limiting
what might be right reporter
read chat chance to
To make things right.
And you know that's my opinion
you know the
I don't know what we're doing
here it's changing more
secretaries of different things
to engage and we're really not
fiction property.
Madam chair representative
Garcia the secretaries want us
to try to have more
opportunities for dialogue and
to learn from experts and those
learn from those who've been
through the system and so that's
what we're doing here it's a
problem solving dialogue sharing
string fitting and creating
greater accountability but we're
not trying to tie anybody's
hands or be punitive.
Of madam secretary and I mean.
Chair you know just seems to me
like we're trying postsecondary
out of position.
Do what do what is right for
CYFD you know like I said
earlier I want to for five more
any and it's always a different
thing the last secretary being
for secretary you know to just
my concern.
Thank you Representative next as
Representative Baca and
Representative dealer Cruz
Pettigrew and harming.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam leader
as Representative Trujillo kind
of made a comment about
Chatfield I'm actually thinking
like representative Garcia here
so I don't know what that means
spent a lot of time together
good thing check but echo vote
I'll be right back.
We allow that.
There.
Yes thirty seconds yes well hold
will take a a beverage break.
The.
K. to twelfth.
I'm going next it.
Thank you okay Representative
Baca.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you madam leader
upper start with just a short
statement
Regarding the of frustrations
and and the stories as a thirty
year educator that I've had with
CYFD
So I definitely want to make
clear that I do support
Children's safety advocates
otherwise but madam chair and
Madam leader.
Of.
Part of what.
I have also.
Questions regarding is all the
different bureaus committees are
their equipment and these other
bills okay as madam chair I sat
here madam leader us out here to
the process of hearing the
budget request for CYFD.
Okay there already there the aid
crescent in dis of the hat a
request for increased funding
and now madam chair I hear that
all know we have an extra three
million dollars that we can
actually appropriate out of this
fund to somewhere else and so
you know I think that this is
where we're we're creating more
opportunity through these all
this legislation for
For not only bureaucracy but
also for miscommunication or
otherwise so Senator my
questions are going to be.
How many FTEs are going to be
created or needed to carry out
the work of not only the center
but also this department madam
chair and madam leader.
Julie.
I'm gonna ask madam chair that
that secretary try to address
that I do think that some of
these folks let me just say that
like on the provider about
Advisory Council this is their
job anyway they're they're
already doing work in this area
and they would be working to try
to
help build the system it's not
like we're going to start paying
the out of this budget the
providers in the system.
Madam chair madam leader members
of the committee and
Representative Baca.
The work that this bill will
entail.
Is in several sections and some
of it will indeed require
additional FTEs to be hired
within the department.
That is in the office of
children and families rights
currently we have that offices
funded and paid for through our
budget and we would seek to
expand that office by Senator
FTEs at a minimum to receive the
complaints or grievances from
individuals regarding the
department and also to to
resolve those grievances and
then prepare report that report
would go to secretary.
On the child welfare innovation
center that will be an
independent outside entity and
the the the the appropriation
that we referred to which is
under section five the special
appropriation that we would use
to fund the child welfare
innovation center and that would
be house perhaps in the school
of social work at one of our
universities or with the
nonprofit
that are if PED depending on the
scope of the work that we would
require pursuant to the bill
would be issued and then that
would be paid through this
legislation through the
appropriation to that outside
entity at this time we're
looking at
approximately one point six
million dollars would be needed
in the age in order to fulfill
that the terms in the purposes
of this particular bill and as I
said we do have a special
appropriation three point
three million dollars that we
can use of for this particular
work.
Thank you madam chair and madam
leader and madam secretary but
are any of these other programs
up there they're all pretty much
related to CYFD are they also
going to be tapping into those
resources and your here are
ready of strained budgets of
CYFD madam chair.
madam chair you madam Lee
the other programs that you're
referring to or what exactly
madam chair talking about
hostility one house bill three
twenty six house bill one fifty
household living that we just
passed this morning and the
house bill four thirty four so
when we're talking about madam
chair we're talking about
budgets here we're talking about
money we're talking about
reoccurring money and even the
cost run in our of P. in getting
the people that are Messer and
require that have a licenses and
others.
There's a cost associated with
that especially we're paying
office space you're talking
about centers even in the
university.
And so madam chair and madam of
leader those are those are the
questions I have here they're
they're strictly budgetary I'm
not going to debate the the the
need for the bill but when we're
talking about in my role here is
and our lawyers appropriators.
We have to
make sure that we ask these
questions one house are going to
be funded.
And you know as next year's
budget requests are coming in.
We have to be also mindful of
that as far as the budget
requests making sure.
That we fund a necessary program
which I believe CYFD is very
crucial to the state of our
students and families but at the
same time we also have to have
that accountability and and
money moving around and being
passed like this of madam chair
and madam
For later.
Are just a raise kind of some
questions for me so
you Madam if you can respond to
that briefly otherwise I'm going
to stop my questions.
And then turned to stay with the
secretary of this I because I
don't sit on your committee and
I don't I can only
By with the amount of work you
have to do it how you have to
figure.
And madam chair and
representative of Baca the
answer to your question is with
respect to every bill that's
considered.
But before the body there is a
the assessment done a report
that's done a financial report
analysis that's done with every
bill so I trust that you
received our views on any of
those pieces of legislation with
respect to this piece of
legislation we looked hard in
ways in which we could tap into
and and and as it was stated
that three million dollars would
fit in very very nicely into
fulfilling the terms of that
particular special appropriation
as well as the purposes of this
bill and we and we we think that
with those resources we can
fulfill the purposes of this
bill.
Thank you madam chair of no more
questions.
Thank you Representative
Representative della Cruz than
Representative Pettigrew Hermio
Herndon and Ross.
Thank you madam chair Madam
leaders so the the governor
signed an executive order last
month.
And why is there the necessity
for a bill verses just
continuing as business.
madam chair I'll answer first
and then let
Amount secretary answers as well
but I think the idea of.
Putting something in statute
protects its continuity in the
future and and that's the the
reason for.
Madam chair and
Madam Majority Leader as well as
Representative De La Cruz there
are similarities in the
executive order but there's also
differences between this bill
and the executive order let me
point out those differences
number one the office of
children and families rights
would be codified that would be
made part of the law so that the
work of that office could not be
changed with the change of
administration that's a key
component of four sixty one and
and and enhance the force of law
that independence number two the
executive order provides for a
policy Advisory Council with
different input from various
professionals in the field this
bill requires a provider
Advisory Council and you can see
in the bill there are at least
ten different categories of
individuals who would provide
information to the child welfare
innovation center the other
difference is that the child
welfare innovation center would
be house apart from CYFD
and that would be through
university's school of social
work and so on so forth and
finally and this is a very
important aspect of four sixty
one the child and family
advocacy boards that are
required by federal law to
review open cases and provide
feedback to the department would
be under this this bill
currently if they're under the
substitute Care Advisory Council
and that is not been very
effective over the last probably
four or five years so there's
key differences between the
executive order and for six.
Thank you madam chair and and
secretary and madam chair that
that's a good answer to make
sense to me thank you.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam for later and
good to see you again.
Chair and four years
Page three.
One sixteen through seventeen.
Can you explain to me your
words.
How the non governmental legal
firm.
Will be selected for.
Madam chair representative it
would be on.
that the department which excuse
me the office would issue an
RFP.
Chair.
All four years of Secretary.
I think some of the key
component for.
I just with that would kind of
speculating here but madam chair
the very briefly secretary could
try to.
Give you some contours.
Madam chair and Representative
Pettigrew I would envision that
that or if rate would be
Focused on having an outside law
firm do an audit that would.
Help identify both the strengths
and the weaknesses of the system
this is designed to give us
meaningful neutral and if the
feedback on how our grievance
processes and procedures so I
think it would be perhaps a firm
an entity that is familiar with
grievances and grievance
resolutions particularly in the
child welfare world that can the
examine our system how the
office is functioning how
effective we are and then report
back not only to the center but
that center would also provide a
report to the legislature about
all of these different aspects
of this bill and I thought that
was important for the
legislature to have good
information well in advance of
the session to then determine
whether there's a need for
additional legislation to
improve our our system is thank
you madam chair for the leniency
thank you
Well for later for that.
Madam chair with with with part
of that response.
What I when it came from the US
I look at the original bill I
conceded it comes from the
governor's office and Madam
chairman for later secretary was
with the words used in your
response I feel like with
respect to the committee
substitute
We have had very specific.
Input with respect where this
bill is now so it's no longer
just a governor's bill.
Would that be a fair statement
madam chair and representative
this
The changes of this bill reflect
really more provided will ban
Department well.
Madam chair and and
Representative I understand that
I'm just taking the secretaries
were set at face value with
respect to when she said I felt
like this and that with respect
to the work.
So that's the reason why state I
now feel like maybe there's an
agency support behind some of
this some of language inside
this is what I will Madam chair
representative there's nobody
who wants to make positive
change more than the secretary
and chair representative I
believe that very strongly I
have had the pleasure of sitting
down and with her and talking
about
her specific goals with respect
to we're CYFD is going and I
believe that very strongly.
And so I was just.
Trying to clarify a few things
madam chair and and
Representative.
On page five under items the.
We list seven members from the
providers I.
Madam chair and representative I
made this point the other day
with respect to something.
I truly hope is is those ten.
different.
Departments or different
professional levels are are are
chosen providers are chosen that
they're not part of the current
problem.
That they're not part of the
system that has created the
problem madam chair and
representative that is the
reason why we have secretary
viel from them.
So pulling somebody from with in
the system to be part of this
Advisory Council would would in
my opinion not be wise counsel
but the health that the left up
to what happens if this bill is
actually codified.
Madam chair.
One of the reasons why I made
this one of the statements are
made earlier as I learned last
night that through debate that
some of that is this legislative
body at times we don't really
care with the secretary.
Following whether the secretary
supports a piece of legislation
where the where the
For the rule makers we get to
make the rules so it is
important to me Madam chair
representative that are
secretaries are in support of
the legislation because that way
we have a better chance of
success when you have this side
where the rule makers look at us
and we're the sectarian
slightly.
Not another one
and and you know we went through
that last night and so is it
that concerns me is is we as we
move forward madam chair and
secretary Representative
secretary I I I there are things
that inside this bill the that I
still struggle with a plan madam
chair and representative to have
a discussion with with with with
respect to that as we as we get
this is Phil probably will go to
the floor before it gets to the
floor so that I can clarify.
that position and those
positions that we discussed last
last summer in an office right
and
it concerns me that we're making
so many different changes Madam
chair representative and
secretary offering so many
different changes to the CYFD
system.
We still have all the rulings
from Kevin us though we still
don't have a complete
understanding of ever seeing
this gonna have to change within
the system in those were your
concerns madam chair secretary
Representative last summer and
so the concern for the repair
that we're here today making.
Dramatic changes
When we don't know the.
Full extent what's gonna happen
so Senator appreciate the fact
thank you.
Thank you Representative next
will have Representative harmony
mu David Herndon brown and we
have a couple other after that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
leader Chasey for bringing this
forward and and secretary of the
hill
you know this reminds me of a
book my daughter loved how do
you eat an elephant and it's
bite at a time and there are so
many fights that I would say
this is a cult so I I want to
tell you thank you for listening
to my concerns
went when we talked not just in
committee but after committee
and and several meetings in
between I am part of the
community crisis response team
and in there we'll meet together
and we often share children at
different agencies share
children so I love the fact that
it on page five
section B. that that you have
included our voices on their
because we come through it come
to this in in different ways as
an early intervention provider I
work in the homes with families
and
and I also work with foster
families and I work with
grandmas and grandpas whoever is
assigned
it to wherever that child is I
follow and so I I appreciate
that that is in here I also and
I haven't been able to to find
it but I had said that my
concern with the three boards
would be communication within
that and can you tell me.
Where that might be how that how
these entities will communicate
with each other
madam chair to be clear on the
three point you're talking about
the.
It says.
The child and family advocacy
point yes yes okay.
I can tell you in the past that.
Hello this is required prior to
federal law we had what were
called citizen review boards and
I participated in and then when
they were called that and when
the board would gather in
Valencia County and.
I would get notice as the
guardian of light on the reserve
responded internet that the
board was gathering and frankly
they were a bit like a tribunal.
And you would go to them I I
never let my client go alone
sometimes when I couldn't go I
filled out their questionnaire
and gave it to them.
I they they were all supposed to
be this some of the state the
same is true with the the
substitute cared by the
council's now these are
envisioned as slightly different
for fulfilling the same function
because one is going to be
looking out the into family
protection act one will be the
critical incidents and one will
be probably more like the the
other boards have function in
the past and then there could be
more than three the three is a
minimum so do you want to add to
that madam chair and
Representative how to me of
those boards will function and
communicate in the following way
the center will provide the
administrative support for them
to form for them to hold their
meetings to review their cases
and to write their reports not
only on individual basis but
also what they observe with
respect to trans that
information will then be
the gathered by the center and
the center will issue a report
to the legislature the governor
and the department once a year
by June thirtieth so the
communication is really the need
for it for support
administrative support together
these volunteers to form to sit
to review the cases select the
cases review them write their
reports get all that information
into a a a a format that is easy
to understand and and and digest
and that'll be in the center's
report it's also require that
they do in separate report under
federal law that goes to the
department that we must answer.
So I think that's how the
communication will be conducted.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for bringing this forward I know
that you spoke to many of my my
colleagues and I I do appreciate
you asking for input on this.
Thank you Representative
Representative Herndon.
Thank you madam chair and.
And and the Representative and
madam secretary so I just wanted
to reiterate of this one item
that Representative block about
a he listed all of the bills
that are being presented before
the legislature that will affect
CYFD in some manner and I do
hope that there is a process for
your sitting down before the
governor signs any of these
bills to make sure that they
which ones will fit most of most
effectively with the work that
you do it so I specifically
wanted to address one particular
area brought up by
Representative.
Representative of tasty madam
chair and so it was a case that
I had great concert that also
and that was the case involving
more we've developed and so
madam chair and members of the
committee one of the things that
I do hope and looking at this
bill on page five in page five
B. in item nine it talks about
early intervention so in the
case of for more we rel of madam
chair members of the madam
secretary madam Representative
the mom in that case had been
incarcerated in Bernalillo
county detention center during
the time that she was pregnant
with the little boy and so what
we have done it when I say we I
mean a group of nonprofits and
looking at this matter is that
we have seen a real disconnect
between mothers and children
when the mom is incarcerated at
the time the baby is born and so
what I would just ask you madam
representative in and of madam
secretary is to please make sure
that you are implementing a
program with the mom is able to
interact with the child during
the time that she is pregnant
because when she comes out there
is always the opportunity and
hesitant to try to make sure
that we are combining those
families together the moms often
disconnected to the child so she
can if she can involved in and
breastfeeding of some kind of
interaction with the child it
will make it much better there
with three children died as a
result of not be in that
interaction that occurs so that
is my biggest request as you
move forward with these bills
thank you madam chair members of
the committee and chair
representative thank you so much
it occurs to me that agency.
That fits in the provider system
is crossroads for women and that
would be one that would.
Would hit the mark there thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative up next
we have Representative brown
David Lujan and ranking member
Armstrong.
Madam chair thank you very much
Representative Chasey and madam
secretary.
Could you tell us please when
the children youth and families
department was founded created
in law.
Senator.
Madam chair Representative I
believe it was in nineteen
ninety one I'm not miss.
Madam chair and representative
the reason I bring that up I.
I just wanted a few ideas and
one of those is I think it be
helpful.
For us and even process
legislators to look back to what
it was when it was started.
And what it is now.
I imagine in the beginning madam
chair of course within the start
up there are some issues but
after a short while probably
things were.
Work was being done that needed
to be done and somehow it seems
to me madam chair that agency
that has maybe been operating
that long and we have any that
have we've offered that there's
a sedimentation that occurs and
we get set in certain ways and
maybe set a cease to evaluate
how we're really doing.
So madam chair and and
representative madam secretary I
just
I I would ask the questions if
if I were involved in this the
way many people will be.
when did it go so wrong when
when the complaints really
servicing what was causing those
things to happen was happening
society that became bigger
problems than what it was
perhaps in the beginning.
And then finally madam chair
with us the question if we could
do a do over what would we do
differently I think we can
answer that question we can
probably do more to solve this
problem then.
In another several
organizations being set up and
all that I I think there needs
to be some very honest
assessment of what the real
problem the root causes of the
problems that we're seeing madam
chair thank you.
Madam.
Madam chair representative brown
you bring up a very.
Very important poorly the root
causes our societal factors you
know in our society and and and
communities are changing we have
children exposed to more
violence and and more
aggressiveness in schools in
their communities so it's so it
it's not that any specific.
A factor because this is change
it's just a reflection I think a
lot of challenges that we have
not only in public child welfare
but in our education system in
our communities as a whole of
that is posing a greater
challenge for us to really serve
our communities serve our
families and keep them safe and
by the way we serve tens of
thousands of families very very
well throughout the year and you
do hear the tragedies which are
very very serious and we take to
heart by all means but we also
do a tremendous amount of
extraordinary work for our
communities and our kids.
One one other just time point
which I'm sure if we think about
it it's it's in the.
To give an.
Madam chair the department was
created but.
Other departments were doing
that the work if there was a
child protective services to
before there was CYFD it was
what got moved into CYFD like
juvenile justice may have come
from corrections I don't even
know but I think it's yeah it's
definitely been around a long
time the committee chairs that
will follow up so I believe
Representative secretary that I
think was it it was king who had
the idea for for this to yes I
think it was and I and I agree
completely there are so many
factors involved here and it's a
it's just a massive problem and
yes CYFD does serve many
families very well there are
many success stories Madam chair
of the person like every other
legislator who gets the emails
from I'm happy parents and other
family members haven't received
a note from a child yet but
I honestly really don't know how
to solve those problems for them
except state talk to someone so
and I I would just like to think
that we can actually get a
handle on this and and have a.
A very always high functioning
agency helping our children
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Lujan and then
ranking member.
Thank you thank you madam chair
Hague I really want to thank you
secretary for being here and
for.
Leader Chasey for bringing on
and bring on this of this
legislation and there are other
pieces of legislation to that
are
Working towards the same goals I
say that.
But what I want to say more
madam chair is that this has to
be the hardest
Issues that we're dealing with
and we are here to be the
problem solvers we are here to
put forward legislation to
address those those issues as
hard as they are
what I brought.
questions to and it for
appropriateness bill that we got
out of our committee madam chair
reaching back to addressing some
of the the the the questions of
those questions again well we
have the secretary in this piece
of legislation before us and
that is.
And I may have missed some of
this because I had to build
another committee and
How is it that you that these
bills are working together.
To solve.
It's a problem solve and to
bring something that's really
collaborative in nature so that
we are all putting good
processes together madam chair.
Madam chair Representative
Lujan.
The whole.
The genesis of this bill.
As if there weren't enough
discussion about CYFD was how
can we get together and solve.
I think some of it is farther
down the road how can we get
together to begin exploring
potential solutions and that's
where we started with the.
We've already got this an
argument started the office of
children's rights in the
department then we start talking
about the fact that are pro hold
providers system was broken and
for a good.
What five six years and then it
hasn't been fully rebuilt and
how can we make sure that other
parts of the state have the same
capacity for Services for court
ordered services that.
Are along the Rio Grande quieter
and that's what we came up with
the providers by the council and
So it kind of it's it's it's a
problem solving approach it
beginning of a dialogue and
bringing up in a experts and
people who've been through it.
Including the tribes including
those with lived experience and
and you know I I would I went to
a listen to session with former
foster youth during the holidays
at the end and can and I thought
I had heard everything but they
had so many good ideas.
And some of them are young
parents now and you know.
This is generational to I mean a
lot of their parents were in the
system so they have a lot we can
learn from them we're really
just trying to have the
conversations and the
departments want this to happen
they want to listen they want to
learn and they want to address
thank you madam chair the every
I thank you for the response I
mean.
The one question that I have on
the previous bill that was
presented in front of us is to
to address duplicative efforts
and Rick and then within that.
The limited amount of resources
that we have.
And so my question goes it goes
out again is is how are we the
wholistic with this is we
reserves were talking how are we
How we addressing that issue
those two components of that
issue of like we have limited
resources we know that.
We have two different components
are to two different ideas that
are are being presented and and
they're not bad either about
over.
You know that's not the issue
the issues have hello
How are we addressing the same
issue and where does where does
that belong where is that going
to be House tires can be lost
because
used where we are using our
resources in the best way I
guess madam chair
Representative
it's a question that that that I
think that really really
concerns me because
understanding these issues in
understanding the needs and
understanding our resources is
it is it is a huge huge issue
especially in this committee
and.
And understanding how those
resources are tied to our
funding right and try to our
budget tied to all operational
budgets and informing you
functioning programs and I just
have the utmost respect for our
secretary and in her pre-filled
the expertise in all the work
that you brought forward.
Could you maybe response to that
madam chair.
Of madam chair and
Representative Lujan.
This particular bill took into
consideration ways in which we
can improve the system in these
four areas and so it's not an
either or I mean if you have
other legislation it's it's
looking at a meaningful way that
we can move the system forward
in in ways that we think are
important children's rights and
families writes how do we
resolve those grievances how do
we address those complaints
provider and advisory making
sure we're hearing from our
providers having an innovation
center that provides this
information based on scientific
approaches and evidence based
practices and finally the child
and family advocacy boards so
while this bill looks like it's
a lot it's really a measured
approach to system improvement
and that's what we're seeking
your support for thank you madam
chair thank you I I really
appreciate that thank you and
that I think in reading and
understanding the information
from this bill is is is really
helpful I understand that it is
a governor and agency bill and
I am supportive of this this
piece of legislation I just
wanna let you know that and.
I guess what you're here for me
is just I just had a very heavy
bill of the committee and this
this is just puts for how hard
it is to come up with some of
these this problem solving ideas
and putting them into policy
really giving it the time giving
it all the all the
The compassion and and energy it
needs to to flourish thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative a
ranking member Armstrong thank
you madam chair and and thank
you
madam for later for bringing
this legislation forward and the
I don't think madam chair that
there's a person in this room
that doesn't think that children
are some of our most important
assets in the state.
There's not a person in this
room that doesn't want to help
solve the problem.
But you are in front of the
Appropriations Committee.
And so I have the pull Madam
chair representative what this
appropriation says.
And it actually says to support
the children's youth and
families department workforce
development plan.
And then it goes on to to name
the workforce development.
And so I I just have a little
bit of a problem thinking that
this money is going to go to
that and not what it was
intended for in the in the
budget that's my personal
opinion and I just wanted to see
and from your gentleman if if
you prefer
how you're thinking this is this
is something that could be used
towards this bill.
Madam chair and Representative
Armstrong if I may clarify so
our our we would we would use
some of the work force
development money for the office
of children's rights because
that's kind of developing that
workforce there would be some
expansion positions that would
be needed and off we also have I
alluded to our federal grants so
we have a total forty grant that
we can draw down and so we're
really gonna look to get
creative and we have our capital
grant which is a child abuse and
prevention and treatment Act
funding that we would draw down
as well and so we're going to
use federal funding
also in our operating budget we
have a lot of ten of funding is
you know that's coming to the
agency that's going to free up
general fund that we can we're
gonna have to get very creative
to fund these initiatives and so
I mean we're gonna figure out a
way to do that thank you madam
chair thank you Sir my problem
is that it's recurring.
That is correct and so you know
the agency's gonna have to come
back and ask for this money
because if this all gets created
and and actually works.
David this is creating a new.
dollar amount that needs to be
funded that that you're gonna
have to ask for and so Madam
chair representative just
looking at it from the budget
standpoint
I have concerns of course we
want to fix the problem and help
you in any way shape or form
that we can that's not the issue
the issue is how we're going
about it.
And and I really truly believe I
have all the faith in the in the
world in the cabinet secretary
and.
But I really don't think this is
the correct way to do this
just because I think Madam chair
representative and secretary
that it needs to be done.
Possibly through the interim
make sure we have the amounts
make sure we ask for the funding
and do it in a way where it's
not using something that was
funded for some other reason and
so I do have concerns about the
way it's being funded and
Just wanted to bring that to
your attention to the
committee's attention because
ultimately we are the
Appropriations Committee thank
you madam chair.
Thank you representative
Armstrong
I just have any other questions
from the committee.
Okay I just have two questions
Madam later thank you for a
presenting with this bill my
first question is do you see
house bill four sixty one and
house bill eleven as mutually
exclusive madam chair I do not.
Thank you second question
Under house bill four sixty one
and I I appreciate the questions
regarding the budget because.
This is the Appropriations
Committee but in.
The broader context of the bill
but my question is how will CYFD
be held accountable.
For the recommendations and the
findings within house bill four
sixty one because there's.
It seems as though there's
nothing requiring them to
implement changes for
respond and so I'm just curious
about that.
I'm not sure.
I.
I think there are a variety of
ways that the requirement of
CYFD to hire a legal auditor.
Of the progress and then to
report both to the Department
known to the legislature right
that that's that's a big one.
The.
I I think that what we have also
the child welfare innovation
center is going to require that
are the gather the providers
Advisory Council recommendations
to give to us as well so this is
it's set up not to
Sedate like sometimes with the
LFC reports as you have these
measures and how are you doing
on these measures this is to
give us an idea of what we need
to be
funding what we need to be
created how to gather the the
the correct data so I don't see
it as
This being a compliance.
Effort as much as a problem
solving effort.
And we're really trying to
strengthen the whole provider
system and bring in as much
creative
problem solving to the legal
aspect and
The program aspect as possible.
Thank you madam leader of.
Before I entertain a motion I
just want to comment that I
think there's some really
valuable parks and and ideas in
how in this bill and sort of a a
new approach and so I think that
there is great potential
you know I obviously have a
slightly different opinion on
oversight accountability but I
really appreciate the bill for
the innovation center and
working with providers yes
Representative Trujillo yes have
the move would do passed house
bill four sixty one actually of
the do not pass and house we
need.
To adopt the and the committee
substitute first so it's a.
Madam chair I move a do not pass
on house bill four sixty one in
the to pass on house.
Bill for sixty one.
Substitute.
Is there a second.
And your point of order did you
just say that we needed to pass
did we did we skip this step.
You can check.
We we moved it we didn't
actually adopt this the
substitute yeah.
So I move adoption of.
Second.
are there any objections to
adopting the substitute yes so
we do a roll call of Sandra
could we do a roll call vote
this is for the purpose of the
best correct and so this this
vote would be to adopt the
committee the house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute.
You're good okay never mind
sorry so there's no objection to
adopting the substitute so.
The that substitute has been
adopted okay back to the motion
yes madam chair I now move would
do pass on.
Substitute house I'm sorry House
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill four sixty one thank you.
Not pass on house bill four
sixty one okay.
Second.
Okay wonderful so we have the
motion from Representative
Trujillo and the second from
Representative Lujan.
And this is do not pass on house
before sixty one and a do pass
on the committee substitute.
okay if you would take the role
for this.
Our.
No.
Representative.
Representative Garcia.
Yes Representative how to meal
yes Representative Lujan yes.
Representative.
Yeah.
Representative Armstrong thank
thank you madam chair just
because I don't feel like it's
in the budget and it is a
recurring cost and I'd be happy
to vote for it when it's in the
budget thank you madam chair.
Representative Chatfield thank
you madam chair chair so I'm
pretty good at math I can go to
both Schneider this is going to
pass but I would be against it
because.
You know I don't want to.
But we solve that problem you
know I would love to.
Get together people that are
experts in that field I'm sure
that's been done before but
Put together a plan and in at
the beginning of the interim
begin to work with this
committee because what I see is
that you have the you already
have the funding this didn't
give you any more funding near
have funding for you have a
partial amount of what you
really need to implement this
program
You have statute your Tory
authority to do anything that
really this bill ask of us to
too great to do then you have to
have the bill yet the authority
and the money to do it.
I would love to see of plan
that.
Restructured things to where
they were used out there going
to work and we felt we could
give you the money for the
starting at the beginning of the
interim working through the year
and and adequately fund.
To do the job that needed to
make the changes that need us
most not a vote of no it's a
vote of we're not through in the
in the thank you madam chair
thank you representative Garcia
and then there is one other.
Thank you madam chair in all of
over and all for one reason just
basically funding you know we
need to fix CYFD like I said in
my statement earlier you know
the way it did been broken for a
long time
well which would have given you
a better opportunity to do what
you were doing a good job with
the state we really look for
state inspection at but
unfortunately things happen and
If the funding was terrible for
me that's been a problem at all
thank.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair
The person primarily.
The primary reason again is the
budget the reason why we're here
monies up there.
I'm not a I'm not a creative
finance for.
I don't go look to take money
from one place to the and put in
another and I feel like that's
what's happened today and madam
chair
Secretary.
I believe very strongly in New.
Is not anything to represent
you.
I know you're working hard.
And as we discussed last year.
What you know what the rules for
what you know what to look at
how you have to act you'll start
presenting your own bills and
that madam chair I find that
the legislators we tend to get
in the way.
More than we get.
In the help.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative that
concludes our business for the
day thank you everyone yes
Representative on.
Committee forty two you're right
this is so okay so there is a
House Appropriations and finance
committee dinner this evening at
six PM at House prime we are due
on the floor I
and so I don't know if we have
any more information on that.
