My fellow colleagues
without funding that is
identified in house bill two in
those cases members there
unfortunately but those in those
cases those bills will be tabled
here after in after a
conversation there may be cases
members where there may be
funding that is has been
allocated to agencies that these
projects can apply for from
agencies and so that is by no
means sort of the a final
strike if you will against an
idea or a project moving forward
it is to say though that it
cannot pass this committee in
its current form
so members I I just wanted to to
give that explanation to it
certainly give that explanation
for members of the public it's a
responsibility that the
committee takes very seriously
again there may be cases where
there is not funding in the
budget those bills will need to
be tabled however we do want to
have a discussion on the bills
and also there may be ways to
apply for funding from state
agencies or other sources that
allow those ideas to move
forward okay members thank you
very much I really appreciate it
with that I'll turn this over to
vice chair Dixon and go from
there.
Thank you we're going to start
with house bill eight.
We are passing out the proposed
amendment.
Maybe call the roll please.
Representative Allison here.
Representative.
Here Representative.
Here.
Representative yes.
Representative.
Your.
Representative.
Yes.
How to meal.
Representative.
Present.
The.
That is.
Health care.
By two.
Wonderful thank you
So we have received the
amendment for house bill eight
so we start by moving the
amendment.
And.
So we can discuss the amendment
Representative us again would
you like to
Discuss the amendment thank yes
madam chair thank you very much
house bill eight establishes a
creative industries division at
the economic development
department and the amendment
that you have before you simply
strikes the appropriation
section section five from the
bill and adjusts the language
accordingly and I'm happy to
introduce the bill at the
appropriate time also.
Thank you any questions from
members about the amendment.
Are there any yes Representative
Montoya Madam chair for the new
members on the committee maybe
you could just take a bit of
time explained again I'm not
sure when small was giving that
description of.
Of what the amendment does.
Thank you madam chair.
So
for all of our members who are
in attendance and as soon once
again what we will be doing is
built that have funding in house
bill two of what we will do is
first amended the bill to remove
the appropriation so that the
language of we will vote on the
bill to move the bill
with just the policy direction
forward and that bill as amended
will move through the process
because the funding is already
on the Senate side
since its incorporated into
house bill two.
I
think of any objections to
adopting the amendment.
you have an so.
So I just say you have an
amended bill.
Given amended bill.
Thank you right up Woods chair
would you like to
That explain house bill eight.
Yes madam chair thank you very
much madam chair members of the
committee this is house bill
eight which establishes the
creative industry division at
the New Mexico economic
development department and the
reason that we could have come
forward with this bill is we
want to fully leverage New
Mexico's creative and cultural
assets as drivers of economic
development and we think this
will be really important for
rural areas as well as urban
areas we have been working with
creative professionals around
the state who have been
incredibly excited the cultural
sector currently provides five
point six billion to New
Mexico's economy and so we are
looking at this office as a way
to really guide future
investment and also leverage
federal funds and the potential
for federal funds to invest in
our creative industries in
communities across the state so
the concept in this office would
be to incorporate both artists
that are seeking for assistance
in learning how to register
their businesses learning how to
market their crafts learning how
to participate in share capital
infrastructure that maybe
created as a result of this
project so that they can have
access to shared makerspace we
have but for example and we we
have so many artists that
are engaged in traditional
crafts that have been shared
generation to generation as well
as large scale and Devers like
how manufacturing Silvercity
video game design and doing Ana
County yeah how will here in
Santa Fe those would be examples
of much larger businesses that
have sprung from some very
status from small initiatives
that that grew and and with me
today I have my co sponsor
senator Jeff Steinborn and I so
I'd like to.
I defer to him if he has some
comments thank you
Representative madam chair
calling so this is a great idea
that is really low hanging fruit
economically for the state of
New Mexico we have a data point
that I was really struck by we
have seventy five percent more
visual artists as a state than
any state in the country per
capita.
We take it for granted but are
incredible parts of our culture
Representative who we are as the
state is also the main driving
forces of thousands of jobs all
over the state in the creative
industries to employ ten
thousand people two thousand
workers in every corner of the
state so the notion of a
creating a division where those
entrepreneurs those businesses
actually had an advocate in
state government actually could
really embraces as an economic
development vision only makes
sense very similar to what we
did with the outdoor division in
fact this bill is modeled after
the outward vision
which was another right after we
had a state that we haven't
really leverage fully so this
leverages this incredible
secretary and you know I in Los
crucis representative
Representative when the first
arts and culture districts in
the state in whiskey to historic
district so when I was running
of this bill that a year ago
You know Los crucis we've been
talking about this forever but I
know many of your communities
have even in places that you
might not think.
Have a burgeoning arts community
impact too so this is just a
wonderful opportunity for the
state had to be a part of it.
After the answer any questions
thank you and if I may introduce
my expert witness who is rose
the sentence had a very
distinguished career and she's
currently the executive director
of Gallup parts.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you so much for
your time today I am here to
testify to the fact that this
bill would have a tremendously
positive economic and community
development impact in rural
underserved in remote
communities across the state are
the creative industry is already
a huge slice of the economy it
directly employs so many people
have five percent as a very
conservative estimate in that
regard but in many places it is
untapped potential and where I
come from McKinley County as a
perfect example of that one
in four McKinley County
residents twenty five percent of
our residents make at least part
of their living through the arts
but the twins to to stick to
that is that we have a thirty
two percent poverty rate one of
the highest in the state if not
the country but the creative
industry division would help us
leverage our community's largest
cottage industry I had to take
it to the next level for the
benefit of all we can help more
artists start and grow their
small businesses we can help
create workforce development and
apprenticeship programs to give
more opportunities to our young
people we can help create the
infrastructure necessary for the
creative industries to center to
thrive so for me really this
bill at the end of the day is
about a healthy diversified
sustainable economy that create
strong communities and strong
families thank you very much.
Thank you
Did you want to make any
additional remarks before we
take public comment now madam
chair Bradford questions thanks
thank you so in consultation
with the ranking member of we're
gonna go ahead and do public
comment after the presentation
before committee questions and
given that the sort of large
number of items on the agenda
for today what we're gonna do is
take three public comments in
support and then three if there
are three in opposition and we
can also see if there are
comments online
if no one is in the audience and
so with that if anyone in the
public here today would like to
speak in support of this bill if
you would come to the center
aisle and I believe is there a
hand held microphone.
Okay we'll use the handheld
microphone
For some type of microphone so
that folks watching online can
here that's the biggest issue
that we have if we don't use a
microphone.
So just one moment okay for.
Yes if you if you want to speak
in support or opposition go
ahead and move to the middle the
first of three and support that
would be lovely
And we may not have anyone in
opposition that's great.
Madam chair.
If there I would love to make a
comment but if there are others
then I'll just introduce my
student that's here to make a
public comment the two of you in
line and so go ahead okay.
Right madam chair members of the
committee thank you for your
time my name is Rosie Hey it I'm
the director of film prize
junior New Mexico we are a
statewide youth film education
and festival initiative we are
currently supporting middle
school and high school students
from over seventy schools in
twenty six counties to create
short films and these films will
be featured on the big screen at
our upcoming festival.
Eighty percent of the US
communities we serve have
populations under fifteen
thousand and we have over twenty
native films.
We serve I support my
organization supports this bill
because it invests in a
renewable natural resource the
creativity and innovation of New
Mexicans it also develops our
social capital and these
industries the opportunities
that will be forwarded expanded
by this bill by this division
will.
Up vote careers.
That are both lucrative but also
meaningful and fulfilling for
New Mexicans here in New Mexico
these are careers that involve
our culture our stories and our
spirit and I'm very happy to
have one of our student
filmmakers from Santa Fe here to
say a few words as well thank
you and just as a side note I
did not mention this earlier but
we typically have a time limit
of sixty seconds or one minute
per speaker thinks.
Thank hello my name is Corey
Feller and I'm a junior at
Mandela international magnet
school here in Santa Fe and I
have started a film club at my
school this year so the film to
me is a way to communicate with
my audience and my community my
community and create and share
my perspective on the world I
hope that you support this bill
because I would
Sorry that this bill would
create a I know that the
challenges I've gone through
this year and trying to get
resources to create my film and
it.
Of bills my club however this
bill would that make these
resources more accessible for
students all across our New
Mexico and so of thank you.
Thank you that we do have
online I believe I read all of
our Lewis
if we can unmute I read are you
perhaps the zoom user.
I am.
Eight go ahead.
you madam chair and committee
members hi am I read all of the
blue a professional cedar artist
arts advocate and arts
administrator for some forty
years from Los crucis I urge you
to invest in New Mexico creative
industries in order to advance
an untapped economic sector and
industry of arts and culture
because of my first hand
experience of the creative
industry I have witnessed
entrepreneurs cultural small
businesses and arts nonprofits
maneuver their growth and
success with a little help
public just of legislative
investment in arts and culture
H. B. H. and this and this house
appropriation what would
establish a division of creative
industries in the office of
economic development and and it
would be monumental game changer
for New Mexico arts and culture
practitioners and businesses
many of us yes and please
support H. bills eight.
Thank you very much with that
we're going to go ahead to
Committee questions and first we
have Representative Christine
Trujillo then Representative
Montoya and Representative part
of a.
Madam.
Care well I was going to move it
to pass.
If we have other questions or
comments before we take the
motion Representative Montoya
did you have questions.
Thank you madam chair yes
Thank you again representative
for and Senator for for bringing
this forward I do.
Have just a couple of questions
new to this appropriations
committee so you get to be my
Guinea pig I get to be yours
Madam chair of just briefly what
is the appropriation on this
bill how much is the
appropriation
that Madam chair representative
twenty at at there is a two
million dollar appropriation and
house bill two four.
Right of industry it is
contingent on enactment of this
bill.
Thank you madam chair and the
two million dollars the creating
is is that for permanent FTEs
what is what is that get done.
I yes at.
Madam chair and representative
if it's not actually specified
in
this page of the budget but I
think the vision for.
The most efficient use of that
funding that the group has been
discussing would be to hire the
staffing create a statewide plan
assess community needs we also
just in at an informal survey of
all of the arts councils around
the state they're already
sixteen shovel ready projects
related to the creative
industries that could be
considered for capital so that's
an example of the kind of
information that the agency
could pull together as they move
forward with implementation.
Thank you madam chair
usually when we're putting
Representative we're putting.
Money to the Department usually
there's some specifics seems
very very open ended
without
Directing money towards staff
how would they be able to hire
staff to this funding.
madam chair and representative
of at at Senator Steinborn what
wanted to admit on this please
sure Madam chair representative
so the bill is actually real
specific when you read the bill
as to the mission of the
division so I think that fills
in all the blanks of what you're
asking what will the division do
what be the purposes of the
division for advancing your X.
workforce development training
and education supporting
capacity building for
organizations like roses so
there's actually a set of
purposes that this funding would
help to empower.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative we are
I think most of the folks who I
would be asking these questions
are not in the room right now I
believe there are in Senate
finance but I am curious
The Economic Development
Department written reverted a
lot of money this year and I'm
just wondering.
Currently I know all the all of
the
different projects that we're
just mentioned that are moving
forward are currently moving
forward under economic
development and I'm just is
there a necessity for an office
that has as it is right now I
know that I've carried bills I I
carried a bill for for a liquor
establishments in downtown
redevelopment areas and our
districts and main street.
Areas and so they're already it
seems to be there's already the
path forward for all these
things to move forward without a
without spending money on a new
department currently are are
these projects not moving
forward.
If I may Representative and
panelists just to clarify the
money is in the budget and the
policy has been debated in the
prior committee so our
responsibility here would be
questions as to ensuring that
the money is in the budget if we
strip the appropriation and pass
it out
thank you madam chair I the
reason I'm asking these
questions is trying to determine
whether or not I want to vote
for spending the money if
there's already money and and
met madam chair maybe I I guess
that is really where I'm at as I
know through private prior
Committee hearings we have been
talking about how much money was
reverted for from virtually
every department.
And the idea that each of the
departments can take money
currently that is directed for
FTEs and re direct for.
other purposes and as long as
there's another as long as
there's a line that they can use
it for a I'm just.
I'm not understanding we're
asking for two million dollars
more.
When we plan much much more than
that was reverted and I'm trying
to figure out what is the
purpose and all us that last
question what is the purpose if
there's already money.
That's in the budget bills in
and they can already use that
money for these purposes.
Why do we need to start a new
office within the department Mr
chair that madam chair and
representative and and senator
and without all.
that'll be my last question I
have a comment them to my
question Madam chair
representative I would just
offer two things one we believe
this requires specific focus
because we have so much
potential as a state in this
area we have so much natural
talent workforce already
existing that is not coordinated
and secondly we did have long
meetings with secretaries of
multiple departments to look at
the existing programming one of
the reasons it's so important
that this division go forward is
because not every community is
large enough to have the main
street program not every
community has the formal arts
and culture district and we
really want to make sure that
we're reaching rural at Denver's
with this and so that led us to
I think even more firmly feel
that this division will be value
added.
Thank you madam chair I I'm not
sure I can support this I'll
probably pass.
A shorter level of these
questions to other presenters
but I just know how much money
was in the budget last year how
much reverted back.
And starting new departments I
know of I just not sure that's
necessary thank you madam chair.
Thank you I just have the answer
you know was interesting I would
just say number one there is not
dedicated funding for a lot of
the things that this will make
you know we have a leader
program that supports big
economic endeavors but these
kinds of micro grants to help
entrepreneurs in the space
doesn't exist in fact in the
state grants to help
organizations like rose that
live and die committees within
the of the arts believe it or
not they don't have an abundance
of state funding that they get
to go to their avenues of the
federal government for national
down with the arts programs this
is where we had a real
deficiency in this space and
then finally the third thing the
bills public infrastructure for
things that help facilitate
these industries also
sometimes maybe there's funding
sometimes there isn't I'll just
share with you representative
madam chair that Farmington
called into the last call
because of their work to try to
grow arts and culture as a
secretary they thought this was
valuable so so we've we feel
like we're really adding value
in adding resources that don't
exist.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair I'm gonna
ask your a couple of very direct
questions and if I understand it
based on that will determine
whether or not I ask anymore.
This move forward from here
because of the house floor for
debate right.
The yes Representative that is
correct in the in ten.
Of this committee is to only.
Either say there's an
appropriation for there's not.
That is correct this committee
does not debate the policy we
simply
amend or table bills based on
If the funding is in the budget.
Madam chair
The normal process as I
understand it.
For House Bills as it gets to
committee hearings that get to
debate.
Whatever side it it's on a given
to the Senate or the house and
this to committees get to debate
the the policy inside the bill.
This one.
That would mean that madam chair
that any bill that goes through
appropriations didn't get it's
to policy debates before it gets
to the floor I have a concern
with that that we can take
offline.
Right now I understand the
policy the way that we're
running this I will debate my
questions on the on the floor.
Thank you Representative heard.
Thank you madam chair and then
as I actually have just a
question for clarification of we
had a public comment today
regarding this bill and I talked
about a festival that is going
to be held I just wanted to ask
madam chair in presenters is
that one of the sixteen Senator
ready products that programs
that you were talking about.
Madam chair I defer to my expert
rose Easton please Madam chair
representative that one was not
on the list so that makes the it
seventeen we heard from
communities across the state
from Farmington to last crucis
to Lee County
to Roswell to Artesia and on the
list are needs for artist live
work space and tiny house
campuses for artist residencies
the need to reclaim vacant space
for pop up shops to help I'm to
be entrepreneurs
that crack the crack the market
for their business plans for
business incubators and and
libraries one in the southern
part of the state that would
bring together economic
development organizations from
across the state to work in
collaboration a glass recycling
business wanting to expand its
operation a group of artists
wanting to create a shared
facility where they can access
counts for firing their clay
works together institutions of
higher education wanting to
start coding camps in New degree
programs at the intersection of
art and technology and and and
an annual writers conference was
on the list combined with the
job fair so that's a quick
summary of the sixties of
already projects thank you thank
you madam chair at present is
just one last classification
question so it and this is not
about the policy but just a
question with respect to the
students at the New Mexico
Academy for the media arts and
the students that are Intel's
high school they are working to
put together a documentary on
forming mental health rooms at
every middle and high school is
that the type of program that
would also fall under these
programs that you're describing
madam chair yes certainly
especially in partnership with
our educational institutions all
right thank you madam chair
thank you presenters.
Thank you thank you
Representative
if.
The shut.
Are we ready for a motion.
Yep okay Representative Garrett
has question madam chair just
clarify two million madam chair.
Two million dollars is currently
in the budget.
Yes the sixty five million can
you just I'm sorry I'm just
putting it all together so I'm
great question representative
there we did already accept an
amendment to remove all of the
appropriation of the bill so
what we will except a motion on
is this is house bill eight is
twice and.
Which has no appropriation.
Hey.
Thank you.
Okay.
Representative Trujillo.
Get right my to pass motion on
this amended house bill.
Twice and.
Okay so we have a motion by
Representative Trujillo a second
by Representative Lujan I
believe us we do a roll call
vote that the.
Assuming there's objection of
thank you could we take roll
call vote.
Representative.
Tax.
I know.
Representative Brown.
No and I'd like to explain more
about.
Representative.
Representative yeah yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative one point no.
Representative.
So and I too would like to
inform of a.
Yes
Representative sorry not sorry
on now yes.
Representative Trujillo yes.
Representative pasta.
Now.
Yes.
Representative Brown you wanted
to explain your vote yes thank
you madam chair and to our
Representative and Senator I
have a big supporter of the arts
but there are some language in
this bill that I think might
violate the anti donation clause
and so I'm not comfortable
voting for a bill rate of free
will choices are just right in
this storm will concerned about
that thank you madam chair thank
you representative
Representative Pettigrew.
Madam chair and committee and
Representative Senator I
appreciate the bill
I too have concerns with
language inside the bill
specific to a representative of
brown just talked about but then
I also have concerns about.
creating to another department
and so.
Following the rules of the
committee I won't get into the
debate on those awful save those
for the house floor but they're
significant concerns within this
bill thank you thank you
Representative
Representative Stansky and
Senator Steinborn you guys have
a that to pass on house bill
eight as Treisman that thank you
madam chair.
Right obviously this is a little
bit of a work in progress here
for those of you participating
at home.
Next we have house bill twenty
nine Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair of the
committee and we want to start
is that in the US.
madam chair
This bill unanimously passed
this committee last year unit
unanimously passed the house
floor last year madam chair
Just a little preface this is
not a house bill two bill.
This is not the general fund
bill.
This is an opioid settlement
fund.
Legislation in the consumer
settlement fund of the AG.
And the only way madam chair
that we can access.
Funding from the opioid
settlement fund is through
legislation so keep that in mind
as I present the bill.
Madam chair house bill twenty
nine makes an appropriation of
one point three million from the
opioid settlement fund of the
attorney general's settlement
fund for an integrated substance
use disorder program and some
you get it County and northern
in northeast New Mexico.
madam chair for the last three
years I have coordinated with
the attorney general's office on
identifying quality.
Substance abuse projects for
funding from the AG's opioid
settlement fund.
Which is starting to be
enriched.
By settlement monies from opioid
manufacturers for their over
prescription of opioids.
For example fentanyl and
oxycodone.
Madam chair this over
prescription.
Led to tens of thousands of
overdoses overdose deaths
throughout the US
and and including our state.
Madam chair
The AG is focusing the use of
these funds to opioid.
And substance use treatment.
Abatement.
In recovery projects in our
state.
Madam chair house bill twenty
nine drivers opioid settlement
funds.
To a state of the art integrated
substance use disorder program
anchored in Las Vegas.
And madam chair again.
Of the opioids settlement fund.
is in is that has a balance
currently of seventy million
dollars line.
And the and again this
legislation
Does not in the anti donation
clause does not come into an
issue with Madam popular money's
it it's a totally different
in
Fund in itself and madam chair
I'd like to yield to my experts
to elaborate on the significance
of this legislation and first is
Matt props to my left he's a
leading Chicano health worker in
our state twenty year
experience physician assistant
and currently is director of
rolling gauge meant for UNM
health sciences center based in
Las Vegas so you want to the mat
for the lab right on the
legislation chair.
Thank you representative madam
chair members of the committee.
this is been a long time coming
and so I know many of you are
aware of this project was
reminded over lunches the eight
years of of work that we've done
the beautiful thing about that
is is that it's really brought
people together integrated is
the key word.
And and and what I want to say
about integration is is that is
the force multiplication that
can bring a lot of fruit a lot
of of all the positive outcomes
it's working together it's
working together a great morning
up in the governor's office with
with SB six and and seeing you
know again the the product in
disaster of working together and
just as we have in order to get
county and what county with fire
and flood disaster we've had
disaster and that is the opioid
crisis throughout the country
and definitely throughout the
state in the region.
And in our area as well the
difference in our area is that
we have no in patient services
we have no inpatient services
eight years ago we started
working together through a
collaborative call them with us
on again one of the local
collaborative to really map by
resources map are assets and the
big missing piece in the puzzle
was a residential treatment
center and so with that we've
got a
now working together with many
agencies many people coming
together to bring the funding
have residential treatment in
northern New Mexico on the east
side of the mountain on the
mountain and and what's
happening inTaos as well as in
Rio Arriba county on the west
side of the mountain range so
that's a big part but I
describe.
Any illness including opioid
addiction opioid use disorder as
a river Health Care river and so
that in patients service that is
the precipice of the river
that's like Niagara Falls if you
will picture that it's a dire
place if you're falling off that
cliff is very scary we have to
do everything we can to say
please.
With this isn't just about in
patient care if we move upstream
to that to the middle of the
river that's outpatient services
so with this funding allows for
is integration of outpatient
services again working together
across collaboration with
agencies agencies providing
outpatient therapy to Mexico
maximize our impact and so
that's every outpatient
treatment agency in the
northeast region and then from
there we move upstream to
primary prevention the beautiful
mountain streams that that I
call home and that is primary
plant prevention with our youth
because if before you even need
outpatient therapy we can catch
our youth are children early
with primary prevention
activities then we we won't have
to risk them meeting that care
in the middle of the river walk
or falling off that injures
cliff so this also allows for
impact which is providing
evidence based.
I'm very prevention education
and services to all school
districts in our meet in our
region thank you.
Thank you madam chair and I I
now yield to a lot of joy and
Slee she is the
the county manager for some you
get County and still going to go
into the weeds in terms of how
this funding will be applied
madam chair.
Thank you Representative thank
you madam chair members of the
committee thank you for hearing
us today and for allowing us to
explain the details of this bill
so as expert Prost was
explaining a big chunk of this
project up in northern New
Mexico is for the regional
crisis treatment center so the
county has the MSG collaboration
has worked for years and years
on the planning the county about
two years ago agreed to be the
fiscal agent of this project and
kind of move forward with the
construction so we worked with
the GST from the state of New
Mexico to secure a twenty year
lease on a building in Las Vegas
that has been abandoned for
about twenty years we were able
to secure that lease and we the
county went out for
architectural services we came
up with the plan we've got the
schematic ready everybody was
agreeing on on the treatment
center itself so we have a
twenty eight bed treatment
facility including detox beds as
well so with the plans and specs
are ready to go the funding the
majority of the funding has been
secured included in that funding
we have four point eight seven
five million dollars which comes
from the county's general fund
from capital outlay
appropriations from a
congressional direct spending
appropriation and through an
appropriation from GST so that's
four point seven five million we
did go out to bid we did open
bids last week we are about a
million dollars short so a chunk
of this money a million dollars
of the one point three million
would go towards construction
renovation medical equipment
furniture and grounds equipment
for the facility itself.
Thank you.
Do we so just to be clear this
is it
so house bill twenty nine is
just an appropriation bill so to
confirm with the sponsor we are
going to be tabling of this bill
today.
Madam chair this is not the
general fund appropriation bill.
This is a this isn't about not
getting paid a bill that
utilizes the opioid settlement
fund in our in terms of the the
project identified so this is
not a general appropriation bill
it's not tied to house bill two
the funding Madam chair for this
project this integrated
substance use disorder program
is in the opioid settlement fund
of which the AG has given its
blessing to.
So this legislation has the
blessing of the AG to utilize
one point three million of the
LFC would settlement fund for
this particular specific project
manager thank you Representative
and so what we may want to do
today because I've been in
consultation with staff
At this point in time we are
expecting to table the bill
because they're within house
bill two there is funding from
the opioid settlement fund but
why don't we do public comment
and questions from the committee
and then
if we feel if you'd like to roll
of the bill so we can get
additional clarification that
would be in a an option but
since everyone is here we could
do public comment and questions
from the committee.
do we have anyone in the public
that wanted to speak on house
bill twenty nine.
Okay and if so will take three
members of the public to speak
if you can
get to the middle I'll and then
use the microphone to make
comments.
Three of three in favor and
three opposed.
Of.
What we do support first.
What we could do if we get well
if the issue is the people on
this you so if we can turn the
micro the microphone to the side
and perhaps if you could speak
at the side of the table thank
you very much let's do that and
if you can keep your comments
brief chair and members of the
committee my name's Randall
brown on the position from
centers I've been that chief of
staff of the hospital for thirty
years I'm also the chairman of
the county commission Guadalupe
County.
I'm here to speak in support of
this.
I've worked in the emergency
room for thirty years and we
have patients who come there.
Can't access anything there is
no care for opioid addicted
patients who always have some
other mental health issues we've
had patients stay in our
hospital for over a week waiting
for a place for them to go and
Guadalupe San Miguel and mora
county desperately need
something for the people of of
our area that's really northeast
New Mexico and so I would just
hope that you find a way to get
this back on the house floor can
get the funding for this we
really need it and and and I
think that's a place for state
government to take care of the
things that the people the.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Hi
Can you hear me.
Yes hi madam chair members of
the committee and Diane **** I'm
with the veterans and military
family caucus.
We strongly support any kind of
funding for this we we go all
over the state we know how
severe this problem as we know
that even in just the metro
areas the hospitals themselves
just overloaded we don't have
enough I appease we don't have
enough outpatient and this isn't
just about our veterans but
everybody so we hope that you'll
somehow bring this is floor
anyway we would really strongly
supported thank you.
Thank you.
New members Taylor brewing from
the attorney general's office to
offer our strong support of this
legislation I know we and our
predecessor I've been in long
discussions with representative
Garcia to bring this treatment
center to look San Miguel County
another rural parts are states
that really need to to the
extent we can answer any
questions you guys have
concerning the funding source
I'll try to do the best I can or
at least get the answer for you
all.
Thank you I'm seeing no
additional public comment
I'm going to go to the committee
and
We have Representative daylight
Cruz than representative Garcia
and Representative Trujillo.
I don't have a vote okay.
Sorry go ahead.
Thank you madam chair and I
don't know if this is a question
for for the panel per se I I
support what you're trying to
but I'm curious
what other counties and
municipalities are doing I I
would think they'd all be
involved to some extent does
anybody know.
Madam chair
Representative leukocytes I
don't know exactly what other
initiatives are being undertaken
I know that I've been pursuing
this the only legislator has
been pursuing this for the last
three years in terms of
accessing the opioid treatment
fund.
for relevant
the.
Severance abuse initiatives and
as to what other entities and
done I I couldn't answer that.
Thank you representative madam
chair right I think this
probably at some point well I'm
going to go to support this but
I think at some point it should
be a unified effort because it
is a horrendous problem
everywhere and not only to
individuals but to people that
surround individuals around
crime etcetera thank you hunter.
Thank thank you and then if you
want to respond I apologize.
Madam chair representative not
close on.
You know as of about three years
ago there was only two million
dollars in the settlement fund.
And so we've had an infusion a
lot of close to sixty million
just in the last two years and
and maybe that's the reason why
other entities and not stepped
up
name and as to why they haven't
come to come for like we have
and madam chair was in the.
next we have a representative
Garcia than Montoya Pettigrew
and low on.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for bring this
the bill up you know I I support
the bill it just kind of.
bothered me or give me heartburn
as to why.
Another part of the state are
getting.
Or you know supporting any other
part of the state in the
northern New Mexico you know I
have a my district is about
sixty five percent native
American and they have a big big
problem with you and with the
federal.
The Nokia eight in and kind of
madam chair.
surprising to me that if we're
not including.
Other people in the state of New
Mexico.
We do you can do after that.
Madam chair and representative
Garcia.
I can't answer that I know that
the.
That a lot of entities maybe
have not been aware of what it
entails in terms of accessing
the opioid settlement fund and
maybe they don't have the
provide projects or proposals as
to as to how it would apply to
kind of specific purpose of
substance abuse in their
particular area you know so I
think there's a lot of these
factors we've come fully
equipped with this program in
the less than us in northern in
northeast New Mexico many
because it's been in the mix now
going on eight years in terms of
what they Mabel to to gather
from different sources and and
and this one point three million
just complements what they've
been able to do in the last
eight years of building this
this integrated substance use
disorder center in the in there
in the less than this area of
the madam chair Representative
so thank you for that answer you
know with this piece of
legislation it might open up
open up the eyes of others
communities that that the need
to help students you know
they'll we'll need to help you
know northern New Mexico so New
Mexico Albuquerque we're all of
the prices with the specially
Finan now and you know the it's
a good eye opener I just put
your legislation but get kind of
bother me a little bit there
wouldn't that to the other
communities what one last
question but.
I may madam chair.
Representative so if this is a
this is a regional effort this
is a regional effort for for a
region that has no in patient
care at all a long effort with
many parts it's a shovel ready
project saying that that is it
one thing there but it's bigger
than a regional effort not a
county level project it's a
regional project and it is thank
you to order County for leading
a regional project and putting
in the work to get things done
but it's bigger than not it's
it's really in New Mexico effort
because what we see modeling and
piloting with integrating
substance use disorder programs
primary prevention of shame
outpatient services and
inpatient treatment to make sure
they're all of those components
are connected across agencies
that is of of replicable project
for other regions of the state
as well.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chairman
Representative Garcia this you
know on the physical effects
says you're so be used for new
program or to fund existing
programs what what are the two
that you know of one point three
million dollars not a lot of
money anymore and to fund what
you're trying to do but thank
you for should I usually and
other million just for
initiative finish the building
you know one point two million
doesn't give you much money.
And.
Kerio two of.
The county manager asked me to
answer that thank you madam
chair representative Garcia the
one point three million was to
be split between the million
dollars for the treatment center
two hundred thousand dollars for
regional coordination and
outpatient prevention services
in the schools and then a
hundred thousand for treatment
within the gel for detainees so
the the post counties plan with
the regional treatment centre is
that once we get it constructed
and equipped and ready to
operate we'll have a provider
come in and actually run the
services so we're actually
working on the R. F. P. now to
get a provider to come in and
start so that we can start as
soon as we're ready.
Your number the enter still.
And unit funding for the
provider for the.
At.
that you're also to know with
construction and are you the
signal or is V. P. for of
provider you do you have funding
provided all.
If I may madam chair
representative so so yes so in
in patient services that
particular piece with the
residential treatment center
those are reimbursable services
so there the sustainability is
through billing and so so that's
the the model that exists again
if we talk about in in Rio
Arriba county with with what's
going on there with all of those
pieces the best we can do with
this project though is so that.
The the sustainability is there
through billable services but
getting the project getting the
treatment center ready for a
provider to move into it being
fully equipped to not have any
up front cost that so we we can
hit the ground running and be
able to provide immediate care
as soon as possible and there is
an emergency clause for that
reason because every time.
He years is too many will be two
years.
Thank you madam chair and
representative presenters you
know I've lost some of his
friends to
And all.
You know this is probably Human
you know it's consuming the
state of New Mexico and I'm glad
you're trying to do this no
because if you say wanted to
live
we're would we will thank you
for that thank you
Representative thank you.
Thank you Representative next
we're gonna go to Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair in.
In looking at the.
Station.
I am in agreement to the.
Well with earlier statements I'm
not too sure that this is the
right committee that this should
be an based on the taxed for and
the purpose within the bill.
This probably should've been
better handled in government
elections an Indian Affairs or
within labor veterans and
military affairs and madam chair
instead of tabling this bill I
would suggest we asked for.
Speaker to reassign legislation.
That's all my comments laughter.
Thank you Representative
Next we have Representative
Montoya.
Thank you madam chair
Representative
The state there were several
questions about other treatment
facilities and other options
and I would like to have answer
this for some of the other
members there are treatment
facilities in different parts of
the state kind of regionally I
know there's one in San Juan
County that supports the region
it's not just opioid it is for
master and for whatever that at
this specifically for if there
is a.
A judge to who is saying that a
person needs to go to a
treatment facility but Madam
chair and representative I have
the reason I understand that has
gone forward through the general
fund in the past is because
there's not been enough money
and you know it will be with
seven at frontier but madam
chair and and Representative.
Hi it is well known that north
central New Mexico in particular
has a problem.
And as it is right now madam
chair if there is someone who
needs treatment and there look
there in north central New
Mexico they have to wait for a
slot to open up and one of the
other communities as I see it
the funding that is in the.
in the attorney general's.
Under his control in the opioid
settlement fund
could then help backfill because
as it is right now if if San
Juan County take someone from
another county that comes out of
our budget
and to be honest sense that
priority goes to San Juan County
in McKinley county since where
the regional hub so madam chair
and and Representative I I
actually think you should roll
your bill and and take the time
to see this this money is not
coming out of the general fund
and the opioid settlement fund
has not been used at all in the
past and this is the very
purpose for which the fund is
supposed to exist.
The attorney general's office is
saying that they want to use it
in this fashion and they've been
working with you and there's
money now there for it.
To be honest madam chair if this
if this were just a regular
appropriations bill I would
rather support this and.
An opening another office that's
unnecessary and one of the other
I'm at the madam chair I I too
I'm gonna want to have some
discussions offline about that
but I would suggest
Representative you roll the bill
because I do believe this
money's not coming out of the
general fund it's for the
purpose built to be.
The the attorney general's
office and saying they want to
spend this money in this fashion
and we all know that there is a
specific need or central New
Mexico and I would just ask you
to consider doing that and all
help you with that if I can
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative two items first I
I wanted to note that this bill
did go to the health and Human
Services Committee first because
it does have an appropriation
specifically in the bill it
didn't come to this committee
For action
the.
Appropriations committee has
appropriated twenty million
dollars from the opioid
settlement fund it is included
in house bill two which is now
over in the Senate staff
reminded me that within that
funding there may be
opportunities to secure the
funding that you're looking for
within those programs so in a if
you can talk to for instance the
department of health
There is funding that you could
apply for to be able to do what
you're interested in doing
so I'm just gonna remind the
committee though that we can
either roll the bill if you'd
like more time but today's
action is going to be
temporarily tabling about.
Madam chair yes.
The staff to this real clear in
terms of how to access in this
case opioid settlement fund on
the consumer settlement fund.
And the statute clearly states
that in order to access.
Funds in the consumer settlement
fund you have to propose
specific legislation of which
we're doing here today.
That amount that apparently is
in house bill two.
You know got there through a
different means it didn't get
there that Fund that money that
sitting in the house bill two is
not exclusive for this
initiative because we're
proceeding with what is in
statute in terms of how to
access.
Madam monies from the consumer
settlement fund in in this case
the opioid settlement fund so
madam chair that that is not
relevant advice thanks because
we're doing what we've been
doing the last three years with
the blessing of the AG and the
agent can attest to the fact
that this is they acts this is
of the X. expand.
Funds in the consumer settlement
fund is the specific
legislation.
But that amount that's in house
bill two madam chair is does not
include this initiative.
And this is been at the
forefront madam chair of that
settlement fund priority.
In a so to what's what's in
house bill two are basically I'm
not saying they're not important
purpose but they haven't been
initially involved in the
process as this initiative has
for the last three years and the
reason it didn't pass last year
is it got tied down on the
Senate floor even though did
make it to the Senate floor
manager.
Thank you Representative
Representative Lujan.
Thank you madam chair and I
really really do appreciate this
legislation coming forward I
would just get back to the point
or
madam chair explained that.
We are we're looking at a
appropriations and granted this
is not an appropriation from the
general fund as as noted we are
looking to find where other
Sources of the funding for from
this committee have moved
forward and I would also madam
chair if you would indulge me
just a a small amount of time is
that.
There is also a bill that has
not yet passed it could pass in
its house bill three fifteen and
it's looking to
Have it's called the cannabis
tax distribution just to be
sure.
And they're looking to create a
fund called substance use
disorder prevention and
treatment Fund within that that
bill and I would I would think
to that that that this would be
another source for this type of
funding understand.
I understand the parameters of
what you're talking about from
the the consumer settlement fund
it is at hand here but I just
also like to say that as
explained earlier by the madam
chair that we this is the
process that we are moving along
with and
just to give that support but
also have some some discussion
for other opportunities for this
type of funding that.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Herndon and
then Trujillo thank you madam
chair madam chair I I'm I'm
bringing forth the question for
explanation and I think it may
be helpful for us all with
respect to the bill that's
before us now with an
appropriation from the opioid
settlement fund of if this
committee tables this bill today
the bill itself is table but
what I think I hear you saying
is that the presenter has the
option the in the Senate finance
committee to put language in the
in the overall budget through
opioid settlement that will
address this even if the bill is
table and my understanding that
correct.
Representative that is correct
and so should that occur then
the bill could be removed from
the table and move forward with
them Madam chair of and and your
budget I'm just clarifying that
we don't have to remove the bill
from the table because the
language in the in the budget
for utilization for this purpose
even without the bill and I'm
just thinking that that's
important for the presented to
understand in terms of what the
way in which this committee is
operating now and I think that
your expert madam chair might
have something to offer for us.
Which is the.
So.
In order.
Did I.
appropriation.
Has that.
Right.
And and thank you of madam chair
and and mystics bird I thought
that think that that was
important for purposes of the
presenter to known what is still
available to utilize funding for
purposes of what is in this bill
even yes Madam in your expects
part is asking a question I
would suggest to people bill
okay.
With the presenter like to roll
the bill.
Madam chair
Of.
The my I'm at the
At the mercy of the committee I
Do not necessarily agree with
the process in rolling the bill.
This bill has made it out of
this committee before.
With the understanding that we
are accessing.
Opioid.
the settlement funds from the
consumer settlement fund of the
AG and that's what that fund is
for is to fund initiatives like
what we bring for today.
So for us to go back and forth
is really doing a disservice to
the four to two in the the
purpose and the reason for the
consumer settlement fund of the
AG which asks that in order to
for for for any initiative to
access funds from the consumer
settlement fund has to be
brought forth to a piece of
legislation and that's what
we've been doing the manager
we're at the mercy of the
committee.
Thank you Representative I think
the best path forward at this
point in time is to roll the
bill and when it comes back up
we will be as quick as possible
so as not to inconvenience your
time.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
I'm is representative Thompson
here to present okay great.
Representative similar to house
bill twenty nine house bill
forty one is simply an
appropriation and so your the
language in the bill is not
necessary since you're funding
is already in house bill two.
Is that madam chair it's not
being House Bill minders.
If for the waiver
but it's the.
The governor's mouth as opposed
to the the provider.
Representative it's our
understanding that there's ten
point two million dollars and
that with the request from the
governor's office and this was
in addition.
Okay if you would like to
present that's fine we will be
tabling temporarily tabling the
bill though thank thank you
madam chair and members of the
committee I'm wearing a mask
because I was exposed so
everybody be careful so what
this let me let me start with
the scenario.
Sure a man six foot seven in his
early thirties.
Who have significant autism and
intermittent explosive disorder
that's my son.
He lives in a group home page
the last I heard was running a
fifty percent vacancy rate for
staff.
My son most of the time it's
fine but when he's not it's very
scary he's as strong as an ox
and he's he just explodes and so
I think about the people he also
wipe species including on the
ceiling and everywhere else so I
think about the people working
in this group home hello can go
to work at McDonald's or Burger
King for better pay and I I I
don't fault anyone for making
that choice because my son is
very scary when he's when he's
Off balance shall we say so this
bill was just to try to bring up
the rate for direct care
providers in in the DD waiver
arena and they've been woefully
underfunded there's a.
Salary study done every once in
a while but I don't believe
we've even fully funded like the
two thousand fourteen one so
we're years behind and I just
want to I am working with
Senator Rodriguez to trying to
get some more in there but I
just want you all to know that
this is a.
Dire I mean if if these group
homes close people like me and
others will quit their jobs and
not be able to do anything but
care for their loved ones so
thank you for hearing me and
there might be some people in
the audience who want to speak.
Do we have of anyone in the
audience that's interested
making public comment wonderful
so what we'll do is will take
three public comments and
support and then should there be
anyone and opposition we can
take three as well but we do
have the microphone working so
if you could line up to make
your comments from the center
I'll and use the microphone that
would be helpful and please keep
your comments brief will do a
minute.
Next month thank you.
Hello my name is Pamela Stafford
I'm with New Mexico caregivers
and after the tone please.
If that was not working we can
use the the one at the table.
Have a seat Pam thank you.
Hello my name is Pamela Stafford
I'm with New Mexico care givers
in action and have been involved
in the work for over thirty
years in New Mexico we're at the
start time where is the wait
list has been ended
but also the providers and
braced rates as raised wages by
twenty six percent and there are
nineteen counties in the state
with zero a bill ability to take
another person in their
supported living homes so we're
ending the wait list interior
only if there's no place for
them to go.
Thank you.
Thank you.
my name's Robert table for the
last decade I've done of
thousands of hours of analysis
and research and stuff on the
disability waiver program and
what's happened and it has a
long sordid history of of being
robbed for funds to cover other
things and our rates haven't
kept up the last rate study
committee I was on into eighteen
into nineteen recommended that
given amount of money be of
brought to pay for have adequate
rates to would take care of
people up that will finally be
funded this cycle we've given
out a ten percent raise with
Medicaid across the board that's
ten percent more than we've
given these people these people
are four years behind we're
given this Department of Health
decided to give their own
facilities are raised in the
same kind of thing and still
we're not funding the DD waiver
equivalently for what we're
paying our own facilities we
have agencies across the state
of converted employees to
subcontractors so that they can
make the thing work it's illegal
as its can be and it's coming to
an end and that's coming soon.
we have the abuse and neglect
rates in this thing which we
took out adult protective
services.
Now we're up to six hundred six
hundred neglect subs
substantiated neglect claims in
a year and that's all about
right we can't continue to do
this and all we're doing is
buying herself in New Jackson
lawsuit so what's be penny wise
and pound foolish thank you
thank you very much one more
person in attendance to speak in
support of and then
Yes if you want to go ahead.
Sure good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee on Jim
Copeland executive director of
the association of developmental
disabilities community providers
in New Mexico and it's my
understanding the last group of
allocation letters to into the
current wait list went out last
week.
Preferably I mean hopefully on
Valentine's day what a great
Valentine to receive from the
state of New Mexico roses are
red violets are blue your
fourteen year wait for services
is through.
But what if you can't redeem
your your Valentine because
there are no providers so with
the to go over the Great
Recession resignation is the
dilemma that providers face in
not being able to hire train and
retain support staff and it's
not just in New Mexico issue
it's a national concern but not
being able to hire staff is
resulting in extreme overtime
for current staff and extreme
expense for providers these
costs are included in the
current provider rates.
I understand the concept of now
money generating future money at
camps current perspective is
will now services deliver future
services house bill forty one
would certainly go a long way to
meet the promise that New Mexico
is made to individuals with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities and their families
who were wishing to receive the
services that they need to live
their best future.
Thank you for your time thank
you very much I see one other
person standing are you speaking
in with because we did are three
in support so I don't know if
you're interested in speaking in
opposition or okay we have one
person on line so if we could on
mute ms Smith.
we.
We'll do that and then will move
to committee COVID.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee hi my name is
Adrian Smith of the New Mexico
caregivers coalition we support
house bill forty one this bill
would provide an appropriation
to providers of the
developmental disability waiver
program this is the Medicaid
funded system in our state that
matches nearly forty dollars for
every one dollar in state
general fund this appropriation
is intended to help those
employers make up.
And reimbursement rates
recommended by the department of
health that and the funded in
previous years even though the
department of health recommended
those rate increases.
The New Mexico caregivers
coalition hopes and expects of
course the lion share
distributional appropriation
make its way to the pockets of
direct support professionals as
they are called in the field
those are otherwise names of the
caregivers serving people with
developmental disabilities thank
you so much we stand and
support.
Thank you and Senator Paypen
would you like to.
Come back up and use the
microphone as a.
Additional test fire and while
she's coming up I recently
received a
choice letter about to to the
speech and language pathologist
for my son in Albuquerque there
was a one choice.
Thank you madam chair I
appreciate that
I to support this bill you know
the people with autism when we
go to trying to get people
tested in the state of New
Mexico
it's like some of them it's
thirty six months before you can
even get some money tested so
that means you have that kind of
a way to get people to start
getting up into the programs
that they get going and these
are people who are disadvantage
but they have a lot to offer to
our communities and we need to
be able to support them we
support so many wonderful things
in New Mexico we support the
arts we support you know our
rivers we support our schools we
support everything but we need
to be sure that we are taking
care of our disadvantaged people
as well madam chair and members
thank you for.
Thank you so much we're gonna go
ahead I've won a committee
member with a question
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair I really
just wanted to go on record that
this is probably the first time
the representative Thompson I
have agreed on so.
So I think it.
I think it is important that we
realize that if the funding
doesn't happen on the Senate
side.
Several of our facilities
statewide.
Will not be able to maintain the
level of support that they have
because for the offset by.
So with that madam chair I yield
back.
Thank you Representative
I'm sorry do we need to I guess
I'd take a motion percent.
Madam chair I move to table.
Thank you join it is second.
Second okay the second
is Sandra do we need to do Raul
caller we're just yes.
We do okay if we can do a roll
call that.
Allison.
Thank you so this is an the
motion to table there is funding
in house bill two and set and
this bill is just an
appropriation although
The presenter is looking for
additional funding.
Yes to table because we have to.
So I have yes the table.
Representative Brown.
Representative capital yes.
Representative developed yes.
Representative Garcia.
Here.
If.
Representative.
Over the phone or.
Representative I.
yes.
Yeah.
I am sure it says yes.
Representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair I think I
want to change my vote no to
table.
You know for the reason being
that you know I have siblings
that are on the DD waiver and
these people are being sold at
about.
You know unfortunately it's
going to table but the two
budget it's going to happen
because if you look out there
and will the people who need
help.
If it's kind of setting and like
I said I have.
Two family members are going to
be we were in it it's tough to
table something so important but
sorry representative madam chair
and members I I I I've been on
probation I know how this works
but I hope I converted you all
into proponents for funding for
the DD waiver in the future
thank you madam chair thank you
I think that you have.
so next on the agenda is house
bill seventy six.
I don't know if Representative
Hochman Vigil was going to be on
the line if she's not online it
for perhaps we could just have
another member of present on her
behalf.
Okay so
Christine could you.
What if Representative Trujillo
can
assist resenting.
And prism okay we do an
amendment for house bill seventy
six that is being passed out
there is funding in house bill
two so we will be and then doing
this bill and then
Passing it as amended
Assuming that's had the vote
maybe we here
so with that Representative and
your experts can also assist.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee the house bill
seventy six transfers the
responsibility of the judicial
education from the university of
New Mexico to the administrative
office of the courts and
provides an appropriation of two
point one million from the
general fund the proposed
appropriation would increase the
size of New Mexico's traditional
education program by a hundred
percent and the judicial
education program at UNM
receives both general fund and
the revenue and in FY twenty two
the program received a total of
one point five million from both
revenue sources and I would like
for my
Expert witnesses to speak in
just a moment but we do have an
amendment that I'd like to
present and I need someone to
move the amendment.
Right excellent wonderful we
have a motion and a second
please go ahead and explain the
amendment thank you madam chair
of first we need to strike House
Judiciary Committee amendment
six then on page two strike
section three in its entirety
and then and then backwards.
Number two we number of the
school seating section
accordingly.
And then I will defer to my
experts
and which one would like to go
first.
Madam chair.
Of Representative I may proceed.
About the amendment are you able
to explain the amendment for to
discuss to ma'am and I can
explain it but.
Questions from the committee
about the amendment.
Okay manager.
Yes.
Do and when you strike an
appropriation as well.
It's not.
Okay three thank you.
Representative Chatfield and
then representative Armstrong.
So madam chair.
Can you explain to me.
What happened the bill went to
Judiciary.
Judiciary amended in a manner
that allow them to pass it.
When it comes from Judiciary
into the appropriations.
The worst tracking what we're
asked to strike the amendment
that allowed it to pass to do
sherry so help me understand
what happened there.
My.
Wonderful and if you could
introduce yourself thank you
Madam chair representative I'm
Carl right second the AOC deputy
director madam chair
representative the amendment
here just strikes the
appropriation and the
As the it's it's appropriate
money and house bill two
I don't listen to something on
the amendment.
The firm
Manson if we could we're
striking
we'll get some staff support
here
It does say number one strike
House Judiciary Committee
amendment six thank you.
Maybe that was something that's
a that's a new twist on us madam
chair apologize okay.
So madam chair we're gonna try
again.
We're going to strike House
Judiciary Committee amendment
number six.
Okay which is hopefully he
explained now it's not explain
to okay who knows how to find.
I'm just here we actually need
have a few minutes
Representative for folks in your
binder.
if you flip the page one yellow
page in front
the amendment number six is
striking the emergency.
So
Amendment number six is on page
three lines five and six
straight section for in its
entirety and insert in lieu
thereof the following new
section.
Okay my experts not.
Yes Madam chair representative
thank you
So read originally we had
Emergency clause added the
reason is is because our
judicial education occurs
annually in June and it put us
in a very awkward spot
financially as a transition
would occur from the university
New Mexico to AOC.
we had conversations with.
The University of New Mexico and
out of.
concerns regarding transition
and staffing.
and in order to not further
complicate the passage of the
bill on the floor we decided to
go ahead and remove the
emergency clause madam chair.
US section three in its entirety
is simply the appropriation
which is a procedural matter few
all and then we would remember.
Thank you that's an excellent
explanation of we do have a
question number sorry to thank
you sorry thank you I didn't
quite thank you madam chair so
that brings me back to my
question I am not a judge and
I'm not a lawyer I am here to
look at the fiscal
Impact of this bill so you were
injured isheri with people who
are lawyers and they saw a
reason to change this bill by by
means of this ammendment.
Passed on to the next committee
and you're asking us to strike
that same amendment that was put
on there we're we're not we're
not here to analyze the the
judicial aspects of this bill
we're here to analyze the
financial we rely on the
Judiciary Committee to make that
analysis they made their
analysis they made an amendment
if passed over to this Committee
and now you're asking us to
strike their amendment so what
has changed from Judiciary to
appropriations.
And thank you Representative and
analysts and am I correct in
understanding that the emergency
clause is no longer necessary
and that was what was added in
Judiciary and so you are this
amendment that you have prepared
would remove the emergency
clause and the appropriation.
Madam chair.
Are there pip involved
explained.
Senator yes effective we've got
to correct the and members of
the committee of the original
bill I had to the regular
effective date would be June
sixteenth whatever it is we
became concerned as justice
Thomas said about our ability to
make sure the training that's
occurring into this fiscal year
would occur.
So at my suggestion actually we
we had the merger because
amended into it in Judiciary
since then we've had serious
conversations with the
university the law school is
responsible for the judicial
education center and it would be
fine have emerged across I'm
confident we would honor every
commitment that judicial
education Senators maybe and
that's a loss because maybe it
bothers the committee to
consider it with without that
you don't want to change
emergency clause that would be
okay but.
We we agree that the university
in us together would be able to
manage this enterprise it's a
little awkward as justice
Thompson said personally I
prefer the virtue because
because then I know that I'll be
in charge of the funds and I
know that I will make sure what
needs to happen will happen but
I am I'm also confident the
university which has been
responsible for judicial
education for a long time will
cooperate with us as we make
this transition even if the
effective date is June sixteenth
so Representative Chatfield
that's the confusion this caused
by us asking for the merger
clause and now.
Will be fine with you but if you
want it but
it it's not it's not as critical
as it was before these
conversations would you agree
just systems.
I agree madam chair
representative I had.
Thank you madam chair now that's
an explanation I can understand
and we'll go for thank you.
madam chair.
Can.
We believe that
We're ready for.
Then the amendment yes on the
amendment Representative Montoya
thank you madam chair I I to I
am very in concerned about that
I think that can be changed on
the house floor but
this committee is where we're
being asked to to do this
without.
Really having the debate over it
I know you just explained that
it would be easier if that could
be that a man that can be added
on the floor if you think it's
necessary but I too am
uncomfortable on on doing what
the judiciary I mean it would be
different if it was another
committee budget this year in
particular on comfortable I
don't know if we could amend
this and just strike that first
first line.
And and then ask and and and and
they can make that change on the
floor if you still want to do
and I I am uncomfortable doing
it with the minimal amount of
debate that we do in here madam
chair would you like
to propose a new amendment our.
Expert witnesses legislative
districts section three.
And so the taken it will make a
amendment you'll make an
amendment a proposed amendment
right now yes or and actually
may perhaps Representative
Montoya would make
Representative a new amendment.
I.
Those.
And do we need to remove of
making appropriation from page
one line fourteen.
That was my initial question was
I did not see striking the
appropriation I was told it was
in section three.
Madam chair but the now we have
to strike upon the title with
which is that.
Sorry so the amendment would be
on page one.
Line fourteen striking making
appropriation.
And then striking section three
in its entirety.
Is that correct Representative
and madam chair remembering.
And we.
Chair okay I so move everything
you just said.
Seconded by Representative
Garrett
Any objections to adopting this
amendment.
That wonderful
House bill seventy six is now
twice amended any additional
comments on the bill before we
go to public comment and then
committee questions Senator I
believe that my expropriated do
we have any members of the
public that would like to speak
in support of or in opposition
to house bill seventy six us
twice amended.
Seeing none of we will go to
committee for questions.
Any committee members with
questions.
Representative insurance I move
aid do pass on house bill
seventy six is twice amended
that.
Right so we have a motion by
Representative Armstrong a
second by Representative dela
Cruz
Any objection.
Do we need to do you still want
to take a roll call.
Or yes okay if we could take the
role please.
We're voting on the bill as
twice amended.
Yes.
Thank you Sir.
Yeah.
The.
Yes.
To.
Committee.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair.
If you open.
Representative Sarinana.
Yes.
Yes.
Without a microphone thank you
thank you Representative for
fighting that okay and so
thirteen two zero you have to
pass as amended excellent thank
you by Senator members of the
committee chair fall thank you
we are progressing to house bill
ninety two do we have either
Representative Ferrary or
Thompson.
Excellent I see we do and
Representative Ferrary am I
correct that we do not have the
funding is currently not in
house bill two is that correct
okay
go ahead with your presentation
if you'd like.
Thank you madam chair
House bill ninety two is would
appropriate eight hundred fifty
nine thousand from the general
fund to Human Services
Department for expenditure in FY
twenty four to funded
organization located in Dona ana
county that provides long term
residential treatment.
Turn my phone so it's not
dictating.
And
That provides long term
residential treatment services
for people diagnosed with
serious mental illness and
psychoses and
So that's what we're trying to
do and I would like to introduce
my experts Susan the Santi and
she has great experience working
with this model.
my name is system used on date
of chair and representative
thank you for hearing this bill
this this residential treatment
facility of this appropriation
opens the door for a unique but
well researched the.
Longer term residential facility
for people who experience the
most serious as serious of
mental illnesses such as
schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder and other psychotic
related disorders all of it.
It's when compared to
conventional treatment which
often involves involuntary
commitment to a hospital of
which we never really have the
right to plan a budget anyway or
some other form of confinement
and people end up incarcerated
in the long term trajectory of
people who don't go the
conventional route but have this
opportunity the they have far
better recovery outcomes.
Nationally are recovery outcomes
for people with serious mental
illness or about five percent
this program has so up to
seventy five percent and it's
being replicated
internationally the daily rate
is anywhere from one third to
one half the cost of
hospitalization
The isn't the.
I think that's the.
Did you all get your hand out
okay right one three first of
the the research is in your hand
out of the cost effectiveness is
also hand out you can see the
that that the cost effectiveness
varies but it's really becomes a
one third to one half the cost
of hospitalization.
And then the long term.
Cost is way less because people
get better and one quick example
so when somebody goes to secure
a typo we're calling it so Terry
house that's a model but any
kind of residential program
there in the community so the
young person would have ended up
in the hospital as opposed to
this they can't continue their
schooling so the so Terry has
that Iran we have many people
had not managed to get their
high school diploma because they
got sick at the time when they
should have been graduating they
got their GED is it's a teary
house other people who were at
university we're able to
continue and finish this
semester it was challenging but
with the support of the staff of
the residential facility they
were able to go to classes and
complete their assignments so
the social the social effect is
great thank you.
One of the reasons madam chair
and members committee members.
I came across as situation where
a mother was telling me about
her son and for a year we were
trying to find a place for him
to go he had signs of
schizophrenia and PTSD he's a
former military person and he
was in jail because he his
psychoses maintenance so that he
was paranoid and he thought
people were coming to get him he
does look like he had a baby
again was trying to get a cell
phone from a neighbor and so
they put him in jail he was not
getting treatment that whole
year they couldn't find a place
for him to go for treatment if
we had a Soteria modelers to
Terry a Los crucis he would have
been able to bend referred a lot
sooner and a lot of military
are coming back with PTSD and
other psychoses among other
people in our community that
need this kind of successful
treatment that helps them
naturally go through
what the.
Psychoses the basically this and
for them to work through that
and so then they have longer
term
Success of coming back to a
normal life and so this is
something that I think our state
needs you know people from all
over the state can refer to it
and then once it's proved to be
successful we can then of have
another you know growth is
Community that would provide
that
and.
with that we stand for
questions.
Thank you Representative do we
have any members of the public I
see one person online so we'll
start with
folks speaking in support of
house bill ninety two
so if you're on the zoom if your
hand is up I'm going to assume
you're speaking in support if
your in person will take two
other people since we've got one
on zoom and if you come to the
microphone at and limit your
comments to approximately one
minute that would be fantastic
and then after we've done our to
folks here will go to merry
white on this soon thank you.
I have a son that's brilliant
and he's schizophrenic.
And I support this completely
there needs to be a safe and
stable place that people can go
We also need I think laws that
enable them we need to be able
to intervene and I'm not even
sure we have that yet but in
this instance we need this type
of facility of.
It's one of the most
debilitating guilt of illnesses.
But if you can get them to a
safe and stable place and
medication it can it can really
help often they'll end up in
jail in isolation.
For a long period of time and
you can't punish the mental
illness out of people.
So we desperately need this and
I I hope you're able to support
it thank you and I apologize
could you introduce yourself I'm
Beth Miller from right so thank
you thank you miss Miller and
next if you're so kind as to
introduce yourself as well.
This is Dr Neal Bowen.
From the HSD thank you good
afternoon madam chair members of
the committee Dr Neal Bowen
director the bureau Services
Division of course not speaking
in support are opposed to the
but to speaking to one detail in
the FIR which surprised us when
we saw the FIR it said that the
HSD does not assume oversee
programs for the seriously
mentally ill I think the source
of that there was ourselves in
our analysis we wrote for a
saying that we would have to
learn to oversee this particular
program and and in our mind that
was simply a reference to the
fact that there is no Soteria
house or something like that yet
in New Mexico so we would have
to become educated about that
but of course the fact is the
vast majority the programs
oversee our for the seriously
mentally ill from linkages
housing vouchers for this year's
and then the LFC to the to the
first episode psychosis set
aside from the federal mental
health block grant so I just
wanted to clarify that point
raised thank you thank you
doctor Bowen next will go to
Mary weights online please.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee some forty years
ago my sister who was twenty one
years old at the time was
hospitalized for nervous
breakdown within two days
hospitalizations she was started
on electric shock therapy she
was diagnosed with schizophrenia
and upon her release after about
seven days she was started on
medication.
There was no opportunity for her
to problems all or to find ways
to figure out what the psychosis
was about rather a chemical
straightjacket was applied they
kept under control sleepy and
all down there's no wonder that
she hated the medication from
time to time should leave home
in order to try to go off the
medication that's not uncommon
with this population.
So year after year neuroleptic
medication became stronger and
stronger to stop her from
hearing voices about ten years
after her diagnosis the
diagnosis changed from
schizophrenic to brain damage.
In the last year I have learned
that long term use of
neuroleptic medication causes
brain damage heart of dyskinesia
or muscular movement dysfunction
is one of those medication
induced brain damage maladies.
My sister died three years ago
after having been started on the
strongest medication available
to her to stop her from hearing
voices that medication required
her to have blood drawn every
week so her body could accept
the level of medication.
She was on that medication one
year and she died.
So so there is no alternative
all way of supporting
individuals in the first episode
psychosis have my sister had
available to her she may have
been able to problem solve and
lead much more productive life
rather than a medication induced
all told them or in I refer to
it as the straight jacket.
so teria is proven to work will
be needed in New Mexico and
folks who are the most
vulnerable of the vulnerable.
He is kind of help thank you so
much thank you miss white we're
now going to go to Committee
questions on that I.
Unless you want to add anything
more madam chair there's another
person on zoom out gal.
okay
if we let's go ahead and allow
Mr Galvis to speak and he'll be
the last person just as we're
trying to limit our numbers
thank.
Mr Galvis.
Thank you thank you madam
chairman and many I just want to
tell you what your piece of the
evidence that tells us that this
is the best practice.
The first house.
Was located in San Jose
California and operated from
nineteen seventy one to nineteen
eighty three it was a research
project of the National
Institute of mental health.
And as a research project a very
good study was done earning of
people treated at Sir Terry with
people treated at the hospital.
Two years after treatment ended
investigators found that the
patients treated so teria we're
doing significantly better in
terms of social functioning
employment symptoms and we
hospitalizations doing
significantly better than the
people to the hospital so this
is I'm a psychologist I I I
treat people with psychosis hi
I'm a student of psychosis I can
tell you this is the best
practice and it's a best
practice we need in New Mexico
and in Los crucis.
Thank you thank you Mr go this
cake of questions from the
committee of Representative dela
Cruz and then Garrett.
Thank you madam chair.
You know New Mexico has sorely
lacked in group homes for the
mentally ill are I had a brother
I say had because he's passed
about four years ago now I do
have schizophrenia it it it
began when he was probably
around eighteen years old and
and went through all of his life
he lived into his fifties and
there was really nowhere for him
to be able to go to get
treatment and care in a
meaningful way in Albuquerque
and I don't think there's
anything like that in New Mexico
I was really impressed when when
I heard about SO terror so Terry
I guess is a recent surgery.
And I said well this is what we
need because as luck would have
it for my brother I had a sister
living in Wheaton Illinois just
outside Chicago and they
actually have some really good
services for people with mental
illness are and he went to live
with my sister and alternately
ended up in a group home where
he could receive meaningful care
and so Representative Ferrary
really appreciate you bringing
this bill forward I believe this
is has a potential for being a
model throughout New Mexico and
so so thank you for that and and
and I hope this bill passes
thank you madam chair.
Thank you thank you
representative Representative
Garrett.
Thank you madam chair of the
first question is has anybody
given to your money for this.
Could you repeat that has not
given any junior money have you
received any junior money for
madam chair and representative
no I gave
junior money last year for the
research and the the budget
development and we thought that
you know it would take so much
that we would be able to you
know achieve that.
Thank you and madam chair that
if the court to the fiscal
impact.
The behavior health
The behavior health services
division and health and Human
the health what is it HSD.
Behavioral health services to
vendor HSD they say that they
don't oversee facilities for
people diagnosed with mental
illness does anybody does
anybody know the answer the
question is anybody oversee
facilities.
Madam chair and representative
that's what doctor Boeing was
referring to that they haven't
had the experience to do that
yet but they can it was just
misinterpreted when they wrote
up the FIR and we do have madam
chair and representative
of many a supportive agencies
are people likely clinic I date
the million at the said they
would oversee it and then we
also have a lot of opportunities
for someone to find the house
because with the funding we
would be able to pay the rent
and the different furniture and
things plus staffing staffing is
major part and also once of we
have this establish maybe in the
first year but during that first
year will be working on getting
a waiver where Medicaid can pay
for the treatment.
So madam chair and
representative this doesn't
actually exist in physical form
yet am I correct in
understanding that not in Los
crucis but the different
opportunities and to put it
together we do have a budget
already established.
Legislative thank you for that
purpose thank you madam chair
thank you Representative
Allison.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative Ferrary I am glad
that you are bringing this bill
forward.
There's a number of bills before
us in the legislature that says
that we're gonna make new bills
or amend the whole once but none
of them is asking.
Us to address the root problem I
believe that what your bill is
asking for is let's address the
root problem before trying to
solve the problem and that root
problem is in the mental or
behavioral health so for that
reason I support your bill it
will be of voting a do pass for
it thank you madam chair thank
you Representative Ferrary.
Thank.
Representative Armstrong
madam chair I move to table
house bill ninety two.
Thank you is there a I don't
need a second look at it okay.
Is that all right.
And this is and will do it will
take the role but this is
because the funding is not
currently in house bill two you
know
nothing against the bill itself
to get the concept Center do
want to take the role.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes the funding and we hope to
get this money Representative
Garrett yes.
Representative heard that yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
Montoya yes Representative
Pettigrew.
Ready.
Yes.
For.
Yes.
Yes.
I shared a sense yes.
You have third about twelve.
One of.
Thank you very much thank you
Representative Ferrary for
presenting the bill and now our
chairman has returned.
And too late to vote but.
Thank you madam chair and Mr
chair we appreciate it.
Thank you so next up is
house bill one twenty seven
Representative Herrera
chairwoman or.
What.
Madam chair
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee in the
interest of time I'll make this
very brief house bill one twenty
seven is simply a bill of that
brings all educational
assistance in the state up to a
minimum salary of twenty five
thousand we think this committee
very much for including it and
not house bill two and as we all
know
Our educational assistants are
really someone just called them
the glue that holds the school
together are there a vital part
of our educational system when
we did our big legislation last
year to increase teacher
salaries six etcetera etcetera
we we we we really kinda left
educational assistance out this
bill was LFC endorse bill and we
talked about this with school
districts throughout the state
during the interim on the
experience is to my left when we
argument from the LFC and my co
sponsor trying Baca who is head
of and then a unified school
district is really the everyday
expert in this field thank you
chair at at a Representative
Baca it's great to see you at
the table there please go ahead
with any comments and then we'll
go to direct thank you Mr
chairman thank you committee my
co sponsor did a good job as far
as.
Kind of talk about the need and
as we've made great strides in
adequately funded education.
Do you know if we talk about
teachers one of the groups
probably my opinion the most
hardest Lars working group.
Because they are the frontline
workers there providing the care
there the the feeding the the
the diapering and others these
are the folks are out there that
are working in our classrooms
providing services you know for
teachers that I've had a number
of us students in their there
are preschools in our
kindergartens in our first
grades in our special education
classes throughout the state.
These folks have done it and
with this bill since it hasn't
minute to address since like two
thousand four two thousand five
currently set the minimum at or
a twelve.
This bill then attempts to to
actually adequately funded pay
for
these folks are really the
unsung heroes in our education
system so hi I urge you to guys
of consider this and we stand
for any questions thank you very
much Representative Baca
director anything to add on I I
understand deeply appreciate the
committee
what we'll do through anything
that.
will do three
folks in the public if you want
to testify in support of this
bill we do know it's in the
budget so.
And
The market is down so we have
the got it okay a if you could
the event from form the the Mike
is working we can hear you there
in go ahead please you don't of
if you can stand up ma'am yes
you know hi my name is Andrea
Fernandes.
I'm I'm with the peace coalition
which has worked to understand
our child needs County and
although we have open slots in
many of our child care
facilities we do not have
employees so and without
employees can't provide the
services and we have
acknowledged that one of the
barriers is the lack of pay so
we would like to advocate
support for this bill thank you
thank you very much for them.
Any other they see so.
And let's go thank you to.
For mining is to go online I
believe we have family family
will down.
your hand is raised if you can
on mute yourself and go ahead
now please Miss World.
Yes thank you Mr chair members
of the committee I've been
labeled out with New Mexico
voices for children and we
support this bill and thank you
to sponsors for bringing it
forward as you've heard
educational assistants play an
important role in our classrooms
and they should receive higher
wages not only to reflect this
also to improve their own
economic conditions and if we
care it is a higher wage then
they're more likely to be
incentivized to stay in the
education system and continue
providing those benefits to our
students so we ask that you
please support HB one twenty
seven thank you thank you very
much this will help.
Okay I don't see any other
comment online things by
projects and for both us and
keep us all squared away go now
to committee comments I think
we'll be ready for a motion.
Representative occurs please.
Thank you Mr chairman are you
heard me says before and I'll
say it again I had the privilege
of being an educational system
right after I got out of you and
them I needed work and that's
what I found and I will tell you
that it is a it is hard work
it's long work in your and I was
working with the students in a
classroom with a teacher and I
came to respect the work that
that is done and I will always
support EAC because I understand
their Billy underpaid and even
with the little in rules that
we're making now it's still not
enough and you'll hear me say
that over and over so
Representative Baca and have I
appreciate you guys for bringing
this forward and you absolutely
have my vote thank you Mr
chairman thank you very much
from Santa Cruz next
Representative Trujillo.
K. move would have I'm not going
to real quick I wanted to is
Representative Chatfield did you
have any movie for.
Okay.
You second would you mind
secretary.
Two seconds.
First.
Okay there is a motion by
Representative Chatfield semi
Representative Trujillo and.
Caption back up getting back in
the committee.
Committee is ahead and I guess
that let's go ahead and asset
the role because.
Elephant yes Representative
Armstrong yes.
Representative.
Yes.
that the office yes.
Yes.
Representative program yes.
Yes.
Representative.
Yeah.
Yes you.
Representative Trujillo yeah.
Representative Lujan.
Yes.
If the yes.
Yes Representative fourteen.
Kate I.
By a unanimous vote
Representative at Representative
Baca and tell your co sponsors
and to your team you have a do
pass thank you so much thank you
members members committee.
K. next we're gonna go to house
bill thirty five this is free
cultural services for foster
families.
Representative Lord come on.
Great to see you please whenever
you're ready if you could give
us a brief explanation for the
yes thank you Mr chair
So this is house bill thirty
five it's an expansion of HB
through three from two thousand
nine that unanimously passed
both house and Senate and was
signed into law to create
section thirty two A. three A.
dash twelve foster families for
admission to museum the state
parks there are currently eight
hundred fifty volunteer foster
families throughout the state of
New Mexico caring for one
thousand.
Foster care foster families
provide safe and secure homes
for most vulnerable youth while
they're working to reunify with
their families these families
often and or their own firsthand
from a based on the needs of the
children they care for and the
trauma of those you have been
exposed to after unanimous
passage of bill twenty nineteen
we about to bring this back
expand insurer the don't only
where there privileges available
for foster families but also
specifically to foster youth and
young adults who've recently
aged out participate in the
fostering connections act we're
here to talk today to fill the
fulfill that promise.
One of the stated goals of abuse
and neglect Act is to preserve
and unify the family and align
with those school CYFD and
protective services prior to as
this as well as family time
often family time visits are
held at state office buildings
or McDonald's this bill was
originally introduced to the
families working to reunify
could have free access to state
owned museums and parks we've
expanded this to ensure you have
access to this to answer Pacific
we want to include youth in care
and shelters like new day
Amistad Santa Fe and the tell
shelters simply this bill
expands free access to include
youth fishing license and
overnight camping trips many
foster families and young people
in foster care take advantage of
the outdoors during the pandemic
and we want to make sure that we
help facilitate as best we can
where site about this kids bill
is a great showing support for
foster families our foster youth
and our young adults and faster
connection also want to let you
know passed in government with
unanimous Democrat support and
with that I'd like to introduce
my when we're open for
questions.
Thank thank you at committee.
My name's Maryland back and I am
the founder and executive
director of New Mexico child
first network dedicated to
improving the lives of children
in foster care I was hearing
twenty nineteen when we passed
what was that H. B. three oh
three five partisan sponsor
bipartisan unanimous support and
one of our promises at that time
right before the pandemic was
that we would bring this right
back and ensure that fostering
connections and that families
working to reunify can also
benefit from this so this is a
promise we made to those
families in twenty nineteen so
it expands additional the
definition expands to ensure
fostering connections young
parents aged young people can M.
S. have some of the same
benefits and then also expands
the budget what we learned
during the pandemic is that when
we sat down and we weren't
allowed to have visits in person
I have a lot of our foster
families and first families took
advantage of this because it
allowed outdoor safe spaces and
so we really wanted to expand
yes at the camping became a
really big part of it during the
pandemic so so this was again I
promise we made four years ago
an expansion to really do good
for foster families families
working to unify thank you thank
you very much Representative
Lord thank you miss backed
will now go to audience comment
would anybody like to say
anything in support please come
on up.
Mike is now if we're yeah we ask
you to our cloud perfect my
name's Melissa Soto I wanted to
the the family's Department the
department does support this
bill we just ask that you make
sure that we had in language
that it's eligible adults
participating in the fostering
connections programs which goes
up to age twenty one.
Thank you very much thank you
for.
Any other public comment.
Okay I don't I don't see any
other public yes ma'am please
come forward.
I think so this is just a
question so would this be
available across the board to
all parents were just foster
parents.
It.
So we with that with this is
just a sort of a public comment
will take that as of at advocacy
for this to be available to fund
to as many families as possible
across the board.
So thank you this is not it's
not a dialogue back and forth
thank you for the public comment
we'll go ahead and will will
address that as we go through
the rest of the testimony thank
you for the question.
Okay I don't see any other
public comment I don't see any
comment on there is online let's
go to Terry Cole.
Ms call.
Mr Chairman.
All lying the president CEO of
the greater working chamber of
commerce I'm here today to
support H. B. one ninety one we
were strong advocates.
We only childhood education
trust fund and like many in this
room we've been surprised and
happy to see just how fast the
fund has grown it's a
tremendously important fiscal to
all of the state as we seek to
continue expanding early
childhood services and the
then select them as fast as
possible thank you for your
revenue gaps for in our opinion
this is a good bill.
Sorry.
This call or miss call sorry
sorry.
Mr sorry the reason I'm
interjecting I think that
testimony relates to our next
bill and I propose you know
you're fine this call.
Hi you are on this bill no
worries State states they will.
I'll be back.
Okay.
Okay
Okay so what we'll go back we'll
see any other public comment
briefly let's to Representative
Montoya then we're going to go
to raking member Armstrong.
Thank you Matt Mr chairman of.
I'm actually confused why
there's no.
Fiscal and all on this this
appears to me that it would just
be free access to so we would
not be collecting money I'm not
I'm curious to why there is even
a fiscal impact.
At all this.
Thank you thank you very much
Representative Montoya
I think that some of the answer
lies in the fact that this would
this might be revenue that would
be connected otherwise collected
otherwise but as noted in in our
FIR it's a very small small
amount and perhaps it doesn't
end of perhaps it's on the very
low end of fifteen thousand up
to fifteen thousand but.
Thank you Mr chairman I just
don't see any reason for this
not to go forward when really
what it would be doing is not
collecting fees when attending
when in reality they're likely
not going to attend.
And I I just don't see any
reason that we would just passes
forward thank you Mr chair
thanks much for seventh place
let's go to a ranking member
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr chairman I move it
to pass.
Okay there's a motion by ranking
member Armstrong second by
Representative Chatfield let's
go ahead and take the role I
think we have the capacity here
for.
More from yes Representative
Baca yes.
Yes.
Representative Billiton yes.
The park staff so the general.
Here.
Yes.
Representative heard that yes.
Representative Lujan yes.
What yes.
Yes.
Yes.
I cared give them yes.
small yes.
Fifteen Representative okay by a
unanimous vote thank you very
much thank you fund for Senator
Diamond thanks for the public
thank you.
Okay now we're going to house
bill one ninety one.
Go for it.
Okay by Dixon's great see you.
Kelly thank you for being here
will go ahead whenever you're
ready by or to.
Thank you Mr chair I'm in the
middle.
Of the popular for it's fine to
have one between one and two I'm
not mistaken.
I think that might be a.
We'll wait as we get.
Where where are members were on
house bill one ninety one.
Okay but great thank you
representative Garcia
Representative Dixon.
thank you Mr chair we do have an
amendment to house bill one
ninety one okay can you let's go
ahead and can you explain the
bill then briefly explain the
amendment will move.
explain the.
Yes let's explain the bill.
And then you can explain it will
move on and okay thank you Mr
chair and members of the
committee house bill one ninety
one is very straightforward and
very simple it increases the
disbursement amount.
For fiscal year twenty four of
funds from the early childhood
Trust Fund.
For the ECECD early childhood
education and care department so
it increases the amounts that
would be distributed from sixty
eight million forty six million
thirty two.
from thirty to one hundred that
is house bill one ninety one now
we do have an amendment based on
let's go ahead can we move the
amendment for just.
Okay it's been we have now can
you please explain your
amendment thank you Mr chair and
thank you members I have the
amendment for house bill one
ninety one actually increases
the disbursement amount from one
hundred million to one hundred
and twenty five million dollars
so we are simply changing the
disbursement amount
that would be going to our early
childhood education and care
department.
Right let's go is there any
discussion on the amendment.
Santa Fe okay is there any
objections to adopting the
amendment.
I don't see any objection to
adopt in the amendment you have
an amended bill Representative.
and we have that here in front
of us it's point two two five
one two two point one.
Okay any additional comments
Representative R. Kelly that
you'd like to offer as it
relates to house bill one ninety
one and then we'll go to public
comment.
Mr chair I think the only thing
that I would note is that
members should have received a
handout that just shows the
minimal impact to the early
childhood trust fund ends the
future disbursements based on
this increase.
Thank you Mr chair just want to
confirm her body in the public
and this committee that House
bill two contemplates this
distribution at a hundred twenty
five million already.
Thank you very much for that and
that can okay let's go now to
public comment first for folks
in the room anybody who would
like to offer comment on house
bill one ninety one is amended
yes ma'am please and if you
could get come up for.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Barbara
Tetreault and I am a provider in
Farmington New Mexico I am also
policy chair for the New Mexico
childcare and education
association and due to the fact
that Cathrynn through Freeman
CEO Ford growing up New Mexico
could not be here asked if I
could in their response I urge
you to please support this bill
the allocation the money's in
the strides that we have made
these past two years towards
early childhood education are
dependent upon the money's and
in order to keep up with the pay
rate increases the teacher
quality the high quality
programming we need the monies
that will that will come from
this bill so we urge you to
please please support this bill
and in the past thank you very
much Mr.
Okay chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza average
of this with the New Mexico
association for the education of
young children we service the
voice of early childhood
educators around the students we
strongly support legislation
thank you very much assessment
of.
Any other comments here in
person okay let's go online this
co let's go to you.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I appreciate your
indulgence Mister chair off try
this again I am the president
and CEO of the greater problem
for you chamber of commerce we
were strong advocates for the
creation of early childhood
education trust fund and like
many in this room weekends off
I'm standing at the to see just
how fast the phone from it's a
tremendously important fiscal
tool for the state as we seek to
continue expanding early
childhood services and insulate
them as best as possible thank
you.
Downturns you this is a good
news well the fund has grown so
substantially that we are able
to increase distributions that
are ahead of schedule to cover
important early childhood
expansions and initiatives we
heard your support for the bill
thank you Mr chair members of
the committee thank you very
much miss call next we're going
to go to this will doubt.
Good afternoon again Mr chair
members of the committee and we
will Taos New Mexico voices for
children we support H. B. one
ninety one I thank the sponsors
for bringing it forward we
support this bill because we
know that the funding needs for
early childhood programs are
great we know that voters
support increased funding for
early childhood and we know that
these investments in the
earliest years pay off for the
lifetime of our children we have
the funding available the need
is there for our kids today so
we asked the committee to join
us and support for eighty one
ninety one thank you thank you
very much was wheeled out and
next let's go to Nicholas
Cordova.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is
Nicholas court of a from the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
we stand in strong support of
this bill all families should
have access to early childhood
education and child care that
supports our families diverse
needs increasing access to
childcare and pre K. insurers
economic opportunity for
families while supporting child
development.
The early childhood fund is
an important way we ensure
robust really childhood
education system the
constitutional amendment to
increase the disbursement to the
early childhood fund from the
land grant permanent fund has
with resounding support from New
Mexico and this bill inch is is
necessary to honor New Mexicans
desire to invest in our
children's education in future
thank you.
Thank you very much Mr part of a
okay I don't see any other
comment online things to Mr
Mulligan for running that so a
way for us let's go to the
committee.
Okay is there any other is there
are other questions okay let's
of course I'll come back to you
for that motion we're gonna go
first to Representative had a.
Representative thank you
Representative Pettigrew.
Hello.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative had a group of
that's because we are only
increasing the disbursement for
fiscal year twenty four
artificially low because of the
way the disbursement was
calculated which was based on
the prior three years and since
the first your first person
first year was zero it
artificially lowered the
disbursement amount so it is
only up this only applies to
this fiscal year.
Thank you Representative next
Representative Chatfield.
Do you have a question my
question was answered there we
go Representative Trujillo.
As in great thank you very much
okay it's been moved by
Representative Trujillo second
by Representative Lujan
Senator would you please call
the roll.
Yes.
Representative della Cruz yes
Representative Garcia act.
Representative Europe yes.
Representative heard that yeah.
Representative Lujan yes.
Representative.
yeah yes.
Representative at.
Yes
Representative.
Yes.
Or call yes yeah there.
They're great by voting and
thirteen in unanimous vote
thirteen from you have a yes to
pass bills on H. B. one ninety
one is amended.
Thank you Mr chair.
Committee agrees more when I
leave.
I just got a.
okay okay we're down
Representative Allison.
Great and let's get where we're
gonna get started with house
bill forty nine.
All right great Representative
thousand great to see you please
go ahead when you're ready and
please feel free to introduce
the experts that you have there
with the table with you.
Thank you Mr chair.
You're not a freshman year I
introduced a similar bill house
bill one thirty seven.
Is it has gained so much success
that we're coming back for the
house bill twelve forty nine and
then as an addition to that to
continue the services that have
been very very successful house
bill forty nine appropriates
five point two five million from
the general fund to the
Department of Health for County.
Tribal health council statewide
to carry out the functions as
stated.
In the county and tribal affairs
council staff and five hundred
thousand to deal ways to
contract with a nonprofit
organizations and then there's
the as you read the fiscal
impact report there's three
examples of how I think that
this will redirect sale for the
FIR because that gives a very
good district description.
One of the fiscal implications
FIR is that it says the FY
twenty three operating budget
for health councils through the
O. H. is slightly over four
hundred thousand both LFC and
Executive recommendations
include general fund increases
for health councils and the
further states the LFC assumes
the appropriation included in
this bill would be in addition
to any increases recommended in
house bill two.
And report without taking any
more time I'd like to introduce
my witnesses to my right is a.
Jerilyn Antonio and Valeria of
LA com and to my left is of.
Representative begins.
Okay so
I'd like for them to.
Tell you about the success of
house bill one thirty seven
leading up to your house bill
forty nine thank you very much
thank you representative Allison
whatever order micellar phone
agency until noon and drive
again please go ahead and make
brief comments.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I am
the tribal liaison with the New
Mexico Alliance of health
councils and so I'm just going
to give a brief overview of
health councils and all the
amazing work that's been
happening there are currently
forty two county tribal health
councils so that means there is
thirty three County health
councils one in every county in
our state right now and we also
have nine tribal health councils
and so I work closely with them
tribal leadership in getting
endorsement for tribal health
councils and also supporting the
work really at a local and
community based level at and
supporting communities so health
councils really the members come
from you know all sectors who
wear many hats community members
professionals Graham eight grand
plus you know it so health
councils truly serve as the hub
for kids you know for their
communities and for the people
that they work with and serve
and so house bill one thirty
seven clearly outlines the roll
for health councils and so that
is to do community
and locally local level
assessment prioritization and
implementation looking at data
and creating you know solutions
from the data but also looking
at policy in the community and
facilitating communication among
their jurisdiction.
I also want to note that health
councils do serve a big part in
the and the fat process which is
with the state of New Mexico our
department of health and so they
other outcomes and some of the
measures the hell health
councils have to inform the
public health accreditation you
know that happens at the at this
level and also in addition to
that health councils also are
informing local level planning
at by developing community
health improvement plans to
inform the state health
improvement process this year so
they've definitely been doing a
lot of on the ground work
gathering data engaging with
community very meaningfully.
And
as far as HM HM to task force
which was developed in twenty
twenty one this task force was
developed to look at the public
health infrastructure system and
health councils are considered
the top one of the top five
recommendations so it was really
to the recommendations were to
create a funding stream for
County health councils build
local capacity and also to
continue to coordinate public
health strategies in partnership
with delete.
And I will and mice my part here
in talking about the
underfunding said twenty ten
health councils were completely
cut from funding down to zero
dollars and so now since twenty
thirteen trying to build a
funding back up and currently
if you look at slide number five
and
Sorry that's why I.
It would be slide sixteen and
slide seventeen you'll see a
graph here of the funding trend
over time and currently health
councils right now are only
funded at twelve thousand nine
hundred and fifty two dollars
and so that alone is not enough
to carry out the functions of
house bill one thirty seven not
enough to fund a have part time
or full time position in
addition to that
to be able to carry out all the
other functions related to
health councils and so on that
note I'm gonna pass it to doctor
Fegan.
Thank you very much was on the.
I've known and worked with
health councils for a long time
and health councils have been
systemically underfunded and
then went to health councils was
the word of the budget we sell
just the you know the diminution
of the capacity of health
councils for many of them.
And if we look at all the pieces
and I've written all this stuff
and I'm just going to talk so if
we look at all the pieces what
we see is.
That house bill one thirty seven
is an unfunded mandate
currently.
It is just black and so full of
unfunded mandate there's not a
lot any of us can do what twelve
thousand and I I think we should
give a huge surprise to anybody
that can try to to do much work
for twelve thousand so what has
been happening though is there's
been funding from Robert wood
Johnson and Robert wood Johnson
came in second funding because
there was a a pilot project with
seven health councils that did
so much great work and its
service to leverage to partner
with in M. D. O. H. in handling
the CDC Kellogg funding that is
poured into our state and it's a
blessing and a curse right you
see this all the time in this
committee so what we have is a
period of short short period
where there's fifty nine
thousand the health councils
have to work and it's not full
funding but it's more than
they've had in forever it feels
like.
And so what health conscious of
that is they have been able to
mobilize factions and thousands
of people to get vaccinations
they were there they were on the
ground they were reaching out to
committee members to talk about
what's working what's not what
questions do you have.
And so health councils have also
been a critical partner would
effort somebody in the state
needs to convene community
members to talk about something
where they go they go to the
health council and so you need
to have continuous baseline
funding and all and with a
couple of things I worked on the
study was Ron Hale who used to
work with the activity was also
executive director of health
councils and we discovered by
looking at a couple years of
funding and this was back in two
thousand and four so we're
looking at funding in two
thousand three two thousand and
two that health councils in the
aggregate they leveraged four to
one ratio so for every dollar
invested in health councils they
returned back for and that does
not count the value of all of
the volunteers from community
health councils right now are of
reaching about forty three
hundred people directly in the
it in the immediate family and
many thousands of people in the
extended families and
communities all what we've seen
is not only did our study show
leverage four of one but a later
study out of you with them using
a different methodology found
that if health councils receive
baseline adequate levels of
funding so we had to studies of
the one I did was wrong hail and
UNM leverages four one so if we
continue to have unfunded
mandates the health councils if
this money is going to sunset
the CDC come up funding will not
continue after the third year
and that's an extra you know.
No cost extension here health
councils will have to say no.
And health councils or critical
part of of the public of the
presentation.
That there's an unfunded mandate
and the data shows and the
stories that we're getting from
health council shows the power
of this group so thank you very
much thank you very much doctor
Egan thank you and thank you
doctor you get and I like to
other little context around the
funding and what made possible
for leading public health
priorities particularly during a
World pandemic comment last year
our health councils were able to
host over twenty four thousand I
a vaccine equity events and also
reach over three hundred forty
five thousand New Mexicans to
ensure vaccination so along with
the examples that are our
colleagues have share with all
of you.
Health councils are the lifeline
to meeting the public health
needs of our local community
rural border towns you know
communities that are not served
in the capacity that they should
be and so this is not just an
investment of public health but
also within the system of health
counselors are mandated to
provide these these you know
developing comprehensive health
impact assessments collected
data so we can also report back
internally and for partners into
the state here is the you know
quantifiable impact that we're
having in our communities and
there's plenty of impact stories
on the qualitative and
quantitative side it within the
work the public health councils
are doing and so this takes a
level of expertise experience
competency X. skill set to
deliver on this work and it's
one that should really be
compensated
adequately.
I get so thank you for your time
thank thank thank you very much
thank you representative Allison
thank you to experts and kind as
the committee's done we're going
to do three voices and support
are there a few more folks want
to speak we don't want to
committee office go ahead if you
could just yeah let's let's have
If you could line up and then
just give a brief testimony
sorry but we usually have a Mike
the Mike is out today if you
would one money introduce you
don't have to sit down and can
introduce yourself.
With that can agree at testimony
into but there were enough
tears.
hello committee chair New
committee chair and committee
members I think you for having
us today my name is Christopher
heights and I serve as a health
council coordinator from
McKinley County one of our
really active health councils
and now we are one of those
health counselors that can turn
that four to one ratio just
recently in our last when we
turned at that twelve thousand
dollars into two hundred
thousand dollars our homes and
homelessness so even more than
four to one health counselors
can help up the those had to get
into community health and cut to
to help collaboration as well as
a provide funding to as well if
we really get into it but at I
really like I think within the
last two years since the the the
the funding was cut we've really
been struggling and myself as a
coordinator I've been juggling
everything that I can not only
just the the the the housing
staff but the education stuff
going on in our community
indigenous and
then a
for that still in in murdered
indigenous relatives we have
connection with those we work
also with structural racism
environmental racism looking at
pinpoints in the community a
where we can make a difference
and help heal these community
members so that way they can
better address our own health as
well too so we have our hands in
a lot of pockets in the
community and we really need to
be funded because I'm tired it's
been five years I've been at
this for five years and you know
there are there are a lot of
opportunities I heard today and
just this past week in
Albuquerque journal that doctors
and physicians and all kinds of
public service people are
leaving our our our state and
since you're now we're
hemorrhaging hemorrhaging our
brain power hemorrhaging a
public health how are and if we
keep on doing this will just
keep losing it will keep losing
coordinators will keep losing
public health officials and will
be a lot harder for us to to to
address so you know we really
need to be funded luckily we do
have some of that CDC funding.
And we're able to move this
around but you know if I had
staff members and things like
that I could have had more time
to look for other opportunities
for the community rather than
just paying myself you thank
thank you very much Mr hoods.
Yes Sir.
German small and Representative
my name is.
My name is Anthony it but I'm
Representative the pueblo of
Santa Domingo
Pueblo of hope of health council
and I think you need to be
reminded that you had just
passed some do passes on several
things that have been brought to
this committee this afternoon
the children to foster kids the
case workers and all those
things happen impact the local
community but who are the people
at the local community that I
understand what the loss that
you pass all of the policies
that are given down to HSD and
it H. H. D. O. H. holiday
interpreted at the local
community health councils are
the ones that don't fully
understand health care public
health care but also understand
the people in their communities
in terms of what their
challenges are from day to day
living and I think that this is
where it's vital that their
health councils are able to
interpret your laws are able to
interpret all the policies and
services provided by the
agencies of the state and yet
translate them so that they are
meeting full that they are
coordinated and then at the same
time we also it Senator me go
find a lot of the vaccinations
because apparently a lot of the
facilities that are authorized
by the state or closed on
weekends so that's where I think
the vitamins and the importance
of health conscious Committee
because we are able to
understand the pulse of the
community yet be able to get all
the services and money that you
appropriated to make sure it's
coordinated and given to the
people that are needed thank you
thank you very much for your.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Lauren
Reichelt to date was my last day
as the co chair of the alliance
of health councils I I think
I've been doing it since I don't
know like seven or eight years
now and for thirty years I was
the coordinator of the Rio
Arriba community health council
in around twenty sixteen or
twenty seventeen I stopped
counting how much money we
brought in we had gotten to a
hundred million dollars and I
just didn't think anybody would
believe me if I raise that and
the farther we passed then
levies fund issues countless
requests and legislative
appropriations we renovated the
Espanola hospital so it is one
of the best hospitals in the
region we built a health clinic
a one stop shop for health care
we built a residential treatment
center and we also back Rio
Arriba if you recall was the
first county in the country to
be hit by the opioid epidemic
back then and that was around
the year two thousand I sat in
the office of the online look at
their death records and realize
that what we were facing was
something that had actually been
instigated by the pharmaceutical
companies and our health council
got that information out around
the country and we change the
narrative around substance abuse
just from one little tiny County
and one last thing I'd like to
tell you is that we
were selected by the CDC as one
of six rural counties to be
emulated by the rest of the
country for vaccinating so much
of our population we organized
volunteers to make math next and
we've got about ninety one
percent of our population
vaccinated this is an excellent
investment and I strongly
encourage you it will do more
for health equity.
Than anything I can pick up
thank you very much I.
Thank you very much we have a
couple of folks online we're
going to go first to miss we'll
go again Miss World out go
ahead.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee the last time
today and and we will Taos New
Mexico voices for children we
stand in support of HB forty
nine and thank the sponsors for
caring at we support this
request for funding of county
tribal health councils because
these councils are able to warn
them we identify local health
needs and to create and
coordinate implementation of
specifically tailored plans to
address the diverse needs across
our state.
Including a variety of social
determinants of health and we
see these councils as an
incredible asset to our state's
public health and we ask the
committee to support each be
forty nine thank you thank you
very much miss will the okay we
have also
And I I apologize for first
thing miss Neff Memphis I
apologize for not Dave go ahead
and if you could please state
your name correctly.
Certainly Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Secora Nefish and I am the
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico tribes the state
nonprofit association I stand in
strong support of H. B. line
health councils are essential to
the well being of our
communities they understand
community needs and work with
communities prior to identify
priorities health councils and
charitable nonprofits for key
allies and serving our
communities please invest in the
well being of New Mexicos
communities by investing in
public health infrastructure
please support H. B. forty nine
thank you.
Thank you Mr that and efficient
thank you and I
okay we're gonna now go to
committee.
First Representative Allison we
want to know I believe there is
there is a small amount a
hundred thousand extra dollars
in H. B. to math for health
councils unfortunately the
entirety of this request is not
contained in H. B. H. B. two
But
I just want to note that first
we're going to go to committee
so
they're all there's also
additional money going to
department of health and and HSD
perhaps the health councils can
apply for some of that funding
and but first let's go to
committee for any questions
ranking member Armstrong please
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative for bringing
this forward I fought hard for
many years to try to get funding
in this and to no avail avail I
mean I feel like a failure.
And I know you guys fight really
hard boots on the ground.
I have given some junior money
to a kid a health council that
asked the junior money is now
closed we've we've allocated at
all but that is another way and
I don't like that weights piece
Mealing and it's not the way to
do it and I would hope that we
could take a second look at this
next year to to do something
these are the people what's on
the ground in my communities
familiar faces that know what
the community needs so thank you
Representative thank thank you
very much for making member
Armstrong any other questions.
Representative Garrett.
Thank you Mr chair so we write
it understanding all every
county has one but only nine of
the twenty three tribes and
pueblos the nations that
correct.
And Mr chairman and
Representative and and experts
the money that goes to the
health council to pay for the
salary of one person.
What is the money to actually.
Currently there's twelve
thousand dollars and so that
pays for a tiny sliver and
that's the only way the if you
so that after this co op CDC
funding is gone there's twelve
thousand dollars.
That thank you doctor thank you
okay thank you.
Okay the Representative Garrett
I have a brief question
Representative Allison experts
when when does sort of the the
philanthropic and federal
funding hello how does that run
out this year or when does that.
What what is the timing for that
I believe it runs out FY at the
end of FY twenty two three which
is the end of June in that
fiscal year and cycle.
that's my understanding okay I I
think and maybe we'll ask what
some of our the the staff to to
look into that
Okay Representative turned.
Thank you Mr chair I I have to
sit general question regarding
this particular item which came
up with the first item that was
before the Committee and to well
this so that they can just to
see it so I I I think what we
generally what we do we will
like we will I think we we will
table the legislation today
Representative turned and
Representative Allison I think
there's been a clear call
representative Allison
Representative remember
Armstrong there is some some
more additional funding for this
purpose but not nearly enough as
what it sounds like
as Representative turned it is
pointing out the Senate is now
I'm just taking up House Bill to
where we sent a little
additional but not the full
amount that.
So we we would table the bill
today this is a straight
appropriation and so it it it
goes straight through the budget
there's no additional changes in
policy is just additional
funding but there is there's a
clear need and I think a clear
call for us as the house in
going into the LESC process for
this to be one of the top health
related items on our list we're
doing very significant work in
that area but is representative
Allison and ranking member
Armstrong pointed out that the
health councils and folks on the
ground or how you administer and
make this work across
communities
but in answer Representative
heard and we will we can table
today if there are changes we
could technically bring it back
up but the changes would happen
in H. B. two as it goes through
the Senate and then in any sort
of work between the two
reconciling.
Mr chair.
You're saying that you're
suggesting we table this is this
even above the recommendation of
both LFC and exec.
Thank you Representative the the
the Representative Allison the
extra amount that is got that
you and and folks of help get in
to HB to will stay in the
legislature will stays in H. B.
two as it is now
we'll table this today but it
won't take anything out of HB to
the sec.
If that answers the question.
Kinda sorta.
One of Mr Mr chair what is table
what does that mean exactly does
it mean that it is not here is
of irreversible or we can
reactivate it.
That thank you Representative
about us and I think if there is
additional money that's added to
that there is still a way to add
an additional resources through
the H. B. two through the help
through the budget on the Senate
side and then in
Reconciling with once the Senate
does whatever action they take
they were they will take on
that.
And and we don't need the the.
So and we don't need the
Legisla- there's no actual
policy in the legislation but
the clear call for additional
funding is here that'll continue
through this session it also
continue into the summer as the
LFC setting this is not only
additional funding for things
like reimbursement for medical
professionals and others but
that the health councils are a
core part of public health and
working to restore additional
funding as part of them okay
Mister chair.
Choose to table it of we would
not resurrected.
I think of what I need to point
out is on page twelve of your
hand out you can see that the
health councils benefit every
inch of New Mexico I want it to
be considered before you tell me
the it's going to be tabled are
you telling me that it's not
going to.
We're not gonna be able to do a
presentation on the floor.
If it's stable.
Thank thank you representative
Allison
that that that yes that that
would be after that would that
would not be a presentation of
the the bill on the floor
however representative Allison
there is still opportunities to
look to add an additional
funding as HB to go through the
Senate and then is reconciled
between the two I think we would
also I don't think we have
anybody from I don't know if we
have any additional junior
funding.
We could will get.
But that's that's the case we
would not hear the presentation
on the floor.
It this year the again
Representative Allison I think
it's a this is.
We're making very substantial
investments in reimbursements
and other health related areas
the health councils.
Including behavioral health
councils there is a little some
additional money not to the
level that you're suggesting
here in H. B. two there is a
million dollars specifically
through there are other
resources of funding that may be
used for this Representative
Allison and experts the.
I think and we can go into
offline though some of those
there's a million dollars for
substance use disorder connected
with on sovereign tribal nations
there is additional funding that
may be available for health
councils as part of that
funding.
Okay thanks for that Mr chair at
this time I can this reserve my
thoughts that thank you very
much Representative Allison
thank you to you thank you to
your experts
with that we will go two for a
motion and and again members and
this is one of the most
challenging things about the
committee is that if we're not
able to fully fund items there
for that the the bills
especially that are just
appropriations cannot pass
through it doesn't mean that
there won't be more funding for
these purposes that flow this
year it just means that in this
fashion we the bill can't move
through this committee so I
asked for a motion to table.
Okay the table Mr K. there's a
motion by ranking member
Armstrong is there a second.
Caters a motion and a second
let is there any opposition to
that motion.
We can bring this back up if
there are changes in the Senate
saying opposition there's a
temporary table for this time.
Thank you very much thank you
representative Allison.
Okay.
Business will be here tomorrow
again after the floor begins and
we'll look forward to seeing
members then thank you very much
for your time today.
