vice chair representative
Christine Trujillo we see we
have Representative Sweetser
Representative Brown is on
Representative Chatfield is on
Representative Dixon is on.
As is Representative Lane.
Representative Lara.
Is on in the course madam chair
you are here also so we are all
here madam chair we have a
number of attendees.
First it just treated
as we all of our hearings madam
chair what would like to do is
to go ahead and go to Mr so Lee
and Mr Liu for their
presentation from the LFC and
then move into a discussion with
our if panelists for Secretary
Stewart very grateful to have
him on does that.
Thank you thank you Mr.
Mr solely can you get us started
please.
I'm gonna have Mister little
start with an overview
since that's the biggest part of
school funding and walked
through how that works and.
Big picture down to some
details.
And then we'll get into the
discussions around this area.
Thank you very much asystole Mr
loop and just as a note
committee members madam chair
wanted to make sure that we went
through this discussion on the
US funding formula at this
granular level to start us off.
Mr Liu.
Thank you Mr chairman chaos in
my screen.
Okay so we can.
So just to give a brief overview
of the funding formula
It's basically a few
calculations done at the school
district level and then compiled
at the public education
department so your first step in
this process is.
Essentially counting ma'am which
is student membership at the
school district multiplying it
by various formula factors such
as you know they're special
education student they generated
additional funding if they
aren't at risk student or if
there and twelfth grade they're
different cost differentials
that are applied to the students
which ones those are all some
then added together.
You get a districts program unit
total what you'll see here in
the first row.
After all the program units are
added together statewide the
public education department uses
that value to calculate a unit
value which you'll see in the
second row.
And to do so they simply take
the appropriation which in part
is called the program cost.
Devided by all of the units that
I mentioned earlier statewide
and that's how you get the unit
value that is discussed
frequently in the public
education budget.
And of course the final process
and determining at districts
allocation is that the credits
for local and federal revenue
which is your impact aid your
local half mill levy are
subtracted from the program
costs to get your state
equalization guarantee
distribution or otherwise known
as SCG so this is just a very.
Simplified overview of how the
funding formula will operates
I'm just to give you a little
more context this is the
distribution of the funding
formula itself for this current.
The school year there's most of
it is in your basic membership
counts which is shown here in
the blue section of this pie
chart essentially.
Here are units that children
generate for being in a
kindergarten through twelfth
grade classroom most of that
funding is dedicated to that the
next.
Big piece of the funding formula
comes from special education
units and then the third largest
portion is of course the at risk
index which the legislature has
increased in recent years.
This is a high level overview on
page twenty six of your packet
basically just breaking down the
total units by segment and this
is a statewide rollout of all of
the units in each category.
And then on the next page page
twenty seven of your packet
we've actually provided to a.
Actual.
Funded nine ten be important for
example district in this case
it's Bernalillo public schools
this will again use of the
detailed accounting to the
district level on how they
calculate their individual units
which
they submit to the public
education department you'll see
they have.
Totals here for each of their
grade levels and then there's a
specific cost differential that.
Those you membership unit those
membership counts are multiplied
against to get program units.
He's a little bigger yeah
certainly I'll try to scroll in
here that better.
Yes.
So madam chair you can see that
not all students.
Grade levels are weighted
equally so there's an assumption
that grades four through five.
Basically are the most efficient
sizes at.
Therefore closest to the value
of one.
There's an assumption that
grades one through three because
class sizes have to be smaller
for those grades that there's a
higher cost and so there's a
higher cost differential given
for those grades the same thing
with
kindergarten.
At one point four four.
And then there's an assumption
that middle school and high
school because
of.
Additional cost at those.
Grade levels particularly for
vocational education the
legislature merge that with an
old for creation of education
weighting factor of one point
two five.
So there's a section to high
school and middle school cost
almost twenty five percent more
than you know and an upper
elementary school cost and this
generates more money for the
school districts depending on
how many students are enrolled
in various grade levels.
Mr chair I think that
essentially summarizes the
presentation now excuse me
please I really want you to take
us through the map I mean
there's there's people on this
committee that don't understand
how this funding formula works
so.
People yeah certainly and
She taken through the math okay
I can do that Mr chair members
the committee so the.
The central calculation is that
the district will take.
State thank you Mr Saly mention
kindergarten.
Students the membership.
Actually also right there yes so
they'll take the membership of
kindergarten first second third
fourth all the way through
twelfth.
Multiplied by these cost index
for those grade levels.
And generate these program units
here on the third column.
Those units are then added
together to get your basic
program units.
Then the district will go look
at their membership and count
how many students are in special
education.
And depending on the level of
service so if you are only
providing a little bit of
special education service you
would be counted towards an A.
B..
Program if you have a a lot of
additional services are a lot of
different time spent providing
special education services you'd
be providing at the level.
Program for the students in New
generate a larger factor.
Comparatively so your A. level
students are generating point
seven units each and your do
level or to enter into.
Units each.
The level are going to be self
contained special education
classrooms typically and a and
B. level will be supplementary
Education services keep in mind
that these men counts.
Are in it are the same the same
kids are being counted twice so
they were already counted if
they were in special ed in the
third grade count in the
districts getting additional
money on top of that base amount
of money for the special
education services.
Thank you Charles.
That's correct so these are in
addition to the basic program
units that a school district
already generates for K. twelve.
Notice that the formula also
includes three and four year old
developmentally disabled
disabled students as well and
they also generate two units
each in the formula.
The special education.
Components also include a
formula for ancillary FTEs those
staff members that are providing
ancillary services they generate
about twenty five units FTE or
full time equivalent.
The case the school districts
for each of those FTE then would
multiply you know the twenty to
factor twenty five units for
each of those FTE and that's how
we can derive they're bringing
in you know what would you say
right now setting a hundred
fifteen thousand dollars per
FTE.
It's it's over a hundred
thousand dollars per one FTE.
So when you hear districts talk
about they don't have enough
money to hire ancillary staff
that's why you'll see perplexing
looks on our faces because we
know how much money is being
generated through the formula
for those staff members.
So moving on to elementary fine
arts programs this portion of
the formula essentially provides
half the sorry.
Provides the point oh five units
for each elementary school
student that is participating in
a fine arts program.
Similarly there is bilingual
multicultural education programs
they generate point five units
based on the.
Time that students are provided
in a bilingual program some
provide up to three hours some
find one hour depending on the
amount of time as you'll see in
this portion they generate a
fraction of point five units.
Also you have your elementary P.
programs at the bottom here
these generate a factor of point
oh six so students participating
in an elementary P. program will
also generate program units.
Based on this case.
Porteno about these programs is
these are optional programs that
districts can choose to do or
not and so if they choose to do
a bilingual program where only
about half of that districts
have chosen to do that.
Then they can generate these
extra funding sources depending
on the configuration of their
programs but it's also they're
supposed to follow the bilingual
multicultural Act in how they
implement and use that money so
that's an example because the
newest type of approach that
we've taken is similar to the
these programs are the extended
learning programs Representative
if you want to do the program
adopt and that's great we'll
provide you what you gotta do it
according to the statutes that
govern that funding.
Yes and I think on this
particular line can be important
since it's from FY nineteen I
don't believe it has the K. five
plus extended learning time
pieces on this yet but they
would be treated very similarly
to these discretionary programs
essentially where you'd be just
multiplying it by point one one
units for an extended learning
time program and point three
units for a K. five plus
program.
Once all of these.
Units.
So the special discretionary
program special education units
and the basic program units have
been added together.
you get something called till
program units.
Before we go there so this is a
this is the latest form that we
had on file.
so it doesn't reflect all the
formula changes that you put
into place including the teacher
cost index in the teeny so
that's multiplied against all of
the basic membership amounts and
is adjusted upward.
And then all of these other ones
that studies highlighted special
education bilingual extended
learning those are the in
addition those are then added to
that new subtotal.
That's correct so the what
you'll see on the sheet is it
says T. any index
it's now like Charles mentioned
change to a staff cost
multiplier which is a mix
between the TV index and new
teacher cost index.
And each district generates that
index based on the licensure
level of their teachers and
staff the experience level and a
mixture of your qualifications
and credentials and so they
generate an index which is then
multiplied against what I've
highlighted here your
kindergarten through twelfth
grade basic program units
and that change was to align the
the three tiered system with the
funding formula for those basic
teacher labor cost and that the
index itself is intended to
identify differences in labor
cost among the school districts
so one school district has a lot
of teachers in the level three
category they're going to cost
more because they have higher
minimum salaries compared to
maybe another district that's
only hiring level one teachers
and their labor cost would be
much lower so there index value
would be lowered they would get
less money because they're
costing us high what's ended up
shaking out is that everybody
looks about the same.
so there's not very much
variation out there among the
school districts and charter
schools so there's not very much
money that really flows through
this because you know we've got
now fifteen years under our belt
of the three tiered system and
everybody's looking like a
normal bell shaped curve with
their labor costs.
What this is important is this
all in statute yes.
How many times has it changed in
statute about the last ten
years.
and last ten years whether major
changes were House Bill five and
Senate bill one.
but there's been adjustments to
like the at risk index weighting
that we'll get to in a minute
overall the no this formula has
been in place since the early
seventies and it's been amended
our maybe about eighty five to
ninety times and how many bills
are there now that have been
dropped to changes formula.
Just this year.
Senator you know that I'm sure
I'd have had good luck but
there's probably at least four
or five that directly affect
many pieces of this.
For that we've discussed already
so I think that's important for
this working group to understand
is that this funding formula is
in statute it's not something
that we cook up in HSC or LSC or
Ellie S. C. cooks up it's
something that is in law that
we're responsible for following
and every time somebody goes
goes in and does some minor
tweaks here it's a ripple effect
is like a domino effect
throughout the whole process in
how things are changed.
So sometimes this formula
changes.
I'm in front of us and sometimes
they don't.
But if they don't that means
that we're not knowing what that
change to the budget is going to
be.
So I thought it was incredibly
important for you as a workgroup
to understand that we're
building this education budget
based on state statute
guidelines it's not something
that we cook up or that we're
trying to side staff or try to
do a work around I mean it's
basically something that anybody
who does this budget's going to
have to follow.
And I asked the staff to put
together a real real time school
district.
And looking at all the many many
factors that go into this and
how just one tweak changes
everything.
So I I I appreciate the US that
I imagine that you're going to
have people that are going to
ask for more time offline on
this but I think it's a good
precursor to the overall budget
thank you thank you
Representative small.
You can take that down us any
thank thank you very much madam
chair this is extraordinarily
helpful before we go forward and
and heeding the call to
To dive into these offline right
we did want to ask if Secretary
Stewart had anything to add on
this overall
funding formula introduction
before we go through the staff
high level proposals so
Secretary Stewart would like to
invite you to offer any quicker
if anything from here and before
we move on.
Thank you thank you madam chair
Mister chair and thank you Sonny
Charles for the presentation I
don't have a lot to add I would
just say that the at the
department part of our
responsibility is to calculate
the unit value based on the
projected units that are
generated in the appropriation
that's made the team at the
department has as.
We we aim to get as close as we
can to the appropriation without
going over typically which in
the last last year's we're we're
getting about ninety nine point
five percent accuracy and and
getting that out I think the the
biggest variables traditionally
have been impacted Aid because
the amount that that comes in at
is largely no more having to set
the unit value so it's
fluctuated and largely out of
state control and also
enrollment growth units which
are calculated in the current
year so so those are two areas
where we have to have to make
some educated guesses as to how
many units are gonna be
generated there when sending the
unit value and this year we
think the enrollment growth
piece is going to be probably a
bigger variable than usual so
we're we're we know there'll be
some pandemic related impacts to
that and then also the impacted
depending on the outcome of the
various bills are moving through
the session and could either
remain the same level of
of of the variable or it if the
state no longer takes credit
then that very well may make go
away so so we're we're looking
at both of those one thing that
is in the executive package is
looking at the state support
reserve.
And the state support reserves
there mainly in case we
overshoot the unit value in our
assumptions and need to to
backfill that money if there's
always a sufficient recurring
revenue source in the state
support reserve allows us to not
have to get close to zero get
close to a hundred percent
without going over it would give
us a little bit more wiggle room
to be a little bit on the high
side or a little bit on the low
side and and so that's why
you'll see some language
requesting the executive to have
any money that reverts from the
SCG go into the state support
reserve up to a certain amount
so that way we can be a little
bit more aggressive in making
sure that the the full amount of
the appropriation is expended
every year and that that we're
not seeing any money left on the
table in a given year so
that'll stop and turn it back
over to the committee thank you
thank you very much thank you
Secretary okay committee non and
also know that we have a hard
stop right around two fifty or
so
madam chair I think what we like
to do next is to go then to back
to Mr Liu
to walk us through the high
level public schools support we
also want to note that we know
we're gonna be hearing Mr
secretary your budget that PED
budget after we go through the
public school support.
So with that Mr Liu and or Mr so
the can you begin walking us
through the high level
Staff scenario for public
schools support.
Mr chair will he be able to.
A put it online as well.
Thank you very much for your
Trujillo yet if we can I I think
let's actually just go through
quickly without it online so
that we're just going through
now as we've been doing in the
past and and we also want to
note that were run and we could
be running short on time
especially as we get to the PED
budget thank you very much bye
Sir Mr little can you big kick
us off.
Certainly Mr chair so on page
one of your packet on the far
right column you'll see the
staff scenario and this scenario
changes the LFC recommendation
primarily on lines twelve and
thirteen you'll see an increase
of thirty million for extended
learning time programs online
twelve an increase of forty
million on line thirteen for K.
five plus programs this is
sensually replaces the
nonrecurring public education
reform dollars that were
provided for those programs in
the LFC recommendation you can
find the differences on the
second page on line one fourteen
and one fifteen.
But back to page one and the
other changes in the staff
scenario include line fifty four
which is an increase of five
hundred thousand dollars for the
indigenous multilingual
multicultural and special
education initiatives and a
decrease of five hundred
thousand online sixty seven from
your steam initiatives.
On your second page.
Lines eighty eight and eighty
nine you'll see a two million
dollar increase from those two
lines for.
Compensation in the back of the
bill section eight first person.
And then alliance.
Let me clarify that Mr go ahead
and discuss with the the
rationale for that it's still a
one and a half percent Cologne
L. AST had a slightly different
calculations for what that would
cost and so this just gets to
the LFC projection.
What.
Excellent.
Thank you for that clarification
Charles I'm moving on to line
one oh seven you'll see a
increase of twenty million
dollars for the family income
index.
Pilot from the public education
reform Fund this is a two year
pilot that will authorize the
appropriation for FY twenty two
in FY twenty three.
On line one eleven you'll see a
decrease of four million for the
tribal remedy framework as
requested by stakeholders there
was a need for general fund
appropriations for their request
online one twelve.
You have a ten million dollar
increase from the public
education reform Fund as a
transfer the to community
schools fund.
On lines one fourteen one
fifteen once again that's the
replacement of seventy million
from the public education reform
Fund for extended learning time
programs and K. five plus.
Online one thirty two you have
two hundred thousand for the
black Education Act and.
Well alliance one thirty nine to
one forty two you have other
state funds and transfers
particularly ones that related
to the.
Tribal education department
messages from the general fund.
And with that Mr chair I stand
open for questions that's your
brief overview of the staff
scenario and Mr chairman just to
clarify that.
The.
The rationale of the staff
scenario for putting money in
the funding funding formula for
the extended learning programs
is that was funded in the LFC
recommendation with a lot of
nonrecurring it's just shores up
the base and it makes available
those programs for all students
statewide
it does not mandated in the the
staff scenario the LFC did not
mandated but the money is there
to do a universal extended
learning.
Actually thank you very much Mr
solely thank you very much Mr
Liu for begin at walking us
through the high level all of
the as is for practice the
workgroup members have all of
these documents
While we wait a little bit for
for folks to get up on to the
board with questions
We'll go ahead madam chair do
you I'm happy to kick off with
some questions.
Unless you would like to begin
on here and I see let me first
then go to Representative I
share Trujillo and then
Representative Sweetser.
Yes thank you.
Representative small and the
Representative.
Either Mister Liu or
Our Mr Saly may be able to
answer this or even secretary
Ryan in the other state and
federal funds no.
We've been working on I think
that's like all of those are
supplementary.
Items to specific.
requested my correct.
Anybody.
State Mr chair representative so
this chart simply reflects other
non general fund appropriations
so you see on line one or three
to one thirty three those are
all your public education reform
Fund recommendations and below
that are funding from other
sources such as the public
school capital outlay or federal
funds or STBs okay so I guess
what I'm trying to ask is.
Madam chair and Mr chair at
one of the three of you.
One of the things that I've
always found it a problem is
that we do the budget.
Kind of segregated from
everything else even though we
have work groups and things like
that but then we run are are
built right in dollar bills.
Unless we've spoken to someone
specifically from LFC staff from
LFC your staff from LTSE.
To figure out a way to in to
inject or include a specific
request.
These items here all seem like
they've already been.
There is something there for
every single thing that.
do the PED or LESC or.
Your LFC wants where where do we
include requests for.
From legislators.
Thank if something you know we
we hear those lasted
appropriations right everybody
does the dog and pony show we
have to go up and expect and and
and hope that the they'll be
money for legislative requests
where are they in here.
That individual legislative
requests are done through the
supplemental bill that hasn't
been discussed yet out.
And so if there is an individual
request that you have
specifically representative will
be taken up in about a week but
this budget is a combination of
a lot of work and the
particularly everything above
the line is dictated by state
law and the things below the
line were a combination of all
of C. work there's a lot of L.
E. S. C. work put in here and
the bills like Senate bill one
and house bill five that were
carried the last couple of years
to deal with major changes in at
risk.
So if there's an individual
request it would have been in
about a week or so to the
supplemental bill well madam
chair thank you I appreciate
that I wanted clarity because
I've been asked by some people
well what happens were further
requests that we're supposed to.
Go through a dating I just keep
forgetting it's through the
supplemental but sometimes when
we go through supplemental madam
chair and Mistretta B. for
example.
The request this seed.
Is sometimes more than the
supplemental.
Can find so how do we how do we.
Work with those that educators
are those legislators are trying
to get something that I think
the main thing is as as you know
being on the committee for the
last ten years what we end up
doing as we go over and we work
with the Senate as they're doing
their amendment process we're
only half of the appropriations
process for the budget bill
fifty percent of it is down here
we do generally all the hearings
if there's any major adjustments
that happens over on the Senate
side but we have to agree and
sometimes we do and sometimes we
don't it just depends on what it
is.
Well madam chair I appreciate
that because I'm not sure if the
if any public is listening to
this but but the bottom line is
the I think everybody needed to
know what the process is and I
think you give us some clear
definitions about step one step
two step three so that we all
know what's going on and the
that we people don't feel like
they've been left out in the
lurch because they didn't get to
this main.
Focus here at thank you for
bringing that up Representative
thank you very much thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Trujillo next we
have Representative Sweetser
thank you Mr chair and my
question is sort of a follow up
to Representative Trujillo this
morning in the house said we
unanimously passed a bill that
gives a lot of flexibility to K.
five plus an extended learning
time it makes it all the way
through then that's going to
allow a whole lot more districts
to qualify for that and I I
guess I just wanted some
reassurance that this budget was
going to be enough to cover
that.
That thank you Representative I.
Mr Saly can you help.
Talk about the universal
Flexibility of the additional
wrecked staff recommendation and
it's proposal to be in the base
budget so the the staff proposal
is that the extended learning
time programs available for any
student in any school district
basically we're intending it to
provide also a hundred percent
of the students and then for K.
five plus it's which is enough
for all high poverty schools not
all high poverty schools will
choose to use it but that's the
how what percentage of the
school setting.
Mr chair Charles it's about
fifty fifty fifty eight percent.
All right excellent so a hundred
percent of extended learning
time close to sixty percent
Five plus correct and what I
wanted thank you so much thank
you Mr thank you so much
Representative Sweetser next we
have Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr chair I would like
back up just a little bit on
page twenty four.
Last three.
It says program crossed my
district local and federal
revenue I assume that refers to
the impact aid which we've been
called we can no longer take
credit for and I assume that
this is the old formula that
will the change once we pass
legislation that changes the
formula is that true or false.
That's correct Representative so
program cost which is the total
amount available for the funding
formula includes both the
appropriation from the state as
well as projected local revenues
and impact Aid revenues those
are combined and then the G. J.
divides that total pie by the
total number of units.
To get the unit value and then
when you're calculating an
individual school districts.
formula funds there is at the
very end of it of that
calculation of that detail she
we're showing you
a calculation to save what
portion of that program crossed
through the formula funding
should come from the state and
what portion should come from
local revenues and impact Aid
revenues and so it's deducted
from that program cost and that
becomes a state equalization
guarantee with those proposals
to get rid of those credits that
calculation would no longer
occur that you see at the bottom
of that page anymore and the
basically the the state
equalization guarantee would go
up to virtually a hundred
percent.
So Mister chair surely this is a
this is the part of the of the
funding formula for Chelsea
What we could.
That we can do it for FY twenty
one but yes you're correct we
lost for FY twenty that
disparity yes and there's a risk
going forward as well so those
local revenues would be dealt
with in a different way
depending on which bills you'll
simply passed thank you thank
you Mr thank you
thank you very much
Representative Chatfield next
we're going to go to
Representative Dixon and
Representative lane.
Representative Dixon.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
I had a question I was
interested in page one of the
packet of rose sixty one through
sixty three.
and this would just regards to
food programs for children in
our elementary schools I have
one of the schools in my
district has a very high poverty
rate and so a lot of our
students rely on breakfast
before the bell and sort of
you know the the co pays for
lunch and I'm just can you walk
me through.
Where the funding is for this
and just so that I understand.
Thank you very much.
Yes Mr chair representative the
funding for those three programs
practice for elementary
students.
Fruits and vegetables and lunch
co payments have been
consolidate online sixty four
the student Christian and
wellness and the staff scenario
also includes language
authorizing the use of those
funds for breakfast after the
bell and the.
Hunger free bill of rights that
was passed recently.
Thank you and Mr chair I'm cert
so is that a reduction in no
It's a little bit of a reduction
Is that correct.
Mr chair representative yes if
you total the the.
Complete three appropriations
yes it does represent a slight
reduction.
Is there a particular reason why
I'm just Chris thank you Mr
chair thank you Sonny Mr chair
yes representative of the the
LFC recommendation.
Is very much aligned with the
findings from the Martinez
Yazzie lawsuit and if you noted
the court's findings they did
indicate that PED below the line
programs were often inconsistent
with funding and sort of
decision making on how
allocations are made and they
were so small that they did not
have the impact that was needed
to move the needle for the state
and so the court indicated that
these were.
Not a sufficient approach to
addressing the educational
deficiencies and recommended
more funding for a program that
would be available to all at
risk students.
Thank you very much thank you Mr
Liu and Mr chair thank.
Thank you very much
Representative Dixon next we
have Representative laying them
Representative Lara
Representative lane please thank
you Mr chair I would like to
first point my question at line
one thirty three one three
three.
And I just you know as everyone
thank you for the sheets that
the steps in our is is roughly
about forty forty two million
lower
and and my understanding the
difference really is is those
dollars coming out of general
fund verses the public education
reform Fund and so I'm just
curious if we if we do the steps
in our work we're taking out a
hundred nine million what what
is that eight as a balance in
the public education reform
Fund.
Mr chair representative so the
estimated balance for FY twenty
two is about a hundred seventy
million going into the education
reform Fund assuming
expenditures from the prior year
are fully expended and so that
would leave roughly sixty
million out of the
appropriations.
After the appropriations are
made in the staff scenario.
Thank you Mr chair my other
question bills of line one forty
seven.
the way I understand this line
is is these are if you look at
fiscal year twenty one the the
cares funding which I assume is
is related to the COVID pandemic
was roughly a hundred eight
million of but then we look at
the staff funding at one forty
seven it jumps to four hundred
thirty nine million which is an
additional funding we're
expecting about three hundred
thirty million and so I'm
wondering Mr chair aware of
these additional three or thirty
million dollars for these
money's being spent and what's
happening is dollars just to be
clear before Mister Liu answers
that representative this is a
little bit of a tricky
line because the the one oh
eight is how much they got this
year they're gaining an
additional four hundred and
forty million.
starting this actually this
month I don't know if the
departments received approval
for that that we expect to be
available through the end of the
fiscal year twenty to thanks
over for over five hundred thank
you Mr that that's awful Charles
so yeah it's it's it's a
substantial amount more than
even three or thirty million so
yeah I'm.
That money is supposed to flow
out according to the title one
allocations and can basically be
spent
On appropriations so the school
districts will be going through
a process of I'm needing to work
with the department of budget
that money
and then when they do that and
those are approved we will
probably ask the department
where they budgeted the money
and and start monitoring the
spending I mean that's that's
what during the at a general
fund.
Committee chair if I could
Representative to answer your
question about availability we
have received the funding and
the application is available for
districts right now so they are
going through the process right
now of figuring out exactly
where they're going to budget
those funds and they'll be
submitting that to us here in
the in the coming weeks
generally speaking anecdotally I
had the chance to talk to number
superintendents about where
they're looking to spend some of
that money some of it is to make
sure they've got all their
students connected others are
gonna be hiring social workers
counselors for their students
others are going to be doing
more to to increase their their
COVID response and find
additional supplemental
supplemental academic supports
for some of their students so
those are just a few of some of
the anecdotal ways but like like
Charles central will be getting
that information in
as budgets are completed through
our application process.
I will follow up with the
committee and provide you with
our estimates about how much
each of the school districts are
going to get.
And these new funds to have a
shelf life through sept end of
September twenty twenty three
during the course of funds.
Great thank you Secretary
Stewart thank you Mr silly.
Representative Lane does that
answer your questions yes that's
awful and and actually I I I'm
sure I'm not alone I would I
would very much appreciate your
the receiving information on how
particular school districts how
that funding comes up in the
breaking down so I look for the
information thank you great
thank you very much
Representative Lane next we're
gonna go to Representative Lara.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for for a city and and Charles
for for the information Mister
secretary as well thank you I do
have a question related to
Representative lanes regarding
those federal funds so I know we
have Mister chair
we have school districts
requesting that we hold them
harmless.
for for the upcoming school year
and I'm wondering you you're in
if that were to happen.
Where would we find the officer
what we're with that money come
from what it comes from the line
one forty seven what does
federal funds be able to to help
with that hold harmless Mr
chair.
Yes.
This staff scenario continues
the LFC recommendations to deal
with this issue
if your call when Mr Lewis going
through that detailed sheet of
of enrollment so the enrollments
from the second and third
reporting period from this year
will provide those basic
membership units for next year
but at the same time there's
also another provision of the
formula that if you have an
increase in your enrollment year
over year you get extra money to
go in and you can see that in
the enrollment growth unit
calculation.
Under normal circumstances PDA
if a school district hasn't been
growing won't allow the school
district to budget for those
enrollment growth units when
they put together their budget
in the spring and that makes
perfect sense in normal times.
The expectation is that many of
the students were not enrolled
this year are going to re enroll
in the fall because hopefully
we'll be back to in person
learning.
So our recommendation is to let
the formula ride and have the
the school district's budget for
those rules those students
returning so that they've got to
certainty in their budget
this spring and there's language
included in your packet
I'm directing need to work with
us and LESC to do that to do
just that if that doesn't fully
work there you've you've just
saying that they've got a lot of
other resources available to
them including cash balances and
this new stimulus package to be
able to offset any
other issues that they might
have at a local level I will
also say that right now
Congress is working on the
reconciliation package proposed
by president Biden.
What if if it were passed as
proposed that would be an
additional billion dollars that
all of the the schools would get
from the federal government and
that's one billion dollars.
So we think that there's a lot
of resources out there the
superintendents association we
met with them they felt that
this was a sixty nine million
dollar problem in a multi
billion dollar funding system so
we don't think that that's going
to to break the bank at the
staff level for school
districts.
Thank you thank you thank you Mr
Saly thank you Mr chairman in
and I'm glad I'm glad to hear
that because it this way the in
essence the argument the hold
harmless harmless argument Mr
chair is is request rather moot
because we have this additional
funding that's coming in and
that can replace that okay that
that's that's right I I like
that response thank you very
much and because a lot of
comfort to me knowing that that
we can use these of these
federal funds to to take care of
that for important for this
because I know that wasn't an
issue Mr chair representative if
I could the Stuart.
One thing I would add there is
that our schools are going to
face extraordinary cost of
students come back that are not
just back filling operations but
things like providing additional
counseling additional additional
supports for academic
intervention or any providing
additional supports for just
responding to wherever we are
with COVID and whatever health
restrictions that we have pretty
extraordinary challenges so so
one thing I would caution
against is trying to
trying to say that one can be
just completely replaced with
the other
we certainly do we and we will
keep watching what happens with
this new package that comes
through we're hopeful that it
provides additional resources
but we don't know yet what level
and and when that that money
will come through and so the I
think the the hold harmless
provisions we've heard from
every superintendent that we've
spoken to is
Budgeting based on the the no of
whether students will come back
they will they noted none of
them feel comfortable with that
they'll likely cut programs now
and then try to scramble and add
them back later once they know
exactly what the what the
picture is so we may be looking
at a
near term cut and then I hope
that we can recover some of
those programs and people that
get cut on the on the front end
if there are certain she's not
there.
I thank you Mr chair thank you
thank you Mr secretary thank
you.
Thank you Representative Lara I
I have a couple of quick
questions and I will go to them
to madam chair for comments
first
I guess just building off of the
last piece Mr solely if the
estimate is the six to nine
million dollar gap
it seems like that is a very
small gap upon which and given
the well let me ask Miss Mister
slowly given the opportunity to
budget for those enrollment
growth units what that cover the
current estimated gap that
potential exists around the
uncertainty of who will re
enroll in the fall in in person
learning.
Mr.
A friend of scenarios you know
there's going to be under this
budget proposal an increase in
the unit value because the
number of units continues to
decrease even outside of the
pandemic that's a really really
important point that I want the
committee to be aware of the
number of students enrolled in
K. twelve has been on a
declining slope for a number of
years so there's already a
natural decline about one
percent and that's because sure
babies are being born and
nobody's moving to New Mexico
with a school age kids and Mr
solely on that can I just it's a
key point we started with this
funding formula what you just
said if there is a decrease in
the the number of enrolled
students state schools can
actually see an increase in the
total in the the you know about
the you of the remaining
students therefore is it correct
that even if it.
We've seen students fewer
students in New Mexico these
funding levels have actually
gone up for schools based upon
that higher unit value.
That's correct and the
additional money that you're
putting into the formula like
the line twenty four replacing
the
the federal funds what juicer
continue you know to to unwind
added up
Percent those increases to the
program cost four lines
seventeen through twenty our
other good examples that that's
increasing the size of the pie
so even if and if once units go
down a little bit through
natural changes that unit value
will automatically keep going up
I don't know that that's being
factored into a lot of the
superintendents calculations
with help you know they're
looking at their own sheet and
isolation at keeping that unit
value constant from this year
not recognizing that it's likely
to grow based on decisions that
you make today.
Understood thank you very much
fully I just briefly then.
Under the staff scenario there
are is a there's a higher amount
remaining in the public
education reform Fund under the
updated staff scenarios that
correct.
As correct okay thank you.
And
the extended learning time the
the universal extended learning
time is Representative Sweetser
he noted through her questions
the expansion of K. five plus
are those core issues that were
part of the Yazzie Martinez
decision providing that extended
time yes the court was very
critical of the state
For having K. three plus is a
below the line grant initiative
and not available to all high
poverty schools and students the
plaintiff districts including
Gallup in Santa Fe you know sued
the state saying we're not
getting enough funding to
implement these programs widely
the court was very focused on
evidence based interventions to
get better outcomes remember
that's the key thing for the
court is that our outcomes are
dismal and therefore the inputs
that we're putting into the
system where it must be
insufficient demand causal link
between the two so the
legislature's been very focused
on addressing those inputs
through Bruce to the at risk
index and what those monies
could be spent on as well as
extended learning which was
central to the the court
findings extended learning also
includes pre K. where the
legislature's continue to make
large investments even though
it's not part of the K. twelve a
formal system
and these two programs that also
include after school enrichment
program funding as part of the
extended learning time are are
central to the state's response
court case okay thank you very
much Mr so the.
And now just will go madam chair
can you take us home with
comments before we then go to a
motion on this yeah I just had a
couple of comments but before I
I ask I wanted to ask our
cabinet secretary question based
on his response to
Representative Lara about hold
harmless I'm looking at the FY
twenty two executive
recommendation above the line so
what do you have dealt with that
if you're not using the same
methodology we are.
So it in the executive
recommendation there was there
was a a wrecked to wait more of
the more of the determination as
to
prior year members or current
your membership I should say for
use in the formula on the
previous years rather than this
one and I believe the wait was
seventy five twenty five we're
we're what line what we're we're
what we find that Mr secretary
it was in the the language
document that we sent over I
don't know the exact form all of
it or what the title of that
document is I still have it
handy okay well I I'm looking at
the numbers that were provided
by the executive recommendation
and of some of the bigger issues
that I see is remediation
programs one big chunk that
would have come out of the
reform Fund and doubt.
Just a couple of other things
but what I'm looking above the
line you are also looking at the
formula working in doing its job
and that's what LFC in this and
HSC has been looking at I want I
want to make a couple of other
comments here it's my
understanding that with these
federal dollars that have come
in recently that.
Education public education
received in December four
hundred thirty two million
dollars.
And if president Biden package
goes through we're going to see
another billion dollars come
into the state of New Mexico as
with the B..
I think it's important to know
that what was presented today is
an indication of seventy two
million dollars increase
education in the recurring
component of this budget and a
reduction of seventy eight
million in the non recurring so
we're moving money into
reoccurring is what we're
basically doing.
The end of the day this is all
about trying to make sure that
we're addressing the Yazzie
Martinez issues by prioritizing
above the line.
making sure that in line twelve
and thirteen that we are
trying to make sure that we're
trying to make up for lost
learning time I mean we've heard
that consistently statewide
every public hearing that we
ever have it's all about loss of
learning.
Course anything like that is
going to you know anything
anything else outside of what we
put in here would require
legislation who knows if
anything is going to pass this
year I think it's also important
that this a staff recommendation
includes compensation you look
at line eighty eight and and the
compensation to person
that was put in there not sure
that that anybody had talked
about that yet I sure like to
during the LFC hearing the
cabinet secretaries of work with
the indexing family income index
support online one oh seven.
I think that's something that we
need to take a peek at them and
see you know that might work
discussion and thinking about
areas like mine and Aurora in a
couple of others.
I think that you'll see that
we've we've got some other
things in there that you don't
normally see one line one forty
two.
Funding for tribal Broadbent and
and who knows what's going into
the tribal cares package or
these these new care dollars are
coming in for education in
general what I want to ask you
Mr secretary when those dollars
command there is a legislature
gonna have some input in how the
money is being spent in the
budget.
You know I don't wanna relive
what we did in the special
session where we're competing as
to who needs to use the
appropriating group and what
have you and I and I just want
to ask you you know the
legislative members going to
have some input in how those
dollars are going to be spent.
Madam chair thanks for the
questions all all school start
with your last when they're
around the federal funds and and
the legislative the legislative
involvement the the federal
government through the through
the elementary and secondary
elementary secondary schools
education relief fund from the
cares Act and from the Carissa
Act.
Dedicates ninety percent of the
money that goes into that fund
to go directly out to school
districts through the title one
formula so in that there's
federal statute that that very
clearly puts it out for those
particular purposes
directly to the local education
agency and so the I think the
vast majority of those are are
determined kind of per that
statute.
In the in the case of the
looking back at my notes here in
the case of a hold harmless I
think you don't see money that's
that's allocated for the for the
public educate for the executive
recommendation in the hold
harmless mainly because what we
don't change the the size of the
pie so to speak we change the
way in which the pie gets gets
divided up and that was the
executive recommendation to find
some certainty on here's exactly
what you're going to be funded
for and in the way that the the
membership for this year is
calculated now I know there's
been a number of different
approaches to it
that find similar amounts of
certainty I believe there was a
bill that was just hurting
Education Committee a few days
ago that that I think would
would provide some of that
certainty but but what I want to
stress on this is that giving
budget authority isn't
necessarily the issue at Public
Education Department I I
personally our budget team we we
can work with districts
if if the final decision was to
give authority to budget for
growth it's just that the school
districts will do it if you if
you have uncertainty as to how
many are going to come back how
many students are going to come
back you're gonna make sure that
you've got enough to pay your
bills and so
us into project out on a on well
this many might come back and
then hopefully we have enough
cash balance to coverage in the
event that they don't come back
or maybe we can back fill it
with some of those cares monies
I I don't think that's what the
that's how that's actually a
play out on the ground and so
like I said you may see some
significant staffing cuts and
program cuts on the on the front
end and then if the students do
come back in August or September
then districts will try to hire
more teachers than and build
more programs back at that
point.
Point and it becomes very hard
to do that in the educational
setting and and that's been
pretty universal what we've
heard from from board members
and superintendents on the on
this one and I would certainly
encourage everyone to talk to
your local superintendents to
see how they would how they
would responding in those
scenarios but but that's the
feedback that we've been given I
think we're open to try to find
a solution that that seems to
work I think there are several
new table that could work in
this but but we do want to make
sure that we're not.
Seeing that the front end cut
and then try to make it up on
the back and with with the hold
harmless.
Thanks I want to recommend to
the committee then based on what
the cabinet secretaries to and
one way that we can certainly
participate is that we at we add
language into the budget bill
basically stating that yeah that
a portion of the allocation of
the four hundred thirty five
million be used for hold
harmless.
Madam chair I believe you have
some other questions in there
but I don't think I capture them
all are there other make sure
that that's part of this motion
them Mr chairman thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
very much Secretary
So that we get this through the
high level it and all of the
questions for the high level for
public schools support.
Then we have Mister Liu are you
in a position to briefly go
through the recommended
language.
Before we conclude with the
motion and then we'll go to the.
Go to the the actual public
education department budget.
Certainly Mr chair if you look
on page seven of your packet
this will show you a high level.
Actually this is a detailed
level sheet showing the
executive LFC and and staff
scenario for language changes
the.
Major differences in the staff
scenario for.
Essentially change LOC
recommendation with a few
technical corrections you'll see
them underlined and bolded
within the text so for example
on page eight line.
Item eight you'll see that
there's a correction to fully
account for public education
reform Fund dollars
within.
The general fund portion as
well.
If you can turn with me to page.
I'm I apologize sure there's a
lot of language you could turn
with me to page.
I I I I will say that there is
mostly just technical changes
Simply.
To to save time there's not many
substantive changes there is one
change if I can recall correctly
and I would need to get to back
to you on this.
Removing specific provisions on
extended learning time
flexibility is that were made in
the special session
got to be more prized understood
thank you very much Mr Liu I
know we're running a little
short on time and we'll be able
to look at that also in the
specials the more.
So that.
The yes Mr Secretary briefly
chair at eight if it please is a
committee I just wanted to see
if of our deputy secretary of
finance and operations deputy
secretary Delgado could offer a
quick word about maintenance of
effort requirements with the
federal funds.
Please.
It's very brief.
Thank you Mr chair members
committee so just just quickly
one thing to keep in mind is
that there at the federal funds
that are coming from the cares
interested Chris acts do require
maintenance of effort of state
funding and they're they're kind
of two areas to keep in mind one
is overall state funding and the
other is of special ed related
state funding so as Senate
presented earlier a portion of
the SCG calculation is based on
special education membership.
So so every all the SCG money
that flows out to school
districts includes a portion is
dedicated for special education
services and there is a
requirement that we maintain a
maintenance of effort from state
funds so that that does limit
some of the potential back fill
in the use of federal funds for
funding that was previously
allocated from state funding I
just want to know that that's
one of the things that we need
to make sure to keep an eye on
because they could put some of
those federal funds in jeopardy
thank you.
Thank you very much step state
W. secretary Delgado
We noted that there is a seventy
two million dollar general fund
recurring increase currently in
the staff proposal and
so I I think we will we will we
are safe and will not run afoul
of that maintenance of effort
and appreciate the noted
specifically as it relates to
special education funds also and
we can circle in on that offline
but I think we're we seems like
we're safe thank you okay
Then committee I think we're to
the point now having gone
through this had a number of
excellent questions and a lot of
excellent discussion I think now
we're to the point where we're
in a position to knowing there's
always the continued work and
ability to correct but with this
seventy two million dollar
general fund proposed increase
from the staff recommendation
And the addition of language
proposed by madam chair
Lundstrom we would accept I
would accept that in a motion
now for the staff recommendation
inclusive of the language.
The Mr chair.
But please Matt so I moved the
motion resources.
Yes if you would.
Do you need me to repeat that
are just say some of.
I I think we if you can move the
staff recommendation for the
public.
And included the.
Madam chair luncheons language
then that would be perfect it's.
Mr chair I move the staff
recommendation up with the
inclusion of chairwoman
Lundstrom is suggestion that a
portion of the four hundred and
thirty five million in federal
funds be used for hold harmless.
Excellent.
Is there a second for that
motion a second Mister chair
thank you great to move back
Representative Dixon and
seconded by Representative
Sweetser is there any objection
to that motion for this work
group.
I don't see any objection that
motion is a departed for the
public schools support
workgroup.
And now let's go Mr Luna can you
kick us off and then we'll go to
miss Martinez for the public
education department budget
please.
Mr chair actually I believe our
analyst Martha the Serra will be
presenting the different sheets
but I'll be happy to stay on and
answer any questions necessary.
Thank you Mr Liu I apologize
please misperceptions.
Of course Mr chair and members
of the committee good afternoon
meaning is more than the Senate
I'm the G. twenty analyst for
the LFC are with me today is my
day at the counterparts in the
Martinez and will be taking you
through the FY twenty two LFC
and Executive recommendations
for the public education
department I'll your packet
includes your sheets up please
note that your the respective
volumes one and two and three
pages all reference at the top
of the first page of the
different sheet.
Mr chair for FY twenty two the
biggest budget recommendations
for the department is identical
for both the LFC and exec out
forty nine point two million you
will notice some difference and
then the remaining section where
the LFC recommends seven hundred
and sixteen thousand Alaskan the
executive and the personal
services employee benefits
category and instead recommends
those seven hundred and sixteen
thousand and be in the
contractual services category in
line with the FY twenty one
funding levels the LFC
recommendation also includes
keeping the department staffing
levels equal to the FY twenty
one levels at two hundred ninety
point two FTE for the executive
recommends the HSD request of
two hundred and eighty six point
two FTE.
With that Mr chair I can hand it
over to Cynthia for further
comments and also stand by for
any questions thank you.
Thank you very much
misperception is please yes
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee again I'm set
there Martinez the executive
analyst for PED over a DFA and
thank you Martha for good
summary of the major differences
and I would just like to
reiterate that you can see in
person and service personnel
this is an employee benefits
there's a difference of six
hundred seven hundred and.
Let's everybody hold on for a
sec I don't know at least in my
feed miss Martinez this is
frozen.
Is that the cell for.
Yeah okay.
What will hold tight everyone as
we make sure and and catch that.
Can you keep us moving Martha
well she works on her band with.
Agency budget sorry I mean but
and but yes that was a summary
of the major differences I think
something was just going to re
integrate that difference of the
seven hundred and sixteen
thousand what's the executive
holds and the personal services
employee benefits category
That's the summary that we
prepared.
Excellent at thank you very much
miss the set up it miss Martinez
is she.
Are we able to get back to the
DFA Representative.
She looks like Mr chair looks
like she said she just dropped
off she's trying to get back on
okay in the interest of time Mr
secretary would it be okay if we
went over to you and then we can
refer return to miss Martinez
for any additional
DFA
thoughts that she wants to add
absolutely Mr chair and all the
very brief I have a couple of
quick slides to share with
regard to the PED agency budget.
So so with regard to the budget
as you can see here we we have a
large percentage of our funds
that come from federal funds and
then FY twenty one about
fourteen point three million
from the general fund the
executive recommendation
requests that to be flat you can
see how it's broken down here in
the in the two hundreds for four
person on three hundred for
contracts and and four hundred
for other most of it most of the
state funds definitely do go to
to our person and it's very
critical for us that we continue
building on some of the
important changes that we've
made we've done some some
reorganization in a number of
different areas in FY twenty and
FY twenty one and so the.
The for us when we look at our
vacancies all of the general
fund vacancies and well we we
still been able to move pretty
pretty well we're a little slow
down by that by the hiring
freeze but we we have continue
to prioritize aggressively
making sure that we fill all
these vacancies especially in
critical areas like our our
Indian Education Division and
now we've we've done a lot of
work to fill out some of the
divisions that has historically
have a large number of vacancies
and we still have a a number of
priority areas where we've we've
gone through we've tiered every
single vacancy in terms of
importance and how quickly we
need them we have a very good
handle on on which ones are
priorities for us and so we are
aggressively pursuing getting
these these people into these
priority areas once we have once
we have gotten through our our
priority hires will will have
exhausted the amount of funds
that we have available for from
our state funds and will will be
in that that sense fully fully
staffed with the with the the
state funds that we do have
available so again I think the
needs that we have go beyond
what we have state funds to to
be able to hire as we've gone
through that tearing process
we still have concerns about
making sure per Yazzie Martinez
in the requirements of Yazzie
Martinez they were able to find
the the level of support and
oversight that the court case
requires
some of these positions will
help but will know that will
need to go even further beyond
that I T. continues to be an
area where we need to invest
more deeply especially in our
data infrastructure
investigations continues to be a
concern for us for where
consistently seeing that as one
big area that is driving
especially insurance costs and
we see some of the the claims
that are out there so we need to
have a strong investigations
team and then reserves
evaluation continues to be a an
area that we
need to invest in more deeply
the money that we have will look
in will help us go toward
addressing these priorities and
and some of these concerns not
all the way so making sure that
we have that flat funding to
continue in that that state
levels critically important for
us as an agency.
Thank you very much Secretary
Stewart for the excellent at in
depth but also consists that ice
presentation
I don't know if that let's go
and see if we have questions
from the committee and will also
course continue to keep an eye
out if there are additional
comments although I think Mr
secretary you captured very well
the focus on rapid hiring and
also the additional needs you
see outside of the the current
PS the any the opportunity these
are there any questions from
committee members I see let's go
to Representative Sweetser.
You Mr chairman and thank you Mr
secretary and just so I'm
getting this straight in my
brain the difference is they've
moved from personal services
employee benefits to contractual
services because that's
historically how that money
which use Martha is am I reading
that correctly.
Mr chair and Representative
Sweetser yes that's correct the
amount of the overall amount
continues to be the same with
the exception of those seven
hundred sixteen thousand are in
one category as opposed to the
other with each of the
recommendations.
And Mr chairman of the it's
because of how it was
historically used is why you
decided to to allocate the money
in that category yes that's
correct LFC recommendations
following FY twenty one funding
levels on to put the seven
hundred sixteen thousand dollars
and the contractual services
category.
Okay and Mister chair Mister
secretary you're you're hoping
that we leave it in person
services because you're hoping
to fill those positions instead
of contracted in my reading that
correctly yes Mr chair
representative that that is
correct we've as I said we've
identified the very specific
positions that we need and how
much state funding we have to to
get those positions filled.
Okay thank you Mr chair was just
trying to.
Yeah.
The difference which is you know
every really is six of one half
a dozen of the other depending
on the direction that that'll
department is able to go to help
those positions thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Sweetser
excellent questions are are
there any additional questions
that are.
That committee members have.
I guess I would ask
quickly and and miss the set up
and then go to Secretary Stewart
So misperception as we went
through Representative Sweetser
established this is just based
on on prior history is there a
Is there an outcome tied to that
history Mr set are is it really
just kind of the way that it's
been done especially noting the
high historical vacancies that
have existed.
Yes Mr chair thank you for your
question I also would like to
refer you to your you just help
sheet that is included in your
packet I do know that the
department has funded several of
those important positions from
the previous fiscal year if I
may I'll show you I do know our
the LFC recommendation does note
all the department requested a
flat budget they can request it
to be reduced from two hundred
ninety point two two one eight
six point two the November
school report compared with that
Singapore in twenty nineteen so
that PED's build conditions
increased by ten percent well
they're vacancies decreased by
twenty seven percent Department
according to our analysis
prioritize hiring positions in
school support account about
accountability licensure
reporting and data quality
student budget and financial
analysis native American
education charter schools and
special education bureaus so our
analysis took that into
consideration and which is why
the LFC recommendation it does
put the seven hundred and
sixteen thousand dollars into
the contractual services as
opposed to the personal services
employee benefits category.
I hope that I did answer your
question Mr chair.
You get it absolutely thank you
very much miss the setup.
Looks like we we it looks like
we have another question from
Representative Trujillo.
Yes thank you very much.
Hi
wanted to ask Representative the
secretary a Ryan you know one of
the conversations we had this
morning in house education I
don't know if you able to tune
in was actually we had a very
long discussion about of the
arts programs in elementary
schools and the we clearly there
was there was a big budget cut
twenty eighteen and we haven't
seen any reinstatement of
funding for of arts and in the
schools and I know there will be
a request this year to try to
get funding for those events get
I didn't see anything of course
in our budget or nor in your
budget how do we respond thank
you Mr chair.
Mr chair representative I I know
arts programs are are immensely
important we have most mostly in
our above the line
we we don't have a lot of New
above the line programming in
the executive recommendation and
so you don't you don't
necessarily see that and it
reflected in the the PED forty
eight the executive
recommendation budget
we do of course it think they're
important and and will always
want to to provide resources for
art said but we just didn't add
them this year especially given
the some of the difficult
choices are having to make with
with regard to the pandemic and
and responding to.
Mr chair and up.
Secretary Stewart.
The argument was made this
morning that
The inclusion of art in whatever
capacity it's a wide range.
Would be really helpful for
students for some very suffering
with mental health issues during
this pandemic is there any money
available that could be used for
from the cares Act or the
federal funds to ensure that
some of these programs can be
included for and funded even if
it's temporarily because I think
that the kids who you know we
talk about lost time lost
learning.
But there isn't anything outside
of really stringent academic.
Outcomes that we're requesting
my argument this morning and I
maybe I didn't stay that way
well enough was that.
Mental health.
Really of.
Is the is the focus of educate
positive educational outcomes
and if you're not feeling well
if you're distracted if your.
Going to all kinds of things
the arts is a way to bring kids
back into focus and the but we
may not see them doing certain
things you know math can it be
used for I mean music can be
used for math art can be used
for
Linguistics and let it language
arts I mean there are a variety
of ways is there money
available.
To to ensure that these kids
needs are addressed so it's not
it's not all about having a
social worker in there that we
can use educational.
Areas to help augment their
learning.
Mr chair representative so first
of all you thank you for your
for your advocacy for for kids
having access to it enrichment
programs I I agree that that
that is very important makes a
big difference to a well rounded
education and to answer your
question I do believe that
federal funds can be used for
arts programs there's there's a
pretty wide range of of what
those federal funds can be used
for and I'm not looking at all
the uses in the in the
The federal law in front of me
but my understanding is that
there would be nothing to
prevent a school districts using
that to bolster its enrichment
programs thank you much Mr
secretary thank you vice chair
Trujillo we do have to hop off
going into another meeting at
three so we deeply appreciate
this conversation moved to
Representative suites are for
the motion thank you Mr chair I
move the executive
recommendation.
Second.
All right it's been moved and
seconded that for the exit to
adopt the executive
recommendation.
Is there any objection to that
motion.
Okay seeing no objection we've
adopted the executive
recommendation for the public
education department's budget
thank you all.
Very much for taking time thank
you to the many attendees who
are they're called in or who
joined on this informative and a
deep dive into both the Public
School support budget and public
education department budget
we're that concludes this
meeting.
And thank you also very much for
your time bye bye.
