Representative Brown here.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Castellano is
excuse for this afternoon.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Dixon here.
Representative Ezzell.
Here.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Garcia.
Representative headed up.
Some discussion.
Representative had act.
Saturday Representative Hochman
Hochman Vigil here.
Representative Lane.
Here I don't Representative
Lara.
Representative Lara.
Representative Sarinana
records.
Representative Sarinana is
located side she's also
experienced understand issues in
our judiciary meeting right now.
Representative Sweetser yes.
Representative Trujillo.
Care and I may go to do this
year because I'm a so madam
chair.
Vice chair small.
Here madam chair.
You do have a quorum.
Okay great we do have a quorum
and we're getting to that point
in the session where people need
to jump off to go put bills on
we understand that we just need
to know it so either let me are
small now if somebody needs to
go in and put another bill on in
another committee.
the first department that we're
going to here today is the
department of public safety
that's agency code seven nine
zero we'll start out with the
analysts and then we'll go to
the Department so analysts were
ready when you are.
Thank you madam chair would you
like me to share my screen yes
we were thanks.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee I'm
Ellen right then LFC fiscal
analyst and this afternoon I'm
joined by secretary Tim Johnson
of the department of public
safety and Diego Jimenez
executive budget analyst.
I'll be briefly reviewing some
of the most significant
differences between the two
recommendations and then Diego
and I are going to alternate
going through program level
differences before handing it
over to the secretary for his
comments.
On that that the overall
different sheets are on pages
one and two of the packet to go
over the entire agency but for
this overview I'm primarily
going to be referring to the
high level that's on page nine
of your practice it looks like
this.
and I'll also note that
additional information on the
legislative recommendations can
be found on pages sixty one
through sixty eight of LFC is
volume one it is three ten to
three sixteen the volume two and
rate is sixty to sixty four of
volume three.
Now over all the recommendations
for revenues to DPS are the same
in the legislative and executive
recommendations and general fund
revenue for both recommendations
is flat with FY twenty one but
the recommendations do differ
significantly in their
recommended uses of these funds.
So in a law enforcement program
the executive recommendation is
flat with FY twenty one the
legislative recommendation is
very slightly higher but it's
basically flat.
Recommendations identified about
three point two million dollars
in vacancy savings that they
reallocate towards other
personnel costs and these
include over time which you can
find in line twelve of the high
level.
I'm again on page nine hundred
includes maintaining a salary
increases for state police
officers on line twenty one.
Additional salary increases for
transportation sectors and
dispatchers online twenty two
and staff costs to support a
second state police recruits
school in FY twenty two and
that's included in the total
amount for a second please
recruit school in line twenty
three.
But you'll also notice in line
eleven.
That the legislative
recommendation identifies every
two million dollars in
additional vacancy savings that
eat reallocate to support
recurring vehicle replacement
costs not so much twenty four of
the high level.
As well as increased training
and best practices for state
police officers and that's
online twenty.
This additional vacancy savings
was based on documentation the
DPS submitted after the first
quarter of FY twenty one those
documents projected about five
point eight million dollars in
general fund vacancy savings in
the program for FY twenty one
but after the second quarter DVS
has revise those projections and
accounting for reasons for state
police officers that implemented
at the end of December as well
as positions the department
expects to fulfill it's not
projecting significantly lower
vacancy savings in FY twenty one
in FY twenty two.
Of the staff have been analyzing
these new projections and we'll
be happy to work with agency
staff at the appropriate time to
account for this new
information.
I'm also just like to note that
on page ten of your packets
there is a state police force
strength projection which you'll
see anticipates an average of
six hundred seventy four state
police officers will be
commissioned employed in FY
twenty one but if only one
recruit school is held in both
FY twenty one and FY twenty two
we'll see that average dropped
to about six hundred and thirty
five officers next year will be
in additional workers school in
FY twenty two will increase
average but it's still likely to
be less than this year.
In a statewide law enforcement
support program.
The legislative recommendation
for general fund revenue is a
hundred and sixty eight point
eight thousand dollars more than
the executive recommendation
that's one point four percent
higher than FY twenty one well
the executive recommendation is
basically flat this is
primarily because the
legislative recommendation
reallocate and increases funding
to support an additional three
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars and I FTE they're
dedicated to Law Enforcement
Academy board you'll see that
online forty two of the high
level.
Along County Board developed the
standards and training that are
required of all state all police
officers in New Mexico and is
responsible for granting denying
suspending or revoking officer
said education
board is established as an
independent entity does not have
its own budget and all its staff
are employees of the New Mexico
Law Enforcement Academy that's
part of DBS which might create
some conflict of interest
concerns when it comes to
misconduct cases many other
states have police officer
standards and training boards
that operate independently from
law enforcement agencies.
I also like to note that the
executive recommendation does
add two hundred five point two
thousand dollars to person
reduce the programs budgeted
vacancy rate and you'll see
that.
I'm sorry you'll see that in
line thirty seven of the high
level.
Legislative recommendation also
includes two hundred thousand
dollars to support best
practices training through law
enforcement academy that's in
line forty three and that would
be for all offices statewide.
Recommendations for this program
also includes funds for three
percent pay raises for forensic
scientists and technicians which
are in line forty four.
For program support the
executive recommendation is two
hundred and ten point six
thousand dollars higher than
provided recommendations for
general fund revenue provided
recommendations for general fund
matches the agency's FY twenty
two request which was a five
percent decrease compared with
FY twenty one and again the
Executive recommendations
basically flat.
I also net for the committee
that the analysts have come to
consensus on all performance
measures and targets and those
are also included in your
packet.
I'll now turn it over to Diego
to go into more depth detail on
the differences between the
recommendations for program
support those are different
sheets are on pages three to
four of your packet.
Thank you on that sorry madam
chair
The executive recommendation for
program support exceeds the
legislative recommendation by
two hundred and ten point six
thousand in general fund which
is flat to the FY twenty one
operating budget.
The LFC recommendation matches
what the agency submitted which
was a decrease of five percent
and that the LFC recommendation
reallocate most of the that I
presented it was reduced to a
different program within the
agency a regarding the other
funding sources both
recommendations are equal and
Representative the agency's
request.
Both recommendations include
reductions in person due to
reduced revenue from other
transfers but the executive
recommendation is one hundred
eighty one thousand higher than
the legislative recommendation
and in recognition of the
programs hi funded vacancy rate
the legislative recommendation
matches the agency requests for
the decreased general fund the
executive adds twenty nine point
four thousand to help those
struggling program produces
vacancies.
Both recommendations are equal
for the contractual services
category and for the other
category the legislative
recommendation is twenty nine
point six thousand lower
primarily to align some costs
the FY twenty actual
expenditures
thank you madam chair.
Now prepared to hand it back
over to the agency for you and
for.
A review of the law enforcement
program.
Thank you Diego madam chair
members of the committee the law
enforcement program different
seats are on pages five three
six of your packets I already
went over most of the
significant differences in the
overview I provided earlier but
I'll just touch on a few
specific items to note overall
legislative recommendation is
forty one point eighty thousand
dollars higher than the
executive.
Nations as I stated previously
reallocate personnel funding but
the legislative recommendation
reallocate two point three
million dollars to the other
category the paper vehicle
replacement costs and increased
training and best practices for
state police officers the
primary difference in the
recommendations in the
contractual services category is
a three hundred and fifty four
point eight thousand dollar
category transfer to the other
categories complies with DFA
implemented account code changes
executive recommendation
includes this and the
legislative recommendations is
not additionally the executive
recommendation makes reductions
to contract the total a hundred
thousand dollars and that's not
in the legislative
recommendation.
Both recommendations to include
language that identifies
appropriations to the department
for the weight distance tax
identification permit fund and
ensures that reversion of any of
the any of those funds are then
unspent at the end of the fiscal
year are reverted to that the
appropriate funds.
I'll now turn it back to Diego
to review the statewide law
enforcement support program and
that's on pages seven through
eight of your pack.
Thank you Ellen Madam chair for
that statewide law enforcement
support program the legislative
recommendation exceeds the
executive recommendation which
is that the FY twenty one by one
hundred and sixty eight point
eight thousand in general fund
revenue and the excuse me the
legislative recommendation
presents a one point four
percent increase in the program
compared with the FY twenty one
operating budget the
recommendations match that
requested amounts for all other
funding sources regarding uses
madam chair both recommendations
include funding to provide three
percent compensation increase
increases for forensic
scientists and forensic
scientists technicians.
The legislative recommendation
of reallocate one hundred ninety
four point five thousand in
vacancy savings and add one
hundred and five point five
thousand that has been
reallocated from the program
support program to fund
dedicated staff for the law
enforcement academy board which
is right in touched on at the
beginning of the hearing.
The executive recommendation
adds two hundred and five point
two thousand for person.
Add to it assist the program and
reducing their vacancy rate.
And that excuse me it allows
the.
The department some flexibility
in New choosing the best and
best method to do so.
The legislative recommendation
includes an additional five FTE
to provide dedicated staff.
As mentioned previously for the
law enforcement academy board.
The legislative recommendation
also includes a five thousand
dollars for the law enforcement
academies boards contractual
expenses.
In the other category the
executive recommend slightly
reduced funding for supplies and
employee training well the
legislative recommendation
instead adds forty five thousand
for supplies and other
expenditures for the board and
then provides an additional two
hundred thousand.
To expand to training and best
practices for law enforcement
officers statewide through the.
Through the academy.
Regarding language madam chairs
the legislative recommendation
includes.
Language that specifies that the
general fund appropriation
includes three hundred fifty
thousand for the operation and
activities of the law
enforcement academy board the
executive recommendation that
does not include language for
this program.
And madam chair I appreciate the
opportunity to assist in
presenting the differences of
recommendations and I'm not
prepared to.
A hand it back to miss Ruben
Ford final comments or secretary
Johnson has to committee is
prepared to hear from the did
you have any more or are we
ready for the secretary madam
chair I believe I'm ready for
the secretary thank you okay
let's go ahead will take this
**** down and will bring on the
secretary.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee let me
first of us thank Ellen and and
you go for that excellent
presentation and their hard work
of every year but specifically
this year I know we're not an
easy agency to work with of what
we do we do appreciate their
efforts very much
I'd like to welcome the new
members I did this yesterday for
for the Senate side I believe we
have cost Yano Dixon lane Lara.
The I can't figure out the study
nine yeah I'm not that when I
can't figure out and and
Representative Trujillo so what
welcome welcome to this
Committee and as I offered
yesterday should should any of
you all want to know more about
the department of public safety
what we do of our doors are
always open to you our phones
are always on we we would love
to hear from you and and and
tell you or teach you a little
bit about us also so please take
us up on that offer in the
future.
And I would it be personally and
on behalf of the organization of
a we're gonna like to think
Representative Lundstrom madam
chair and the members of this
committee for the respect and
flexibility of that they
provided us.
As it pertains to scheduling
this committee as many of you
know we had an officer officer
died in the line of duty a
couple weeks ago and and I can
assure you that we were not
prepared.
Operationally emotionally in any
way to present this and I know
this group did not have to allow
us that but I did want to
mention that and and find my our
issue or give you my thanks for
giving us some flexibility and
and how we schedule this or
allowing us to reschedule this
All all first slide start by
introducing the staff of the PS
staff that's on this call if you
don't mind we have the this is a
distinguished chief Robert
Fortin we have a acting deputy
cabinet secretary Troy we slur
also on this call as a deputy
director Kerman Lotto
LA director Kelly also harder
our CFO Jessica Lou Cerro and
our budget bureau chief of
police maybe as you'll find out
more than likely during the
question and answer session of
those of the smart people that
will be answering all your
questions is it won't be me but
I'm glad they're on there and we
have an excellent team.
I was introduced to as many of
you know I've met several of you
for those that that I haven't my
name is Tim Johnson I've been
with DPS for twenty years a
little over twenty years and
I'm.
The home built in honor to be
able to present of the DPS
budget to all of you today
Tional on behalf of the Levin
hundred employees that we have a
made up of outstanding men and
women that do every single thing
they can to make this state a
little bit safer each day like I
said I'm I'm honored to be the
one to present for them
it's a collective group of
public servants
that yes we have false I think
of there being debated currently
occur not just in our state but
across the country we do have
faults but it's definitely a
group that is more likely under
of the worst ten months.
As a profession and as an agency
your comment and some of the
ongoing reform conversations on
not to say that a lot of folks
the last ones have not into a
lot
I'm not trying to take away from
the table you have been a rough
time ten months for us.
You not asking for sympathy or
praise
but.
Just asking for ongoing dialogue
about our budget in the various
of the important aspects are
that are coming across as does.
And I can assure you that
regardless of any of those
things every single one of our
employees showed up every single
day to work to do what they
signed up to do.
Mike said I'm very proud very
proud that I'm the one
presenting almost.
I do realize Representative
illustrious madam chair this is
a dollars and cents meeting so
I'll get to that
What I would like to other
groups you know when I say this
every time to include the new
the new members that do not
understand this is that.
The dollar any dollar you Sander
appropriate to DPS are you're
also setting that dollar
appropriating that dollar a to a
lot of the rural agencies and
communities around our state a
lot of our efforts.
These and those efforts.
For the are your constituents
who may not have the money or
the resources to provide the
level of public safety that may
be of the state police can also
we take pride in that well we we
try really hard to not ever tell
any of them no and help them to
the best of our ability so
please know during this
presentation you know every cent
you send us.
You know is being used to to
assist the of the constituents
in the and agencies and you
representative.
We can go to our slide show
please.
Thank you Mr Senator for you
continue.
Mr secretary the committee one
extender condolences for the
loss of your officer down in the
southern part of the state we
know we had one of our HSC
members that have staff
recognized him on the floor
through resolution and that was
Representative Sweetser so well
we got a pretty good picture
from what she read to the whole
body about your about your
officer and we certainly want to
extend our condolences and
to let you know that it it's
have a heart for all of us here
in the in the state in New
Mexico.
Yes ma'am thank you thank you so
much for that and and we did
fill a ton of support and and
just to not to correct you then
to get this off on the wrong
foot but he he wasn't
necessarily just our officers
use use yours to you find them
and and make sure that we're
equipped and have the salaries
that we do so he was he was all
of ours but I agree with that
and I I meant more in just in
terms of the you know the the
uniform and the protocols in the
and the responsibilities that
that your officers have more
thank you thank you so much that
does mean a lot of many of many
of you reached out and and and
it was built super important to
us and and we do appreciate
that.
So our food to the next slide
just to please.
And all that all of you read
that I I know you'll have a busy
schedule but here's our vision
our mission and our guiding
principles what we live what we
live by every single day here at
the department of public safety
are you seen those before I'm
certain you'll see them again
but what we'll move on to the
next slide please.
Just a few things that we would
all like to brag about maybe for
the new members that do not know
you know some of the things that
we do in the some of the things
that we're proud of and I will
tell you this now and I'll tell
you this stuff probably
throughout the presentation a
lot of the success or
accomplishments that that we
have as an agency I like to the
like to say or think that those
are shared success successes and
we share those with with the
folks that make up this
committee obviously of there is
no department public safety no
state police if you folks do not
fund it also all the successes
are are shared
with with your support and and
the money that you sent to us
also we please you have our our
prison are thanks for that but
also a few that I want to
highlight of the community
engagement that that's one of
the pieces going going around
currently regarding reform of
officers not being in the areas
that they work not understanding
the culture of those areas we we
recognize that when when we when
we took office and we created
what we call a community
engagement team aware these
folks are trying to get into the
community in the various schools
are and try to let let people
know who we are in the in in
somewhat of a non enforcement
type role so they can you don't
see that we're human beings just
like them all and and and
getting to learn from them as
well some of the issues they
have and and figuring out ways
to address that you know so pre
COVID we did you know many
events you see there are hundred
twenty five of post comment
obviously that number went down
a little bit however of that
team if if any of you have
social media all and follow the
state please or follow DPS you
would notice that that community
engagement team a post comment
were
you know putting a lot.
Effort into homeless shelters
food banks assisting those
people and then obviously
handing out a lot of masks and
hand sanitizers or hand
sanitizer to try to try to keep
the community safe during this
pandemic also the the the
adjusted their role little bit
and and I'm and we're proud that
they did.
Another US your success as of
June of last year the end of the
last fiscal year we we fully
implemented phase one of our
body camera project and like the
group to know specially the new
ones we were not one of the
agencies that were fighting that
we we've we've and we embrace
that and we still do we do
believe there needs to be some
tweaks to the law and I've made
that known to us Senator so what
does who is nice enough to allow
me to type of many non some of
that input but so you know we
were we were not one of the
agencies that that the book to
that or try to push back on a
body camera projects we do
believe that's that's an
important piece of equipment for
both ourselves and for the
public.
but you know you appropriate is
three point two million dollars
over years ago we told you we
would have that stands and have
every single of sworn officer
within our organization equipped
with a body camera I'm here to
tell you that that is done of
from the chief down every single
officer has one of those on his
body is our body.
Some of the other funding that
you provided that I think is
high level would be the records
management system as many of you
know I don't know I can't speak
to their other departments but I
believe our to our technology is
probably from nineteen eighty so
we're we're spending a lot of
effort of putting a lot of folks
towards trying to get us more
modern and this records
management system is one of
those of the soon the nice piece
about that as I keep mentioning
a dollar to us as a dollar to
rural agency is that once this
is implemented.
The smaller agencies who who
lacked the resources of the
funding will be able to tap into
this technology at a reduced
cost hopefully something that
they can afford and then they to
have this excellent piece of
equipment and technology to to
make them safe and and and to
help protect their communities.
as you you know you can see see
the top of graduated several
people another another piece
that we're proud of is is a
hundred percent homicide rate
for that for the fiscal year in
question
I I know you read most of you
read the paper of certain areas
that that's you that's a huge a
huge percentage we're proud of
that and you you will find that
many places also so that that
that we take a lot of pride in
that.
you know some of the other
important pieces that are going
around of late have to do with
the New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy of discipline process
and although that that still
isn't perfect for some some
reason some reasons that are
ours that we need to fix our and
some reasons that of takes and
fixing and in maybe rules in
statute I can't tell you that
since that topic has been
debated over the last eight
months we believe we have done a
not only us but the attorney
general's office has done a much
better job of trying to get
those cases initiated and turned
around and so that we're more
transparent with the public and
to ensure that the bad officers
are are no longer employed with
law enforcement agencies in the
state and again that that system
still isn't perfect but we're
working really hard to to get
that get that fixed the best we
can.
some of the highlights from our
lab in our records and I. T. you
know as you can see there.
Eighteen thousand pieces of
evidence from a hundred and
forty different agencies around
the state again the dollar to us
is a dollar to other agencies
are grants management folks of
distributed six million COVID
funding our sexual assault kit
which was which is a very.
Highly debated topics you know
five six years ago we're we're
doing really well on that end
and following the law and
getting getting that turned
around the best we can and then
also implementing a statewide
sexual assault kit of.
website were victims can kind of
track
where they're cases that in the
process which a lot of states
are going to and so that's
that's huge for us as well so we
can go to the next slide please.
I don't think you can hear
presentation from a law
enforcement agency without this
punch to the face also I
apologize but.
You know we're still having
problems with our state of
getting a handle on our of
violent crime in our property
crime I don't have to tell all
of you that that is a huge issue
in our state and and we're
working is working as hard as we
can to figure out some solutions
to that some of which you'll see
see there at the bottom right
but you as many of you know for
the last many years as we can
remember we've been number one
or number two and both of those
categories and I don't I don't
think it's something we should
be proud of but as you as you
look to fund certain agencies
this is this is something
probably need to be aware of
so for your next slide.
In here also you're also saw
again.
Want to keep repeating myself
but a dollar a dollar to us as a
dollar to another agency as you
can see you many of our
specialty specialty teams
there on the left whether be our
tech team are here to year
craft.
As you know many many of the
rural agencies will many of
agencies in the state frankly
don't have the resources or the
funding or the equipment or the
expertise that we have in these
in these areas us so as many of
you know we're usually primary
on most of these a critical
incidents because of that and so
you know you look there of all
those missions twenty five
percent of those are free or for
other agencies so I think that's
important for all of you to know
in that when you're in your
thinking about what we do for
all other folks.
If you can kind of see the right
some of the other ways that we
try to try to keep New Mexico
state I won't read all those you
can you can look at those at
your leisure this evening or or
not so you go to the next slide.
So you know I just told the
store yesterday and some of you
may laugh maybe not but the I
walked I'd been the chief for
about six months well about
eight months when I walked into
my first session last year and I
walked out of that session
wondering why all the previous
cheese we're always complaining
or crying on how hard work it
was and how hard it was to get
what they want.
We walked out of last year's
session with every single thing
that we ask for and you know I'm
not gonna lie for the lot for a
couple weeks there I thought
maybe I was the greatest chief
ever and that the rest of them
just didn't have the skills that
I did
But as many of you know come
March from COVID it was very
quickly humbled.
In that so didn't didn't really
get any of the stuff that we ask
for at that point but going into
this like I the little bit of
humor to discuss that
some of the the budget in twenty
twenty for us.
Those of was a bit wonky because
of we had to you know we had a
setting exercise and various
other things not knowing what
our state's budget would be it
does appear like that looks a
little bit better now obviously
madam chair would have a better
understanding of that the needs
of but you the state took some
said more we were we gave them
specific to this to a a ton of
money back that would likely
normally wouldn't of I couldn't
figure out a way to hide it
but so reoccurring for FY twenty
two to tell us that okay not I.
Okay all right ma'am.
So you know some of the things
that the reoccurring costs that
we're they were asking for FY
twenty two which I believe Allen
and Diego did a did a really
good job on as we were able to
you gave it you guys gave us a a
decent chunk of money last year
for pay raises we were very
concerned once COVID hit
where our budget would be so we
didn't get those implemented
immediately
Because we thought we were gonna
have to like to cut that when
when we did the setting exercise
but we you know come in late
December once he's started
noticing that it was looking a
little better than and the what
we thought of we did implement a
version of a pay package for for
a major for a vast majority of
our US one person to include
TI's and dispatchers and so
that's three point one million
is just to ensure that we can
afford that the next year
you know we're also looking for
another which will get into here
in a second but another for.
Three hundred sixty thousand to
give a four percent increase to
dispatchers in TI's which again
later on this presentation
you'll see that that is still.
Disgusting but we're we're
trying our best and then a
another part of the setting
exercise was removing a couple
of our recruit schools which as
Ellen mentioned
could have a huge effect on the
amount of personnel that we
have.
Come FY twenty two so we're
looking to add that to school
back.
You can go to the next slide
please.
Again talking about some some of
the things in this to make sense
as we move the slide for but of
all the things that we do for a
lot of other people which is
what you pay just for and and we
do take pride in that but our
forensic lab for those that
don't know is is the main lab
here in New Mexico for all the
evidence and as I as I someone
mentioned earlier the get
somewhere in the neighborhood of
eighteen thousand pieces a year
and for you know for various
your looks a hundred and thirty
nine other agencies so to
include some of our tribal
partners our law enforcement
academy
you know graduated two hundred
ninety three last year you know
nine of them being tribal and
and they they trained and
graduated folks from thirty
three different of police
agencies.
Our our records side which I
think a lot of folks don't give
much attention to what I have a
ton of jobs that you all of you
all require of them and they do
a really good job or are law
enforcement records side as as
as you can see that they they're
tasked with all those things to
the ladies that are.
Very busy and
I think a lot of folks call in
need those resources and they do
a great job great job of that
moving on to the next slide are
I. T. R. I. T. division there
the given various levels of
database access two hundred and
eleven hundred other agencies to
include law enforcement courts
attention centers dust so again
dollar US dollar to everyone
else our program support.
To highlight this are grants
management.
Grants management bureau
get somewhere in the in the
ballpark of twenty million
dollars a year from the fence
of that they distributed to
twenty seven of other state
agencies or other agencies
within the state of New invest
to include the one point two
million of that we passed
through to our our tribal
partners
you can go to the next slide.
And what all of you been waiting
for the dollars and cents piece
for me to hopefully set up a
little bit quicker but again the
things we're looking at of the
three point one million to
maintain those raises that we
provided in December of another
four percent for TI's
dispatchers and to get that
recruits go back so we're not in
that bad a shape come FY twenty
two of the nonrecurring stuff
I'm not sure madam chair if you
want to get into that but some
of them I think are very
critical and super important to
us
but the P. E. R. A. I am sorry
for not going to do the specials
and supplementals but because
we're we're still working on it
that deficiency you do want to
specifically highlight lied on
it go head just talk just very
briefly about it because what
we've been doing is handling
that and another subcommittee.
Yes ma'am and I I if you recall
madam chair I was was unable to
get out until very late during
that subcommittee but I'll just
go over really really quick so
this your number one priority on
that one is the P. E. R. A. and
health care or retiree health of
four R. M. T. D. N. S. ID folks
that merged in two thousand
fifteen for any any any
committee member that wants to
know kind of how that happened I
would my phone is always on but
that peace is super critical of
those folks deserve deserve to
be on the same retirement system
as the state police and and I'm
not sure what happened back in
two thousand fifteen but I do
think we have an opportunity to
fix that this year and we will
we will definitely need your
help to do that this you have so
security for for that same type
of type of top that same topic
on our vehicles you know we
always need that
We're we're we're deficient two
point three million dollars due
to has a big up hazard pay pay
outs and then you'll see there
are forensic lab for many years
we have not been able to recruit
or retain them up because of our
south of our salary structure to
be looking to do do some work
with maybe Nevil of to get a get
a good study on that to get it
over to you all to let you know
just how bad a shape or in New
and those folks are critical and
then there's a few are what I
call reform pieces a law
enforcement reform which would
be the correct the doing a
curriculum the job task analysis
you know what we call phase two
of the body camera project which
is needed another Monteiro bass
and some scanners for for our
privacy folks but I hope that
was quick enough ma'am next
slide just.
We're talking about reform in
talking about transparency are I
believe this slide is very
important again I won't stay too
long on it because nonrecurring
but all you know as you can see
some of those pieces that we're
asking for have to do with
reform of trying to get in front
of several those things
you know if you look at that
last bullet on the bottom on the
bottom chart.
You seven use of force incidents
per ten thousand incidents
handled.
in that does not include of the
shelves upon thousands of other
citizen contacts that we have of
that go of go very well and it's
a good outcome so I just that's
a little just a little bit for
context you know some of the
things that you may be hearing
elsewhere although those are the
stats we ran I thought that was
important to include
in in this presentation so next
slide.
Again shared success we of time
of credit to you madam chairs to
the members of the committee
over the years Senator Smith
over the years all the people
that have supported us then you
may remember seven eight maybe
ten years ago you wouldn't find
the New Mexico state police on
either one of these charts
our pay was so low like we
weren't even in the ballpark and
we've done a ton of work are you
well you your committee and and
and our department to to get us
where we're at right now I don't
think we're completely there yet
I always feel like.
In my opinion the best law
enforcement agency in the state
would hope to see that they're
the best rate but I do know that
you all have committed over the
years and I I hope that you will
continue to commit.
To to getting us to that number
one spot even if it's only for
one year
but the you're looking at that
the the the raises that we're
able to implement this in this
past fiscal year past fiscal
year the current fiscal year so
you can see where we sent that
money
You know that was at the bottom
of our organization and when I
don't mean brought in a in a
negative way but of the folks
that are actually out on the
streets working our officers or
sergeants in our lieutenants got
alligned share of the of the
money that we you guys give us
for raises and and we're proud
of that it's it's not top not
top loaded like.
Like I think some agencies would
do we put the money exactly
where it needed to be to the
people other actually doing the
work
you can see kind of how that
moved us which is which is
awesome your work from starting
pay from fourth to second our
highest from the highest paid
from fifth to fourth
So again a lot of credit a lot
of credit to you madam chair and
and your committee over the
years and I would hope we can
still continue to work
workforces I won't get into the
the vacancies are unless you
want to
maybe during question and answer
but it's it's always a little
walking hard to understand but
if you if you want to get into
that on the other side of next
slide please.
This is the slide in the makes
me sick and I would hope that
discuss all of you as well
so this is our pay scale for
transportation inspectors and
our dispatchers I think
everybody knows what of what our
communications folks are are
dispatchers are you know very
stressful job
Long hours because the the
vacancies that we have and and I
would just tell you it as we
work towards getting the
salaries up with your help just
understanding how hard is
recruit for that position and
basically it's hard to recruit
because of the stress the stress
doesn't match the compensation
and so we would love to get love
to get both of these fix and
we're trying
with your help and then also
some internal internal money to
try to get these folks up of
on the obviously on the right
you'll see our dispatch of.
Where where we rank all and then
on the left you'll see our
transportation inspectors which
is yes it's overwhelming to to
look at that the amount of
certifications they going to
that job
yeah and again the hours because
if we can't keep in funded again
though the those certifications
in the work on massive
compensation and we recently
lost Senator to the department
of transportation well in the
very in in the exact building
they left us they want to DO T.
in that I think of three and a
half to four dollar raise for a
job that's easier on and I'm not
of that housing or disparaging
US secretary Santa D. O. T.
Do that probably thousand that
position as well but we really
do need your help in trying to
address these two
if not now then then in the
coming years.
We can move on from the.
We can discuss vacancies of
there in the question and answer
if you'd like.
One of the last the last couple
slides in rural shut my mouth
just kinda reviewing the
executive first LFC I I had more
things to say of prior to Ellen
Diego coming on but I do believe
that there's some conversations
going between them and and maybe
some folks in our organization
to kind of fix a few of the
things that I had issue with as
it pertains to the LFC
recommendation of verses of the
executive you know one that I
would highlight is that you know
that eight.
Seventy five thousand dollar
transfer from of program support
to statewide law enforcement US
support
that was to positions within our
HSD that
that we put on the table for the
sandy in I believe that was June
June or July also those are
vacant at the time so we put
those up as part of the setting
and now that feel like that
setting is being used against us
if if the budget is indeed in
better shape of you know we
would definitely like to have
those positions back in HSD and
then maybe figure out a way to
fill a fund some of at least off
on a different way.
The name of the appropriation
and then the next slide please
this is the last one just go
okay.
So talking about
of vacancy savings which again I
have more to say on that I do
believe that do you go now and
have been discussing that we
didn't we didn't necessarily
agree with the five point five
million dollars in vacancy
savings we weren't able to find
that and and now we were pulling
it up but I do believe
you know based on some numbers
from last September
the didn't account for recruit
school graduated of the hazard
pay of that we order we're gonna
comment funding for but ended up
passing eat that out of our a
general fund budget on it also
didn't account for of the
targeted pay raises that we
implemented in December also I
can definitely see how that
number was a tad bit or or
insulated and why we felt like
that was on the table to move
move somewhere else but I can
assure you based on our
calculations it is not
In on that topic I do appreciate
of what the LESC was trying to
do their work as I keep
mentioning it at the reform talk
that is the that is been been
happening for the last several
months with me and breaks that
and I do realize that we were
trying to put some money over
there to try to fix some of the
issues that folks believe or or
that are that we have and so I
do I do understand why that was
over there I just wasn't
necessarily in agreement with
the vehicle of how we got it
over here and again there was a
couple to positions from AST
I do believe Ellen and your are
working that out and we'll
definitely will definitely help
them and so in closing we all
think again thank you so much
ma'am madam secretary members
the committee for the
flexibility we really appreciate
that and and again I appreciate
the opportunity to build a
present of from what I believe
is the best department of state
has on and or team as I
introduced earlier will will
stand for any questions.
All right thank you very much we
do have some questions we have
some committee questions and
then after that I've got some
some comments also but we've got
to Representative Hochman Vigil
Crowder and lane to start with.
You're on mute.
My apologies madam chairman
having problems of many
communities in lately thank you
very much madam chair and and
and and thank you for that
informative presentation I was
going to ask you about the
vacancies savings secretary but
you already answered my
questions I'm just gonna go to
the second line of questioning I
have it's with regards to of
funding of the police academy of
law enforcement training is kind
of an at the forefront of our
policies this policy discussions
the last couple of legislative
sessions and throughout our
discussions the same issue has
come up time and time again
which is that the law
enforcement academies
chronically underfunded and so I
was wondering if I could ask the
secretary to.
Answer of the question if he
does believe the police
academy is chronically
underfunded and if so how.
madam chair R. Representative
Hochman Vigil I'm I believe many
aspects of law enforcement is
currently under funded
but to answer your question
specifically yes I believe
Eleazar underfunded I believe
the the borders under funded and
I do believe.
And we would be willing to work
with anybody that that wants to
tell us how how we should go
about getting that signing a do
know those a couple of bills
floating around ma'am
about you know maybe changing
LDH changing the bore and it's
putting some of the money I
believe from the law enforcement
protection fund into
into some of the reform that
you're talking about and getting
in getting better training for
our officers and so I mean I'm
not sure that you ask Miss from
certain someone will
Well as it pertains to reform.
Any executive worth his salt.
We'll tell you that reform needs
to happen of certain certain
pieces of reform need to happen
and what that looks like
in in my opinion I believe of
that is us sitting down with you
and figuring out what exactly
are wanting and and us figuring
out how exactly we can deliver
that
and so with that obviously
always comes funding and and
again you you guys provide us a
ton of a ton of money and we
appreciate that but a lot of the
things that I think that people
that the use of folks have been
asking for have not come come
with any dollars and so several
things that I I do think we need
of levels of of de escalation
training having certifications
and that and requiring every
officer in the state to have a
certain level of that whether it
be a C. I. T. which is critical
incident training or CNT trying
to figure out ways to get every
officer at some level certified
in that de escalation or
critical incident stuff R. I
also believe you're not us but I
will tell you if you don't mind
ma'am would be the duty to
intervene on.
No executive worth his salt is
going to tell you
or shouldn't tell you that
they're against the duty to
intervene
and so I believe with funding
and with proper training every
single agency an officer in the
state should and the agency
should have policies on that of
that we should intervene we see
one of our brothers and sisters
who might
no be a little bit more worked
up than they should be and and
we should be stepping in front
of that to prevent that and then
also having policies to protect
employees from discrimination or
excuse me retaliation
for stepping up to stop that so
there's there's several years
reform
that that I think we need in but
again that require bonding not
only to law enforcement academy
Representative Hochman Vigil but
to the various law enforcement
organizations and the satellite
academies around statement.
Thank you very much madam chair
and thank you secretary Johnson
for that for that can answer I
appreciate it very much madam
chair I know that may be pretty
late in the budgeting process
for the session and to make
those connections and start the
discussion but I know that I'd
be very willing to work with you
Sir are and we have a fantastic
LFC analyst you know who isn't
working on this issue for quite
some time so maybe and then your
future we can sit down and we
can start to have those
discussions thank you very much
madam chair.
We're ready next we have the
Representative Crowder in the
online.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you secretary Johnson your
presentation I always enjoy your
presentation your your brain
just the right amount of
coverage of it and it makes some
interesting so thank you for
that all right did you did at
the very end of your
presentation Mr secretary.
Rests my concern on the funded
vacancy or vacancies savings so
I would like to.
The numbers are still shocking
to be on the budget rate so that
we're looking at when I see
that.
You know the exact is reckoning
recommending one point seven
million more than last year's
budget in the LFC is
recommending seven hundred
fourteen thousand less than last
year's budget that's quite a
spread and it's all in the law
enforcement
HSD division is where the
majority of it our paperwork
shows that there six million
dollars.
Unfunded vacancy savings.
In that account eight million
dollars total and all your
agencies and so my question of
madam chair Mr secretary and Mr
bean I want to direct my
question to the LFC analysts.
And ask about is this dated
information that we're looking
at in our different sheets are
PS calc Sheet� are those really
dated numbers.
Secretary mentioned that you
guys are kind of working on
that.
I have a very high level of
confidence in LFC Allison and
their numbers so I would just
like for you to speak a little
bit about the accuracy of the
data that we have in front of us
as we try to make this decision.
Madam chair and representative I
do believe that the information
that you have is stated as the
Department mentioned there are a
lot of things that include
including the graduation of
their recruit school that was in
progress at the time that they
submitted their budget request
which is where we get the PS
talk numbers and at the time
that they submitted the their
own projections which are
basically a version of the PS
talk that we actually works
together over the interim to
come up with that separates out
different funding sources
because the agency thought that
was really important to
recognize that some of their
highest vacancy rates are among
federally funded positions so
since since they submitted that
they have and that was their
queue one submission there's
thank you to initiatives is very
different in fact shows a
potential deficit in person
funding we are in the process of
reviewing that I think.
There's there's a of.
The goes into it as as far as I
can tell up at this time I would
say that I do believe the the
HSD is accurate when they say
that they have significantly
fewer vacant lower vacancy
savings and they were projecting
when they did their budget
initiatives are when they
submitted their FY twenty one to
one they can see production
report.
Okay.
Sure in the Mr being thank you
for that it it do you believe
that it something has caused you
to believe that it is.
dated information is it off by
fifty percent is that off by we
were showing balances in here of
eight million dollars for this
agency is off by fifty percent
is off by seventy five percent
what what is your.
So look at the numbers.
We're we're is I've got to make
a decision in a minute and and I
need some help some guidance
from you place.
Madam chair and Representative
if I may share my screen I can
actually show you a comparison
between what the agency
submitted
in.
I know it's most recent
initiatives as well as what it
submitted in.
FY twenty one Q. one you see
just a moment to pull it up Mr
chair is it okay if she shared
the screen.
Yes of course.
Thank you madam chair.
Okay so.
The amount of this is what the
department submitted in the at
the end of Q. one and you'll see
that that.
I'm not here is as I said almost
five point eight million dollars
this is pretty close to the
doctor on the PS health they
were wrong I think the numbers
that were maybe two weeks to a
month part of the you know
that's the total number is
delighted with the PS helped so
I felt it was it was reasonably
close
so so that's what you see that
cost.
This is the department's most
recent rejection it they have
increased significantly
increased what they estimate the
cost of fill positions for FY
twenty one will be and that is
because they've implemented of
pay raises for state police
officers and because they have
added.
Not hazard pay amounts
it quite clear that a large
amount of hazard pay
actually got the.
The amount over here I think
that would be about yes three
point seven million dollars in
hazard pay so there's a lot that
went into making this number now
as you can see that gives them a
much lower amounts here which is
comparable to that five point
seven I showed you earlier of
course
has a payment not be a factor in
FY twenty two or hopefully at
least will not be a significant
of a factor which affects what
we are estimating the cost will
be.
The agency also projects are
going to fill some vacant
positions before the end of the
fiscal year and that will
increase their cost pro rated by
about one point six million
dollars
you know this is that is that is
the news is good faith
Action of what they're going to
do am I really can't speak one
way or another as to as to
whether that is that is accurate
but I do believe that they made
that projection in good faith.
so as you can see that there's
been a lot of a lot of changes
in the number is I've done my
best to track them my
understanding is that.
They're very they should.
Likely be an adjustment made I
think that's a decision I think
the committee should make and
it's definitely something we can
discuss in more detail with
agency staff
or as an ad hoc subcommittee
whatever the whatever the
committees hi friends would be
but that's absolutely something
that that we're looking into and
we're willing to discuss how to
adjust.
Thank you Mr green thank you
madam chair might follow up
question would be of the hazard
pay funding is a hazard pay
count COVID dollars for the
cares Act dollars for the coming
of the general fund or where
where is that money coming for
the hazard Hey how do.
Federal dollars from the COVID
money to plug into this formula.
Representative I think that of a
DPS staff member may be best
able to answer that question my
understanding is that it will
have to pay out of the General
Fund although I think they could
definitely go into a little more
detail as to why and why why is
not being covered by federal
funds the DFA idea may also be
able to speak to this.
Thank you Mr man I appreciate
I'm sorry to do that to you I
just I'm looking for all the
information I can get before I
have to vote thank you thank you
madam chair and
Thank you Mr secretary Johnson.
We can take this chart down I'll
go back to the.
Committee Representative Eli.
So madam chair.
I want to just say start with
that.
Hope secretary knows how much we
appreciate everything they do
for us as a state I hope you
know the legislature appreciates
the work that you all do
law enforcement has a special
place in my heart my grandfather
actually the state patrol and
back in the fifties and sixties
that was a different era back
then this is is a his area of
coverage was Shiprock curling
all the way over to dole say
asked Dick all the way down to
Cuba and and many a shift he was
the only officer on duty to
cover that lawyer some I'm
grateful that that those days
are behind us but so long for
some of special questions are
but with that I want to ask
about death benefits to
survivors
can you madam chair in the
secretary.
Let me know how how much is that
amount and is that amount set by
statute.
you madam chair.
Representative Lane.
We we just got we discussed this
yesterday and all that chief
Jordan chime in as well but it's
currently set at two hundred and
fifty thousand dollars and that
that that's not including of
some of the the P. R. A. stuff
of all Alexi Stourton answer
that if you're okay with that
Sir.
Madam chair representative that
is correct it squarely set
statute two hundred fifty
thousand for the insurance
benefit there's some other
benefits that come along what
pair the state farms all the
concern.
Thank you madam chair
Representative quite quite
frankly the numbers shockingly
low
I think we as a legislature can
can do better but let me ask a
follow up question and I don't
mean to be insensitive but I I
just need to maybe get my arms
around this little better how
many officers is your department
lost in the line of duty over
the last decade.
We lost eight.
Accidents crashes.
This is the first line of duty
death without by
Thank you online need by gunfire
in thirty years.
Thank you madam chair so I I
think this is something to that
that we is legislation in need
to evaluate
And I know it doesn't feel
specific budget by zoom there
are still some dollars your
marketing budget deal survivor
benefits but
you know I think this is
something that that we need to
take seriously.
and then my last question chair
is.
We appropriated I think it was
roughly around two million two
point three million for the the
care and protection your
officers are providing for us
around the the capital
madam chair how much of that two
point three million has actually
gone to the sector's Department.
You know that was actually in
house bill one so I don't have
that break down in front of me
maybe we could have LFC staff
look at that are right quick to
see how that break down was was
distributed I know some went for
homeland security state police I
think National Guard in some of
the others so what let's have a
research that what you're asking
your questions.
And Madam that was my my final
question thank you.
Hey Allen did you find out that
FIR for house bill one.
I
just pulled it up so if you'll
give me just a moment I will try
and get you that answer okay
well you're looking I'm gonna go
to the next person which is
Representative Chatfield.
Hey your muted.
I gave a wonderful talk to you.
Chair thank you for those
comments next to no I'm just
kidding got going at this are
your lips moving got.
Of course can meet you how many
times during the year do you
normally have it.
Representative Chatfield is good
to see you Sir and if if if at
the end.
I know I know Representative
Crowder just mentioned that he
likes my bit of humor that I add
to this if at the end of this
everybody would like a little
bit of animal on Representative
Chatfield.
But I will I'll let the record
as a harness for that
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Secretary Madam chair
representative Chatfield we try
to schedule to people basically
saucer training academies a
year.
White ones we try to schedule
four of the research ones that
officers need a shorter one.
And madam chair Natalie
straighter state police officers
but also our deputy sheriffs
various other law enforcement
people are does it always train
our state police.
Neither chair actually animali
and kadam the trains officers
all over the state the New
Mexico state police run their
own separate academies.
So we're talking about does not
supply the officer for the state
police.
Correct.
Madam madam chair Representative
Chatfield in this budget
presentation that two point nine
million dollars that you're
looking at is a state police
academy it's it's can I I it's
can is confusing and if you're
asking these questions Sir
because you want to join.
Thank you.
I would assume that that is.
Let's just talk
so well I guess what I'm getting
at is do we have enough money
there to keep enough officers in
the supply in the pipeline to
replace these vacancies that
we're talking about and if they
do complete their training do we
have enough money to hire those
vacancies are left in the budget
you know what I'm looking at a
number two property because of
got that written down big in the
center my paper here and number
two violent crime I I have a
serious.
Jack in my in my in my spirit
about shaving the budget I'm
agency that the is trying to
supply the for a you know safety
for our community I'm wondering
do we have the the money in
there at this just give them the
tools that they need to train
their officers we cost of the
request and require that they
have better training more
training
more officers to fill vacancies
are we give them the tools to
work with to do that so that's
my answer our questions.
Madam madam chair Representative
Chatfield
I think several people could
probably answer that to to to
get.
To answer quick questions quick
responsible if if if you choose
to fund that recruit school of
that that's going to be very
helpful to ensure that we have
enough people for now
and I think a lot of factors a
lot of things factor into
whether we have enough officers
on the streets right now or not
I would imagine all most of you
would believe in and I believe
as well we don't and you know
without this recruit school we
just give to recruit school
right now and this past this
past fiscal year
due to the expanding exercise on
that we would be without to
recruit schools and then we're
also kind of monitoring of some
of the legislation that comes
out this year
in that that could also affect
some of those folks that might
be close to retirement alright
okay by a couple by your by your
to leave so
A lot of things that factor into
we're gonna be in a good place
to come FY twenty two or not but
we're hopeful.
So madam chair I guess you know
without understanding at all
totally I just wonder if there's
any space to our.
J. give some consideration to
this budget to make sure that
they have the tools they need
our families
Well.
Do you know is on the line in
the state of New Mexico.
And
I'm sure does not want to not go
very slowly over to the capital
this morning but I only wore my
we have a lot my neighbor has a
much nicer vehicle than me in
the pre for the as a I I let
mine get warm otherwise just
drive hello level one is still.
So that's it Madam.
RT thank you representatives go
to Representative Anderson.
Thank you madam chairman.
Chairman I I really had a
question to follow up
on the crime statistics
Secretary of.
Johnson.
My question is this I I think
about New Mexico being number
two in property crime number two
and violent crime I think that
the of.
It correct me I see violent
crime is in your bailiwick more
than property crime it you know
what I'm trying to ask you Sir
is simply of of how much.
Of how old are you in what we
call property crime in New
Mexico Sir.
Madam chair of Representative
Anderson if you're asking which
to commend me personally of zero
but as an agency.
As you know Sir we are the
primary in a lot of the rural
community around the state that
don't have a sheriff's
department or don't have a PED's
or a Marshall of so you know if
you're asking what percentage of
those property crimes we
investigate of verses are
metropolitan areas I would
imagine it's pretty low as
compared if you added up all of
the PD's of crucis PED Santa Fe
PED's up up but we do have a
piece of that in those rural
communities of like I said that
many of you that many of you
Representative.
Very good I I I appreciate very
much your answer to want to
trick one it was really a
clarification and I think your
answer is is exactly correct
which is in rural rural New
Mexico we are
I suppose you in the share of
our our the investigatory
investigating property crime
violent crime however of the
seat.
Or down the strike zone that you
work in regrettably so we we
certainly look forward to your
improvement and and want to do
what we can to offer to to see
that you're supported how are
you doing Sir on that in that
way when we're you're asked
about officer retention you do
you see that is is we should we
hear about that and other
agencies and somehow I just
don't see that as a particular
issue in the New Mexico state
police is that correct.
I will say you are correct of
you madam chair I'm sorry
Representative Anderson I would
say that you are correct in all
knock on wood when I do that I
think a lot we would like I said
earlier was only with your help
we've been able to you know
significantly increase the pay
of our folks around the state
and so that and so that's very
helpful and this the similar
question came up
yesterday Representative
Anderson and and it's something
that I'm proud to proud to say
speak about a book we have a
very very loyal organization a
lot of our folks come on board
the state are and so the
question yesterday was are we
losing our officers AP your
crucis PED are some of these
other agencies that might be a
more or are they moving to Texas
or Arizona and as far as the
state police goes that answers
no
The loyal we have to continue to
stay on the pay raise you know
making sure their pay is good
and the work environment is good
because that loyalty can road
very quickly as you know thank
you thank you for that that's a
great answer of why I think
finally I want to talk.
Briefly I guess I was the.
surprised to see a dispatcher
salary on the low end new hire
at thirteen thirty seven I
recognize that if we try to
address of the thirteen thirty
seven number we have to look at
at the of more experienced
dispatchers as well but I think
I heard something you say Sir
that suggested that of turnover
in dispatchers is a bigger
problem or retention and
dispatchers is a different
problem and I'm wondering if our
I was taken aback when I saw
Montana at a at a twenty dollars
in New Mexico and thirteen it
did seem like for that specific
job that there was a.
Unexplained
disparity
and.
Then I guess the question I on
that server is to the LFC
analysts is in the LFC budget
recommendation is there any
consideration given to
the
Starting wage rate for
dispatchers how how how is his
department going to improve
okay great for a starting
dispatcher LFC analysts please
okay I'll be brief place we need
to wrap this one up go ahead.
Thank you madam chair
representative the LFC
recommendation includes three
hundred and forty one point
seven thousand dollars to
support pay increases for
transportation inspectors and
dispatchers that averages about
four percent but of course the
department would apply that as
it saw fit to best fill those
positions thank you very much
for that answer madam chairman
that concludes my question good
luck secretary Johnson.
Thank you okay Allen you had an
out another comment go ahead.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to follow up on the
earlier question regarding house
bill one which includes a
nonrecurring appropriation from
the general fund totaling about
one point five million dollars
for GPS.
and so I wanted to give you that
answer as well as to follow up
on some of Representative
Chatfield questions regarding
training and just to know that
both the legislative and
executive recommendation you
include funding for a second
state police recruit screen and
edition the LFC recommendation
includesd three hundred thousand
dollars for best practices
training for state police
officers that includes a problem
oriented policing crisis
intervention and de escalation
that sort of thing as well as
two hundred thousand dollars for
the law enforcement academy to
offer that kind of training to
other are agencies statewide.
Right thank you very much I have
some questions and I'm surprised
that Representative Crowder or
Garcia didn't ask but I'm gonna
ask everybody to turn the
personal services employee
benefits help she.
Want to look at column and.
And in the language it states
that the agents say the
recommendation.
And included that the agency.
Used funding for pay increases
for state police officers
dispatchers transportation
inspectors and scientists I want
to ask you Mr secretary how much
did you find to the
transportation inspectors and
dispatchers.
Madam chair thank you for asking
that I meant to mention that in
my presentation well but right
out of the gate in July we gave
them a six percent both of
those.
Six percent what about the rest
of the department.
Well the state the state police
raise going until December.
so they'd they'd that was and I
think I was on that the.
on the slide we find that for
you well I'm just looking at the
comments at the bottom of page
fifteen.
Wirth says the agency including
pay raises for state police
officers so I ask you what what
what what percentage was that.
We find that manager let me find
that thanks for.
This little.
So as of December of our patrol
officers received six point
five.
Our sergeants.
Receive six point two five.
Our lieutenants received four
point five.
Our captains received three
point five.
All and then majors and deputy
chiefs got a three percent.
Okay does is follow your wage
and salary classification plan
that was approved about six
years ago.
I don't believe I would have to
look at that but I don't believe
so I don't know that we've been
on that ma'am for as long as
I've been on this organization.
Yes that's that's the part of
our issue around wages or salary
classification is that will pay
for a study to be done the
department does the study and
will help out here if we can't
fund the whole thing the first
couple of years then there's out
years of Medicaid for job with
changes in ministrations of
things like that so I'm gonna
ask you Mr secretary does that
all see how many out here so we
actually have looked at this
because what what my concern is
is looking at call then.
And we look at what those dollar
amounts are for law enforcement.
And state law enforcement
support and then we go back to
work these avid been suggesting
so a program support LFC keeps
the five percent cut that was
suggested by the administration.
Executive doesn't but then in
law enforcement the executive
keeps the five percent cut that
was sect suggested by
administration and the LFC
doesn't.
So there's not that's not
consistent for me analysts is
not consistent we can stay in
one piece of a budget we're
going to keep that five percent
governor's recommended cut and
then the other piece we're not
gonna do that when I look at
what those vacancies are so I I
guess I've got a little
concerned about that.
And concern
that it didn't get yeah we got
the same amount of general fund
this coming out for both
analysts here if you look at
what that general fund transfer
number is.
But it's not a consistent
process for me I mean they are
either we're gonna.
Administrative requests level or
we're not.
So I'm going to take a look at
this all work with the analysts
on this and I'll work with bill
on this let's see if we can do a
little bit bit better job on
their side I do have I have some
concern about it we've got one
program especially when I see on
the.
Chain.
what we're looking at law
enforcement.
That's the highest value in
there and that and the executive
keeps the five percent
executive recommended cut.
Madam chair.
At.
The executive that keep the five
percent cut for any other
purpose we return them back to
the FY twenty one operating
level what is a hundred sixty
eight of.
So the executive I'm looking at
state law enforcement the seven
eighty six what I'm looking at
the general fund transfer on
that.
Tell me what that means did I
read that I read that wrong and
do I owe you an apology.
Yes ma'am I did what what page
are you want.
On page seven I'm on page seven
and I'm looking at that general
fund transfer number what I see
there the executives at twelve
five zero nine and that's a typo
in the LFC is at twelve six
seven eight that that the total
five zero nine is flat with our
FY twenty one operating budget
that doesn't that record isn't
that the five percent requested
cut that the governor asked last
June.
I have that there would be then
accord  in accordance with the
solvency measures from the
special session okay that's my
point.
And so the LFC is suggesting
that it ought to be higher.
The.
This but let me ask Miss
Representative small for a
motion we gotta move on here I
want to thank the department of
thank the committee on the US
Representative small for the
motion and I'll I'll get
somebody to help me on this let
me get laid and Herrera help me
on this.
The LFC recommendation for
department of public safety okay
we have a motion and we have a
second also the manager okay we
got a second to get a motion and
a second for the LFC is running
opposition to that motion.
Saying lane and rare to help me
with this and we'll get that
piece corrected.
Thank you Mr secretary let me
thank your staff.
Thank you madam chair.
Appreciate everything you guys
too so let's move on to the next
HSD.
Nine four zero.
Public school facilities
authority and let's go to the
analysts first.
Thank you madam chair would you
like me to share my screen at
this I would I'd like you to
share your screen.
All right I'll go ahead and do
that madam chair members of the
committee what's going on I'm
sorry Lujan the LFC and we're
joined joining me today is done
a Rivera from the department of
finance and administration I
believe we also have PS of phase
director Jonathan chan one on
the line as well.
To give you a high level
overview the public school
facilities authority agency nine
forty.
Is entirely other state funds
their budget comes from the
public school capital outlay
fund.
You'll see on the sheet that the
LFC recommendation is thirteen
point nine thousand higher than
the executive recommendation.
Both of the recommendations
essentially increase the other
category to provide for
construction and school facility
management information systems
and the major differences are
and some cost assumptions
between the person services and
other category and I'd be happy
to turn it over to Donna for
additional comments okay go
ahead for additional comments.
Yes miss madam chair members of
the committee the executive was
just trying to also support the
agencies need we're trying to
fill as many vacancies and as we
can because there's so many new
new projects that they're having
to look at throughout the state
we've been working.
Gently to fill those vacancies
so we would offer that the
personal services category be
funded more
at at the executive
recommendation with that thank
you very much madam chair ready
thank you
Is it director on and would you
like to make a few comments
place.
you madam chair members thank
you you know you're gonna have
to speak up our ability to take
this sheet down please.
Representative the madam chair
members thank you for having me
I'll keep my remarks brief my
name's Jonathan Chaplin the
director of PS effect of as
mentioned our operating budget
is drawn from the public school
capital outlay fund not the
general fund a request for FY
twenty two is for five point
seven eight nine million six
percent of that is for person.
category two hundred we have.
And TV's.
With this budget request will be
able to staff up to forty eight
fifty in FY twenty two we're on
our way to doing that now.
and Representative two percent
they can see settings for the
next year.
As mentioned we're looking to
staff up so we.
Increased projects and awards
for the last few years so I'll
leave it there and take any
questions thank you.
Okay let's go so.
Let's go to the
The committee first and let's go
to I know that
We got a couple of people here
and I want to first I want to
call on now Representative
Anderson.
Yes Sir madam chairman I was
actually prepared to make a
motion whenever you're ready.
Okay we have I just have a
member here that is interested
also in the adjustment of one of
the recommendations that the
authority has put together.
And so I'm gonna let
representative Garcia talk about
that I'm gonna call on him next
I'm not sure if it's appropriate
within this operating budget
representative Garcia or that we
talk about it offline with these
folks but going and tell us what
your issue is.
Thank you madam chair up.
The presenter appreciate time
all I had a concern not able to
make a motion on to increases
were forties under the blue
water school which is in
requests below how the school
district
we get one madam chair the
school was twenty two dollars
twenty two thousand square foot
would be gone of.
The committee wanted to just cut
it down to fourteen thousand one
time and we talked about it and
we had agreed on back twenty
pool and they came back with the
I'm not for of seventeen and
that's way too small for the
schools.
Not all there is the a little
bit over eighteen thousand
square foot Madam my concerns
are we had the same issue rural
school in the same school
district they made it to small
when they open a school.
It was way too small can we got
a lot of surrounding areas like
of woodland Act mall requests
are grants of so we have done
all of places the wood to the
school and the school one of
being too small so that to go
back in there and try to make it
bigger we're still having
problems with that school and
madam chair on this water school
well it is surrounded by
reservation also including
haystack Baca blue water
grants Milan some of Dale and
hate and was that a second sorry
and when we go back to school
wanted to open it the school was
going to get the.
We do small and what they told
me that they're called the head
comes down which it is madam
chair we got taken to
consideration the COVID.
Has a lot to do with it the
condition of the school itself
right now has a lot to do with
the two kids are a automatic
would not of the water going
into the schools in laundering
requests but as soon as we get a
new school these kids are gonna
go back to that school and we're
going to be too small and and
you know the big concern of mine
I've been talking to
The the director John
chamberlain and David Abbey
about this and you know the big
concern though the
superintendent of schools which
is Mr Maxted it is is concerned
about it and I don't know how to
go about it madam chair with the
motion is even in order but I'd
like to do it anyway because we
need to address is before used
to Fatah have members that and
chair.
Okay I think within the
operating budget Representative
Garcia this is a little bit
awkward with insider operating
budget okay what we'll do
whatever you and I and Mr
chamberlain get together here
and get into zoom call and find
out what the heck's going on
with that school so I'm gonna
ask you that staff set that up
yeah we're gonna find out what's
going on here because I know
that you've reached out a couple
of times
I thought there was some resolve
to the US this is the
appropriate place to put their
us a request like this would
actually come to the capital
outlay but capital outlay bill
is the way that that would be
handled because it's
construction.
But I see Mr Abbey is on there
also.
So Mister added you have any
comments on this issue can say
this is a dire issue this
legislators ready to make a
motion that would directly
affect affect this operating
budget.
I think it's not appropriate
inside an operating budget but
it could be something that's
right somewhere else you have a
comment.
I can't wait you're on mute Mr
Abbey.
You're on mute.
he's running somewhere so thank.
Where it ran to that I don't
know if that's a good sign that
site here.
Must.
It looks like our committee
room.
there yes already
have an operator error so I I
didn't hear.
But I I think I understand I
know the issue.
This the council is but a lot of
time on the blue water school.
I can go into
detail.
This the school.
I don't.
I don't want to get into all the
details of this one project I
just wanted I just wanted to be
clear that if the Representative
wants to affect the size of the
screen this isn't the right way
to do it that we're going to do
it in a capital budget request
that.
Is this is an operating budget
we're dealing with right now I
agree with with that comment
madam chairman I will work with
representative Garcia to think
of ways that we can work with
director chairman.
The capital outlay budget to
addresses concerns without
without taking too long.
The the old school was too big
for modern needs but there are
legitimate concerns of the
district about that that the new
design not be too small so we've
worked hard will keep working on
that and we can work with
representative Garcia in the
capital outlay bill to find some
way to
you know you know extra efforts
to allay those concerns which is
what I would suggest chair.
Okay I want to do that in this
budget this is that's not the
proper place for it but I do
want you to know as he's brought
forth to the whole committee
this is a concern and I can tell
you I mean it's just one of
those things and this is for the
staff that's the frustration
that legislators have with this
whole this whole process.
Is that you know here we are.
Trying to get something done
hearing that constituent needs
and then bureaucratically it's
controlled someplace else.
So with that I'm I'm not going
to take that motion no
Representative Garcia let's get
let's just stay on the operating
budget do you have any questions
about that.
Thank you madam chair for that
and you know I apologize to
anybody I stepped on a line on
this committee but it's very
important to me I do have one
question madam chair go ahead.
Although funded vacancy where is
that money going to the almost
three quarters of a million
dollars where where's that money
going to.
Jonathan you want to respond to
that.
Try that again can you hear me
now Madam yeah yeah.
so the our operating budget any
unused
The funds just revert back to
the capital outlay fund.
so it's it's a.
It stays contained within the
public school capital outlay
fund for school construction
projects anything.
The madam chair.
The director that report of
million dollar was originally
put into your budget for for
employees right now my question
is.
Are you there for employees are
usually percent bells other than
employees could you know you're
asking for money to fund
vacancies and yet you have three
quarters of a million dollars
sitting somewhere.
Bill would you know that are
with a three point eight million
dollars that I've heard of one
wanted to go back to the
treasury but you know this money
is sitting there I don't think
about sixty million dollars in
the treasury on on funded I mean
that until I'm sorry I'm funded
vacancies elect like seventy
million dollars in the treasury
of people now use in New and my
question is.
What are you doing with this
record of million dollars or use
it for something else other than
vacancies.
so Madam chair representative
Garcia I'm not sure exactly what
the number you start we have a
we have a authorized FTE count
up to fifty.
for planning to fill up to forty
eight in FY twenty two to
positions vacant.
For.
Vacancy savings as part of this
budget request is that is that
the no well I'm I'm just I'm not
that we have the madam chair I'm
sorry Senator we right here.
On call in that funded vacancies
in dollars and and you should
practice L. from you should
tracked out from M. and again to
seven hundred twenty six
thousand two hundred dollars
almost a three quarter million
dollars number one of my
question is where is this money
at.
Madam chair if I could interject
it's kind of difficult because a
lot of the agencies get asked
questions on documents that the
representatives have and they
don't have access to those
documents as well so they're not
able to address them fully and
in the future I would advise
that it's really helpful at the
agencies had access to what you
all are seeing.
Okay so let me just ask here
You do you can you speak to your
funded vacancies.
John.
yes ma'am sure so again any of.
In the expenditures from our
budget that are used in any
given year so will in any given
year and prehistorically we've
requested certain amounts we
don't always use up to that
amount in any given year we
don't expend that amount any
unexpended funds from our
operating budget revert back to
the public school capital outlay
fund and they become available
for schools projects or anything
else.
Capital expenditures that are
drawn from the capital outlay
fund.
That is okay.
Anything else the representative
Garcia not about I'm sure not I
would like to talk off line to
the director on on these issues
so we can both be on the same
page yeah we well I mean the
thing is of the sheets go up and
that's the whole reason that the
analysts go through every one of
them now the kids the of public
service our personal services
didn't go up at all let Mrs
Rivera know that when we talk
about these agencies the high
level different sheets to go up.
And the agency's do see them.
Yes but they don't see the other
spreadsheets that you're
referring to madam chair yes
they do and I'm going to ask you
to read reserve your comments
thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair and do all and madam
chair there are no thank you
madam no intent of
Representative anybody wrong I'm
just reading what's in front of
me and I took it for granted
that if I have it they should
have it too thank you madam
chair.
Okay I'm gonna say this again.
Everybody gets to see these high
level spreadsheet is when we put
him up on the screen.
We get to see the different
shapes when we ask the analyst
to talk about.
I mean it.
I hope everybody's been able to
see those.
All right let's go to the next
question Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair and and I
know that I was getting late so
I would appreciate just a brief
answer but I heard the analysts
say that one difference we're
looking at in this is cost
assumptions and I just wondered
a little bit I'd like a little
more information on what cost
assumptions are giving us that
differential thank you okay
Jonathan.
So chair I would ask of Mr Lewer
miss Rivera to address that
question was.
Certainly madam chair I may.
The LFC recommendation provides
essentially flat.
Person services employee
benefits for FY twenty two and
it supports the agency's
original request to increase
their other category to one
point three million which
includes funding about five
hundred thirty six thousand for
their facility management
information system and I'll turn
it over to Donna to explain the
executive differences.
Madam chair yes the executive
funds all of the currently
filled and the requested
increase to build more vacant
positions because we understand
there's a lot of new projects
throughout the state that the
agency needs to deal with and to
supervise and to help the
schools so they can get their
requests met and of the
executive also recommended the
other costs are enough
basically three hundred thirty
two for and for the FIM system
and two hundred four thousand
for the sim system which help
with the software for the
schools and so really the only
difference is where we put more
of the money I put it.
Okay let's go to is there
anything else Representative
Sweetser madam chair thank you
all right ma'am anything else
for me to committee members.
Representative Anderson for the
motion.
Madam chair and I'm of the
executive because I'm confident
that Representative Garcia it's
concerns will be resolved thank
you.
And we have a second
Representative small is there
any opposition to that motion.
Okay I don't see any thank you
very much that executive has
been accepted.
Let's see we've got kind of an
interesting schedule coming up
here we things are changing
again so we'll try to keep
everybody informed as to when
the rest of the scheduling here
it looks like we've got a floor
session tomorrow and we'll work
around that I hope we are
looking out.
A full committee hearing and
receiving amount of a number of
the subcommittee reports so each
one of the subcommittee chair
should have seen those reports
signed they're going to go into
a packet.
and then we'll go through those
tomorrow I believe are also on
deck tomorrow to hear the
recommendation from house
transportation committee so that
one will be coming through also.
Looking behind my back here to
see you and
I think that's what will be
consisting of is all those
workgroup reports as well as the
house transportation committee
so we'll keep everybody in the
loop as to anything any other
changes.
we'll get aware of the two
people I asked in the analyst
look at this public safety
budget again and I don't have
anything else unless or
something else bill that we need
to talk about.
We're sorry okay we're down
thank you everybody I appreciate
the good work today I.
I'm not sure right.
