Assistance there would be David
Abbey so Representative small.
Chair madam chair committee I'm
pleased to come before you with
house bill two today that can I
discuss the amendment madam
chair of the amendment okay
first I need somebody to move
the amendment.
Second we have Representative
Chris street Christine Trujillo
and seconded by Representative
Sweetser so now you can talk
about thank thank you madam
chair thank you members madam
chair members as you recall we
had an excellent hearing on
house bill two which appropriate
some of the American rescue plan
funding many members of many
community members here they'll
resume spoke in support
madam chair committee we also
for important feedback and I
want to go through that feedback
which is a incorporated into the
proposed amendment this is been
moved.
Madam chair and committee
for the overall total first of
all this is five hundred and
four million dollars from the
federal American rescue plan
state really funding capital
fund.
As we all know this is slightly
less than half of the total
funds that are being transferred
into our appropriations
contingency account there are
some technical adjustments in
the bill some adjustments and or
deletions of probation for this
portion of the American rescue
plan and some new appropriation.
I want to first go through those
technical adjustments these
clarify.
The transfer of federal art with
the relief funding is to replace
lost room revenue this is very
important that is one of the
federal guidelines that governs
how American rescue plan funds
can be transferred the ability
to do this is based madam chair
on your leadership the LFC over
the summer and are excellent
policies that we additionally
clarify administrative
appropriations they go to the
department of finance and
administration without
specifying and division in order
to insure
That the appropriation for major
road projects are not rematched
with federal funds and to give
the flexibility needed to
support especially local
communities.
Madam chair and committee they
to
removals cover the appropriation
for the water project fund and
for land acquisition by the
department of game and fish
these are not in this bill the
amendment based upon really
important feedback from madam
chair you the committee with the
amendment splits appropriations
for housing into one ten million
dollars appropriation to the
Department department of finance
the.
And Administration for housing
the homeless and another fifteen
million dollars for energy
efficient affordable housing
through the housing trust fund
as members will know this
actually increases the support
for housing in this legislation
by five million dollars.
Madam chair committee the
amendment consolidates
appropriations from the Arbor
capital fund again into one the
technical side and critically we
heard very important feedback
from a number of committee
members specifically around the
broadband appropriation and this
allows department of information
and technology to also use the
funding for alternative our
satellite broadband without
specifying without specifying
madam chair and members that I
must go to those purposes we
heard we want all technology
office options on the table this
does that without using one or
another.
Madam chair very importantly the
amendment and new spending items
to the bill one madam chair a
committee that will go to DFA
for fifty million dollars to
construct and equip an acute
care hospital in a county with
less than one thousand one
hundred thousand residents.
responding to important
healthcare needs in our state
and another madam chair and
committee that includes a fund
transfer of two million dollars
to the proper the teacher
preparation affordability for a
scholarship fund as we have all
heard over the summer again
through LFC and the subcommittee
you created our teacher shortage
is acute this response to that
so that we
going into the holiday season if
New Mexicans want to become
teachers for those New Mexicans
who want to become teachers they
know for this body is taking
action right away to support
them in that.
madam chair committee that goes
through a quick summary of the
amendment and the invite if
there's any additional technical
comment from Mr average emerge
Sicily and then stand for
questions that.
Charles there's.
There's an additional amendment
madam chair that will update the
FIR that strikes the matching
requirement for the outdoor
recreation fund there's already
a matching component in statute
that would cover that
appropriation rather than what's
in your Original Bill.
David did you have a comment
thank you.
Comments.
All right let's let's go to the
committee Representative Brown.
Good morning madam chair thank
you.
Representative I'm curious to
know about the hockey to
hospitals this ammendment.
I would go to account.
Fewer than one hundred thousand
infatuation is there a County
this issue right now for this
publication or is it open to any
county under that population
limit.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Brown madam
chair representative brown this
covers the vast majority of
counties in New Mexico and there
is not language in this bill
that specifies one county over
another madam chair and and
representative of so how of what
other than population criteria
and what other criteria would be
considered do we know of any
counties that are requesting
acute care hospital I'm I'm just
I'm just thinking we need more
information.
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative
There is the again this is this
is open to the majority of the
state I know that there have
been Madam chair representative
there been a number of pieces of
requests and feedback from
around the state for more health
care support this using again
entirely federal money
really dialed in at the hospital
level but to be very clear
there is no specify County in
the legislation chair
representative for all of this
you know this is a work in
progress lots people get to
weigh in on
the possibility come to my to my
attention which doesn't mean it
would be limited to this is the
Lancia I'm just put that out
there thank you madam chair and
I I I think that's the answer
I'm looking for to know what
question that it's open to
anyone who wishes to apply yeah
the plan is of yes my I hope is
is that we heard a very
compelling presentation from the
health and Human Services
Committee at LFC you were you
were there when they presented.
Representative Trujillo and
Senator Ortiz C. Pino about
health care in general and what
their needs were I think we got
a three page list of stuff that
they needed my plan is when we
get into HA of state that we're
gonna look at this is a call as
a package this this kicks the
process all okay all right thank
you well we have.
All right anybody else.
Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair thank you very much
Representative.
There is a
better to minerals and that are
they really the.
The.
Those are working wheels for
more because this is the.
What are they doing madam chair
and representative in
conjunction with the C..
Madam chair representative help
thank you for the question Madam
chair representative of oil
conservation division OCD is
under energy minerals and
natural resources that is whom
we appropriate funding to so
they are not only the absolutely
the right place for this
destination Madam chair
representative they'll
thinking back to our first
hearing madam chair you talked
about thousands of orphan wells
which is absolutely correct
there is at least
one the there are over fifteen
hundred orphan wells alright
that will be part of OCD is
application to the federal
government for plugging Madam
chair representative they go
through a rigorous process and
this is something that I know
having talked to folks in the
inner energy industry this will
keep.
This will help.
Wells continue to allow our
energy to energy industry to
operate at historic levels and
make sure that we don't
use the funds that the private
sector pays for well
remediation.
Inappropriately for other
purposes so this is really
excellent investment that will
help draw down federal funds
support our energy industry and
really well functioning
departments.
Chair representative thank you
for the response that I do that.
whether the presenters.
Was the one that stated
thousands of miles and I knew
that was not the case.
these marginal and that's where
I have to arsenal will serve the
ones that are allowing the
smaller producers to be able to
go out to the exploration on and
I don't want their interests
jeopardized in any way I might
have an extermination maybe
without the consulting between
the two agencies to make that
determination and I understand
where this is going there has
been companies in the past Madam
chair representative to where
company Michael is that to keep.
At the somebody's that.
So if if they are working in
conjunction with each other and
not doing.
To our small.
This is a.
this very welcome anybody else
on the rate of up to the left
Representative Dixon.
Question thank you madam chair
and Representative small.
I was wondering if you could
talk a little bit about the
addition of the two million
dollars for
Perspective teachers and madam
chair.
Well specifically I'm wondering.
How many users were for in the
state currently and about how
many teachers potential future
budget up for this edition.
Thank you very much madam chair
representative this is
Is
there we have an approximately
we've heard from PED of up to a
thousand
vacancies that is a teacher
shortage Madam chair
representative this is part of
the LFC recommendation again
with the subcommittee that madam
chair created
and I know we time is short of
briefly do we have an estimate
of how many teachers that this
will help support.
The full LFC recommendation when
it comes out in January would
help over fifteen hundred
teachers because get their
certification with two years
worth of scholarships this will
help almost a hundred and
seventy.
As as a down payment.
Thank you madam chair and.
Percentage of small for
including this is a really
appreciate it thank you.
Representative Herrera.
Thank you madam chair thank you
presenters I just wanna make
sure
looking at me see section four
A. M. B. one A. striking out and
be an at eight what we're doing
is we're not services support
we're putting all the money into
one pot and we're not gonna
limited a hundred million to
just satellite expansion that
they had.
In fact in these programs can
they may do a satellite that
it's not we're not going to
limit a hundred million to that
so we have all that money in one
pot and we can and we can choose
if their shovel ready projects
that are already ready or we can
we can decide as as that as they
are as the bodies are
responsible public responsible
parties can decide how best to
use that money and we're no
more.
Setting aside a hundred million
for satellite is that correct
Madam chair representative yes
that's absolutely correct thank
thank you madam chair radio
that's.
So.
That money being available to
that how the process going to
work of people going to apply
individually in terms of access
to those funds is to step in our
our.
Entity that is overseeing that
who is going to make sure.
The disbursement to is is not
credible number one of the plan
is going to apply with drugs
puts a process so people the
public knows what to do.
Representative Trujillo the
department of information
technology with this Legislature
vested with more authority and
the support with the brought
director broadband will oversee
that giving the experts with the
all the the ability to implement
and oversee this and also chair
Representative Trujillo for
those specifically for students
and tribal libraries that's
through the Public Education
department so it was process so
madam to the there will not be
any individual applications for
those resources.
Representative Trujillo the
establish processes involved
entities will be followed for
disbursement okay.
Thank you madam chair.
What else Representative Garcia.
Madam chair one question it's on
page.
Fiction State.
The public let me libraries and
and Revenue structure for
American
For native communities are we
make sure.
But.
Is divided equally between
everybody could you know level
nations huge the.
Let.
More small communities and we
need to make sure that everybody
gets a fair shake up the ten
million dollars what we have in
place for that.
Thank you madam chair thank
representative Garcia there the
through PED they have some
shovel ready ready ready
projects madam chair
representative including on
smaller in some of the smaller
sovereign tribal nations as we
recall these have been part of a
request of involved before this
body this money will also be
available to help support
planning and design to support
exactly those
sovereign tribal nations
including tribes and including
problems who we really fully
expect will be have access and
utilize this funding and madam
chair representative Garcia in
the full Aussie rack there is
additional funding to support
the excellent planning and work
that's going on.
At the thank you madam chair.
Senator now the text.
So the two million for teachers
are we looking at
futures what we're looking at
cars who is going to be for.
These are just a students and
teacher preparation programs so
it could be in either
traditional or alternative and
it's a scholarship that you've
established a couple of years
ago and at the legislature's
been appropriating money to
and it needs to be replenished
to continue to expand the
pipeline.
Thank you.
But I also saw the less.
Okay Representative Sweetser and
chairman of the direction of the
amendment.
I have about a second for the
adoption of this amendment is
there any opposition to the.
Members of another of management
and Representative small.
We can go through the process
but if you think this is not
from my I don't want to do the
so look at it there.
This amendment passed out.
Thank you madam chair the
amendment is being proposed by
Representative Ezzell.
Correct and that that's one of
the so.
The
it is we get it passed out and
then I need to see.
For
of the projects dollars.
That.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair and and and members.
Look at the amendment this
amendment would actually step
outside of what we're doing in
the rest of the bill which is
not allocating specific amounts
of money within
within the department of
transportation funding to
specific it goes to a level of
specificity that avoids the
the.
Frame that's been set up which
is to go through existing
programs that have the best
ability to appropriate those
funds so I appreciate seeing and
then that but at this point it's
unfriendly.
What we go ahead and move the
amendment so we can talk about
it so I need someone.
We have a thank you for the
second it be a Trujillo and
Herrera for discussion go ahead
representatives I want to talk
about it Madam chairman.
state highway that we are
talking about.
The.
Rossel so we.
Time.
Three million more perceptions
the year
Is that our renewable.
Is taken from.
Whatever their motives of of
hello.
Instructions that are going.
The two hundred million euros.
Thank you sort of it does back
on our.
We also have lots of.
Whether gas production that does
take place for these particular
I do have to refuse that are
school bus drivers that will not
only ensure counties and you can
do to still there at times.
Well service all that with we
have medical services that he
needs to.
Be able to ambulance service if.
He can.
Session over to to.
Active cultures.
There's also a state more.
This
is a lot of yeah.
This.
That's models like all the staff
for.
Madam chair this rate has grown
to the point that it's.
When times are very dangerous
there's have been several wrecks
on the.
And I would love to see this
consider fired committee it is.
It is imperative that we do my
district four is available to be
used by everybody in the state
of matter without having to the
slow down to forty miles an
hour.
I.
All right
I had.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I would just
point out for the committee that
in our LFC recommendation there
there is
more than double this amount
that will be put into state
roads and so in the regular this
money it hi the department's
hands slow actually investment
of funds and what should give us
all come for is that there will
be more than double this amount
that will be available in the
regular session per the LESC
recommendation and the
bipartisan work there.
Okay let me ask you which
project is identified for that
DOT district right now supposed
to have a project for every one
of those DOT districts which one
fits in there I don't know what
district number that is.
From the general manager of the
funds that I find the job and
that road madam chair.
One twenty eight a service of
one twenty eight right but we
try to do with this is we try to
make sure we had at least one
project from every house
district in here
and is this project the the
Representative is brought up is
that on the stand for this
year's construction period you
know Madam chair representative
provide for is the
Is is the the this road for
three eighty on the staff for
the highly one twenty eight.
And that is referring to three
eighty yeah milepost one fifty
eight in Travis county to the
Texas state line I'm just
curious if that road is can the
New Mexico hi everyone of these
projects is in the state
transportation improvement plan
for one year for the first year
construction period of what what
is this do know is that in there
madam chair I do not know but we
do know that all the projects
already identified in H. P. two
are absolutely on the step and
the work particularly down in
Carlsbad in general continues
very significant state
investment in the heart of our
energy industries that have been
made over the last few years.
And and I think that's part of
the issue here is designating an
exact dollar figure are we dealt
with any of the others because
they're already in a step
process so what I'd like to do
with this project Representative
is that we bring it up in
January when we put together our
transportation package.
Madam chair of the.
This is the US highway does
actually start at hello of
course it does go through the
cap off that area all the way
into also to the restriction
from where it has.
Very well maintained and just
Destry services.
We're learning how and and as
soon as it does leave Ross will
offer that's whatever very.
Like.
If that so what we're gonna do
that we get in the age of state
when we deal with the
transportation budget make a
note of this is still a little
more research and see exactly
where it's at.
Not gonna take it is so this
ammendment there's no need is
there any other questions.
I just go to the bill or do you
have a question Representative
Crowder pro.
The broadband opportunities.
We heard the.
Senator we started a few days
ago about broadband and and why
now why don't we just do it
during the thirty day session
why why put it out there now
instead I I didn't follow
protocol correctly I need to
table that amendments as we
brought it up to discuss okay so
can I get a cabling to table
have Sweetser posted on is there
any opposition saying none it's
table of sorry go ahead thank
you madam chair
Representative Chatfield I were
informed of an opportunity of
twenty five million dollars
worth of broadband projects that
have been had filled out
applications they have been
vetted they've been approved and
they're sitting on a shelf
lacking funding and and so
several of us got together and
wrote a letter to the new
broadband guru that's coming in.
To see if we can get that money
immediately put to use
madam chair helped us guide us
through the process of of doing
that not amending the bill and
and I I just it kind of hit me
real strong that this is an
opportunity.
To put the money to work
instantly and to do that through
this process will come after
three months worth of time and I
think it's a good opportunity
whether we're successful or not
we'll find out but the
opportunity arose and then
It was very nice so did you get
your letter out as we have we
did finish the letter we signed
it last evening they were three
members of this committee that
signed it and then no one
Senator signed on to it I
understand there's another group
that's gonna have a similar
letter that worked on the
broadband project and they're
going to try and I don't know if
they're already sent they're
having to communicate via email
right now with the new director
good so it's either went out
last night or this morning or
they're holding it for the
second letter to us and about
that same time I'm a little bit
unclear but the opportunity it
it shows justification and
reason why during it now instead
of waiting till the regular
session came just several months
of a jump start on the whole
project in those projects are
sitting on the shelf there's
vetted approved and ready to go.
All over the state small
projects did you ask for a
response before we get back in
January from them I will.
Yeah let that in writing in that
letter make sure that we ask for
a response before we get into J.
January session so when we get
to do it in front of us will
have their either written
response or they'll be lots of
questions to answer you know we
need to have that in writing so
they know we expected them
because this is a new person
that knows process okay good as
any other questions photo of the
promotion of the bill as amended
Representative Sweetser thank
you madam chair I move we adopt
House Bill two as amended.
Okay we have was at brown okay
let's so we have a motion for
adoption of house bill two as
amended made by Sweetser and
brown is there any opposition to
that motion.
Good to pass thank you madam
chair thank you committees.
Thank.
