Representative Baca.
Representative Baca.
Representative Brown.
Representative Brown.
Representative
Representative Chatfield,
Representative Dow.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Garrett.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Herndon.
Here.
Representative Herrera.
Representative Herrera,
Representative Little.
Here
Representative Lujan, President.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Sariana.
Representative Silva.
Representative Vincent.
Vice Chair Dixon.
Chairs small.
We have a forum. Excellent.
Thank you very much, Ms. Jackie.
OK, members, we're gonna go
straight into um agency code 993
public school support, uh, we'll
be acting on this budget today,
although we have uh a work group
tomorrow uh or actually today,
so there's a great deal of work
that's ongoing in this, um.
And then we have the public
education department, followed
by the public school facility
Authority.
Uh, in, uh, make sure, yes,
Madam Secretary, please come on
up.
I also wanna, yeah, please, Mr.
Santa.
Members, as we recall, we've uh
work to integrate sort of the
three different parts with the
LSC with LESC and with the
executive with PED together, the
budget we see today will be
choosing between two budgets,
that will only be the the LFC
and the executive budget, uh,
but, uh, Director Senna and your
staff, thank you for being here.
Well, we'll first start with, um
Mr. Liu.
And we'll start off, uh, public
school supports.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um thank
you committee members. Happy
Valentine's Day and uh for uh
for some of you, this will be
your 2nd look at public school
support and for some of you,
this will be your 3rd, so I
appreciate your patience. Uh,
we'll try to get through this
quickly.
Looking at your high level, um,
we'll note that between the
recommendations, there's a lot
of similarities as well as
differences, just to highlight
some key differences, uh, you'll
notice there's a difference in
the LFC and LESC and executive
recommendations on proposed
formula changes, notably related
to at-risk units and secondary
membership weights.
You note that there's
differences in salary increases
of 3% in the executive and LESC
recommendations and 4% in the
LFC recommendation.
All recommendations have similar
amounts for insurance. There's
some differences, but generally
it increases for transportation,
and then the last major
differences are in some below
the line programs and the amount
for universal school meals and
recurring.
Your major differences in
non-recurring.
Uh, relate to a $90 million
increase for Indian education
fund from the executive
recommendation.
Some differences in
The
Universal school male
deficiencies, but you'll see
similarities across the agencies
for
Structure, literacy
implementation, also known as
the summer reading program, uh,
a lot of similarities,
similarities in amounts for CTE,
although they are coming from
different pots of funding.
And of course, additional
funding to support the state
support reserve fund.
Notably all recommendations do
have multi-year appropriations
through either the grow or the
public ed reform fund to study
the efficacy of these pilots.
Uh, and with that, Mr. Chair,
I'll turn it over to secretary
and um Mr. Minor to make and Mr.
Senator to make brief comments.
Right, Mr. Minor, uh, and Mr.
Sen, if you, I know you're not
on the agenda, but again,
welcome, appreciate being at the
table, Mr. Minor, and then uh
we'll go to Madam Secretary.
Oh, excuse me, Mr. Minor, Mr.
Senna and Madam Secretary. Uh,
good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. Uh,
I'm Andrew Minor. I'm filling in
as the K-12 education analyst
for the executive now for Simon
left some big shoes to fill both
physically and metaphorically,
but I'll do my best. Uh, I just
wanted to point out a few of the
key differences between the
executive and the legislative
recommendations for public
school support versus universal
school meals or recurring the
executive provided 50.7 million,
uh, which
In line with current cost
projections, whether the LFC is
at 42.2 million for recurring,
uh, the executive also supports
a $5 million non-recurring
appropriation for potential cost
overruns, uh, and that's in, uh,
neither the LFC or the LES LESC
recommendation. Uh, New Mexico
grown, the executive, uh,
recommends 2.3 million, uh, for
the Mexico grown program, LFC
does not include an amount
there, school safety, executive
recommends 5 million.
recurring, including 1.5 million
for panic buttons and 3.5
million for mass emergency
notifications and alerting
technology platforms, uh, the
LFC and the LESC recommend 1
million non-recurring for panic
buttons.
Indian Education fund, moving
into non-recurring, uh, the
executive adds $90 million
non-recurring over 3 years for
the Indian Education Fund, while
the LFC has 15.5 million over
three years.
Uh, special education
initiatives, uh, the executive
and the LS excuse me, LESC
recommend 4 million
non-recurring while the LFC did
not include a recommendation.
And last, education, excuse me,
educator fellows program.
Executive and the LSE recommend
20 million recurring, which is
flat or sorry, non-recurring,
which is flat with uh 25 FY 25,
the LFC recommends 15 million.
So that concludes my remarks, so
I will pass it to Mr. Santa.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Sorry for
the confusion. There's been a
little bit of shuffling around
on the agenda today, so I wanna
make sure I bring some, add some
value and don't detract from the
conversation. I think the one
thing I'll, I'll point out, uh,
aside from the, what, what
Andrew and Sonny have already
said is
Going back to the recurring
piece, um, that there is some
agreement on um uh some policy
that LESC has recommended in
House Bill 60.
Which is to swap out the way
that we determine at risk in our
funding formula and replace
that.
mechanism the family income
index, there's agreement on
that. There's also agreement on
creating a standalone English
learner factor, which will
direct funds uh for those for
services for those students. And
then again, just highlight that
difference in the recurring
piece around, um,
Increasing funding for secondary
students, so 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th,
10th, 11th, and 12th graders uh
under the proposal that LESC's
brought forward would generate
more funding for school
districts to support, supports
for those students, CTE
performing and fine arts, uh,
other kinds of secondary student
supports. Um, the only other
thing I'll point out, Mr. Chair,
committee members, is, um, in
those 3-year pilots.
Uh
A, a program to support students
who are unhoused, essentially a
pilot that was run uh in a few
districts that we think has a
lot of promise, um, and then
innovation zones, which is a
Secondary reform effort to help
school districts rethink their
secondary experience for
students, um.
gives schools an opportunity to
think about how they're doing
business right now.
And how they can improve those
practices and experiences for
kids because we know that
secondary students are still in
in need of a lot of support.
It's where we see our outcomes
start to diminish after growth
through elementary school, they
start to dip off in middle and
high school, um, with that,
I'll, I'll turn it over to the
secretary.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee. Um, I also want
to extend uh a happy Valentine's
Day greeting to all of you, uh,
two documents that I have. This
one you've seen before. I've
presented it, I think twice.
It's just for you to reference
it's the full uh exact budget
rep and then the one this larger
one includes the differences.
I'm just gonna highlight a few
cuz again we have been in front
of you many times over, um,
something that has not been
mentioned is.
Uh, the reduction, um, in SCG
funding uh in the LFC budget of
35.2 million due to enrollment
decline, um, we have some
concerns about the impacts of
that reduction, uh, as we know
that we really don't see a 1 to
1 reduction with enrollment and
um also concerned about
inflationary costs to the LEA's
and what that impact might be.
Um
Arty mentioned Universal free
meals, but I just want to note
for you that we've seen so far
as of February of 14% increase
in our claims from our school
districts and charter schools
for meals, so it's a 14%
increase from last year.
Um, and the exact re reflected a
5%, so we're, we're already
seeing higher claims.
Um
All of the recommendations other
than the exact has 0 for family
income index. Again, I think
that's um a really important
program, but I won't elaborate
anymore, um, special education
initiatives, the $4 million that
are not in the LFC or the HAFC
scenario is significant for us.
The amount of work that is is
that we're able to do with that
4 million has a huge impact on
families, we do regional, uh,
professional development and
resource tours around the state
for families, we do the same for
educators this allows us to host
our parent university
conference, um, it allows us to
support the stay in school
initiative, which supports high
school students with uh uh with
disabilities to make sure that
they graduate on time, that $4
million is really critical. I
would love to see that back in.
Um,
What else has not been mentioned
that I want to mention.
I, I will say that the HAFC as
wreck does have 5 million back
for educator fellows, which is
great. Uh, that $5 million
does support 12 fellows, so
we're really pleased to see that
back in HAFC Rec also has uh the
1.5 million for the Education
Acts.
Um, and then also add an
additional 10 million a year or
uh the Indian education fund.
So I will stop there.
Great, Mr. Lu.
OK.
Uh, we'll start with
representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
presenters, uh.
Appreciate all the hard work
that's gone into this, um.
Um, members of the committee
last year I sponsored the
legislation calling for a review
of the SCG.
Um, and I don't think it'd been
uh taken we hadn't taken a look
at that for I think over 20
years, I, I'm not sure of the
exact date, but I would like to
ask Mr. Santa what all went into
that who participated in that
and, and we've spent a lot of
work in the interim, looking at
this, and, and I think people
ought to understand that these
are significant changes that
came up from the ground level,
but I would like, um, um, uh,
John, if you could kind of
elaborate on that.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative Vennetta.
Um, yeah, so, as you said, this
is uh born out of your, your
memorial from 2023. And uh we
staff LESC staff undertook a
essentially a two-year process,
uh, that involved the working
group that included, I think, as
I've said before to this
committee, superintendents, uh,
school boards, school business
officials, some of our members,
uh, labor partners, the public
education department, the
partners from the finance
committee.
Um, it was a pretty, pretty
substantial group of, of
students, I'm sorry, of of
folks. We had multiple meetings
over the course of primarily the
summer of 2023, they got me the
list
6 meetings of that working group
and then a um
And then a sort of culminating
meeting that happened this past
interim as we sort of started to
shape up those.
Those recommendations.
And uh
I guess what I'd like to say is
that that I hope this committee
understands that this was the
work of a lot of people, and I,
I hope we follow the LESC on
this because, you know, these,
we worked hard on this and not
we, I really wasn't a member of
that committee. I mean, the
royal we, but um, I, I really
appreciated this work and I
thought it, it wasn't a huge
change, but I, I thought they
made significant changes in in
how we're gonna, how we're gonna
give more money to um.
Older kids in our schools that
need more. They just need more
money and there are a lot of
things in that equity in that
formula that I think, uh, I
think we should take a hard look
at. I guess that's all I have to
say, Mr. Chair.
Great. Thank you very much
Barrera. Next, we're gonna go to
represent Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm still
looking at some things, um.
So I'll just go down through
some of the things that I
mentioned, uh, first I wanted
just to add uh.
Or to um address the New Mexico
uh.
Grow uh find uh for the 2.3
million. Can you, it was brought
up as something that we didn't,
we didn't include in LFCs or
yeah, LFC budget, Mr. Chair
representative of the New Mexico
grown program is a appropriation
that he has had in the past.
This looks like that it it would
add it back to the departments
below the line program and it
mostly focuses on getting local
producers for fruits,
vegetables, and other products
that are
created here in New Mexico into
schools and and to your
question, no, it is not in the
LFC recommendation. I like to
flag that that line in the
budget, I think that that this
has been a proven.
Um, program, and I'd like to
make sure that it's not just
benefiting our kids, which is
most important in getting fresh.
Um, produce and and.
Nutrition into our, our local
schools is it's also, you know,
there's an economic uh
development component to this as
well that I feel like we really
we need to uh pay a lot more
attention to Mr. Chair, um,
thank you for that. And so I'd
like to flag that, um, so it's
doing a lot, uh, also with like
uh.
looking at the, the special ed,
um,
Line item was that Mr. Chair, is
that just for clarification for
the special education office
that we're we're looking to
codify to laws.
Mr. Chair Representative Luhan,
so the
asking all of that cost is built
into PEDs.
budget.
So the $4 million really
supports a lot of the
professional development, the
conferences are law conference,
our data and fiscal conference
that's coming up, our parent
university, all of the PD
professional development that
happens for educators and
administrators around the city,
um, the, the supports we provide
for families to understand IDEA,
um, to understand their, their
child's IEP and other sort of
um.
Information to help them
advocate for their their child.
So that's, that's what we do
with that funding. It also
allows us to supplement the
monitoring that happens in
schools as well.
Mr. Cha is that uh with the, the
re, um.
Restructuring of the IEP um
process as well.
Mr. Chair Representable Lu Han,
we have created an IEP template,
statewide template, and there
was a process that involves
stakeholders from around the
state, um, but the actual IEP
template.
Infrastructure that needs to be
built, that's part of our, our,
our, uh, IT task and so it is in
the budget in all of the
budgets. Thank you for, for
clarifying that. Um, but with
this 4 million also help with um
with um.
Parents
With their children and their
special needs, Mr. Mr. Chair
Representative, yes.
And what, what would that look
like? Is that outreach, is that,
is that education for them? What
does that look like, Mister Cha?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Luhan, yes, it's, it's the
professional develop parent
university, which you are
participated in, that was a
really important event that that
people are asking for more of
that sort of thing, um, uh,
again, all of the regional
tours, our staff is out around
the state, providing meetings
and resources and and supports
in community around the state.
So this funding allows us to do
that. Thank you, sure, I just
say that, you know, going to.
event was not just, it wasn't
just a a conference like maybe
we go to a lot of conferences.
It's very, it was completely
interactive and uh really uh
provided for families and and
um.
In understanding where where
they had.
Programs for them in the
outreach and everything was all
in 11 space for them to and for
them to actually find community
and um congregate together and
get support from one another so
that within that that realm of
advocacy of what happens and
needed in our public school
schools with um with children
with special needs with their
families as well, and I can tell
you, um.
As a part participants there. I,
I
I helped and did and had
advocacy work myself because I
understood what was going on and
more than where they could, they
could get some, um, get into the
programs that they need for
their children because a lot of
them don't really didn't even
realize that some of these
things existed, Mr. Chair. Um,
so maybe we should look at that
a little bit more, um, Mr.
Chair, also I'd like to, um,
Look at line item A on the high
yield.
Go to
item 83, which is out of school
learning summer enrichment and
high dosage tutoring programs.
I know that we were, I think
LESC was looking at $20 million
and it looks like we got $150
million. That's really good.
Thank you. I think this is a
great thing. My concern I'd like
to flag is, is the language and
to leave room here or have a.
More discussion about um
implementing uh room for other
out of school, um, networks that
provide, uh, that are provided
at schools now or don't have um
necessarily the high dosage
tutoring aspect to them, but
they're providing many, many
opportunities for our kids for
growth and enrichment.
Um
Mr. Chair, and I think this
might come up again and it's
come up with other members, Mr.
Chair, as we've had our
discussions here.
On online items 90 and 91 are
blackation Act and Hispanic
Education Act, um.
Like to look at that again, uh,
we had.
We've had many honorable
honorees, uh, throughout the
week in our joint, uh, sessions,
uh, and
It's just come to our attention
that we need to, we need to look
at these line items again,
Mister Chair.
That there is work going out
there, especially in southern
New Mexico, where the outcomes
are, are being measured and that
there is a lot of work being
done there, uh, using those
fundings.
Mr. Chair, so I'd like us to to
look at that again and
I'll keep listening, I think,
um,
I think we made some changes and
I, I like what I'm hearing, but
I'll pay attention to the rest
of the conversation. That sounds
great. Thank you very much for
the question, Representative
Lohan. Uh, next, we're gonna go
to Representative Silva, then
Representative Buck.
Thank you, chair. Uh, thank you,
everyone. I am
Wondering on the high level
lines.
On line 8 for the 6th grade
membership factor, uh, the LFC
recommends um increasing that to
1.1475.
Uh, rather than the LESC's
recommendation to increase it to
1.30. Are we gonna, uh, is there
a plan to do it incrementally
over time, and that's the
gradual uh increase or is that
gonna stop right there? Thank
you, chair.
Mr. Chair, Representative, I
think uh the work group is gonna
be tackling that, um.
Uh, later in this agenda, um,
but you certainly have an
opportunity to to discuss that
and consider options for uh
potential incremental adjustment
each year.
Great. Thank you. Um, I'd, I'd
like to see it increased to
match the 7th to 12th grades,
um, if not this year, over time,
so thank you, chair. And then,
um,
I'd like to recommend the online
63 of the high level, the New
Mexico grown fruits and
vegetables if we can move that
one item to
Um, reflect the executive, that
would be amazing.
Um, and then, I know we talked
about this.
The 1st or 2nd time we talked,
uh, but CTE lives in a lot of
different places and so I just
want to make sure one that um
schools are getting access to
CTE whether it's online 108.
It's again,
143 and 145.
And then it looks like it got
moved out of the group.
from line 159 from Innovation
zones. So I just wanna make sure
like things are getting
The, the CTE funds are ending
up.
In schools, and I'm wondering if
we are adding performance
measures that we're gonna be
tracking because I know that was
a big challenge of these are
temporary funds because we don't
know if the students that are
being attracted to those courses
have high graduation rates
because they're the students
that they are, or because it's a
case of like these CTE courses
are really working, so I really
want us to have some performance
measures for those. I know that
was a really long question, but
uh if you could
respond to any of those, that
would be great. Thank you,
chair.
Yes, Mr. Chair Representative,
the, the recommendations have
relatively similar funding
levels. I will note that the
LESC recommendation puts it
through this
real
process that has more guardrails
on looking at evaluation.
Mr. Chair Representative so, if
I can add, and I will just say
that the public education
department is building in.
Much more, um,
Extensively uh performance
measures and every bit of
funding that flows. So whether
it's in the Perf grow or it's in
another place in the budget.
Um, that is something that the
agency is doing.
Mr. Chair very quickly, uh,
Representative Silva, I think
part of the reason that you're
seeing these things in different
places is that they actually
represent different pieces of
the CTE system.
Right, so innovation zones, um,
are still pretty nascent in in
their development, but it's
about helping schools to rethink
the kinds of programming that
they should offer and getting to
CTE might be one of those
things.
Having explicit CTE,
non-recurring CTE funding that
pays for startup costs,
equipment, those training for
folks. Those are one time things
that you, that a school district
or a school might need.
To do that when they're starting
a program.
Um, whether you, you do it in
the secondary factors through
some other sort of uh recurring
format, there are ongoing costs
to those CTE programs that
generally are more expensive to
offer than other secondary
programs, and I would throw in a
couple of things. One is the
career technical student
organizations, which, um, those
are things like
Future Farmers of America,
educators rising, your DECA
programs, those kinds of things
that actually facilitate the
organizations that are necessary
for those programs to work. Um,
and then, of course, just your
ongoing things like you need to
pay for instructional materials
we use, we hear the example of
things like welding rods, that
kind of stuff. So even though
they're all CTE related.
And may seem duplicative or
redundant.
They do have specific roles to
play as we build up that career
technical education system in
the state.
Thank you, chair.
Excellent, great questions.
Thank you. Uh, we're gonna go
next to represent Baca, then
represent Fernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for your presentation. Um.
I have the pleasure to serve on
both committees, both the uh
house appropriations and
Education and the corresponding
LFC and LESC.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I think that
This process could probably
benefit from.
Throughout the interim, having
more.
Discussions on budget, budget
protection.
Um, and projections, and so, you
know, I, I do, I do think that
there's opportunity as we kind
of, I feel sometimes I'm, I'm
thinking from both sides of my
brain and sometimes from no
brain, right, but um.
So, Mr. Chairman and director
Sanna and uh Madam Secretary.
When we, when we began to look
at this SCG working group.
What were some of the
Outcomes that we hope to do.
What were some of the things
that were studied and what,
where do we get our information
in order to conduct
This work
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Representative Baca. So I
think there were some, some
overarching, I'm really
Daniel is sipping on our, our
fiscal analyst led that process
would be able to
Uh, tell you a lot more about
the details, but we're trying to
make sure that the funding
formula is accurate.
Making sure that the data that
we're using in that formula to
direct funding to schools is is
accurate.
That it's transparent.
That we understand the, the kind
of data that goes into it, and
that we as a state have some
idea of what that data means and
I'll just use Title I as an
example. We use Title One, which
is a federal designation in our
at-risk, uh, calculation
currently. We have no control
over that data, that number just
comes to us from the federal
government.
We wanted to make sure that the,
that the weights in the formula
were actually distributing
money.
To the places they needed to be,
to a place that money needed to
flow.
Um,
and that they were responsive,
that the formula itself was
overall responsive to what local
school districts needed.
To make decisions about how to
serve their students.
We can, we consulted, uh,
obviously some historical work
that both the legislature and
the American Institutes of
Research did for the state in
2008, and some recommendations
that they, that both that study
and a joint LESC and LFC in 2011
found.
As well as some of the things
that are happening nationally,
identifying a standalone factor
for English learners, for
instance, is something that a
lot of states are doing because
they recognize that those
students won uh are protected
and, and need additional
resources.
And that funding should follow
those students, so that's
schools can be intentional about
how they serve them.
So, again, all those sort of
basic principles, but also some
of that national research, and
then, of course, hearing from
Um, not just the working group,
but folks that we invited to
that working group process to
talk about how the formula is
working for local school
districts.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and so,
um, and director sent up.
So we, we were looking, we were,
we were.
Working under the assumption
that some areas of the formula
were not providing adequate.
Funding. What were those
outcomes that we were looking or
hoping to
Um, correct, by the
recommendations from the LESC.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Baca, thanks for
the question. Uh, I, I, I'd like
to say that we didn't have
preconceived notions that things
were working or not working. We
had, we had heard concerns, but
there were also, we've also sort
of
Relied on this best practice of
Reviewing funding formulas, the
best practice that we've heard
from from national experts is
that we should be taking a look
at a funding formula every 10
years to make sure that these
pieces are responsive and that
it's still working the way that
we wanted it to. Um, and so
there were a number of places,
you know, I won't, I won't pull
it up, but we've got a formula
that's got a number of different
weights and factors in it.
And so there were a lot of
things that the form the working
group did not suggest changing
because they actually seem to be
working the way that they're
intended, um, but again,
Because the pieces that we saw
did not necessarily provide that
accuracy, that transparency,
that it wasn't necessarily
flowing money to the students
that were generating or that
should be generating that money.
That's why we brought those
particular recommendations
because those are the, the
changes that the working group
felt were appropriate.
Thank you and uh
Mr. Chairman and the panel here,
so.
What was the difference between
the LESC and the LFC
recommendation. What was that
dollar amount?
Excuse me, Mr. Chair.
Again, as I said at the very
beginning, there's actually some
pretty strong agreement around
those first two pieces around at
risk and English learners, the
biggest difference is the
increase to the um
Secondary factor.
Moving those factors for 6th
through 12th grade. It's about
91 million is what the the LAC
recommended the, the
recommendation from LFC was $15
million for that, 6th grade, so
about 75 million just in that
particular uh place in
recurring.
Thank you. And now I'm just
gonna get, you know, to a kind
of a programmatic.
Question Mr. Chairman and
Director Senna.
So we talked about the dollar
Mountain, it was somewhere uh
and again Daniel or Sonny,
whomever, what was it was what
100, 100 million, 120 million,
is that what it is? Around
there, I think it's
approximately there some of
you're kind of total proposal is
132. The difference between the
two proposals is 76 76 million,
OK.
So, Mr. Chairman and, and
Um, Mr. Senna.
What would be the uh
Adverse effects if the
recommendation were not taken,
what, what types of activities
could or would be affected in
this recommendation.
And really quick question about,
can we, uh, let's identify the
line, uh, if we can and great
questions, so we'll just flag
the line for, for everyone and
go from there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Baca. Yeah, we're
looking at lines essentially 4
through 9 on your high level,
specifically lines 8 and 9 that
refer to the secondary, right?
Um, so, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Baca to your
question about what might not
happen, um.
It is important to remember that
we're, we're in a fortunate
position that for the most part,
these are all adding to, to the
school district's budget.
So in um potentially not funding
the entire package.
School districts would not have
additional funding to do the
kinds of things that they, that
they've recommended for
supporting secondary students,
it wouldn't necessarily mean
that they would have to stop
doing anything.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And so
I know this kind of high level
stuff. Now, my next questions
are gonna be very line specific
CTE.
I believe it's line 21.
For 30 million.
That was their budget. So where
does that
Word of that $30 million go?
Where was that basically?
Uh, where do we see that
reflected on these uh these
sheets.
Mr. Chair, representative, that
30 million was just a unit value
increase.
In fiscal year 25, so it does
roll over into this proposal as
part of the base.
I will say that the vast
majority of public school
funding goes towards
compensation operationally. So I
would
A pine that the vast majority of
this has gone into staff
salaries.
And I think the representative
is asking some questions, sorry,
yeah, and I will, I will wrap it
up, um, oh, no, please keep
going. You're, you're great.
I, I think the other, you know,
cause I guess what what we're
really talking about and, and
what we, Mr. Chairman, and is
it, we kind of struggle between
the above the line where it's
just this pot of money, the SCG,
and we're talking about directed
funds.
On specific projects, and I, I
think that's also very important
to me as well. And I think
that's really kind of where, you
know, it's gonna be important to
see is where are these
The specific funds that, you
know, are earmarked for these
activities, including CTE and
again, I understand that.
Districts are wanting above the
line funding, which means
they're put into this pot of
money and they can be expended
in certain ways.
Um, but as far as with the
appropriators,
Sometimes we want to make sure
that those lines or those funds
are targeted in basically
earmarked for those.
Um, so, um, Mr. Chairman and uh
committee, the other
Um
line that I flagged and I do
think that it is as the Ed
Fellows line 100.
Uh, I know that when we talk
about the
Educator pipeline. I that is
something that
Uh, as we work to get a
qualified uh teacher in every
classroom.
That is a program that we have
seen good success with.
And uh
You know, I would like to see if
we can't help with that.
And so I know that there's
questions, I know maybe some
more recommendations may come
out of the work group, so I may
have some more questions
regarding this, but I do thank
you for your time, Mr. Chairman.
Excellent. Thank you very much,
Representative Baca, and thank
you for the leadership on
bringing LESC and LFC together.
I think we're seeing dividends
even as there's more work to do.
Uh, we have Representative
Hernandez and then
Representative Garrett, then
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I had the
similar um question, uh, more
specifically, Mr. Chairman, line
number 9. Mr. Chairman, I, uh,
uh, had a visit with, with, uh,
Dane College last last week, uh,
Madam Secretary and presenters,
um, and, uh, what, what thing
that that they also expressed to
me was a just the amount of
remedial courses they're doing
because these
Ready, uh, for, for college
level classes and I think, uh,
again, Mr. Chairman, um, Madam
Secretary, I think 9 is
critical. I, I, I, I understand.
Trying to understand why, why
it, it, it, it's, uh, you know,
we're not carrying over the LESC
recommendation, uh, which I feel
should be targeted for those
students who will be career
ready or college bound. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much for
Hernandez. Uh, next
representative Garrett in room 7
Duncan.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thanks, all
of you. It's, um, I mean, this
is my year 7 plus before being a
legislator that's looking at
budgets, and I just know that
every the PED LFC LAFC
everybody, the FA, everybody's
really worked hard on these
budgets, and they all show that
we care about kids.
And we care about educators, so,
but, but I always think of um
Mr. Chair, my favorite part of
Stephen Covey is his experiment
where he puts the big rocks in,
and then he pours the little
sands in, not the little sands
first because of the big rocks
don't fit. So when I look at the
budget, I'm thinking about what
the big rocks are, and the SCG
formula.
Which, you know, we have
differing interpretations, and
we also know that, and I hate to
say this, sometimes everything
can't be done in one year.
Sometimes it takes 2 years. Um,
I know that
We have the, the 3 bills from
PED, the special education,
maths, and structured literacy,
they all seem to be here, is
that correct, Madam Secretary?
Representative, yes. OK, thank
you for that.
Um
And there's agreement on the
family income index.
There's agreement on the English
language learner exit increasing
that to make sure it's robust. I
know that both LASC and the SCG
working group.
Really believed that.
Part of the importance of
raising the unit value for
secondary from 121.25 to 1.30
was to fill in those gaps,
especially with career and
technical education. Everybody
that's come to speak to all of
us has talked about, it's
expensive, and even if they're
doing um community colleges for
some of that, it's expensive for
supplies and things. So that was
the reason why we wanted to
raise that.
we wanted to increase 6th grade
because in most districts and
charter schools, 6th grade is
part of middle school, and we
know research wise and all this
experience wise from our own
kids are being teachers, that
that 6th grade year is when kids
start lose, they don't get
engaged. They need the hands-on
stuff that costs more, so we
acknowledged that in the 6th
grade factor.
Uh, but what I want to ask right
now is about the three-tier
minimum salary.
In the LASC budget.
Uh, 55, 65, 75, and then the
salary increases in line 16.
would make up differences. Can
you talk about those new um
levels of salary for educators.
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative, good questions.
Both the LFC and LESC
recommendation raise those
Minimum salaries by 5000 each.
The only difference between
these recommendations is how
much the across the board raises
are so an LESC, it's 3% and LFC
it's 4%, and so the difference
to get to those new minimums,
changes depending on what you're
across the board rate is.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Sonny. And I think we all know
that part of the race doesn't
prove to be erased because of
insurance raises. So it's like
teachers get a raise and then
it's like, where did my raise
go? Oh, went to insurance, so
that's just a reality that we
have to think about.
OK, so I, I hope in our working
group we can look more at that.
Um
CTE, um,
CT is in line 108 uh under
innovation zones.
I just marked this, and of
course I can't already find it,
um, career technical education
129 for the executive.
Innovation zones, which is
essentially um spread over 3
years.
Um, is very kinds of
internships, CTE it's very
effective.
And um let's see.
So I just, that's something we
have to look at more.
And then we're hearing about Mr.
Chair, public education reform
Fund.
Um, can we hear a little bit
about that.
Because it's, I know there's a
bill in the Senate.
That would be tied to some of
these things.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative.
To give you a little more
context, there are two bills,
one for the grow fund and one
for the public education reform
fund, and they are very similar
in that they are
Giving parameters for state
agencies on having a strong
accountability and evaluation
plan at the beginning before
they do these pilot programs.
Companion to that in the
Budget or 3 year appropriations
to test out those pilots, so you
have both of these.
Bills creating more guidelines
and parameters on.
How we work together to set the
measures of success and measure
over 3 years, how these programs
are working or not working. And
then in the budget you have
companion language to draw these
out and Mr. Chair and Sony, can
you tell me the Bill numbers and
the appropriation current
appropriation associated with
each one of them.
Mr. Chair Representative, I'm
gonna take a guess on grow and
I'll follow up on that. I
believe the bill numbers are
health bill 181 and 187.
And
I think it's about
I would have to get back to you
on the amount in the grill
recommendation from LFC, but I
do know the public ed reform
bill, the Senate Bill 201, and
the recommendations currently
sit at 150 million.
Transferring to that fund.
OK, um, that's all my question.
the areas where I want to make
sure we really thoroughly look
at. Do any of you want to say
any other thing about, we just
have to get this in the budget.
My bottom, our bottom line is we
really need this, whether it
ends up or not.
Just any final comments about
that, the big rock.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Garrett, I think I went over
several things that I, I think
are really critical, um, I will
just point out that the 150
million, that is tied to the
purf.
Is all dependent on the bill
passing and so that could be a
significant issue in terms of
$150 million not actually ending
up.
In the PSS and a lot of the
important programs that we have
talked about would be tied to
that, so I just wanted to to
flag that.
Thank you.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Garrett, um,
Obviously, LESC staff and I
think the committee is very
proud of the policy work that
it's done to get you these
recommendations about the SCG
reform, and I think, as I said
earlier, because of the
agreement, we've made some real
progress and I think some good
things are going to happen
regardless of where you land. So
I'd love to say that that's the
thing that has to be done. I, I
think we'd be remiss to not to
forget teachers.
And that salary increases and
increases to minimums, the work
that you've already done around
residencies, whether it's at 15
or 20 around Ed Fellows. Those
folks are at the core of what
happens in schools every day.
And I think
Where there's agreement that
those things are going to
happen, and so I don't think
there's a threat that it's not
gonna happen. But in the end,
that's the, that's the most
important piece. Thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Garrett, uh,
Representative Duncan, and
Representative Dow, please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I just
have some questions just
On this because I'm just trying
to learn a little bit about
this, so.
Um
Miss Charon state equalization
guarantee, the um, can you tell
me a little bit about the LFC's
recommendation and
It's 35 million less, is that
correct?
Um, Mr. Chair, representative if
I'm understanding your question.
The
Recommendation from EFC for the
state equalization guarantee is
4.4 billion, which is a 6%
increase.
That's a $250 million increase
from the prior year online 28.
The LESC recommendation is about
100.
Sorry, 83 million.
Higher
And the executive recommendation
is about 50 $48 million lower.
So LFC is in the middle of the
two recommendations, but they're
all raising between 5% and 8%
for this fiscal year. OK. All
right. Thank you on that. Um,
the next
questioning Mr. Cha is the
universal free meals.
Um, LSU recommendation is 42.2.
Uh, E L ESC is 557, that's the
same with the executive. Are we
going to meet the, the needs of
our kids.
With the LFC recommendation.
Mr. Chair Representative.
Two things, um, the prior year
appropriation for universal
school meals is 41 million.
We have been tracking the number
of meals that have been going
out, um, in this first quarter
of this first two quarters of
this fiscal year, uh, we only
saw about 1 to 3% increase in
meals, but the secretary has
highlighted in her comments that
that may be growing rapidly, so
we're keeping very close track
of that. Um, if you turn with me
to the 2nd page, line 96 and 97.
The $7.8 million supplemental
and the $3 million deficiency
are
corporations for costs that have
already been incurred, so for
this current year and the prior
year that we were short. The
recommendation covers those
shortages, uh, but then it grows
recurring slightly in
anticipation that we still don't
have good projections on what
the real cost will be.
Um, so the recommendation
gradually increases recurring
while covering the shortfalls
that have been realized.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and,
uh, Sonny on that. Can you tell
me?
How we can build that budget out
with that in mind if we're
getting 13% now, are we able to
adjust that next year and and
put in the um you know, extra
that we might need.
Uh, Mr. Chair, you've been doing
this for the past few fiscal
years, I think it's appropriate
once we get into the next
session to re-evaluate and make
adjustments as we get there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for sending on that.
OK. Uh, my next question is, uh,
line 43 out of state tuition.
Can you tell me what that is?
Mr. Chair representative this
appropriation goes to schools
who have students that are very
close to the border.
And have
Less of a commute per se to go
to a school right across the
border.
So, rather than having them go
to one of our industry in state
schools. We pay tuition for
those public school students to
attend the state school on the
other side of the border. OK.
Thank you on that. I, I just
wondered what that was. I
appreciate that.
Um
My next question would be on
line 118 uh head legal
settlements in 150, which is
sufficiency lawsuit fees. Can
you tell me, are those?
Do they represent the same thing
just out of a different pocket?
Uh, Mr. Chair, that's correct.
One is coming from General Fun,
the LFC recommendation is
recommending it out the consumer
settlement fund.
OK. All right.
And then Lane 126.
His for family income index
support. Can you tell me what
that does and what it includes.
Yes, um, Mr. Chair,
Representative Duncan, thank you
for the question. So the family
income index, you put it already
mentioned uh from director Sanna
that that methodology was used
to address our at-risk
calculation. So the family um
income index has been a program
at the public education
department that uh directs
funding to the school level
instead of the district level.
That funding.
is dependent on um schools that
have students um that have
higher rates of poverty and
higher needs. And so this
program directed funding to the
school level allowed them to
identify what are the best.
Sort of areas that we should be
focusing on to support uh the
academic needs of students and
so that program, um, is one that
really is an incredibly
innovative program.
Um, and allowed a lot more
school level autonomy. They know
their students. They know their
families, they understand the
needs and it allows at a school
level to make those decisions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for that. So where else can I
find in the budget that this
will also be a
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Duncan, it is in the executive
budget request, it is not in the
LFC or the LESC budget requests.
Thank you for that. I, I guess
my question is, there's probably
other funding somewhere else
that
Almost mirrors this.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Duncan, um,
There is not funding for the
program, so without funding the
the program will go away.
OK. Thank you for that, Mr.
Chair. Um,
I think my last question uh
would be on line 159, the
innovation.
Uh zones, there's 45 from the
LESC on that. Um, is that
enough?
In that fund.
I assume there's a whole lot of
asks. Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Duncan, um, I'll
just
Points out that that's a
$45 million over 3 years. So it
would be $15 million a year,
which is essentially what the
legislature has funded or that
the that the PED has used um
some from secondary money
essentially over the last couple
of years. So this would keep
that, that flat, but ensure that
they had sustainable funding for
3 years. There's still money
online.
Um
Once
108.
You'll see on line 108, it says
career technical education, next
gen, and innovation zones. And
so whether you fund it on a
one-time basis in that line 108
or potentially in a 3-year
basis, um, um, line 159,
similar, similar uh initiatives.
Thank you for that and um if I
take the 109 or 108 line 108,
sunny than what I look at this
and say that the LFC.
recommendation is 40 million.
Yes, Mr. Chair Representative.
Altogether
In fiscal year 25, you
appropriated 45 million.
Or CTE, which includes
innovation zones, NextGen,
CTSOs.
Work-based learning and
equipment.
The LFC recommendation holds it
flat between lines 101 and 108,
so that's 5 million for
internships, 40 million for CTE
innovation zones, and the same.
Um
initiatives that were there from
the prior year.
The EliasC recommendation does
30 in the CT line and then does
the other 15th to also get to
45.
In the 3 year pilot grow fund.
OK, thank you for that.
Mr. Chair, I think the one thing
that I'm finding is there are
Lines of money that are very
close.
So I would love to see all the
lines.
Right at the very, you know,
this is what this group's for
right here. These 7 lines were
this group, this instead of
having to go through here and
And say, OK, this line is
related to this line who's
related to this line.
I'm not an accountant, Mister
Chair, but I'd sure love to see
that. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Duncan,
great questions. Uh, we're gonna
go to some down and represent
Little.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary. Hi again, um, OK, so
I, I have a question about the
out of state. So I used to
represent a district that did
that. They were first counted at
the local public school.
For the purpose of generating
the funds and drawing down title
and then that district paid.
This is Lordsburg to Duncan. So
then the district paid.
The other state based on their
per student allocation. Are we
not doing it that way anymore.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
think the process has been the
same since.
And it's this is the same
appropriation for that purpose.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Sonny,
then why, why do we need an
appropriation for that if
they're counted in the per
student, they're part of the
enrollment at the in-state
school, public school, and then
the school pays the out of
state.
District.
I
Mr. Chair, representative, I
think the department might be
better able to answer this, but
I don't think the intent is the
double count, but you be
flagging.
Potential issue that's what I
was like Lordsburg said, OK,
there's 20 kids in Burden. They
counted in the Lordsburg
district, Lordsburg got the
funding per student, full
funding allocation per student
and title money, then they wrote
a check to Duncan, Arizona.
For the
For the full STE for Duncan or
whatever was needed for Duncan.
Mr. Chair, because they're not
attending Lordsburg.
My understanding is that they
would not be considered enrolled
at Lordsburg.
OK. OK.
Thank, thank you.
Mr. Chair, thank you for that.
OK, and then I'm still, I'm so
confused about the school reform
fund. So I'm listening and I'm
tracking what people are saying
and I, I,
OK. Oh, they're getting an
answer and Madam, yeah.
Take your time if we have an
answer to that, please. So Mr.
Chair Representative, what I'm
being told.
Item goes to the school district
or charter school, and then they
pay the out of state school.
and if we need to get more
information offline, I see Mr.
Rounds and others. Maybe we can
have additional information. OK.
Yeah, thank you. I guess I, I
want to understand it now, but
it's not, uh, we've got, I'm,
I'm very glad that the students
sat close to the border, cause
like there's no difference
between in the case of Verdon
and Duncan, there's.
It's one side of the street and
the other. So it's, I knock
doors in Arizona inadvertently
when I was first running. But I
mean like that's their one side
of the street the other. So it's
a great thing to do and I'm glad
that we do it. But, OK, thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you for
that. OK, so on the school
reform fund.
Now
I think I understood you to say
that if we, if we don't
Transfer the dollars to the
school reform fund, and these
things that we really like
wouldn't get funded, but
couldn't we also just keep the
dollars and the general fund and
then allocate them for the
programs we like if we're like,
we really like the innovation
fund, we really like the CTE. We
really like the um local
community authority on this,
the, the tribal pilot, and we
wouldn't have to transfer to the
school reform fund. Is that
correct, Mr. Chair?
Mr. Chair, representative, that
is within your purview. OK. Um,
OK.
And then online 41.
This alternative, Mr. Chair.
Um, secretary, the alternative
school.
Thus fueling and charging
infrastructure is, I don't see
any, uh, do we already have a
program like that in place?
Because I don't see a contingent
of bond, but we heard a house
bill that funded this. Mr. Chair
Represented my understanding is
this is for propane bus pilot
program that's been in place for
several years. OK. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you for that.
And then on 143, where it says
security CTE and maintenance.
And it's um wire.
What, uh, what is, why is
security in CTE in the same
line?
Mr. Chair, representative of the
Distribution from SB 9 for
capital improvements. OK.
Is um a very
Unique formula that
Isn't exactly
1 to 1 for each student. I will
point out that the LESC
recommendation is asking for a
per student.
Um, allocation from this $50
million distribution, the LFC
recommendation uses the capital
improvements formula to make
allocations for schools that
have less property wealth,
essentially. Um,
Part of the impetus is to
provide infrastructure for
security, but we also have been
hearing a lot of needs around
infrastructure for CTE and of
course some schools just want
additional funding to support
their general maintenance. And
so the uh the uses are pretty
broad, but the intent is being
outlined in the language. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Sonny. OK, I get it. I wasn't
paying attention to the public
school capital outlay fund. OK,
thank you for that. And then,
On 148 where it says Las Vegas
City School District Memorial
Middle School renovation.
It's this pills out of place
cause it seems like it's capital
outlet. Can you explain why
that's there?
Mr. Chair, representative,
you're correct, um.
It was an appropriation added to
the bill.
Last year.
Or Las Vegas, um, certainly it
does create some risks related
to zoning. It does fall outside
the typical rewards you would
make through the council. OK.
All right. And then, Mr. Chair
and Sonny is, is, I'm kind of
like Duncan here. If, is, is
everything that we talked about
in supplemental.
Special supplemental and
deficients the appropriations
when, when, when I look at
education, Department of
Education, it's, it's here.
And
That changes here are now
reflected here.
Mr. Chair Representative, my
understanding is the committee
skipped the public school
changes and they're going to be
reviewed during the work group.
Thank you. OK, thank you. I had
to leave for Bill hearing. OK,
thank you, Mr. Chair. Cool.
Thank you very much. Uh, we're
gonna go to Representative
Little and then Representative
Herndon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the presentation this
afternoon, um, uh, Madam
Secretary, uh designate, uh, Mr.
Chair, I have been trying to
figure out, um.
To see if I could locate um the
governor's commitment to fund
$50 million for the Indian
Education Trust Fund, I see in a
different lines of 46, 92, and
164 different amounts.
Um, that don't, I can't quite
get them to add 50 million, uh,
but I'm wondering, so my
question, Mr. Chair, and um
secretary designate, would you
please share um Governor, the
governors and your strategy to
get to the $50 million annually.
Where you need education or
guide me if, you know, I'm
mistaken in this. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative Little on line
46, you see the Indian Education
Fund.
There's 20 million.
Which is our base, that's what
we have currently.
And then if you look on
Line
92.
You see 90 million to be spent
over 3 years.
So that's in addition to the 2.
Thank you very much and so can
you tell me, thank you, I
appreciate that, uh, Mr. Chair,
one more
question. Um,
The one, can you guide me on the
uh section 9.
Uh, line 164 for 15,500.
15 million 500.
Um
Mr. Chair that relates to,
yeah, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair Representative, that is
part of the LFC recommendation
to create a formula.
That would help the state make
allocations to tribal education
departments, it also support
tribal initiatives that are
related to indigenous education
over 3 years. Thank you very
much. I appreciate that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's the
end of my questions. Great.
Thank you very much. We're gonna
go to Representative Hoon and uh
Representative Sainana.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters. I have 3
questions for you, and I am
first looking at line 149, and
this is on page 3. This is the
Grow Your Own Teachs fund.
So my question regarding this is
under Yazi Martinez, one of the
things that brought was brought
out is that there were not
enough Native American teachers.
So under this, is this fund used
to help uh um address what was
addressed by the court in terms
of that, uh, lack of teachers.
This chair representative, this
$3,300,000 in the grow your own
teachers fund has just been a
balance in the fun and has not
been leveraged. Um, the LLC
recommendation appropriates it
out of the fund to provide
scholarships for EA's pursuing a
teacher degree and license.
Um
You are correct that um most of
the participants in Grow your
own type programs, particularly,
uh, redirect you to line 100
educator fellows. Uh, we do find
that participants in that
program are more diverse. Um.
All right. Thank, thank you, Mr.
Chair. So we are addressing what
the court asked us to do to
address the shortage of Native
American teachers, and it is
occurring as, if I hear you
correctly, in the educated
fellows program.
Um
Mr. Chair, I might be citing
this incorrectly, but I believe
25% of the participants in that
program were Native American
educators.
Mr. Chair Representative
Herndon, I will just add um Ed
Fellows is a Grow Your Own.
These are, these are individuals
who are working in the schools
that they're already in in their
communities, they do stay in
their communities upon
graduation and uh they reflect
the population within their
community. Um, I will just add
that through the Indian
education fund that funding also
supports our 520 language
education.
ator s and so that is another um
investment related to a Native
American specifically language
educators.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you. My second question is with
respect to special education
initiative. So I want to look at
page, uh, I mean line 86, that's
one item. And then there is in
your appropriations, um,
Line 155. So special education
under the definition doesn't
mean just students who need
special attention, but it also
means gifted students. So my
question and how do you also
perpetuate their um their
ingenuity. So my question to you
is, where did this money go?
Because it's now 0.
Mr. Chair Representative
Herndon, um.
Where did it go in the other
budgets? I think you can ask uh
both uh director Sanna and um
Mr. Liu about why it's not in in
those budgets. I will tell you
that uh the funding was and is
being utilized this fiscal year,
the funding that we received for
special education, and again,
these things, this um supports
professional development for
educators, administrators,
families, um, all of the tours
we.
done around the state, it
supports, um, our stay in school
initiative, our parent
university, additional
monitoring that happens of IEPs
and special education within
schools, all of those things are
reflected in in that.
Budget line item.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Herden, if I, if I could.
I'm not, I'm not talking to
clarify, but at least he does
have that in our recommendation,
but actually the reason I wanted
to, to, to speak up is to remind
folks that students with
disabilities generate additional
funding through our funding
formula. So this is money that
goes to the 4 million that
you're referring to here is
money that goes to the
department for explicit
activities that the department
conducts. School districts are
are responsible for providing
services to students with
disabilities, and students with
disabilities generate about 800.
$0 million in the, in the
funding formula that flows
directly to school districts for
those services.
Oh thank you, Mr. Chair and
presenter, so none of this
special education funds, Mr.
Chair and presenters, and my
understanding, are you directing
it to our gifted students under
the term special education. I
didn't hear you all address that
and I'm just clarifying.
Mr. Chair.
gifted students are typically
counted as A level students in
the funding formula, and I
It's been a while since I
looked, but last I checked it
was about
30 million of that 800 million.
Mr. Senna described may be
attributable to to those
students, so I can follow up on
the actual amount. Thank you,
Mr. Chair and, and this
presenter, my last question, I
want to direct your attention to
line 109, and that's on page 2,
and it was the career
development success pilot. What
was that pilot and what did,
what was the outcomes of it,
because I see it's no longer
being funded.
Mr. Chair Representative Herman,
that's not something that we did
in the past. That's a new.
Recommendation from LESC, um,
that's paired with a bill that's
actually being run on the Senate
side.
That would provide additional
funding to school districts when
students earn a um industry
recognized credential or
certificate. So this, this is a
proposal, not something that
we've done in the past,
something that LESD has brought
and is not in the other
recommendations. All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters.
Thank you very much,
Representative Herndon. Uh,
next, we're gonna go to
Representative Saana.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I
heard earlier you talked about
innovation and innovation
centers. I wanted to know in the
um and line 108 or 59, 159. Is
that part of the STEM innovation
network. I know there's a Senate
bill that's for NMS use um stem
center of excellence that they
needed money. Is that, is that
part of it at all?
a note, two different, two
different initiatives. One is
specifically that center of
excellence, the STEM innovation
Network. Yeah.
The other is, is an innovation
zones is the name of a of an
initiative that the department
started to sort of transform uh
secondary experience for
students. OK. All right, thank
you.
Thank you very much from
Saagana.
Uh, next we're gonna go to
represent Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you to the panelists.
Secretary, good to see you. Um,
I, I do have a question, Mr.
Chair, about uh CTE, um.
I think many members of the
committee were very vocal last
session that we needed to
adequately fund CTE.
Um, we had non-recurring funding
several years in a row, about 40
million each time.
And I'm looking now at um the
language from last year on, on
Curtech it says um for career
technical education, innovation
zones and work-based learning
initiatives and equipment.
Um, the other state funds
appropriation is from the Public
Education Reform Fund.
And then I'll, I'll stop there.
Uh, the language proposed for a
fiscal year 25 is different. It
says for pilot programs,
including career technical
education, career technical
student organizations,
innovation zones, work-based
learning initiatives and
equipment.
Including 5 million for summer
internships.
So, Mr. Chairman and um whoever
wants to answer this, I'm, I'm
concerned that
Maybe we're fragmenting too much
when we add summer internships
and things like that. I wanna
make sure.
That our schools have adequate
funding to stand up CTE
programs, uh, give them a really
good launch.
And get students engaged in in
career tech.
So, I'm just curious.
and some of these are great
organizations, and I support all
of them at Skills USA would be
eligible DeA BPA. I love those
programs.
But I'm concerned that maybe
we're splitting it into a
fractions where we won't have
the impact that originally I
thought we would have. So, Mr.
Chairman, I, I just point out as
well that I have uh some
listings of some of the money
that was awarded.
To um
High schools, charter schools,
and so forth, and I look at the
numbers, there was a planning
award, uh, they weren't, they
weren't big dollar figures,
maybe um South Valley Academy,
$18,000 to do some planning
around CTE and then there were
um various awards given as well,
and, you know, the numbers of,
of Carl's bed, schools, $300,000
under this, um this, this award.
So if you would just, uh, Mr.
Chairman and whoever wants to
answer, just tell us a little
bit about why.
A decision was made to split the
corpus, um,
other ways, adding into the, who
would be eligible.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative of
I'm very impressed by your
historical recollection of the
evolution of this appropriation,
as you are all well aware, this
used to be about a $4 million
appropriation.
And each year, new language has
been added for additional uses,
um, I will say that in fiscal
year 24.
The uses were much more limited,
however, the department did
spend some of the funding
funding for other
Option other other programs
because the language was not
restrictive.
The next year, those new uses
got added to the bill language.
So now the department has more
authorization to spend for those
extended purposes, but
To your point, um, once you
start spreading it then, the per
dollar amounts for each entity
began to shrink.
And Mr. Chair, Representative
Brown, I'll just add and in
previous years, we had separate
line items for those programs,
and we have moved more towards
putting multiple programs into
one line item. So, um, that may
be part of what you're seeing a
difference in terms of, you
know, we kind of are creating
buckets. And so that does allow
us to um.
Kind of modify um how much money
is spent in different programs.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
So I'll go back to the point,
Mr. Chair, I made a few days
ago. I can't remember when
exactly, but.
What I would like to see is the
school districts, uh, driving
the discussion, them telling us
what they need for their CTE
programs to either stand them up
or expand them or.
You know, do some, uh, facility
modifications, whatever they
have to do, because I want to
make sure that we really are
giving them what they need so
they can um be successful. And
again, I, I appreciate DECA and
Skills USA. I love those
programs. I just want to make
sure we're doing justice to the
main mission. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Brown, and thank
you for your leadership in this
area, truly, uh, we're gonna go
to Vice Chair Dixon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I made
a nice long list of questions,
and I've been able to cross
quite a few off, um, but, um,
I'll try to keep these uh quick.
Um,
Mr. Chair, this and this may be
for sunny on line 112, the um
educator and administration
prep.
Um, is, is that just what I
think it is?
Mr. Chair, vice chair, I will
take a guess. This is actually a
bill tied to changing how
principles.
Superintendents and site
administrators are trained.
And there is a bill, I believe,
House Bill 157, that's tied to
this appropriation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Sonny. Um, line 122, the
community schools. I'm just
wondering how many community
schools would be able to be
served uh with uh the
appropriation, um,
That were that's recommended.
The chairman and vice chair.
The community Schools Act
currently authorizes grants of
50,000 to 150,000 for each
coordinator at a communication.
And do some rough math, I think
about at 40 if it's at the
150,000.
Um, allocation under the LFC
recommendation.
And
Higher for the exact. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you, Sony.
There was um an effort, um,
maybe a year or two ago about uh
figuring out how to evaluate the
impact of community schools.
Have we figured that out?
Um
The chair and vice chair, there
was a task force charged with
Um, developing a plan and an
evaluation and accreditation
methodology to look at the
effects of community schools.
Um
The department has an earmark of
about $400,000 to create that
accreditation.
Uh, rubric
I would defer to the department
on the progress thus far.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Dixon, this is something that
the department has been working
on with um community schools,
um, themselves and with our
community schools organizations
and so it's a matter of just
rolling out um that process for
certifying of the the specific
components identified through
that process for a community
school.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um, thank
you, Sonny and secretary. Um, I
am a huge fan of community
schools, particularly as we talk
about improving child
well-being, uh, in the state of
New Mexico and making sure that
families have the supports, um,
necessary to avoid, um, some of
the interactions with, for
instance, CYFD that could be
avoided by ensuring that
families have access to housing,
um, and food security and things
like that. Um, so I will look
forward.
to seeing that rolled out and
then um
Efforts to track.
Um, progress and how the
community schools are doing
because I know that, you know,
tracking that is different than
other metrics that we may have
for uh tradition sort of a
traditional public schools. Um,
Mr. Chair and um.
Maybe this is for uh Mr. Senna,
I think.
Line 161.
Uh, dealing with the secondary
um education literacy. Uh, can
you just, oh, actually, I guess
it could be for anyone, sorry.
Could you remind me what that
is?
Mr. Chair, uh, I share Dixon,
I'd actually deferred to the, to
the secretary, the LESD
recommendation reflects
something that the executive was
asking for. I'll let her
describe that professional
development.
So, Mr. Chair Representative
Dixon, this allows us to do what
we've done in elementary schools
and middle schools, so it allows
us to train our middle school
teachers, um, and administrators
related to structured literacy,
it allows us to hire coaches as
well as um establish model and
uh support schools.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary for that. Um, and then
Question about.
The uh secondary credits. Is
that what we're calling them,
the um 6th grade membership
factor and then the 7th through
12th.
What is
the unit value, um, so, uh,
lines 8 and 9.
Um, how does that actually work
when so um if we increase the
value
Or have the unit value for a 6th
grader, and those funds go to
the school, right? And that is
serving the 6th graders.
What is that increase actually
going to, and how do we, how are
we making sure that it would go
where it's supposed to go.
Mr. uh, Vice Chair Dixon, it's a
great question. So,
Everything from line
21 and up.
It's what we call above the
line, and it's part of our state
equalization guarantee and it's
discretionary funding.
Right, are the formula itself
and the weights that we assign
to students are merely
distribution methods.
And they're supposed to signal
one that
We recognize as a state that
certain students cost more to
serve, so a middle school, uh, a
secondary student right now
already.
Generates more funding for a
school district than a 4th
grader does.
Right
And ideally, that money flows to
the students that need it. It
flows to districts so that they
can use that money to serve
those students. It is a
discretionary pot of money and
so our formula essentially
signals intention.
And recognizes the cost of
serving those students. So the
increase to secondary, um, and I
think it's important that I,
that I say this from the LAC
perspective is that we did not
bring a number to you or to the
legislature to consider. This is
a policy recommendation, and
this is what it costs to fund
that policy. And so the policy
recommendation is to recognize
that those students cost more to
serve?
Signaling to school districts
that they should be using that
money to serve those particular
students, whether in the case of
high school CTE and other, other
kinds of supports, and in middle
school, college and career
exploration, social workers,
behavioral and mental health
supports, all the kinds of
things that we know, uh,
students have an increased need
for in that particular time of
life. Thank you, Mr. Cha, Sonny.
Do you have anything to add?
You know, just maybe explain
this in a very simple way.
The SCT is at its core just a
division problem. You've got the
appropriation in the numerator,
you got units in the
denominator.
You could just add units without
increasing the appropriation,
but that would essentially
reduce the per student amount
and flow it to schools that in
this case have more secondary
students.
What the proposal here does is
it adds to both the numerator
and the denominator, so that
It's a proportional distribution
and then those schools that have
6th graders would get about
$1600 more per student in those
schools that have 7 through 12th
graders, we get about $300 more
per high school student.
In middle school too.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Sonny, um, and Mr. Senator for
that. Um,
And and do we make sure that the
school districts are following.
The intent and distributing
money the way we want.
Mr. Chair, uh, Vice Chair
Dickson, um.
There are, there are some
statutory requirements around
asking school districts the
educational plan is the one that
comes to mind first, that our
school districts to tell the
department in the state, how
they plan to spend their money.
Again, the
Just discretionary in practice,
it is statutorily defined as
discretionary and so
technically, there is no
authority to tell a school
district how to spend their
money.
How you measure and how we
measure a staff whether or not
money is going to the right
places or getting to the places
it needs to to go.
student performance and student
outcomes, um,
And making sure that we're
meeting all our statutory both
state and federal requirements.
And Mr. Chair Representative
Dixon, I'll just add there there
are not specific.
Performance measures associated
with funding that flows through
the SCG.
That is very different than
middle and below the line
funding. So in those instances,
the legislature says this
appropriation will be spent on a
specific way.
And then we have the ability to
establish performance measures
for that funding and to identify
what are the outcomes that were
accomplished as a result of
that. Thank you, Mr. Chair. um,
thank you, Secretary. So,
Two last questions.
Um, number one,
For Mr Senna, uh, you mentioned,
uh, the pilot program that LESE
recommended regarding unhoused
students, and I'm wondering if
there are other areas in the LFC
proposal, um, that would be able
to support that if it weren't
it's only uh line item, uh, like
attendance efforts or other
areas.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Vice Chair Dixon,
it's a good question. I think
I'll defer to Sunny, but I'll
say one thing that the CTE
discussion that Representative
Brown brought up.
Um
below the line is the place
where you have some discretion
and and some and to provide
direction and having a
standalone line item, whether
that's a one time non-recurring
or a 3 year pilot, that
specifically calls out
something.
Provides direction to the to the
uh department to administer a
particular initiative.
versus having something and
saying you could use some of
this money to do something.
That doesn't necessarily provide
the kind of direction that you
might want if you have a
specific thing in mind.
But
first.
Mr. Chair, Madam vice chair, our
understanding of the proposal
coming out of LESC is that there
is, it's modeled off of another
program that's existing where
students are getting uh payments
to attend school, go to
tutoring, there's some sort of
parameters around that.
There are and and that's
targeted to students who have
housing insecurity. There are
other appropriations in this
high level.
For tutoring.
For attendance, for out of
school programs. So, ostensibly
there could be some overlap in
some of those other
appropriations related to this.
Thank you, thank you both, uh,
thank you all for the, the
answers. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair, uh,
excellent questions. First, I
wanna thank the um Madam
Secretary, you and your team,
uh, Mr. Liu, Mr. Senna, of
course, Mr. Minor, I think
we're, we're bringing LESC and
LFC together more and more with
our PED partners, and that's
good. Second, great questions
from the committee. Uh, a few
questions from my end. Uh,
first, the biggest one, I guess
the biggest early difference is
simply the salary.
Um, the LFC approach is roughly
40 million more.
For salaries. Is that accurate?
Yes, Mr. Chair. OK. And um
one thing maybe to flag. We've
significantly and appropriately
sort of rapidly increased
teacher compensation. We have
targeted pieces around
administrative support and
compensation.
Are we starting, you know, we
heard the courts members, you
know, after a judge pay, then it
seemed like the courts were
talking a whole lot about their
lowest paid employees. Why
aren't we hearing the same
conversation within our
education system.
Are there concerns about sort of
the non, you know, not teachers,
maybe not even EAs, are we
starting to create larger and
larger pay gaps there.
Mr. Chi, it's a really great
question, and I think it is a
concern of the committee and a
couple of years ago, um, you all
approved an increase to educator
assistant salaries that were
statutorily set at $12,000
although no one was making that.
Uh, and you raise that to
$25,000 minimum per year, um,
there was, there is a bill that,
that proposes to raise that to
not just for educational
assistance, but for all school
employees to 30,000 $30,000 a
year.
Um, there is some, there is some
complicating factors when you
talk about school employees,
some of which work very lengths
of contracts and are often paid
out of different sources of
funding, and so when you talk
about providing funding to to
raise salaries or setting
minimums. It does get sort of
complex as to who's on the hook.
For those salaries, but to your
larger point, um, of course,
and, and you'll hear all
superintendents, and I was a
school principal, um, say that
those folks are the heart of
schools.
They keep things running, and we
definitely wanna um.
To look out for them as well.
Um, obviously, the 4, the 3%,
um, that I will say is was
LESC's attempt to not break the
budget while also proposing some
of these larger policy pieces,
the 4% is absolutely appropriate
for, for all school employees,
and we hope we'll address some
of the issues that you're
talking about.
Great. Thank you for that. And
uh maybe that's something that
we can look at as we go into the
summer, uh, appreciate that and
appreciate, um, yeah, appreciate
that. Uh, secondly, um, really
appreciate the vice chair's
questions, and I think uh it
really came through that in the
SCG
I guess.
We would hope if we adopt some
uh, increase in the SCG.
How do we track where those
dollars went, which students
they supported and what the
benefits or not were for those
dollars are
Or is, or is the SCG pretty hard
to sort of do that granular
tracking.
Mr. Chair, um, I think the
department does have the ability
to a certain extent to track how
school districts spend money.
And so right now there are no
requirements, as we said, about
how they do that. Um, it's
possible to, to track how they.
Whether or not or what we do
with that information is, is up
to the department and up to you
all to decide about, you know.
Do we start to track, you said
you were going to do this, but
then you didn't do it. Why
didn't you do it? That kind of
thing. Um, so it's possible, but
it's not something that we do on
a, on a sort of regular
standardized basis. Madam
Secretary Mr. Chair, that's
right. So we, we, um, we
approved budgets. We, um,
budgets are, how they're spent
are coded. We have a dashboard
called Open Books. It's a, it's
a dashboard that identifies.
Um, how, uh, school districts
and, and schools are spending
money.
Um, but we do not, um, have not
as a state directed school
districts and charter schools
how to spend SUG funds.
Um, something that that we have
been talking about at the
department related to the at
risk money now with a move to um
family income index. Um, we
would be able to see which
schools obviously are generating
those funds, and so we could,
um, at the start of the budget
year, um, provide that
information regarding which
schools generated those at-risk
funds, but again, right now,
we do not have a mechanism to
tell them.
Spend it on those schools that
generated the funds. Thank you,
ma'am, Mr. Lu.
Um, I do, Mr. Chair, I want to
give the department some credit.
You set floors.
You
said floors
Yeah, no, seriously, you said
floors on how much teachers must
be paid. So when you put funding
in and you raise those minimums,
school districts start there.
They say we have to pay these
employees at this level, so in
some ways you've almost made
that accountability measure in
place. Another example is like
K12 Plus, they have to have a
certain number of school days to
generate K-12 plus bilingual
program units, they have to have
a bilingual program that meets
department standards. So there
is some like accountability or
Executing on some of the things
that the legislature has funded.
I think the question about, say,
a secondary membership rate,
which is just.
Money for a student.
Um, there's not really a
mechanism to say you must spend
this amount per student.
Thank you, thank you for that,
Mr. Liu, and thank you all. I
think it's, it's very important,
it's a good conversation. Uh,
one final question on that. Our
unit values and our, you know,
particular so like CTE unit
values if that exists. I it may
not, but is there a way in some
of these areas where there's a,
a, a sort of a broad and
bipartisan focus, nothing sort
of more, I think at this moment
in CTE and
that space
Is there a way to um
You know, both at the school
level, at the district level,
but also at the student level to
uh look at encouraging and and
sort of robustly funding that.
Or, and if not, that's OK.
Mr. Chair, um,
That is a very difficult
question to answer because not
all CTE programs cost the same,
right? You may have a nursing
program versus a heavy machinery
program and because our formula
is student based.
The scale at which you would
need to ramp that funding up for
smaller school districts would
create a lot of variability, so
I think finding a magic number
that will get you a perfect CTE
weight
it could be possible, but it's
gonna be extremely dynamic. I
think that that is the challenge
that we're faced with right now,
Mr. Chair, and I, and I promise
this isn't another last plug
for, for the the the secondary
increase. It, it, I think what
Sunny is actually
to is the need for flexibility
at the local level.
Because it's very hard to
determine the exact cost of of
programming.
Right? And in and in trying to
get at that one, you might
actually limit what people can
do.
Um, and you might actually, um,
Essentially price some people
out of ever being able to
participate in some of these
programs, if you create
particular units for things like
specific kinds of programs.
And then I just want to add very
quickly about accountability,
and I'm gonna actually quote
Sonny, because we were in Senate
Finance a couple of weeks ago
presenting on this very thing,
and Senator Padilla asked, who
wakes up every morning and make
sure that this money is going to
the right place and serving
students the right way. And
Sonny said, 50,000.
Every morning. Their teachers,
their educational assistants,
the principals and
superintendents.
Who's
Main job every day.
is to get up and serve kids.
And so from a state perspective,
we want to have very cut and dry
accountability measures because
we want to make sure we're
spending money appropriately and
that's absolutely the right
thing to do.
But there has to be a place
where
We trust folks who took this
job, a very difficult job.
that they're doing their best
every day. And we still need to
support them in doing that
better because clearly our
results are not what we want
them to be, but, um, you know,
Sonny was right to point out
that those folks are getting up
every day and, and trying their
best.
Thank you. Um, uh,
Last question, Madam Secretary,
for uh the special education, I
think we're, where there's,
there's some good ways perhaps
in a non-recurring way to uh
manage many of the points you
brought up.
Uh, we may, there's not very
much, there's very little room
recurring wise here, unless the,
we were to uh reduce salaries,
right? That, that is the wiggle
room that exists in the budgets
as we see them here, and, and I,
um
So, but Madam Secretary, I would
ask that we work.
To support you maybe in a
transition time around the
special education because you
really focused on that, which
is, which is important. And so
the last, I think, you know,
we're, um, whether we get there
this year or next year, I think
it'll be a $2 billion increase.
Um, either this year or next
year from, from my, my first
chance, which obviously it was,
there was more of a, you know, I
came in at not all that long
ago. Um,
I, I think we're working on the
conversation at least in a much
more collaborative in a very
collaborative manner.
And which is essential, because
so that, so that is positive
while we acknowledge the vast
investments that have been made
and the gulf that remained,
yeah.
For fewer students that, you
know, there are fewer, uh, as I
understand it, fewer students
and obviously very, very
increased dollar ratios. So
we're very appreciative, uh,
members, I'm gonna ask for the
LFC uh recommendation on this
that includes the higher raises,
um, there's a great deal of work
for the work group to still
engage in, and I know uh there's
been a lot of work behind the
scenes to uh create more options
for the work group, which I
think is really
really good.
We'll go to the vice chair.
And if members wanna look uh we
can see sort of the total before
we get into non-recurring and
grow slash uh reform fund. If
you want to look at line 78.
That's gonna show us uh the
various amounts, and again, the
LASC budget is not, um, that's
not one of the voting options
here. Um,
Although it's helped, it's very
much influenced, I think in
positive ways, the work that's
gone on.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, at this
time I would move the committee
adopt the LFC recommendation.
Second, OK, it's been moved by
Vice Chair Dixon, seconded by
Representative Silva and
Representative Lujan. Is there
any opposition to that motion?
for recurring and I don't see
any opposition. We've adopted
that motion.
OK.
Uh, we're gonna go on really
quick to the next part.
Which is our public education
department. Well, actually
members just to be very clear,
uh, and appreciate Director
Soli. We're gonna adopt the non
we're gonna go back and ask that
we uh clarify that it's
recurring and non-recurring so
that we have a base to work from
in the work group, expect both
of those to be adjusted. Sorry
about that, Madam Vice Chair,
can we go back to you?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My
apologies. Uh.
I move that the committee adopt
the recurring and non-recurring.
LFC recommendations. Second, OK,
uh, the motion is to adopt the
recurring and non-recurring LFC
recommendations for public
school support by Vice Chair
Dixon, seconded by
Representative Silla. Any
opposition to that motion,
seeing none, that's adopted.
Uh, OK, let's go on to public
education, 924.
Mr. Chair, if you could use the
same packet, uh, I believe it's
on page 23. This will be the
public education departments
operating budgets, so what the
agency uses for its day to day
operations.
Um, I'm joined here with the
secretary and director minor,
uh, just to give you a high
level overview.
The executive recommendation is
a $3 million increase in general
fund appropriations, which is
the primary difference of 12%
increase. The LFC recommendation
is at $8,002,000 increase or
3.3%, uh, the LFC recommendation
increases the use of other state
funds, including those from
federal special education idea
bea funds and the charter
schools set aside in the SCG.
The major differences.
Amounts of FTE requested for the
Office of Special Education,
which is the primary uh request
within this budget
recommendation, um, I will.
Turn it over to Director minor
for any follow-up comments, but
there's been consensus on
performance measures, um, and
partial consensus on the
expansion.
Thank you, Sonny, good afternoon
or good evening now, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
just to reiterate the, the
differences in the PEDs
operating budget, the executive
recommendation provides for a 3
million general fund increase,
12%, $1 million of that
increased funds approximately 8
FTE for the Office of Special
Education, which is currently
funded exclusively through
federal funds, so this general
fund recommendation will ensure,
uh, continued support for the
office and the executive
recommendation also provides
Uh, $1.7 million in general fund
to fully fund the agencies
currently filled positions, and
with that, I'll turn it over to
the secretary for any comments.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I will just elaborate
on, on the FTE, um, we need this
funding to continue at the
levels that we're currently at,
we have staffing that has been
hired with federal money as well
as with uh vacancy savings, um,
so our funded vacancy rates, um,
Uh, goodness, what do I have?
Our current vacancy rate is 16%.
Um, um, and so we, uh, do a
great job with the funding that
we have to hire the employees
that we need, but in terms of
the work of the department, the
size of the public school
support budget, the programs
that we oversee, um, we really
do not have um staffing to
support the needs that we have.
So the funding that we're
requesting does.
include an increase uh for FTE
in the Office of Special
Education, but also allows us to
uh continue staffing levels at
the current level. Um, I will
point out that the LFC budget
does have um an increase of $1
million. Um, however, only
571,000 of that is general fund,
which would support
approximately 5 FTE, uh.
There's $609,000 which gives us
an additional budget authority
for federal funding, but it
isn't, um, an, an increase for
us to actually hire additional
employees, so I just wanted to
point that out that we're really
not getting very far with uh
where we're at with the LFC
budget recommendation for FTE,
uh, for the department.
OK, uh thank you very much,
Madam Secretary. Thank you,
Doctor Minor. Um, I'll, any
questions?
That first one got us there. Um,
uh, Madam secretary, I'd ask,
are the, are the, the expansion
is within the special education
that we see on here,
Mr. Chair, it includes an
expansion in the Office of
Special Education of about 8
FTE, but it also again allows us
to address other
staffing needs in the
department. We do have the staff
in the department that we do not
have recurring funding for
again, we were able to hire
using federal um money related
to the pandemic as well as with
vacancy savings, and can I ask,
Madam Secretary, is that slated
to run out in FY 26. Um, Mr.
Chair, um, in this current
fiscal year. OK. OK. Uh, thank
you for that.
Um
OK, um, well, uh, thank you for
that. We're very limited on
recurring, but I, I think, you
know, as we're looking for more
from the department, it's very
fair for us to work as hard as
we can to support the
department. Thank you.
OK, we'll ask for the LFC
recommendation on uh public
education and look to make any
modification. Yes.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I move that we
adopt the LLC uh budget
recommendation.
OK. There's a motion. It's been
moved uh by Representative
Garrett, seconded by
Representative Luhan to adopt
the LFC recommendation for the
public education department, uh,
agency 924. Any opposition?
Please show Sam Duncan in
opposition, will adopt that
motion.
OK, and now, um we'll ask Ms.
Carswell.
To come on up.
OK
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, PSFA does have a
presentation that's up here. I
don't know if you want it up on
the screen or not.
Please, that's great. I believe
you do also have the handouts.
OK.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Kelly Carswell,
um, PSFAs LFC analyst. We are
behind tab 9 agency code 940,
the public schools facility
Authority, uh, with me today are
Mr. Minor on budget division
director at DFA and Iris Romero.
She's the executive director of
the public schools Facility
Authority, um, PSFA does not
receive general fund. It's
operating budget comes out of
the public school capital outlay
fund and must fall within a.
statutory limit links to grant
assistance from the fund, which
the recommendations before you
more than do, um, we should make
this one quick and easy for you.
Um, the LFC and executive
recommendations are the same,
uh, the very small difference
you see, um, both the agencies
consider a rounding error, and
analysts have reached consensus
on performance measures. Um, I
don't think Mr. Minor had any
comments, so we will turn it to
Miss Romero for a quick.
Good evening, um, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee. I do
also want to introduce uh my
colleagues who have, uh, come up
with me, um, to
Of acting CFO Mr. Matthew
Schimmel, we have seniors,
projects manager, Mr. Scott
Ficklin, and we also have
programs manager Elise Ramos.
They are the backbone to what we
do and how we support our
students, um, with the capital
funding. Um, I'll be quick, um,
our budget is
Excuse me, I don't know how this
works, but I believe you have
the handouts, so we'll just use
the handouts, um, as Ms.
Caswell. Oh, there we go. Thank
you.
Miss Carswell indicated our
budget uh lies within the
parameters of statute2-24-4. If
you look at like item number
one, the total annual
expenditures from the fund or
the core administrative
functions shall not exceed 5% of
the average annual grant
assistance authorized from the
fund during the 5 previous
fiscal years and as she has
indicated, we are well below
that 5% of um that average on
your next.
slide, Mr. Chair and members,
this is pretty much what sums up
our request for our operating
budget and our um appropriation
request. We are requesting
$7,894,0228. This is a
$4,083,000 increase, where
majority of that increase comes
from our personal services in
the form of um
Pay increases, and Mr. Chair, if
you want to also go to the next
slide, we can get into detail of
what that also encompasses, um,
keeping in mind out of the
458,000 that were requesting
additionally for the personal
services, 100,000 of that is
actually not an internal ask, if
you will. It is um a line item
for employee liability
insurance, which covers employee
matters that is just added to
our.
items, um, from the state. So
that is not part of our, our
request. We just have to account
for it.
Um, also within this request,
Mr. Chair and members that we're
requesting a 3% increase as part
of a performance-based
compensation strategy. This is
to be ready for the influx of
projects, uh, second phase
construction projects that are
coming online within the next
year or so. Also within that
request, we're requesting two
FTEs, another regional project
manager again to help, um, be
ready for that influx as well,
as well as an
Energy manager.
There's been a push towards
sustainable and energy efficient
design practices in
construction, energy code
changes, uh, for electric
vehicles and PSFA is currently
spearheading a maintenance and
verification program, uh, that
is aimed to help districts with
utility cost savings. So this um
energy manager will help PSFA
continue being part of these
great initiatives.
And Mr. Chair, finally in our
ask we're requesting a $25,000
increase to our contractual
services. This will help, um,
start the process of looking for
a vendor and to contract with a
vendor to start reanalyzing,
re-evaluating the state local
match funding formula, um, and
so this will help us get that
started with that, Mr. Chair and
members, we stand for any
questions. Thank you very much,
Mrs. Romero. Uh, we're gonna go
first to Representative Sanchez.
And then down the lines and
Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
uh, just a quick question for my
information. Is this the
department that oversees
upgrades to existing school
facilities and uh building new
schools. Representative Sanchez,
that is correct. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Where's the money for those
upgrades? It's not the 7
million, is it?
No,
but what is that amount that we
have put in the, the budget to
upgrade schools for this year is
that?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Sanchez, um, so the money for
the construction grants comes
from the public school capital
outlay fund, which receives
revenue from the severance tax
bonding program, um, the current
overall balance in the fund is
about $1.6 billion. Some of
which is already committed, but
that's the absolute balance.
Chair and Representative
Sanchez, they do want to
piggyback off that. That is
definitely um
does not include earmarked
dollars or second phase
construction funding. So that is
not a clear um
Vision of what is in the fund.
Thank you. I just also want to
add, uh, I heard about
initiatives to put EV chargers
and stuff, and I'm sure that's
being driven by us. I just want
to mention that we have schools
that are in
Complete disarray, we should uh
focus on fixing those schools
and making them safe before we
focus on initiatives like that.
I know uh an elementary not in
my uh district, but uh it's in
Riperea Hernandez Solimentary.
This mouse sewer constantly in
the school. It's uh 70 year old
school. We should uh focused on
on fixing things like that
before we uh
Move to initiatives like that.
Thank you, madam, Mr. Chair and
thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Sanchez, uh,
Representative Duncan, and
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I just
want everybody to know I'm not
driving at initiative to, to put
those charging stations anywhere
near a school.
Um, but, but my question, um,
kind of dovetail in another
earlier committee today, we
heard about schools that are
You got some major problems with
roofs, uh, with um air
conditioning, air conditioning,
uh, going through holes big
enough to get them out of there.
Is this the same, the, the fund
that um that just talked about
is that where the maintenance
fund would be located as well?
Mr. Chair, members, as far as
maintenance goes, we do have a
systems based program that is
not necessary for to maintain
these systems. It is to request
upgrades and additions to those
systems. Now I know public
school, excuse me, public ed has
uh SB 9 funds that they allocate
to help with those maintenance.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Where is the oversight come with
that?
When we hear in committee that
there are schools that are in
disarray. Where's the oversight
with that?
Are they able to spend those
funds on other items? Mr. Chair,
members, again, those SB 9 funds
are overseen by the public
education department. I'm
assuming they would probably
have some oversight of it.
Thank you, Miss Chair. I don't
think, I guess my next.
Thought would be, I don't think
they're doing a very good job of
it if we continue to hear these
problems.
So,
my mister the my next and last
question will be, can you um
tell me what the
performance-based compensation
strategy strategy is, I'm, I'm
just curious. I don't know
anything about it.
Yes, Mr. Chair, so, um, we're,
we recently just are finalizing
our new strategic plan.
And along with those that
strategic plan we uh creating
KPIs that, um, effectively will
um work towards those goals of
the KPIs. So once we initiate
that, then we also initiate KPIs
within each employee's
evaluation. And so, by utilizing
these metrics, then we can
analyze their performance and be
able to offer a percentage
increases, um, to
kind of drive the agency towards
the next level, see where
they're showing up some um gap
stop measures um on
Providing our services to our
school districts, um, so it's
based on what's going to be
based on performance metrics, I
don't know if that answers your
question. Thank you, Mr. um, I'm
gonna go really basic. What's a
KPI, uh, key performance
indicators. OK, it's a way to
track performance. OK, very
good. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
That's all I had. Thank you very
much for Duncan. Uh, we have
representative Hernandez and
Representative Dell.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
director Romero.
Uh, you mentioned that 1.6
billion, uh, there's, there's,
there's a fun.
For that, I, I, I heard
something about SB 9 funds. I'm
not familiar with SB 9 funds,
um.
And you also mentioned already
committed. Are there any funds
committed to Central
Consolidated School District for
any new school buildings,
Mr. Chair Representative
Hernandez, I want to defer to
Miss Elise Ramos. She is our
program's manager.
Mr. Chair, members Central
Consolidated School Districts
has several projects including
Sibada Middle School and
Newcombined and teacher housing
as well.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um, I, I, I've seen the progress
with some of those mentioned,
uh, the biggest one that my
community, Mr. Chairman, uh, is,
is just continuing to ask
leadership there is the middle
school, um, and uh so just like
to continue that conversation
offline to see what we can do
to uh move that, uh, to see what
the barriers and challenges are
in, in my school district, um,
My, my last question, Mr.
Chairman is on this energy
manager, uh, Mr. Chairman, and,
and director Romero, um, with
this energy manager be doing,
uh, any energy audits on public
schools.
Mr. Chair Representative
Hernandez, um, we're not quite
sure exactly what the scope of
work will be. It'll be based on
the needs of, uh, the school
districts as well as any
initiatives that you put into
place.
Mr. Chairman, director of
American Energy Audits, uh, be
part of that scope of work.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
absolutely.
Mr. Chairman, uh, director
Romero, um, and Tohatchie High
School. I, I did notice that,
that, uh, well they have this
really nice solar system that's
on, on near the, the, the
parking lot, um, is this an
initiative that could be part of
this energy manager,
Mr. Chairman will have to look
further into it to ensure that
we meet your needs. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman, that concludes my
questions. Great. Thank you very
much for
Hernandez represent Dow and then
represent Silva, then represent
Bach. Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Cha, thank you for being here.
I, I am so confused about this
process. Um, so there is a
school in my district that's 40
years old. So they were told
that they need to repair or
replace the facility by our
direction. Is that correct, Mr.
Chair, at the, when a school's
40 years old, and they were like
ranked in the top 10 to be
replaced.
But the roof was so bad that
they did repairs on the roof and
then they were bumped down.
So
I'm also really confused on if
we're saying the school's old
and the school needs to be
replaced.
I'm glad to hear that you're
doing a study.
Then now this small rural
community that can't afford to
replace the school has to spend
like 500, 60,000 on a bond
initiative.
And then it's not going to pass,
and they're not at 10% trigger,
or I mean, there's all these
different factors, but they
didn't have to replace the
school, they were told to
replace the school. So you, can
you explain to me a little bit?
Mr. Madam Chair, if this is what
you're talking about doing a
study on.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative,
I'm gonna defer to.
Mr. Chair, whoops, excuse me,
members, um, Ms. Doo, I believe
I know what school you're
speaking of. Um, that school did
apply for several small um
Systems and things that the
PSCOC cannot fund in that um
discussion with the district, we
did walk the site and we did
talk about we could do short
term or long term goals in this
scenario, the long-term goal of
replacing a school would be
beneficial.
Um, however, there is a process
to getting to that point both
for the district and the
council, and part of that is
achieving the state and local
match.
This district will not be able
to afford their local match and
so there's a waiver process
through statute. Um, there is
waiver criteria that must be
met, one of which is the um mill
levy of 10.
At least.
Um, so when school districts are
looking for um applying for
PSCOC funding and applying for
that waiver, um, they go out for
geo bonds to raise that mil up
to 10, and then come to the
council, ask for the application
to be um
Reviewed for award and potential
waiver. OK. So thank you, Madam
Chair, Mr. Chair.
Madam Chair, um, so in this
case, I know that I think I was
I'm tracking this right. The
school board Association, one of
their legislative priorities was
to request that that be changed
to like 8.5. Um, because it
impacts multiple rural schools
and their ability to bond,
especially when the community
is, and I guess in this case
where the school district is, I
think the average age is 58 and
they're fixed income, low
income. So is that
It is they still have to spend
the 400, 50,000 on a local
election and have a rejection of
the bond to get the waiver. Is
that correct?
Um, Mr. Madam Chair, uh, members
of this out, um, the waiver the
local match reduction per
statute cannot um be applied to
a district unless those criteria
are met. So right now, for
larger districts above 800
students that 10 mil levy must
be met prior to consideration.
Also, school districts need to
um demonstrate a good faith
effort to raise their local
funding uh to uh uh contribute
to the the local match. So, so
that is correct, for districts.
Smaller than 800 men, um, there
is another um waiver criteria
option with the Millevi at 7.
There's also another bill right
now, SB 82, I believe, um, which
is, um,
Attempted to amend that statute
as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. And thank you
for that. So the statute would
need to be changed to change the
bonding capacity.
To allow a smaller school or to
go to the 8.5 or OK. All right.
And what, so as a large school
is considered over 700 in a
small schools under 700. Um, um,
Mr. Chair, um, members missed
out, um, according to the uh
statute, which is section 22245.
Um, it is 800, above 800 m, they
need to have insufficient
bonding capacity over the next 4
years. I mean no levy at least
10.
For small districts less than
800 men. They also, um, would
need currently at least 70% of
the students to be eligible for
free and reduced lunch, the
local match greater than 50%.
And in the middle levy at 7.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And so
we're still having folks
complete the free reduced lunch
form just even though we're
doing free, just to know where
they qualify.
Um, so
Um, Mr. Chair, members, Ms. Tao,
um, that is what SB 82 is two of
the line items that would be
removed as the free and reduced
lunch as well as that local
match of 50% by removing those
that would help smaller
districts less than 800 achieve
uh the waiver criteria and
statutes and therefore, if they
don't meet these currently they
have to reach 10 mLs. So if we
remove these two items more
small districts under 800 would
be able to qualify for that
waiver if they reach 7, if they
reach 7. OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for that explanation.
Thank you, uh, representative
Silva then represent Baca.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you,
Director uh Romero, uh, I, I
know that you're not seeking
funds for this, but why is the
liability insurance going up so
high from 10 to 100K
representative uh Silva, um,
Keeping in mind that PSFA is a
small agency of only around 56
employees, um, any employee
matters that risk management,
um.
Takes on, um, 1 to 2 employees
that have some litigation, that
is what's driving the cost.
OK. Thank you. And then um I'm
on page 3 of um the um budget
worksheet.
Uh, on the performance measures.
I am seeing one, the average
number of months between initial
award to occupancy is 46 months.
It's about 3.8 years. That seems
like a much better completion
rate than what like our state
capital outlay projects are, so
I just wanted to name that and
say, wow, and if you have any
tips or advice, that would be
great. Um, and then the other,
uh, line item is the average
number of months from project
close out to finance.
So close out is 14 months, was
your actual, and then the, the
recommendation goes to 3 months.
Is that something that's doable,
um, yeah, how does that land
with you all? Thank you, chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Silva, I believe that that is
doable.
Excellent. Thank you, Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative, uh, we have
Representative Baca, then
Representedrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and uh,
Thank you for what you guys do,
um, my question's really, uh,
are about the um facilities,
right, that's what we're, that's
what we're talking about, so,
um,
Mr. Chairman and uh Doctor
Merrill.
We talk about, we, we currently
have legislation that reduces
the local match for a school
district to pay their proportion
of their share of it. Uh, when
does that, uh,
When does that legislation run
out?
Mr. Chair, Representative Baca,
I believe it runs out in fiscal
year 27, um, but we currently,
as Mrs. Ramos was indicating,
was sentability 82, we're
requesting that they extend that
for you, and thank you for that.
One of the, I, I have, I, I do
sit on the PSCOC as an advisor
or advisory member.
One of the questions that I have
and, and it really is uh.
What is the dollar amount of
projects that we have basically
logjam that we're not able to.
Um, that, the money sitting
there has been awarded and it's
kind of no progress has been
made on the project. Do you have
an idea about
But that number is.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Baca, um, I'm gonna say that
it's that number is.
I believe quite low. I'm gonna
say around maybe
400 million.
Keeping in mind the um
That is
It can vary up and down. So I
don't want to be held to that
number, but I'm gonna say about
400 million.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your answer. The,
the other question that I have.
is what we're dealing with in
all areas of our communities is
the cost of construction.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, we talked
about when we were calculating
costs of building schools just a
few years ago, just prior to
COVID, we were looking at
somewhere around $450 to $500
per square foot.
Um
Mr. Chairman and uh medical
director, we're we're now
talking for some projects that
are being um
Basically spiked out. We're
looking at 800, 900, I think I
saw something like almost $1100
so Mr. Chair, my question is,
How are we accounting for that
and how are we going to be able
to support our schools and make
sure that we don't have school
buildings that are 70 years old
like I have in my community, or
that we have buildings that are
flooded out or, or these types
of things, so it, it really is,
it's a question that I have is
these rising construction costs.
It almost seems like we're not
going to be able to make the
The necessary upgrades to our
facilities for our kids.
Mr. Chair Representative Baca.
I feel you. We're we're feeling
that, and we're feeling that
effects of those cost
escalations and the cost of
construction. Keeping in mind,
yes, in those areas that the
cost is 800, 900, even $1000 per
square foot. It's not because
we're allowing them to build Taj
Mahals. We live in a very
diverse state, and the
topography and um the air in New
Mexico is just varies so much,
so.
Um,
the topography as well as the um
location where they're at as far
as being remote, trying to get
um contractors to bid on
projects that are in the.
nowhere, um, having to do
demolition and then how they're
gonna truck the the materials
out, so, um, what we're facing
is just based on the diversity
of New Mexico. And again, we're,
we're monitoring that these
aren't Taj Mahals. And so we can
do what we can to support our
school districts, no matter
where they are within the state
of New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you in my, in my, uh, my
comment was to, to say about the
Taj Mahal, uh, because I
understand that my, my question
was really about
The, the dilemma that many
school districts find themselves
in is that they have a project,
but these contractors and these
builders are basically going
back and they are picking and
choosing.
Projects that they have a a
greater potential for uh return
or cost of the project size of
the projects, and so many of
these
submit to smaller projects are
basically being kind of
continually pushed to the bottom
as we have a lack of
Not only resources, but also as
workers and so I, I just wanna,
you know, kind of highlight that
if you can respond to that, and
otherwise, uh,
I know that you feel it, but,
you know, for us as
appropriators in here, and we're
talking about
You know, creating systems and
supporting schools with our
learning environments. It's
tough for a kid to learn if you
don't have adequate heat, if you
don't have adequate air
conditioning and the facilities
are not
Conducive to that learning
environment.
Mr. Chair Representative Baca,
yes, again, we, we hear what
you're saying, and we also need
to keep in mind the um labor
shortages and that is sometimes
is what's hindering a different
contractors from bidding on
these projects. So we're kind of
trying to move forward with what
we have. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you. I'm done with my
questions. Thank you very much
Representative Representative,
please.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I.
I, I just want to make a
statement that it really is time
to look at the public school
capital LA formula, uh, overall,
because basically what it does
is it punishes small rural
school systems. It it, it
rewards growing schools and it
punishes uh basically rural
schools that are shrinking in
size, and so it it it's just
created this.
This problem, uh, that we have a
state and, and it's kind of
It also
We 2/3 of our superintendents
are brand new. They're not gonna
start, you know, closing and
opening schools. So that's not
gonna be their first job, so I,
it, it, it's kind of a huge
problem that I think we really
look at long term and that was
just my suggestion, uh, really
don't have any questions, I
think we're all kind of stuck in
a formula that doesn't work.
So, thank you very much for
Vrera. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Romero. um, we're, uh, yeah,
great conversation this will be
something that we'll talk more
about in in the summer and a lot
of things to Miss Carswell for
helping work through and try to
create some options as we look
at resources. We'll go ahead and
ask for the LFC recommendation.
Um,
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
would move the committee adopt
the LFC recommendation.
It's been moved by by Dixon,
taken by representative, uh,
Hernandez. Is there any
opposition to that motion,
seeing that we've adopted that
motion. Thank you very much.
OK, uh, committee, we're done
for tonight. uh, for public
school working group, please
stay over dinner is being thanks
to Director Bri for that, um.
Is there any public comment?
Thanks to vice chair for the
reminder. Anybody who wishes to
make public comment.
Sean, uh, if we, I think we have
been told we have online.
OK. Uh, the first, I, we don't,
I can't see him on our screen,
but if you could just let the
first person.
Please identify yourself and uh
one minute.
Uh
OK, uh, Johannes Lenzer. Hi. Uh,
my name is Joanna Spencer,
National Center for Frontier
Communities. I want to say thank
you for all the members of the
committee for your support of um
The uh NM grown program and the
other food uh initiative from
the governor's office, and yeah,
with PD we're hoping for 2.3
million to continue supporting
local producers, renters, fresh
food into, you know, our
schools. So thank you very much
for that. Thank you very much,
Mr. Linzer. Uh, Matthew Paul.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, I'm sorry, I couldn't
be there today. My name is Matt
Paul from Public Charter Schools
of New Mexico. Um, I just wanted
to highlight an issue with the
family income index and the
transition or the potential
transition to a new at risk
index, um, we have a number of
charter schools that lose a
significant amount of funding,
uh, there, and we're just
seeking, we're not trying to get
in the way of the policy. Um, we
think it's the right thing. We
want to generate that at the
school level, but we do ask
Um, as that bill comes forward,
HB 63, um, for your
consideration of an extended
hold harmless period of 3 years.
Great. Thank you very much, Mr.
Paul.
And now, uh, we'll conclude uh
online with Elena Paisano.
Good evening, Mr. Chairman. Good
evening committee members. I am,
and Elena Pisano, the approved
supplier program director with
the New Mexico Farmers Marketing
Association. I'm just here today
also to thank you for your
support so far of the Governor's
Food Ag initiatives and also
request that you do support the
$2.3 million request for the
public education department for
the New Mexico grown program. I
get to work with the over 275
producers that are supported
through that program that really
rely on the market opportunity
to sell.
their food in their community to
their kids. So thank you very
much.
Thank you very much.
OK. Uh, did you want to give
public comment? Please come on
up.
Uh, this will conclude, so we're
concluded online,
and you can um
Uh, grab the microphone, just or
touch the the make sure the
green light is on, please,
sorry. There we go.
Oh yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman
and committee members, my name
is Pam Roy here representing
Farm to Table New Mexico Food
and Agricultural Policy Council
and Rocky Mountain Farmers Union
requesting your support as many
of our my colleagues have just
stated for the $2.3 million from
Mexico grown and represents
Silva, thank you for bringing me
up. Repent Luhan as well. And
for many of you who have
supported this in the past for
schools to have the most
nutritious food, um, and it's
grown right here and it provides
economic opportunities for our
farmers.
And we look forward to that
being also part of the whole New
Mexico grown program that also
is investing in our seniors and
our early daycare centers, um,
and we're the only state doing
it across all generations, so
thank you. Thank you very much,
Ms. Roy.
OK, that concludes a full
committee uh work group, uh,
well, the dinner's coming for
you and thanks everybody for a
great day.
We concluded.
