Vice chair small here.
Madam chair launched nonstop.
I'm care and again good morning
to everyone
I'd like to welcome our new
member Representative the cell
to the house appropriations and
finance committee I'm glad to
have you on the committee today
and joining arguments are all
our work.
I want to remind everybody that
please keep your computer on
mute as as others are speaking
because we can we can we get a
lot of feedback.
Today we're going to be dealing
with the higher education budget
and some of the special schools.
It's also come to my attention
we're gonna have to have a hard
stop around ten o'clock
unfortunately there's a whole
bunch of other committees are
meeting this morning I heard
last night when we finished up
on the floor session.
We'll go a little bit longer but
it's got to be close to ten so
we can get everybody on their
way to other other committees.
So that being said to for the
benefit of our new member what
we always do is we start with
the analyst report first and
then the department
our focus is on the operating
budget or special issues that
tied to the budget specifically.
There is a volume one two and
three for reference on each one
of the budgets that we deal
with.
But at this at this point mark
are you there.
You madam chair thank K. what
are you going let's go ahead
good morning let's go ahead and
start with the analysts and are
you going to do some screen
sharing with us today.
yes ma'am madam chair and I'm
gonna very quickly a point you
in the committee members with
volumes one and and to if you
just give me a second chair.
And as I walk through this let
me also introduce.
my colleague.
Miss more so this set of who is
and education and also the LFC
she'll be taking you through the
department budget and then also
with us is our colleague from
the department of finance and
administration the call Musaeus
who will be taking us through a
portion of the recommendations
as well so and as and for the
committees and for the record my
name is mark bounds well on the
analyst at the legislative
finance committee for or the
entire sector higher at I
believe you can now see my
screen which shows you the
volume one policy document that
both Mrs miss the set of myself
prepared for you I'm I would
just point out a couple things
because the LFC recommendation
is strongly tied both to the
financial recommendation but
also the policy it's really
driven by this policy I keep
telling I think what is the best
story in New Mexico and I've
been trying to tell it is as
often as I can to the top left
corner of the presentation there
high school graduation in New
Mexico's gone up it's a great
story and it's been increasing
year after year over the past
six years at the same time and
that's not only the rate of
graduation but the number of
students who are graduating with
degrees in four years at a high
school is increasing in New
Mexico it's great story at the
same time we're seeing declining
enrollment in our colleges and
universities despite the fact
that we are the third law lowest
cost of higher education in the
country you can see in the in
the middle of grass there that.
That the enrollment by sectors
so pre COVID.
enrollment in colleges and and
universities New Mexico drops
thirteen percent.
The the impact was felt evenly
between the four year
institutions in the two year
institutions.
Then COVID head and we saw we
lost another ten thousand
students in New Mexico and you
can really see that that
reduction right here and the
final year the the difference
with Mexico post comment is that
the community college secretary
the to your sector decreased are
they if they absorb eighty seven
percent of the declines in that
one year and that was at the
same time when we were offering
the inaugural year the
opportunity scholarship free
tuition and fees at two year
colleges.
I'm taking through and and so
enrollments really been a
trigger issue at the LFC we've
done a lot of work both the
analysts and the evaluators and
we've really been trying to
understand what's happening on
the roll inside in New Mexico
some of the things that we begin
to we've been digging into are
just the administrative fix
friction that exists within
higher ed is a complex entity in
itself just between the the for
your research institutions the
for your comprehensive the two
year community colleges well and
so we started looking at the tri
factor reforms that had been of
implemented in the prior
administration just to kind of
look and see where New Mexico
was in terms of completing the
trifecta work and they try
secretary work is really was
intended by the prior
administration to streamline
higher at to make it easier for
students to approach and to add
navigate and so some of the
slide you see here the pictures
you see here are just some
examples so the top rate is the
general education curriculum
court the ideas that all the
institutions in New Mexico will
be teaching the same general ed
court and you can see there's a
high amount of very ability just
just within those core pieces of
the course of as an example
creative fine arts there are
several institutions that that
offered the well they all offer
this but you can see that the
vast amount of courses offered
across the state when you
compare mathematics to
humanities as an example
breaking into humanities the
middle chart there you see how
humanities courses that meet the
core requirement for for New
Mexico's our graduation
requirements at the higher level
how they compare by institution
so you can see that C. N. M. as
an example they offer forty two
humanities courses when our when
our research institute.
Tions like UNM only offer
nineteen and so there's some
very ability here that that that
the LFC when we're looking at
that we were really trying to
understand the bottom the bottom
right and this is hard to see
and I and I apologize for this
let me see if I can well my tech
skills aren't as good as others
see if I can blow this up a
little bit.
This brought table here is as a
representation of all the common
courses lower level these are
freshmen and sophomore courses
that are offered by the by the
institutions across New Mexico.
Only six of the courses of this
database of of two thousand six
hundred forty three courses only
six of them are offered.
Bye bye all the institutions
which which is just it sort of
befuddles the name of COVID
course and you can see that on
the bottom that one to three
institutions are offering unique
courses so sixty seven percent
of the courses that are in this
database of concourse lower
lower level courses are unique.
Again just to kind of point out
the work that LFC has been doing
and leading into the
recommendation you're about to
hear we compared academic degree
programs that are offered in New
Mexico to our surrounding states
and our surrounding states are
experiencing greater enrollment
then then we are New Mexico so
we took a look at that and we
looked it per capita on a
hundred per hundred thousand
adult basis so comparing
everybody evenly New Mexico
offers a hundred seventeen per
hundred thousand students
academic programs compared to
taxes that offers forty three
again just a piece of
information that helps to sort
of talk about this this last
this sector.
From a revenue perspective the
bottom left chart shows you
graphically how the institutions
are funded and I'm gonna sure
another chart with you in a
moment but typically there's
three main funding sources for
all institutions.
State state general fund is the
biggest investor in higher ed so
you are the largest investor you
are more than fifty one percent
of the investment on average
across the higher it secretary
but it but it varies by
institution so New Mexico junior
college and M. J. C. their
community
develop that that junior college
and they've put their financial
support behind it they have
tax themselves at the maximum
level of five mills and so you
can see that the state share of
support in that community is
only about twenty percent of the
overall instructional costs
compared to the amendment you
Rossell as an example in a
Roswell Roswell the fifth
largest city in New Mexico
they've only tax themselves the
minimum of one mill and so you
can see that amendment you Ross
will is highly dependent on the
state state appropriations so
there's this level of inequity
exists just from a funding
perspective when you look at the
institutions across the for.
Is your your support of higher
in your the six most generous
state in the country when it
comes to supporting higher
education you can see in the
graph here that shows that on a
per.
A student basically the of
preparations have risen one
enrollment the green bar has you
can see is declining the red
line there is tuition fees also
another indicator of of
financial support from the
institutions themselves despite
the declining enrollment tuition
and fee revenue has stayed
relatively stable and that's
because of the institutions have
raised the tuition rates and the
student fee rates are pretty
consistently year after year I
think it's an important point as
we discussed issues like the
opportunity scholarship.
Very quickly just comparison of
the student outcomes or our
surrounding states you can see
the New Mexico the Green Line is
lagging from a graduation
perspective graduation rates and
then also retention rates
these are up only four year
institutions I'm not showing you
the a two year colleges.
And then finally I'll move on
quickly here because I know
we're strapped for time the
positive story higher ed is that
awards have increased by twenty
two percent since you as the
Legislature put in the
performance based funding
formula which incentivizes
student completion awards have
increased by twenty two percent
since that happened in twenty
twelve over the past five years
the story however looks a little
over waited for certificate so
the blue line there is you can
see that over the past five
years.
So baccalaureate certificates
have grown by forty two percent
of the past five years when
master's degrees have declined
by six percent it's a point that
we've made several times LFC and
and some of valuations in the
bridge that we've written that
that is not necessarily a
negative thing that sub
baccalaureate certificates are
rising it's about the magnitude
and and the even this in the
overweight nature of it we're
told pretty frequently I know
you are as well that the largest
additional employers would like
to hire more more New Mexicans
who graduate from our colleges
and universities with master's
degrees or higher and Sandia and
Los Alamos and and we all know
about the the need for teachers
and nurses and social workers
throughout New Mexico so so the
indicator of or this that or the
data about basses agrees
declined by six percent is is of
concern here so having said that
let me move on to share with you
also
The volume three give me just
give me one moment.
What I did tell you that I would
share with you the revenue side.
Let me.
And I will move along quickly.
Here's a chart that you'll find
in the volume three one of many
and this just shows you by
institution where the revenues
to support those institutions
are and and again you'll know
and I and I like to point this
out that two year institutions
receive local mill levy revenue
though that was what I was
talking about earlier with New
Mexico junior college in Hobbs
and eastern New Mexico in
Roswell the differences that
exist there for years that uses
do not however for years to
generate more research grants
and and funding in that way so
and when you have time you can
see some of the other tribes
that exist here here's the top
feeder high schools into U. N.
M. a New Mexico state and
there's a lot of good
information I think you'll find
useful and and helping you sort
through of the the
recommendation so with that
madam chair let me jump into the
recommendations and I'm gonna
refer you now your packets
that you have.
Let me share that and I'm gonna
invite my colleagues to
participate here.
Now from a numbers perspective
we're not that far off R. two
recommendations are four point
seven million dollars part but
the detail is important so that
mark wanted to try and make that
just a little bigger yes ma'am
thank you.
The primary it so we're for four
point seven million apart the
LFC is lower but the key issue
and and this is the set is gonna
take you through this right now
the key issue here is that word
twenty million dollars apart on
the department's budget which
you can see here in the bottom
and the court difference of that
if there is the recommendations
for the opportunity scholarship
the LFC recommending five
million to keep thinking to
continue and the executive
recommended twenty six so with
that let me turn it over to Mrs
the set up and I'll move you to
the different sheets on the
department.
And Good Morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Marcus I'm the P. twenty
analyst for the legislative
finance committee and I'll be
taking you through the L. LFC
and Executive recommendations
for the higher education
department comprised of three
programs department operations
of student financial aid
opportunities scholarship
program.
The over all the LFC general
fund recommendation is lower by
twenty point three million
dollars as mark stated primary
difference here is the executive
recommendation for the
opportunity scholarship.
For department operations the
executive recommendation is
lower by four hundred and seven
thousand of the LFC funds the
adult basic education program at
six point five million of which
is a slight decrease from FY
twenty one funding levels and
the executive includes a one
million dollars suicide
prevention initiative for the
higher education institutions.
Most of the recommendations
includes funding for the Navajo
technical university arts
college of nursing program and
to address the need for nursing
professionals in remote rural
communities throughout the
state.
For student financial aid of the
LFC and exec recommendations
aligned by keeping all the
student financial aid programs
flat with FY twenty one funding
levels with the exception of the
student work study program which
the LFC increases by one point
one million dollars.
For the opportunity scholarship
the executive recommendation
Dacian includes twenty two
million dollars for the
scholarship.
Four million dollars for pilot
program that focuses on the
students not lost a lottery
scholarship.
The LFC recommendation includes
the opportunity scholarship
being flat with FY twenty one
funding levels five million
dollars.
Additionally the executive
recommends three point six
million dollars from the early
childhood education and care
department to increase
recruitment and support for
bilingual and indigenous
educators.
Well clear process season and
seller pathways to credentials
and degrees and accreditation by
the national association for
education of young children.
With that I will handed over to
you are calling act saying the
Coleman C. as for her comments
thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Nicole
agency yes and I have nothing
else to add in addition to for
the higher education department
that wasn't already mentioned I
will now move on to the
instruction and general
questions
I and calmly known as I. N. G.
for the institutions
just a high level overview for
the colleges and universities
online thirty four the LFC FY
twenty two general fund
recommendation for institutions
is twelve point four million
dollars higher than the
executive recommendation for UNM
health sciences online thirty
six the LFC FY twenty two
general fund recommendation for
UNM HSC is one point eight
dollars million dollars higher
than the executive
recommendation for special
schools online forty five the
LFC FY twenty two general fund
recommendation for special
schools is seventy thousand
dollars higher than the
executive recommendation funding
for special schools as mark
mentioned previously is largely
generated from land grant
permanent funds
as far as funding of funding
formula basically options
For the federal funds what FY
LFC restores the twenty million
federal cares Act swap use
during the first special session
in June twenty twenty the
executive recommends restoring
half of the swap at ten million
dollars.
New funding LFC recommends a
zero point five percent new
formula funding the executive
recommends a flat I. N. G.
budget for performance.
Funding for based redistribution
LFC recommends a two percent
where the executive recommends
no based redistribution for
performance measures the LFC
recommendation equalizes the
wait for momentum point thirty
and momentum point sixty
measures momentum point thirty
are for
Momentum points for students
that tried that.
Are going to eighteen thirty
credit hours and momentum point
sixty are for students attaining
sixty credit hours just for your
information.
The LFC makes this policy based
on their assumption that in
prior years the momentum point
thirty measure was overweight.
As far as research measures the
LFC recommendation equalizes the
funding for research
universities with UNM and NMSU
each receiving thirty seven
point five percent of the
funding and New Mexico tech
receiving twenty five percent.
As far as impacts under the LFC
recommendation eleven
institutions lose minor amounts
when compared to FY twenty one
budget the maximum loss is less
than a hundred thousand as
previously mentioned the
executive recommendation
provides half of the federal
funding swap back to
institutions and provides
institutions with a slight
increase when compared to post
special session cuts.
I will now move on to the
research and public service
projects which are known as our
PS P. funding online fifty one
of this sheet that market
showing.
Both recommendations founded the
R. P. S. P.'s across the board
with few exceptions LFC applies
a three percent reduction and
the executive provides a three
point two percent reduction the
executive recommends a flat
budget for the department of
agriculture and the LESC
recommends a one point five
percent reduction.
Both the executive and the LESC
recommends a flat budget for
special schools are PS P.
programs.
the LFC recommends a one point
five percent reduction for
nursing programs throughout the
state and increases funding for
the comprehensive cancer center
at UNM HSC and the office of the
medical investigator also at UNM
HSC I will now turn it over to
my counterpart at LFC more
felons well it to wrap it up
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you to call so I wanted to
finish taking the committee
through this package just so
you're aware of what is in front
of you the page two begins to
show you the differences between
the the executive recommendation
and the LESC by institution by
branch campus and by all the R.
P. specific are PSP's this is
only general fund it does not
include any of the other
revenues I talked about earlier
such as research for local
property tax revenues at the end
of this page you'll see the
recommendations for the special
schools and so you'll see on
line to fifty here and I'm gonna
try to highlight and I I hope
you can see some of the stuff
that I'm.
You can see the recommendations
for military institute school
for the blind and visually
impaired Alamogordo and then
school for the deaf and that's
from the general fund
perspective then just below that
you'll see we've rolled this up
by institutions.
So we will shortly one and this
shortly madam chair let me just
take you through some final
pieces the funding formula
recommendation is on this the
paticipate this faced paced
thirteen is vacancy that and and
we always talk about how the
funding formula should be the
funding formula affects
institutions individually and we
call it you know we talk about
winners and losers because what
happens here is a portion of the
existing budget gets put into a
competitive poll and based on
everybody's performance then
gets redistribute re distributed
and so you can see in some cases
there's minor reductions for
some institutions and it has to
do with primarily the the
significant drops in enrollment
and subsequent growth in awards
and each of those institutions
I will now take you through the
TV before I do that and and I
will say my word we will stop
this certainly I wanted to share
with you the
The federal funds information
for the new cares Act.
And so I believe you can now
see.
You can see what is going to
receive I'm gonna I don't know
if I my video is locking that
for years but.
So right here you can see that
ENMU the whole system was C. six
point one million under the new
this second phase of the cares
Act highlands three million New
Mexico state twenty seven
million UNM thirty one you can
read it on your own all told the
institutions will receive a
hundred seventeen million of
this a significant portion is
going to be used in dedicated
for for students like the first
round was fifty percent was
dedicated to students to help
support their cost of a loss
such as dorm dorm room costs and
food costs that they lost
because they had to move out of
dorms and and in those cases
where we have gone so when we
talk about this opportunity
scholarship the LFC to take
credit for any of this this new
money and so when you look at
student support yeah we look at
this piece is being supportive
of students rather than our
recommendation on the
opportunity scholarship.
So let me now take you back and
I again I promise I will stop
this shortly.
I can.
Eriko.
Now I'm finally back to your
packets.
All the performance measures and
I want to I want to preface this
we did a major based on your
guidance madam chair we did a
major re hall of the data
reporting functions of the
institutions as your will call
of the colleges universities
having getting receiving almost
a billion dollars from the state
prior to this we were only
receiving two to three
performance measures from each
of them and so based on your
guidance we completely revamped
the data of reporting and and
measurement framework for all
the institutions so now each of
them report on about forty five
measures they're all the same
for every institution so that
the number of pages that follow
these are all the same measures
that are reported by each
institution we did have some
differences between the DFA and
executive there there on six
measures we have come to
consensus on that they are
mainly about enrollment and
graduation rates and so you'll
see that the and what the
consensus that we've come to is
that institutions should strive
to increase our enrollment by
ten percent next year that
that's agreement that we have
with the effect on a graduation
rate perspective as a as I
showed in earlier slides on New
Mexico lacks our region and so
we're really asking institutions
to support this and I have to
give them credit the presidents
of the institutions are on board
they really talked about new
strategies for enrollment
management this administration
with the with the higher
education department is very
focused on as well so we have
consensus on graduation rates
for both standard one hundred
percent time meaning if you're
getting a master's degree you're
gonna earn that basses Grande
for years.
We have a for a hundred fifty
percent time which is six years
for about first degree and then
for the two years we'll have a
lot of part time students we
have a measure of three hundred
percent graduation rate meaning
a student is getting a two year
degree will have six years to
get it this aligns with the
opportunity scholarship Senate
bill one thirty five talks about
directing twenty two million to
part time students at two year
colleges and and supporting
those students paying for their
their degree process for five
years to get a two year degree
and you can see how some of the
institutions are reporting their
request of what they believe
they will be able to graduate
and so the rates are very low
and and and this the secretary
already has a twenty seven
percent graduation rate which
means that seventy three percent
of the students that are
proceeds the secretary are not
finding success and so I'm
hoping to reform the institution
to have better success may be a
more effective strategy it and
building our our educational
pipeline and future workforce
pipeline I'm not gonna take you
through all of this these are
all those measures by
institutions that that I talked
about earlier madam chair with
that I know it was a lot we will
allow secretary Rodriguez to
make your presentation and
invite the presidents and then
after that be available for your
cough and one other thing I I'm
sorry I forgot to mention in
addition to this recommendation
we the LFC has recommended
additional compensation for
faculty and staff and higher end
of one and a half percent you do
not see that in those numbers
but I wanted to just let you
know that that that number there
are some funding there for
faculty raises and staffers so
with that I'll turn it over to
secretary Rodriguez.
Thank you mark good morning
madam chair and members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to permanently the
executive budget recommendations
for the New Mexico higher
education department madam chair
I promise this is less than ten
minutes I am Stephanie Rodriguez
and I am the acting cabinet
secretary and as some of you
know I joined the agency late
this summer and I have been
responsible for the oversight of
the department and the higher
education institutions in
addition to our COVID nineteen
response at our colleges and
universities.
Over thirty thousand of our
citizens graduate from our
public colleges and universities
with degrees and certificates
annually and our agency is
dedicated to increasing the
number of New Mexicans for
postsecondary degrees so we can
help versified job opportunities
and our broader economy
investment in higher education
continues to be a priority
especially given the need to
reinvigorate the state following
COVID nineteen.
As you can see on your screen
the agency has nine public
facing divisions from policy to
data capital outlay and
financial eight we have
oversight of over a billion
dollars with fifty one F. T. E.
I must note that this includes
the new in fusion of employees
from the federal character Act
grant and other federally and be
funded positions within the
adult education and private post
secondary division we administer
capital outlay for higher
education institutions and
oversee state financial aid
programs including the lottery
scholarship opportunity
scholarship and college
affordability eight and more.
Now.
Full of years and even at the
height of a global pandemic we
have had some games for student
success with your support we
have implemented an educator
pipeline there been expansions
to financial aid programs and
during the pandemic the agency
issued guidance to provide
support to current students
graduating twelfth graders and
with your question support we
have started to evaluate
articulation and transfer issues
within higher education through
the newlyestablished New Mexico
academic Advisory Council.
However this pandemic is taking
a toll on all of us especially
our students we are asking for
one million dollars to establish
or enhance existing programming
at colleges and universities for
mental and behavioral health
services and suicide prevention
social emotional well being is
critical in ensuring students
can be successful during their
time in college it is our job to
reduce stigma and remove
barriers to allow our students
to access the services.
I also want to emphasize the
importance of supporting
supporting a robust teacher
preparation system with the help
of our colleagues at the early
childhood education and care
department we are asking for
your support and a chance for a
three point six million dollars
from the early childhood
education trust so the higher
education program development.
This will allow our agencies to
work in conjunction with
existing higher education
program to establish early
childhood education down that
would be central and looking
over our existing curricula to
create sustainable pathways for
educators educational assistant
to become teachers and as you
know we need teachers in several
areas but we are no stranger to
the critical areas that we need
to focus on right now we need to
recruit and retain teachers that
will support native American
Hispanic English language
learner apparatus and special
education students here in New
Mexico.
The administration and you have
been supportive of the teacher
pipeline support you say
financial aid programs over the
course of the past few years the
teacher preparation
affordability scholarship
benefited over six hundred
students in FY twenty in two
million dollars was budgeted for
this academic year loan and
there have been over five
hundred awards to date for the
teacher loan repayment program
supporting these programs are
key to providing future teachers
with the financial aid they need
to carry them through higher
education and beyond.
We're asking for your support
ensuring that these programs by
adding two point two million
dollar special appropriation to
the recurring dollars to get
this back to the original five
million dollars appropriation
for FY twenty three teachers
help create great students and
we get there by investing in
these teacher preparation
support systems showing the
students that we care and we
will support them.
Another initiative that my
colleagues also touched on is
the opportunity scholarship
the opportunity scholarship
renews the promise of the
tuition free education at one of
our public colleges to your
programs across the state
opportunity scholarship fills
the gap left over from the
lottery scholarship and other
state programs but still allows
a student to use other federal
aid such as Pell grants to cover
the cost of attendance including
books housing and child care.
Program has impacted nearly five
thousand students last semester
and we can make the decision to
enroll thirty thousand students
and certificate and to your
programs with the twenty two
million dollar investment this
is incredibly important and let
me explain why.
Looks like I messed up my slide
so I apologize.
Over the past couple of months
my colleagues at the agency have
shared testimonials opportunity
scholarship recipient I want to
share with you Ramon Tokyo story
from the university of New
Mexicos branch campus at Los
Alamos.
The pandemic and the news of
becoming a first time father
Ramon made the decision to
reconstruct and go back to
school he was faced with the
question I have can I import
just after applying filling out
the fact that in gaining
acceptance into the school you
learn that the answer was yes he
was able to leverage the
scholarship to move closer to
his goal of becoming a college
graduate Ramon is one of many
New Mexicans who are
nontraditional students that
will be closer to achieving
their goals and attaining a post
secondary degree.
But for us to see the full
impact of the opportunity
scholarship and to ensure that
students like Ramon and obtain a
post secondary degree and work I
ask that you consider reducing
twelve credit are are meant to
six credit hours as intended in
the original legislation because
of the impact of COVID nineteen
this will open the door for a
multitude of New Mexicans.
And another item that I would
love to touch on opportunity
scholarship hi would you have
also heard about it will affect
the individuals that we are
calling the last lottery
students how many times of
public official does have we
heard I lost the lottery and I
only had one year left to finish
my degree we'll send we are
asked.
Support and initiating a former
credit hours so that the
complete the four year degree
program thank you for their
salary to continue to support
our families at a bigger level.
Also we must make concerted
efforts to support New Mexicans
from the day they are born and
our that is why there must be a
focus on a cradle to career
educational system which has
been a priority for the governor
longitudinal data system will
help educators and you
the policy makers identify
student challenges early on May
targeted interventions and
investments and determine what
educational practices and
programs Dr student success from
the early years into the work
force.
This is a partnership amongst
the agencies starting with the
early childhood education and
care department to the public
education department our agency
and the finish line will be the
department of workforce
solutions.
And executive budget
recommendations you'll see that
we reduce pastors that were
duplicative with other state
agency programs and initiatives
we preserved agency staffing so
we continue to support our
programs and initiatives we have
in instituting at the agency.
Now real fast the majority of
our funding we oversee our
transfers from the lottery
scholarship the next large
pieces of higher state financial
aid programs we also oversee
federal programs and executive
budget recommendation include
support for adult education and
tribal dot college dual credit
adult literacy and Navajo
technical university's nursing
program to name a few and over
eight million dollars agency
operations will remain
relatively flat moving forward
at three point five million
dollars.
I must highlight that we need
support for some of these
programs I mentioned today we
are asking for a data and I. T.
expert for the longitudinal data
system additionally capital
outlay is centered at our agency
we would like to build up the
division to assist with the new
comprehensive process we have
put in place last we must have a
special focus on data and
analysis so we can work across
state entities to see how higher
education affects our
communities and state.
And during my short time at the
agency we established a
strategic planning group in
which we have the participation
expertise all college and
university presidents and other
stakeholder groups you have
reignited a group dedicated to
evaluating in analyzing higher
education data for quality
policy recommendations in the
future and we have to really
listen to your concerns
surrounding the COVID course
number in system general
education and dual credit and in
response we have invited
programs chief academic officers
registrars and other higher
education leaders to participate
on the New Mexico academic
advisory committee on top of
that we are opening the door
communication amongst adversity
inclusion experts in
communication professionals
across the higher education
institutions and I can assure
you this has been done hand in
hand with all of my colleagues
on this call today.
Thank you for allowing me the
opportunity to present to you
this afternoon and share with
you the vision of New Mexico
higher education madam chair I
will send it back to you or the
next presenters thank you.
All right thank you madam
secretary
Market next star is the and
members of the the cop is that
what's next door tell me what's
up.
Madam chair Joe separately that
is correct.
All right go ahead thank you
madam chair and will also make
this very quick we do this now
in conjunction which with each
of the three associations of for
the new members as the counts of
university presidents to New
Mexico to panic community
colleges New Mexico
association of of community
colleges and as you can see the
real quickly
all of my colleagues Becky
Raleigh and Cindy Rooney
introduced there particularly
people about from other counts
of university presidents we have
eastern New Mexico university
headed up by a president Sam
Minner.
I'm sorry eastern New Mexico
university is headed up by
Patrice Caldwell
Saturday.
The highlands ended up by Sam
Minner minority of mining and
technology headed up by Steven
wells Mexico State University
headed up by chancer in our
recent northern New Mexico
university is headed up by Rick
Bailey University of New Mexico
is headed up by Garnett Stokes
and of western New Mexico
university headed up by myself
with that thank you rally to
energy shortage.
Thank you just thank thank you
madam chair my name is Becky
rally president of Santa Fe
community college and also the
chair of the New Mexico
independent community colleges
are members include Clovis
Community College ahead by
trials one quote central New
Mexico college president Tracy
Hartzler Luna community college
can Patterson Mason lance
community college now look a
large
New Mexico junior college Calvin
sharp New Mexico military
institute Jerry grizzle northern
New Mexico college Rick Bailey
San Juan college twenty
Pendergrass and also western New
Mexico college Joe Sheppard and
now I'd like to introduce my
colleagues Andy Rooney from UNM
Los Alamos.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Cindy Rooney I currently service
the president of the New Mexico
association of community college
I service the leader of the
campus at UNM Los Alamos and
also as the interim chancellor
at UNM towels into a new
individual can be higher in that
position it's my honor to
introduce my colleagues
representing as the president of
in in in in the U. Broadwell is
Dr Sean how from Ian you in you
know so is Ryan transfer from
NMSU Alamogordo doctor mark cow
from you issue Carlsbad doctor
engine wanting.
From the president of Dona ana
community college Dr Monica
torrez representing an issue
grants is Dr Marlene Chavis W.
not representing you in Gallup
is Dr James mom and representing
UNM Valencia is Dr Alice let me
and I will turn this back over
to Dr shepherd.
Thank you I appreciate that the
next slide shows the higher
education budget recommendations
and this is a great slide that
sums up what you have already
heard from the DFA and as well
as the LFC recommendations but
it puts it into symbolic form
for you couple pieces on the
slide that I'd like to your
plate relatively close attention
to the opportunity scholarship
of courses is paramount I think
to to all of us we strongly
support the the the opportunity
scholarship naturally we'd like
to see it funded and funded
fully from sources other than
the the swap the federal
government provided for
institutions real quick note on
that federal swap you'll know
that that was one time money
this download into a second
trying to use that on that and
with that it was agreed upon
that would be replaced back in
special session we understand
how that all works etcetera but
first and foremost we need to
support those those revenues
that were earmarked to support
those expenses because remember
it's not new money it's money
that are it is a universities
deal with your comment issues
and they and the surrounding
financial impacts and we the
federal government will
reimburse you for that so those
are reimbursable monies to the
institutions the other piece of
course is compensation you
recall madam chair and members
of the committee that last year
four percent compensation was
earmarked to go into effect
signed off by the governor
Xcerra but then COVID had we had
a special session and that had
to be rescinded and so we're
we're we support the one point
five percent on the LESC side
one particular comment about the
LFC madam chair your leadership
is has been absolutely wonderful
in particular I want to
compliment David Abbey director
of the LFC markdowns will simply
because this year we worked
extremely close with the LFC and
I think you're starting to see
that sheep up with with such a
small difference between the two
budgets of the executive side in
the LFC side so what I think my
colleagues there as well as
Stephanie Rodriguez
Really need for working very
closely with the institutions
there's some of the pieces there
that I recommend the committee
members look at but in essence
of time let's move on to the
next slide the next slide deals
with of course what I mentioned
on the federal really you heard
from mark balance well of the
hundred seventeen hundred
seventeen million new dollars
are going to the university you
also heard that a portion of
that will be going to to
students so it's not going
directly to the university's
again those are reimbursable
those are to make up what we
have lost in terms of testing in
our our downtown of revenue in
our housing is people stay home
and so on and so forth and so
these are not new money so once
again these are one time monies
that are supposed to get us
through two thousand twenty one
two thousand twenty two and so
those have already been spent
very similar I gave you fifty
Bucks and as for five Bucks back
and you gave me five Bucks back
and I give you your five Bucks
back doesn't mean that you just
got new money just simply meant
you had an expense for which you
decided to cover on on our
behalf and that's what the
federal government pieces next
slide with Becky Roland please.
Thank you madam chair so one one
of the most important needs for
our students at any time but
this is been especially
exacerbated during the pandemic
is a need for enhanced student
financial aid so we support
additional funding for all of
our scholarship programs the
lottery scholarship the
opportunity scholarship
especially the provision for
allowing part time students to
be able to be covered for
community colleges and also
other assistance programs
including the college
affordability act we we have
surveyed our students and and we
know for a fact that the single
most important thing to them
during the pandemic has been
needing stability funding source
so many of our community college
students are there their parents
their young parents they work
one or two jobs and so not
having reliable funding for
college will mean that they will
have to drop out and that is
been the cause of a lot of our
moment and Romit problems during
during the pandemic and so we we
know that the more scholarship
money they receive the more
likely they are to complete on
time next slide please.
Another initiative that we're
asking for full funding for is
dual credit this is a high
school program whereby students
receive high school and and
college credit the same time
it's designed to native high
school students to head into
college in a successful way to
sit and to save the money at the
same time currently the PED
funds high schools at a full
level for the students and
colleges do not receive that
same funding we receive a small
portion of what we would have
taken an intuition to offset the
expense that we have it's a very
expensive program for colleges
to run but it's incredibly
important and it has there's
very clear success that students
to take dual credit do well and
do crept into a into a credit
I'm much more likely to
successfully matriculate and
graduate from college.
And now I'd like to turn it back
over to Cindy Rooney.
Thank you doctor rally two other
items on this light that we want
to highlight the first one is
the higher rate endowment fund
that fund allows institutions to
recruit excellent researchers to
retain them it also allows two
year colleges to build up and
down wants to find items such as
professional development.
Also want to highlight the high
skills fund that fund but a
provides funding specifically
for two year colleges to do non
credit workforce training and I
think as we've gone through the
COVID environment we're finding
more in in individuals employees
and also employers that are we
needing to retrain workers
whether it's getting workers
into the medical field into the
I. T. field or whatever and so
we ask for continued funding on
the high skills on.
Next slide.
We greatly appreciate LFC
recommendation to a knowledge
compensation increase for
employees as Dr shepherd mention
last year the initial
recommendation was for four
percent but because of the
challenges of COVID and the
special session that was not Act
allowed to be realized we
recognize that our employees
have only had increases six of
the last twelve years and in
some cases those have been just
kind of a basic cost of living
sort of increase our employees
like so many across the nation
have stepped up during the COVID
environment to provide great
assistance to the students and
to help them to achieve their
goals and to learn new skills we
ask for this funding but we also
ask for recognition recognition
that this funding should be
Funded appropriately so many
times I think it was Martin's
well it talked about how state
funding very from twenty to
eighty percent across the state
and sometimes in the past that's
been the level of funding for
the increased which causes a
burden on universities to have
to fill in that gap funding
that's not state funding so we
ask for this funding to be this
increase to be funded at a very
high level next slide please.
We've also noticed that not only
are the through the individual
colleges and the three
associations working more
closely together but we're also
working closely with the hiring
department and LFC and we
appreciate the work that drive
right reduces doing with the
higher education department and
we support the request for
additional funding for that
department for the number of
initiatives that they're working
on.
Hi doctor Schecter.
Thank you.
One of the one of the issues of
course that sometimes gets lost
in the whole funding piece of it
is many institutions have
additional
agencies within them other state
agencies and so for example you
can see on this particular site
slide for the office of the
medical investigator or the
bureau of mines in the bureau of
geology over at tech or even
department of agriculture over
at at State and and the
cooperative extension's there
and those of appear in the
budget typically in the R. P. S.
P. side of it
And on that the some other
pieces that are important to
note we are PSP's the research
research and public service
projects those particular pieces
also include a lot of our our
health education so for example
I know on my university side the
R. P. S. B. has never seen and
so if we cut those that
particular portion of the budget
disproportionally or do not find
it equally to that of the IGP's
other wonderful Akram
your oftentimes will be cutting
some things are very very
important our state like health
care and like these particular
agencies within the university's
next slide please and.
Madam chair so and and in some
just to kind of reiterate our
our a request we do support the
LFC budget recommendation with
the inclusion of enhancements to
scholarship funds including the
opportunity scholarship fully
funding dual credit investing in
the higher end endowment fund
supporting the high skills fund
supporting the compensation
increase an increase for the
funding for HUD and addressing
the state agency reductions
we're grateful for the support
that we received from this
committee in from legislature
legislators over the years and
we really appreciate your
recognition that higher
education is really the key to
economic mobility for our
students with that we are happy
to answer any questions you
might have.
All right thank you very much we
do have a number of folks that
would like to ask questions and
I'm gonna start though because I
want to provide context for the
committee
I'm gonna ask mark to do a
couple things for me as I'm I'm
interested in that chart you
showed us in one of the volumes
regarding core curriculum.
That that is one of the issues
that I've discussed many many
times of higher at.
The whole idea of of
articulation between one school
to the other.
And what I saw on that chart was
a little disheartening since
that's all I ever talk about
what we get this group in front
of us.
Is that it is disheartening to
me to say that we don't have
more articulation between one
school to the other.
I see that on the bottom there
is that.
Can you can you pull that up
mark.
Madam chair you me
We can use.
I can see that we're says twenty
four institutions.
Courses are six zero percent
nineteen to twenty three
institutions
This is this is important for
the committee to understand.
Is because that is been a major
issue for us and in the
development of the higher ed
funding formula.
And certainly has been on my
part as your chair I want to
know what the real.
Opportunity here is and what are
we really doing with trying to
ensure that there's articulation
from one school to the other.
So I'm looking at the nineteen
to twenty three institutions.
That share or I guess there's
articulated forty six courses
that's only two percent.
One to three institutions.
Have the one thousand seven
hundred and seventy five courses
as sixty seven percent.
The reason that this is
important to me is because I
want to know more to look at
page thirteen I want to talk
about the I. N. G. funding
formula.
Why this matters.
Okay give me give me a second
madam chair and I'll get you
there thank you.
Part of the issue for me is is
that.
You know we do have a higher a
higher ed funding formula.
Pretty complicated and it's one
that the number of rural
communities have complained
about just because of the way
the performance the performance
is measured.
There you go so when you look at
you look at that chart.
And the LESC difference LFC
wrapped over and under to the
far right.
And you start with all those red
number starting from line twelve
thirteen fourteen fifteen
seventeen eighteen twenty twenty
one twenty four and twenty five.
Those are reductions to those
rural schools.
Now when we are measuring
performance under this current
funding formula it's all one
market so that means a school
like.
You an and Gallup is but in the
same market as you amendment
Albuquerque.
So that's how this is get this
is that's how it gets done they
measure the performance piece
here and under COVID this last
year I'd be real curious to see
how performance is actually
measured.
Since we've had the transition
to everything being virtual many
of the campuses have been closed
major decline in school student
enrollment.
And now we're putting forth a
charge that is going to penalize
or create losers in this formula
for rural areas.
So mark what's that total what's
that total under the LFC
recommendation.
That great that is the loser
amount in other words what are
all the red numbers add up to.
Madam chair it's it's roughly
three hundred and fifty thousand
but I I'm just trying to eyeball
it right now okay.
Three hundred fifty thousand
dollars.
When you start looking at some
of these areas will take
Line eighteen which is my
community I think.
That we talk about the hit to
cope of COVID in McKinley
county.
And the decline in enrollment
and lack lack of broadband and
all those other things give me a
break look at the one above that
under seventeen New Mexico State
University drugs.
When you look at the northwest
corner of the state was hit the
hardest during most of this time
so I want to know how these
performance measures were done.
because what I'm going to
recommend just so everybody's
got a heads up is that we're not
going to change the dollar
figure.
But we're going to reduce.
Those that are going to receive
funding if we go with the LFC
recommendation to make sure
these others are held harmless.
I just can't imagine why we
would go in there and take.
Eighty thousand dollars away
from or they wouldn't be
receiving New Mexico State
University Alamogordo.
That's what that's a lot of
money for these rural schools.
So I've got I've got a concern
on that the other issue for me
is of this hundred seventeen
million dollars is coming in
this next project cares money.
As as Dr shepherd says that's
not new money that's to cover
other things to fix things that
happened that they had to occur
during this COVID problem.
So it's not like the small
schools are going to be getting
a boat loaded cares money that
makes of those differences.
I do have some concern about
that but fundamentally this
funding formula has to change
and I have mentioned this in my
working group with Cobb over the
summer and and then in the fall.
That if I'm the LFC chairman
this next summer this is going
to be a major focus.
Because it's time this is been
in place for a long time we
always come up with winners and
losers and I don't like the fact
that we're we're evaluating them
in the same market.
And then they have different
performance levels I also
question number twenty two which
is C. N. M..
On this I mean they're at.
Excuse me six hundred and twelve
thousand the bill reads as to
the good so to speak.
I want to know what those
certificates look like what is
that school providing that
nobody else can.
You know I I I want to know what
those certificates look like.
Because here again you've got
metro area.
Metro area with line twenty
eight.
I want to know what those
certificates look like when we
get it all those funding formula
stuff next summer.
The other fundamental issue for
me as I said is the common core
piece.
We don't have enough
universities are working
together.
And I think that's ridiculous
we've talked about this till I'm
blue in the face.
There's another thing I wanted
to ask is
When we're asking mark did you
look into how many New Mexico
students go into New Mexico
colleges I know you're provided
that chart to us last summer but
I want the committee to get a
copy of that chart I want to
know how many of the high school
students students in Albuquerque
New Mexico go to New Mexico
schools as an example or out of
Gallup or any of these towns I
mean that's what we're paying
for work pay for these
institutions to help educate
kids and we hope that there are
kids.
And and and other people that
are getting into higher ed.
Some other comments when it
comes to the budget I've got a
whole boatload of people that
have questions right now.
But it is a little amazing to me
also about the executive
recommendation.
This funding formula about zero
of absolutely no change.
And I I want to know a little
bit more about that too why is
there absolutely no change.
Madam chair Stephanie Rodriguez
here I do want to touch on a
couple things and then I'll
defer to my colleague it's cool
to talk about the executive
recommendation question that you
just touched on but I share your
frustration and it has been
quite for two years at the
agency with no discussion of
articulation and transfer and
that is why we have established
this new council that will work
on those very issues for meeting
with our presidents for meeting
of us the registar isn't
everyone to get in that room and
my colleague mark Rylance we let
also included in that committee
so that I can have your
perspective moving forward
because we do need to address
these my colleagues and I
recognize that as far as the
funding formula you have my
commitment to come to the table
and assist with that commitment
my colleagues so just keep that
in mind as well and Nicole are
you on the call can you address
the chairwoman question yes
thank you Stephanie madam chair
members of the committee as far
as the executive recommendation
for I. N. G. a provides
institutions of relief during
the COVID pandemic to ensure I
NG operations are sustained and
they aren't penalized by reading
the formula at this time thank
you madam chair members of the
committee.
Committee questions and I just
want you all to know that I'm
going to sit here and anybody on
the committee that wants to sit
with me past ten is welcome to
do that I know you're gonna have
pressure to run off to another
committee but you may just have
to set up to computers or user
I. phone or something I mean
this this system that we're
under now is not great as there
so there's quite a few questions
and I'm and I'm not done yet
either so I vice chairman has
given me the list of.
His hands I'm gonna vote we're
gonna start with
Representative hoc Hochman Vigil
Representative Dixon
Representative Anderson
Representative Trujillo and
Representative Chatfield for
right now so make sure after
you're done to meet your commute
your computer so go ahead and go
ahead Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you to all of those who
have given this presentation to
us a lot of information to
digest quickly I just have I'm
gonna give myself one question
madam chair and I'll stick
around after today and after
tend to ask for additional
questions I have but I just
wanted to ascertain Rodriguez
about her funded vacancy rate
I'm saying twenty seven point
five percent almost one point
three million dollars Secretary
Rodriguez can you give me more
information on that and talk to
me about maybe the funded they
can see savings of what you've
done with that money thank you.
Absolutely Madam chair
representative thank you so much
for that question you're right
that was our vacancy rate in the
summer however we lost a
secretary and a deputy which are
both highly paid positions and
we are working on changing the
organizational culture and
higher and to be more proactive
with regard to public concerns
over re organizing how we manage
this agency and we're actively
working to retain and
potentially recruit new folks we
were at that very large number
but I'm happy to report now that
our current vacancy rate is that
seven point five percent and
you'll see the executive
recommendation is seven percent
but do you have anything to add
to the vacancy rates at this
time.
yes madam chair representative I
would like to clarify that the
LFC reckon vacancy rate that he
stated was from November and so
currently for the department
there's about sixteen thousand
dollars currently available in
vacancy savings so they have
actively hired and there are
hold on excuse me currently
thirty eight positions felt for
the department and
there are some unfilled
positions about two for general
fund that are under funded and a
couple of vacancies within
federal funding so the the
department is actively trying to
fill the positions within the
the department thank you.
Thank you very much madam chair
and and thank you for that
answer madam secretary in an
agency agency yes Madam what I'd
like to reserve the remainder of
my questions but I want to give
my the rest my colleagues the
opportunity to ask there's so I
know it's frowned upon to ask
questions twice but I'm hoping
that we'll be overlooked today
thank you madam chair right
next.
Thank you madam chair and
presenters
I I lake Representative Hochman
Vigil do have a number of
questions but I anticipate some
of them will be answered of
asked by other folks so the one
question that I wanted to start
with was
I noticed that we have really
broadened the number of programs
that are institutions are
offering in terms of types of
degrees types of certificates
but I'm not seeing an increase.
In the graduation of more
students and so I was wondering
what's being done to make some
determinations about if that is
an effective use of funds and
how we're specifically measuring
that thank you very much.
Madam chair representative thank
you for the question I I will
say that one thing that we have
been seeing though and the data
is even though we are having
maybe less graduates we are
seeing more awards per capita
which means that people are
stacking degrees and
certificates so that they can
continue to move through there
are area of expertise and
potentially get those salary by
I will recognize that there's a
long way to go our agency has
hired a public information
officer and we plan on being
better about letting New
Mexicans know about what
financial aid opportunities are
available here in New Mexico how
to get them enrolled in school
and support them in that process
that's just step one there's a
long way to go but I did want to
make that data point about more
awards for capita in the state
of New Mexico at this time and I
also believe my colleague
president shepherd right and may
want to address that question as
well.
Thank you madam secretary of on
that notice of more violence
want to set awards have gone up
twenty two percent our data
suggest that our graduations of
actually increased overall but
as of madam secretary just noted
one has to be careful with the
data in the sense that we're
talking awards as opposed to
people actually getting degrees
I know at at a number of
institutions particularly
community colleges and and my
institution in northern others
what are sometimes happens as we
have the nontraditional student
who goes and gets the welding a
degree goes out and starts to
make eighty ninety hundred
thousand working for the money
working for the oil patch
whatever it might be in and of
course attracting that student
back to get the final bachelor's
degrees that is a is a little
challenging or or different in
many cases they may not want to
but we have seen an increase of
moving in a positive direction
actually in the graduation rates
can we do better absolutely
should we do better yes.
Thank you and and I guess part
of my question madam chair
and presenters is it the cost
efficiency of you know adding
additional programs
And I'm just wondering how we
measure it measure that thank
you.
Madam chair of Representative
one of the pieces at the to your
point I think there's another
piece to that question or at
least another piece that answer
and that is this adding new
programs or ending the
certificate should be responsive
to the market and so that in and
of itself is not a bad thing
would institutions I believe
need to be taking a look at is
what about existing programs or
programs that may no longer
apply higher education is run
out for adding stuff without
getting rid of things and that's
something I think that we need
to take a solid look at.
Thank you very much thank you
madam chair I have no other
questions right now thanks.
Okay next.
Thank you madam chair this week
of madam chair this morning I
just wanted to make a quick
quick statement and perhaps a
question but it goes like this
you know I think when we look at
higher ed New Mexico it's sort
of a glass half empty glass half
full and then a very wise New
Mexican suggested you know one
of the problems with New
Mexicans is we are often good it
glass half empty so this morning
in approaching higher at.
I'm looking at half full and I
say what you know what did I
hear what did I hear was.
We say that our high school
graduation rate is up in that is
certainly been a goal and it's
always good to see.
What are education goal.
The other when I heard this
morning was third lowest cost in
higher ed in America I think wow
that that's really good that
suggests of
The value value for New Mexicans
value for taxpayers it also
makes me think madam chair we
got to protect that we've got to
nurture that and we've got to be
ready for the challenges ahead
quickly I also hear about
declining enrollments that is a
question that I think is
unanswered I hear this morning
we're going to have a target of
ten percent enrollment growth.
In the higher ed.
In FY twenty two and I think
while.
That's a lot but they're the
experts on not but when we when
we address higher and I think of
okay what what we need to do to
protect nurture in push for even
greater success well obviously
it's more money.
With fewer students and that's
always a little bit of a of a of
a difficult issue to taxpayers
in and this provided for
so I want to simply make a quick
closing comment on what do I
think is wrong I'm not sure
madam chairman we're not getting
too many specific entities funds
scholarships created and there's
part of me that suggested that
perhaps this a good group of
university presidents and and
others can can address that I
look at of the lottery
scholarship Representative
Warren I had a bill this year to
put more money in law lottery
scholarships and I'm afraid it
it has failed.
There to my knowledge no one
else is trying to figure out how
to put more money in lottery
scholarships which is a very
successful and now longstanding
programs we have a new
scholarship opportunity
scholarships we all support that
what I'm hearing about more and
more general fund coming in to
support goes and I think with
the scholarship programs and
other findings must have over
hits there must be a more
efficient way to help New
Mexicans meet their school cost
higher ed costs.
In some consolidated way
I would also like to provide new
revenue sources but we tried
this year and failed we'll see
where that goes in a couple of
years but my only point madam
chairman I think of.
excellent presentation this
morning and I look forward to
the rest of the presentations
today but remain a little bit
concerned that we're starting to
many tuition student support
higher end programs and we're
not we're slipping down and so
lottery scholarship takes more
general fund to meet a minimum
standard we're not talking about
where we started we talk about
where we got to I'm afraid we
may be making the same mistake
on opportunity so madam chairman
that concludes my remarks this
morning I I appreciate the
excellent the report this
morning and the work done by all
the participants if anybody has
a COVID I welcome it when I am
done.
All right thank you
Representative Anderson I think
I'm gonna go ahead and move on
here Representative Trujillo.
Yes good morning everyone I'm
glad that I'm able to be here
this morning because I have a
meeting right after this my
concern is I think everybody
that has asked questions has
raids were relevant of points my
concern is is the issue of.
The funding that should go to
programs that generate revenue
in higher ed institutions and
one of the things that I've
struggled with the is you know
as a classroom teacher you're
clearly as a bilingual classroom
teacher for the.
Most of my life one of the
things that we lacked were
certified bilingual educators
and now people are really
starting to move into that arena
because of the Yazzie Martinez
lawsuit and what's happened is
that instead of of moving that
forward in colleges of education
or in ethnic studies it seems to
me that certain colleges are not
celebrating.
That diversity and including
Supports financial supports
first for programs that are
really really
Looking toward educating us
students in that arena and I
want to I've several of us in
the legislature have been
talking about the issue of
concern that ethnic studies.
A programs and the programs that
involve multi culturalism Isshin
are not being given
consideration and the folks that
are
That are asking for those
supports tend to be.
diminished in some way and what
I would like to do is make sure
that you are all aware that we
have to fill teacher slots with
people that understand their
culture people that that they
don't have to be and this big
bike minority but they do have
to be people that understand
there are that communities in
the state of New Mexico ethnic
studies is critical in the state
of New Mexico and I I feel
really strongly as some of my
colleagues do that they're not
being given
the attention or the funding
that they deserve
I'm hoping that all of you our
understanding what's going on
and that to you you can't.
You can't pick and choose
sometimes whom you're what's
your favorite programs are going
to be especially if the program
is generating lots of funding so
I I would ask for input if there
is someone available to give me
supports and I guess I am I want
to be clear that I am really
referring you and them at this
time madam chair.
I
think I might Representative
Trujillo one of the issues that
was discussed between myself and
the house education chairman was
adding higher read into the el
ESC hearings which I I never
understood why that hasn't
happened in the past but there's
a big disconnect there because
higher incomes in front of us.
By the bill of state but never
from the Education Committee so
I'm hoping that some of that may
be.
shared your concerns I mean we
hear it from the Education
Committee but those are the
issues that come forth by higher
at I mean when you look at what
they're recommending for their
own school sometimes there's a
disconnect so I'm I'm hoping
that there's going to be more
coordination with the education
people this summer.
Madam chair this is current
Stokes I'd be happy to make a
comment in response go ahead
make a quick comment please I'm
very quickly Representative he
I'm more than happy to look more
carefully at this you know to
see what exactly we are doing
but I do want to mention that we
have worked really hard I think
we have great respect and and
and C. as really crucial are are
ethnic centers and and we have
tried to protect them from the
major cuts that pretty much
cross the board in in.
In academic affairs but I look
at that more carefully and happy
to get you more information and
very very much appreciate what
you have set and and believe in
the importance of the issues
that you've raised.
Thank you madam chair and I just
want to make sure that those
considerations are included in
the priority list at the
university's center us.
Okay thank you representative.
Now the representative
Chatfield.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair as I look down to this
budget I see some things that
are of vital importance to us in
the rural areas of the Ag
experiment station the
cooperative extension service
and the funding for our
grievance with art with the with
schools
for years we have not been able
to get a child into vet school
in Colorado hardly at all I mean
there was just so few openings
that we finally came up with an
agreement to with the in school
in Lubbock that would allow us
to send a child there and
If you we took if we took to the
executive recommendation there
would be zero funding for that
also the experiment station
without they're all over the
state we have one into comparing
where we do the pull test in the
cooperative extension service
they are the people that do the
research and and
not only do they do the research
but they reach out to our
farmers and ranchers and help us
know what to do what what the if
there's a disease that we're we
don't know how to deal with if
there's we that is command it's
killing our cattle or invading
our crops we turn to them to
help our industry know what to
do are there maybe maybe you're
saying in our in our communities
and it looks like there are set
to take a hit I I I know we ask
for everybody for a reduction
when we went into this budget it
seems like we have a little bit
more money if we could do
something to help those guys it
would be much appreciated.
Representative Chatfield all
right to the it is all right
let's go to representative
Armstrong.
Thank you madam chair I was
going to wait but since you
called on me I I'm going to ask
about
it looks like you know four or
New Mexico tech just in general
that
The bureau of.
Bureau of and geology and the
bureau of mine safety are a
little they're housed in New
Mexico tech but they're more of
a statewide agency and so I'm
curious
madam chair and and
representatives that.
Why would they seems like they
take a little bit bigger hit and
and our sort of treated like an
R. P. SP instead of a state
agency can maybe more can answer
that.
Madam chair very quickly
we have both the DFA and the LFC
treated those entities this
similarly we applied the three
percent reduction from LFC and
three point two percent
reduction from defect so so we
treat them just like the are
PSP's to your point.
Okay I just want to know that
you know I'm I'm it's a it's the
state the whole state benefits
from these two and they're
they're getting cut the three
percent where there's other
agencies that are similar that
are only getting a one and a
half percent cut and so I'm I'm
just curious about that just
wanted to bring that to
everyone's attention thank you
madam chair and I will stay on
later.
All right thank you I was gonna
representative Garcia.
Thank you madam chair of.
And the presenters Mike insurers
are on page twelve and madam
chair brought up earlier on on
the couch if you look at the
percentages of.
Yes are you a state or city
requests The New Mexico Gallup
got the hardest hit we're I
think that there are four
hardest hit in the cards and
considering we were the most it
would comment on now.
The state of New Mexico one is
the pandemic happened that you
want to make a record.
We really need to adjust sees
hit that people are taking
because this is not a fair
judgment of what I need to this
is part of our progress state I
mean and up Madam judge want to
make that a record we need to
really adjust used prices
they're getting hit.
Thank you madam chair.
Right next as Representative
Herrera.
Thank you so much madam chair I
guess my question down is I know
we increased funding for dual
enrollment last year I
specifically remember doing that
and I guess I don't know what
what is the gap that people are
talking about in dual enrollment
for universities I don't know
who could answer that question
for me but it was one of the
major points.
Our.
yes ma'am madam chair of I'm I'm
afraid I don't have a great
answer for you I what I would
suggest is that I circle back
and provide you some more
detailed information it's hard
to measure the impact of dual
credit cost at the institutions
because in theory one dual
credit was created for
concurrent enrollment on in
campuses slops those seats were
to go to they were supposed to
be suits or education that was
already being conducted for
institutions and what we've seen
as some of the two year
institutions is there tremendous
drops in enrollments have been
replaced with enrollment from
bill credit students so it's
really hard to get an apples to
apples comparison for you but if
if if if if you allow me I'd
like to circle back with you and
give you some more detailed
information.
I thank you madam chair.
Madam chair I might be able to
add a little bit to this is
Becky rally okay great sure part
part of the issue is you know
sometimes we especially to your
schools will create whole
sections that are taught by our
instructors that are dual credit
classes so in that case we have
a full instructional costs and
there's no one paying tuition
and the reimbursement for that
is a fraction of our it's based
upon a fraction of our tuition
or per our percentage of our
tuition so when we offer and
those are very high quality
classes generally speaking but
they're also very expensive to
offer.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Herrera.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair I I agree with your
observations on page thirteen
the rural and in the Rio Grande
corridor Madam in the funding
and the cuts I completely agree
with your observation my
question is regarding your
credits also I find that are
worksheets that we have about
two hundred and fifty thousand
roughly for the tribal colleges
but I could not find it in here
for the other colleges as I
understand it the bill credit
funding now is going through PED
we have not seen those are
different sheets yet can
someone.
Tell me about how the process
works.
on dual credit.
In my community it's it's
It's an outstanding program in
and I want to make sure that
it's something I look into and
and solid asked Mr males went to
help me understand where the
funding for dual credit is in
this budget.
Mark madam chair I just
presented a sheet for you.
the state the state government
does not appropriate to tribal
colleges and so because of that
we flow the funding for any
tribal entities and programs
through the higher education
department so the department can
engage in a contractual
relation arrangement with the
with those institutions specific
to dual credit for tribal
colleges online ten of the
spreadsheet you'll see that
there's an item there that shows
the LFC recommendation was two
hundred forty thousand points
and seven hundred dollars and
the executive recommendation is
two hundred sixty three thousand
nine hundred dollars so that
that is works is funded and how
it's funded.
Thank you madam chair mark I I
understood that that's the
number I said roughly two
hundred fifty thousand but I
don't see it for the remainder
of the college where is the bill
credit funding for the remainder
of of our colleges in the state
of New Mexico does it all flow
through a PED and we will see
that when we review their
budgets.
Madam chair and representative
through the funding formula for
higher ed there's a portion that
is a this it's included for dual
credit that's that's where
you'll see those numbers PED
well and I don't I don't have
that spreadsheet to show you
right now
PED only funds dual credit
instructional materials so as a
as a doctor probably mentioned
earlier I stepped you don't pay
tuition or fees are keeping
tuition for dual credit courses
the PED will pay for their
instructional materials out of
their budget.
Okay ended thank you madam chair
thank you mark I'd like for you
give me a call when we're done
and let's talk a little more I
wanna make sure I fully
understand the funding for dual
credit in the state of New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you Representative Crowder
now the representative Allison.
Thank you madam chair I'm gonna
be back on to the.
My neighbor Representative
Crowder I have the same question
on dual credit when we first
started the presentation one of
the first slides that caught my
eye was when mark showed the
well as the slide from page
forty of volume one we're talked
about dual credit and the.
Throughout the presentation is
been mentioned several times
that we will fully fund dual
credit and then on this one page
twelve that more just recently
referred to of the tribal
college dual credit two hundred
sixty three was the executive
recommendation and then the LFC
is twenty three twenty three
thousand dollars less I think it
was during the
the special session where we had
the same scenario where we had I
believe it was eighty eight
thousand that was cut and that
was restored for us it sounds
like we're.
Are going through the same
scenario of get another cut
I'm just curious as to why the
reason for the cut and what do
we need to do to get restored to
the executive recommendation
because we said several times we
need to fully fund dual credit
thank you madam chair.
Already thank you Representative
Allison and that's what's
interesting about this is that
because these are complicated
budgets there's bits and pieces
in categories that make sense in
one recommendation and possibly
not in the other.
So that's why I've written out
on that one.
Representative Sweetser.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you everyone
maybe because it's Saturday
morning and I don't know I'm
just kind of trying to get a
higher level view of what's
honestly happening and and that
charts that we were looking at
on forty two forty three of
valium one have really stymied
me you know that the higher ed
academic programs hours verses
our neighboring states we have
so many more
we we had comments on on our our
affordability of our college
education and and our strong
state support I think we get
more in lottery other than
Alaska and Wyoming and yet we
have declining enrollment over
and over I guess I guess I'm
frustrated on that that chart
that shows how many
Unique courses each university
has that madam chair referenced
earlier and then the next page
with our academic programs I
guess I feel like.
Dual dual credit was supposed to
be a great enrollment tool so
that students were already
getting college credit before
they graduate high school
therefore they would want to
keep going to the university
they were getting credit that
doesn't seem to be materializing
to the level that we thought it
would and and all of the trans
just just are frustrating for me
state appropriations tuition and
fees way up enrollment down I
guess I'm just looking for a
little bit more intentional
strategy from higher ed and and
I and I don't know that anyone
can answer this.
What we're getting from I think
we really see something that.
Are getting low credit
enrollment credits still
choosing to go out of state for
higher ed and and I don't know
they want to answer that but the
trends are not not looking good
for us madam chair.
Yeah we're gonna call the
cabinet secretary to respond to
that I want to remind everybody
please keep your computer
submitted.
Madam chair representative sweet
thank you for the question and I
hear you I mean I started late
this summer but we're doing
multiple things to address this
had on because quite frankly
it's been stagnant and there's
been zero communication with you
the legislature and our agency
to improve higher education and
our agency and how we can better
support New Mexicans so we have
our data advisory group we have
our strategic planning group
which is but you have been
asking us to do and you have the
academic advisory group.
Want to be very cognizant of
that.
Geographic neighbors doesn't
necessarily make us here.
New Mexico is addressing higher
education in a very different
way and we have to because we
represent a completely
demographics and some of our
neighboring.
Is that excuse no I'm telling
you I'm willing to tackle that
and figure out how are we
different and how can you.
And then the other thing I want
to say is you mentioned
financial aid financial aid is a
little frustrating particularly
state aid because it targets a
very specific demographic New
Mexicans and that is a recent
graduate learner we are trying
to enforce the opportunity
scholarship and really start to
look at our financial aid
programs to look at different
New Mexicans the non traditional
New Mexicans Ingle parent the
students who are working part
time or full time and want to
get that answer to getting
credential but also have to take
care of their family we're
thinking of those nontraditional
students so I really urge you
all to work with me I'm thinking
of how do we improve our
financial aid structure to be
more inclusive all encompassing
of New Mexicans so that we can
get that enrollment and stop
looking at one demographic of
students to do that that's not
the answer the answer is look at
all of New Mexico to do that.
And madam chair and and madam
secretary I appreciate that but
I I hope we don't do that at the
expense of looking at that one
demographic because when you
look at core groups that are
most likely to achieve
graduation they are often those
recent college graduates who are
very goal oriented and getting
in the work force and you're
returning students often have a
period of the goal that extends
over years maybe decades until
they're finally able to achieve
that goal so I I hear what
you're saying I think it's very
important I have taught that
nontraditional core group for
years and dimming for WNMU
Deming but I also do not want
you to to lift lose sight of the
fact that our recent college
graduates are are highly
targeted people that we'd like
to keep in state and not have
them go out of state because
they feel like they're being
diminished I guess I guess
that's my frustration at this
point madam chair.
All right thank you
Representative Sweetser star
Representative small thank you
very much madam chair thank you
madam secretary
I guess one just to pick up on
Representative Sweetser is
questions
Madam chair madam secretary and
and and maybe LESC I know Mr
balance well put in the chat
that LFC is recommended some
predictive analytics software
maybe that will apply in some of
these areas but it's a great
point that are are soon to be
your recent high school
graduates engaging in dual
credit that's a very.
Clear market that we should be
competing in
and how that goes does tell a
significant story I would agree
completely Madam chair of madam
secretary and LFC I think
generally at a high level it
seems like that this funding
formula some of the main
outcomes and I've written down
kind of both minimizing and
standardizing the general
education classes enhancing
collaboration
it doesn't seem like it's move
the needle necessarily in those
areas is that fair Mr balance
with the madam chair.
Madam chair and and
Representative small
that's right the of funding
formula incentivizes completion
and and so as the chair had
mentioned earlier you know the
LFC was had planned this for
interim to look at the funding
formula and comment and the
impact of the special session
kind of gotten away so you're
absolutely right the chairwoman
is absolutely right that it's
time to dig into the formula I
will work with you know restate
for the committee and
particularly for new members of
the LFC did a pretty extensive
evaluation of that funding
formula and talking about these
market share issues between the
large institutions and the small
the urban versus the role and
and several other items like
that so I I know that's not
exactly the question but but I
hope I hope I was helpful to
you.
Thank you very much chair thank
you Mr balance with the it is
helpful it is very good to look
forward to that and it's it'll
be nice to revisit some of that
foundational work that you just
noted secondly madam chair
Mister Valenzuela in a number of
these areas that we've talked
about including the increase and
certificates but the decrease in
either in in either associates
and especially bachelors in
those equivalent degrees and the
uncertainty and whether those
certificates translate into a
stacking program that the
secretary mentioned to get to
those completions how they
translate or do not into either
career or financial improvement.
Is there anything on the horizon
or is there anything in this
budget that will give us
More ability to understand those
quantitative analyses
And I'm specifically again was
just noting what you put in the
chat this predictive analytics
software that you mentioned but
those areas of depth of
understanding and of course from
Cup and others
it just a key area for us to
understand thank you madam chair
thank you.
All right thank you
representative small
Questions that I had I have some
other questions I want to ask
but before we get into into that
I know some of you got a
committee meeting that starts in
ten minutes maybe you can go
ahead log in on that one and
maybe have two different
computers or iPhones going to
say to stay as part of that.
But before we go back into
questions I'd also ask for a
very high level overview of the
athletics budget because I have
been very concerned about having
our.
Higher ed institutions have
their teams outside of the
state.
I want to know who's paying for
that out I want to know if this
is a work around the health
order I I I'm concerned about
that and I wonder said want to
understand how that affects the
budget we don't have a full
schedule but yet we've got a
full cadre of staff so market
you do we have anybody that's
going to talk about that just
briefly.
Madam chair we do we have both
the athletic directors from the
university of New Mexico and New
Mexico State University on the
line so if if if it's your
pleasure can we have a UNM's
director speak first I share.
We have just a few minutes to
this space but it was important
enough for me to bring to the
whole committee.
Thank you madam chair thank you
as well as well this is at any
as
I we we submitted not apologize
I can put it up here if need be
but we submitted a memo to the
groups that had a little bit of
the breakdown of some of the
questions that you had asked
some of the major questions and
I guess the memo what we did is
try to summarize
the cost of current per current
budget as well as our twenty
twenty as well as the three
sports as that were relocated.
to start off I think the first
the three sports a we're talking
about men's men's basketball
football and women's basketball
all three of those sports as
we're discussing were relocated
primarily because of the
opportunity for us to be able to
generate the revenue necessary
to be able to be part of the
bound west TV distribution as
part of that we we made a
commitment rule eight early as
what this process to make sure
that if we're gonna go down this
road we had to make sure we're
doing in a healthy safe
environment that we can move
relocate our teams to a location
that we can continue to do
everything that was being asked
of us to the health order make
sure that we're doing the three
PCR test everything that was
necessary.
With that relocation some of
things that need to be discussed
is that those if we didn't
participate in those three
sports because of television
contracts as well as a football
bowl games distribution the
college football playoff all
those different entities that do
play a big part of our
distribution with incomes the
mount west we would have been
able to obtain that that revenue
so when is also not done those
numbers are in there we've spent
about six hundred thousand in
football
but roughly give or take within
basketball things one hundred of
one hundred thousand that we're
and that's still we're still
working on that as they're still
competing but every at the end
of the day once we get
everything back from the
conference are estimates will be
it will actually generate two
million dollars more for the
department after all expenses of
course
we would love to of been able to
get more than that and be able
to have home games but because
of the cut because of COVID and
other challenges that were in
front of us unfortunate was
impossible so
out that's that's a high level
coverage I think it's some of
the major questions you ask will
be happy to answer any questions
in particular echoing more to
budget if need be.
Okay Mexico state.
Yes madam chair Lundstrom and
members of the committee thanks
for allowing me to speak today
I'm more emotion.
Mexico state director of
athletics I will take you
through the entire thought
process that I had out here but
we did revert locate.
Our men's and women's basketball
programs it on October
fourteenth the NCAA allowed
men's and women's basketball
programs run the country to
begin practice and prepare for
the upcoming seasons at that
time the New Mexico department
health order did not allow our
teams to conduct full practices
only allowing for players on the
court at one time and us and and
you remember the only teams in
the country not allowed to
practice or play one of the
reasons behind our fault process
was that up with the NC's
deregulation of our transfer
rules we're Senators jeopardy of
lost of several student athletes
to transfer as well as coaches
and being and they'll
immediately eligible at other
institutions and I believe that
would have set our program back
significantly much like what
eighty said
in addition to that we've lost
out on revenues from the western
athletic conference as well as
the NCAA if we were the only
team in our conference not
participating and finally we
have a seven figure annual
contract with the multimedia
rights partner Learfield of
which are guarantee payment is
based on televising games having
them on the radio signage for
corporate sponsors partners X.
cetera so that would have all
been in jeopardy so after we did
transition to up to Phoenix the
estimated expenses incurred for
this relocation for men's
women's basketball was
approximately two hundred forty
five thousand dollars on
November twenty third are
department launched the donate
for state program designed to
seek private funding for this
endeavor and not expose the
state of New Mexico to any
additional costs to date the
donate for state programs
generated a hundred and fifty
eight thousand seven hundred and
twelve dollars as of this
morning.
In addition that's the campaign
has a pool of eighty five
thousand dollars in unclaimed
season ticket money to solicit
as well as the tire the the
entire general alumni base via
an email solicitation so I'm
confident that the total cost
will be covered one hundred
percent by the donate for state
program and fund raise
discretionary dollars with no
state or taxpayer funding
utilized and I'd certainly stand
for any questions.
Thank you for the opportunity
thank you both for the
presentation
I did say presentations
presentations provided by both
of you and mark I think you have
that can you make sure the whole
committee gets a copy of that.
Well yes Sir or yes K. backs.
Yes ma'am also not okay I can
get into a lot of detail right
now because we still have some
special schools and some other
things so what I'm gonna do is
I'm going to go back around I
noticed that Kevin sharp houses
is hand up I'm gonna call on him
and then I'm gonna go back to
the members for some quick
questions seven thank you madam
chairman excuse me that's our I
thank you madam chair I just
want to clarify New Mexico
junior colleges status on
athletics are athletics teams
have not participated in a
single practice screen major
competition since this pandemic
started in state or out of state
the teams who lost seasons this
school year remains and women's
rodeo golf baseball volleyball
men's basketball women's
basketball and cross country.
Three reasons that we did not
participate is we had to observe
the governor's health orders
number two New Mexico junior
college could not afford to
relocate teams out of state we
need those resources to educate
our students and number three we
were concerned about equity in
title nine if some teams were
allowed to relocate and some
teams were not.
About a hundred and fifty our
athletes transferred in January
two other institutions in states
where they could compete this
season therefore therefore
residence hall occupancy is
approximately thirty percent of
full capacity.
The loss of students is a
financial blow New Mexico junior
college and this year we lost
momentum with the most
successful collegiate athletic
program in the state of the met
state of New Mexico I thank you
for your time today and I thank
you for listening.
Appreciate that update to the hi
I appreciate you doctor sharp
jumping on here
Want to ask you one quick
question also that the doctor
more the concept of our R.
collaborative down there in the
southeast corner have built
COVID.
Well that bill is made it
through Senate education and and
progressing right along and that
is a bill that seven of us
joined in to create a model for
transferring courses from
community colleges to eastern
New Mexico university import
talus which is a strong partner
and we're glad that to have them
on board one of the things that
we're trying to do is trying to
stem that tide and students that
leaves the state and goes out of
state to complete their
bachelor's degree we help this
pilot will get passed through
will have the opportunity to to
get those get that pilot going
and ensure that around the state
as we as we go.
An issue that.
All righty thank you very much.
I'm gonna allow for one more
quick round about two people
that have some additional
questions but I want to be quick
because we have more on the
agenda Representative Hochman
Vigil and Representative Herrera
and and remember members you can
always made offline with the
analysts.
Thank you very much madam chair
I just have one quick question I
guess would be for the US
secretary Rodriguez regarding
opportunity scholarships as are
these money's going to.
Right call are these money's
going to new enrollees or is it
being used to supplement funding
for people that are already in
school.
It will go into new enrollees
however I do have a technical
expert on the line who can
answer the question if to your
op and lottery scholarship
recipients in their second year
added to your program would be
eligible.
Okay I'm.
All.
Thank you madam chair
representative for the question
I guess this would be able to
supplement for to your program
students enrolled into your
programs if they were or were
not receiving the lottery
scholarship the opportunity
scholarship would be able to
bridge the gap to tuition and
fees.
Thank thank you.
Thank you very much Madam thank
you for that answer and US
secretary Rodriguez I noticed in
some of the reports I've read
about the opportunity
scholarship concerns that have
been raised about how it can be
used to supplement our in lieu
of other grants or funding
monies that would be available
at the schools themselves it is
that is the case have you
considered adding additional
language two The appropriation
to prevent that from happening.
Now I am trying really Madam
chair representative Hochman
Vigil I'm trying to understand
your question and I think we're
in good getting at is the
opportunity scholarship by state
aid and then supplements with
the actual opportunity
scholarship federal aid other
aid that is not state aid can be
applied for the cost of
attendance for colleges and
universities so this lottery
opportunity scholarship actually
will supplement and help
students have a right up in
their academic endeavors and
higher education.
Thank you madam chair secretary
Rodriguez so your answer is that
these funds are not being used
in place of other grant funding
that would be available locally
at school at the schools.
What what I guess I'm trying to
say is the grant an
institutional eight would be
applied after opportunity
scholarships so that they could
get more for their back.
Okay so I I think the answer to
my question madam chair of and
secretary because this is
potentially maybe just I also
have just one last question
madam chair
secretary Rodriguez I through
some of the other materials I
went there I noticed a three
million dollar increase in our
PSP funding and the last three
years and so just wondering if
anybody at your office is
monitoring those programs and if
you're doing any sort of a
valuation on to make sure that
they're you know they're working
they're doing the job that they
have been funded to do.
We do monitor our PS PS as far
as the processes for evaluating
our PSUs usually do that hand in
hand with the LFC who also does
monitoring of programs dependent
on a legislator an individual or
the governor asked us to
evaluate a program or look into
a program to see if it's worth
what it is producing so we will
follow up with any entity that
you ask us to to make sure that
the data and everything for lax
what you're actually providing
to those institutions.
Okay thank you very much I have
a few more questions offline
that'll bring to secretary thank
you for your answers thanks
madam chair thank.
Madam chair this is mark and I
think respond very quickly to
this very quickly yes ma'am so
there is evidence that
representative that the
opportunity scholarship is
crowding out some of the
institutional funds in
particular the bridge
scholarship institutions have
and then the second point is on
student fees we've seen
institutions apply the
opportunity scholarship to
course specific fees that are
well in advance of the total
tuition and fee cost
and so the LFC recommendation is
not which that would restrict
the opportunity scholarship to
general student fees that are
paid by all students at that
institution not of course
specific fee specific to one
individual thank you.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you just around relevant
answer.
All right we're gonna go to
Representative Herrera and then
representative Armstrong and
then we're going to cut this off
so go ahead.
Thank you madam chair this
question is to the athletic
departments at UNM and NMSU I'm
just curious what your
graduation rate for student
athletes is and four year period
and I guess my second question
is to provide health insurance
if athletes if your student
athletes get hurt and hurt badly
within the course of the
athletic season you find them
health insurance to cover those
long term costs thank you madam
chair.
Matt this is adding more madam
chair.
represent their this absolutely
we are graduation rate the first
thing you asked was needs right
now it's eighty per eighty
percent we've been actualized
three semesters here have had
actually the highest GPA ever
and athletic department history
we finish this this past with
the three point three five
source student athletes are
really doing to unbelievable job
excelling academically the other
part that you asked about was
the insurance all our student
athletes are insurance if
anything if they do they're
insured as everybody have to be
student as when they come in
here so they don't have
insurance we also assist them in
any way possible so whatever
they're not covered we would
cover for them if there's any
injuries any health related
issues as long as our student
athlete at the university Mexico
we we do help women everywhere
we can't.
And I'll pass it on to market
madam chair woman
Yes thank you.
Madam chair Representative
Herrera eighty four percent of
our students scholarships
student athlete graduated last
year so we're ready our fall
cumulative GPA was three point
three seven so we're doing very
well academically certainly in
comparison to the general
student we're not in competition
with them but to measure
ourselves on the question of
insurance somewhere AT yes all
of our student athletes have
your primary insurance we have
their secondary so any medical
needs is a hundred percent
covered from a insurance
standpoint surgeries doctors
visits successor.
Madam chair and panelists I know
their health insurance is
covered whether student athletes
if there are long term
ramifications and they have to
drop out of school because of
injuries do you cover them after
that.
You madam chair Representative
Herrera sorry no wonder.
Yeah currently the NCAA is
discussing long term
potential
coverage after competition it is
not required by us we haven't
seen it a whole lot of quite
frankly more of the assistance
with student athletes is if they
leave and don't graduate and
want to come back later we have
the ability to help them
academically with aid to get
them graduated but not as much
from a health if you broke your
leg a decade ago and came back
you know we we necessarily would
not cover that.
And from the university Mexico
perspective if there are and I
in Santa Fe New Mexico state if
they're hard and they're not
competing but they're still
student athlete and they're
still register student they
would they would still fall
under the insurance and then the
same thing to a more just said
that to double is looking into
this and actually putting some
some opportunities for the
future to really make it a
little more cumbersome after the
graduate if they're still health
related issues concern.
Thank you madam chair.
All right our final member
representative Armstrong thank
you madam chair I'll just be
really really brief I just
wanted to make sure that and
everyone knows that at New
Mexico tech in the bureau of
geology and mining mineral
resources are they leverage
several hundred thousand dollars
from the federal money and they
depend on our our funding from
the state to be able to leverage
those federal funds so I just I
have a list I'm not going to
read it off but it's it's over a
million dollars easily that they
leverage so but will a lot of it
is one to one match so thank you
madam chair.
Right I want to thank the
committee I thought this is a
very good hearing and of course
for just touching up the tip of
the iceberg here there's a
tremendous amount of information
is provided by the LFC and the
DFA staff and the cabinet
secretary plus each one of the
institutions
and these hearings just due to
time constraints where we're
cutting them down but I'm gonna
ask for a motion from
Representative small on this to
include we look at page
thirteen.
The LFC rack under numbers I
don't want to add more money
what I wanted to do is we
calculate those so those those
schools are held harmless I just
don't understand how we're
measuring performance in a
situation that we're faced with
now with with COVID and then I
will look at New Mexico tech
under catch up clean up and that
program that Chattfield was
talking about we'll look at that
and catch of clean up if there's
an issue Representative small.
All thank you very
recommendation with your for the
stove cleaning calculating
right distribution to usher
there are just cool not.
Miss.
With the R. fifty were okay
that.
Okay I'm not sure I heard
Representative small.
Let me try again I apologize
madam chair madam chair I would
move the LFC recommendation with
approve the so that we
recalculate the redistribution
under the formula to ensure that
schools are held harmless and
that the R. P. S. fees are
worked on and catch a clean up
specifically for New Mexico tech
and for an MBA and aces.
Yeah I'm not interested in all
of our PS pays so I want to make
sure that everybody understands
that those are the two will look
at we're gonna hold those
schools harmless and then go
with the LFC is our second to
this motion thank you madam
chair okay we have a motion and
a second and is there any
opposition to this motion.
All right again I want to thank
everybody and we need to quickly
roll through the special schools
I don't want to lose the
committee yet because we need to
make motions and get things
through so mark your.
Yes ma'am let me me again pull
up of the spreadsheet.
Madam chair the special schools
are are
Relatively simple I don't want I
don't want to say the policy
issues are simple the the
funding is simple relatively so
give me two seconds and I'll get
you there.
Okay so what you see before you
are the recommendations for the
New Mexico military institute
school for the blind and
visually impaired in Alamogordo
and The New Mexico school for
the deaf here in Santa Fe
And so the only difference that
you can see on the I. N. G.
portion is that the New Mexico
military institute where the LFC
is slightly higher.
and with am I and also out there
madam chair you can see those
numbers and all this either
answer questions for your are
allow the the superintendent of
the schools to suggest what
their what their support for a
recommendation would be okay
Jerry we're going to let you see
your work and then we'll go to
the others quickly so go ahead
please.
Thank you madam chair what we
support the LFC is
recommendation we appreciate the
support as always we get from
the legislature I'd like to add
what president sharpened in New
Jersey she said about athletics
about could ma'am we have not
moved or relocated outside the
state we have worked I would say
with in the health order not
around the health order it's
been a challenge all of our
games are in the state of Texas
and actually not that far from
Rossell so we've been able to
leave play our game and return
we've actually acquired our own
quick test the PRC test so a PCR
test so that we can conduct the
the tests that are required for
the health order and keep our
athletes safe when they leave
and then safe when they return
so we're playing our sports
right now volleyball basketball
and baseball and our football
doesn't start till later in the
semester it will be the biggest
challenge simply because of the
number of athletes but we'll be
playing our games again very
close Cisco textures most of
those will be no further than
Dallas are quote unquote home
games we've arranged to play
those in Seminole Texas just
south of brownfield and so we
are able to maintain the the
sports on behalf of our athletes
but work within the confines of
the health order and madam chair
again thank you very much for
the opportunity to quickly speak
we appreciate the support and we
would recommend the LFC proposal
for NMM live.
All righty thank you very much
is there any questions.
For the New Mexico military
institute by any the committee
members.
Representative Anderson.
Representative yeah go ahead
thank you madam chairman I'll
just be real quick I I just want
to.
Salute the New Mexico military
institute for the job they've
done during this COVID crisis I
think it's perhaps the only one
that we got a report in an
earlier committee on how they
handle this in the Spanish flu
basically a hundred years ago
and it's good to see the
leadership at New Mexico
military institute delivering
education face to face with
these young cadets who are.
In a very COVID
Our careful manner that has
resulted in outstanding
results on controlling the virus
madam chairman that is my
question thank you have a good
day.
All right Representative itself
for the motion.
Madam chair thank you very much
I do move.
That the committee accept the
recommendations from the people
that just spoke is that the
proper motion right there madam
chair are you a member of the
LESC many of the LFC met madam
chair okay we have a motion and
do we have a second
representative small that get.
And we have a lot.
For saying there's no opposition
to that motion it has been
approved at the LESC level let's
move on now to the New Mexico
school for the blind and
visually impaired.
Mark you want to make a couple
comments.
No madam chair I I would just
invite Patricia Beecher she's on
the call if you want to express
our recommendation or her
preference for recommendation
already Patricia.
Good morning madam chair good
morning members of the committee
I want to thank you for your
support
and remind you that the New
Mexico school for the blind and
visually impaired not only has
two schools with students
attending but we also serve
students who are blind and
visually impaired throughout the
state in a variety of ways
we appreciate the partnership
that we have with the state and
the state support and we would
recommend the higher executive
budget for the school for the
blind thank you all right thank
you very much do we have any
questions from the committee for
the New Mexico school for the
blind and visually impaired.
You know mark I can't see what
the general what that amount is
we've got these I've got all the
people on line they are grid
system here I mean look at it if
you don't mind.
Communicated to you it is madam
chair it is the executive is
approximately fourteen thousand
higher total than the LFC.
Okay let's go to the committee
representative small.
Madam chair I move the
executive.
All right we have a motion for
the executive do we have a
second.
Madam chair I second okay we
have a motion and a second is
there any opposition for that
motion.
I don't see any opposition so
the executive recommendation
will stand thank you.
To the next one.
Which is the New Mexico school
for the deaf.
Madam chair we have our doctor
rose merry good Gaydos online.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee you're
aware of our extensive services
and partnerships across the
state but I would stand ready
for any questions about that we
are requesting the executive
budget this year and we are
grateful for your support thank
you.
All right do we have any
questions from the committee on
this budget.
Okay we have Representative
Anderson go ahead.
Madam chairman I was actually
prepared to make a motion.
Okay we'll call on you for the
motion Representative Anderson
but we did have a question is
that you representative career
that had a question about is
like your hand up.
Yes madam chair I I do have a
question I'm.
I'm curious how many how many
deaf and hard of hearing
students do we have throughout
the state.
Thank you for the question madam
chair and representative that I
we have we serve across the
the number of students in our
continue of of our services
across the state that would
include our offices in Santa Fe
Albuquerque the schools in
army and and Oscars so this and
Albuquerque and then our
consultation services schools
and all our services that we
provide statewide.
I guess madam chair and and Dr
I'm just curious are the are the
numbers the same for the blind
your your budget is so much
larger than our schools for the
blind and visually handicapped I
just wanted to know are those
numbers a lot smaller or seven
hundred versus two hundred I'm
just trying to figure that out.
If I could care Representative
that are members of the
committee eat how we count
students may deferral it between
the school for the deaf missiles
of wind and.
It would be to have to a request
that there are services that we
provide that we don't count for
instance we provide hearing
screening last year we provided
I think about housing students
and we don't count that in these
numbers we only count both.
directly getting getting a
direct services from us or
direct consultation services so
there are children and services
that we provide in our tree that
we don't we don't count I'm not
sure we could compare those.
At the apple store just.
Thank you will be my job to
follow up on thank you thank you
madam chair thank you all right
let's go back to Representative
Anderson for the motion.
Thank you madam chairman I move
LFC.
Okay we have a motion for the
LFC we have a second so.
A second motion under okay we
have a motion and a second is
our opposition to that motion.
All right I don't see anything
thank you very much that the
motion will stand.
There's one other issue that I
had for what we kind of rush
through here and that is the
actual department the higher it
Department
I want to go back to that mark I
know that we talked about it
pretty.
Pretty high level but we didn't
take any action on it.
I'm gonna I'm gonna move you to
that right away okay at.
What you're seeing here I'm
hopeful that you can see this
you're saying the
The high level view of the
department the key difference
here is the opportunity
scholarship recommendation so
the executive isn't recommending
fifty eight million four hundred
nineteen thousand dollars and
seven hundred and seven hundred
dollars for their total
department which includes twenty
six million for the opportunity
scholarship the LFC recommends
thirty eight million one hundred
twelve seven hundred dollars and
five hundred dollars for the
opportunity scholarship
I will take you to the detail.
And the spreadsheet that details
about the specific line items by
the program for that Allstate
for questions madam chair sorry
so basically what we're talking
about is the difference in the
opportunity scholarship then of
any substance is that correct
mark yes ma'am that's correct
madam chair.
Okay we've heard that we've
discussed it I'm gonna go to
Representative small for the
motion thank you madam chair I
would move the LFC
recommendation for the higher
education department okay it and
we need a second.
The manager.
Okay
we have a motion and a second is
there any opposition to that
motion.
Seeing none the LFC
recommendation for the
department will stand.
All righty I want to thank the
committee for this morning.
I'll tell you I'll be so glad
when we get back into regular
committee room and we can all
start the.
Working together in one place at
one time that the very helpful
and having all of our higher ed
folks there it's always nice to
have these conversations with
them in the hallways and in our
offices and that kind of thing
and unfortunately we couldn't do
that this year I want to thank
all the higher ed institutions
that participated this morning
as well as the committee and let
the committee members that have
got more meetings happening good
luck today and same time well
not will be meeting on Monday
we've got two sub committees I
believe one is our computers and
the and the other maybe
supplementals I I can't remember
but we've got to to meetings on
Monday and they're the
subcommittee so thank you
everybody and we'll see you
Monday.
The minister I am.
